HISTORY OF SERPENTS. OR, The second Book of living Creatures: Wherein is
contained their Divine, Natural, and Moral descriptions, with their lively
Figures, Names, Conditions, Kinds and Natures of all venomous Beasts: with
their several Poisons and Antidotes; their deep hatred to Mankind, and the
wonderful work of GOD in their Creation, and Destruction.

Necessary and profitable to all sorts of Men: Collected out of divine
Scriptures, Fathers, Philosophers, Physicians, and Poets: amplified with sundry
accidental Histories, Hierogliphicks, Epigrams, Emblems, and Aenigmaticall
observations. By EDWARD TOPSELL.

The Boas


LONDON Printed by William Jaggard, 1608.

TO THE REVEREND AND RIGHT WORSHIPFUL RICHARD NEILE, D. of DIVINITY, Deane of
Westminster, Master of the SAVOY, and Clearke of the King his most excellent
Majesty's Closet, all felicity Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal.
RIght worthy DEANE, if it be true that the Heathen man said, Otiu^ sine
literis mors, and viui hominis sepultura, I think there is nothing more
commendable then the study of those Letters and that point of Learning, which
GOD himself has wrote, not only by the great Spirit of the Prophets, but
also by his own hand, without Scribe or other instrument, (the Creation and
several dispositions of living creatures:) wherein with the greatest and
noblest Characters that ever were, he has engraven the highest wisdom of
all Majesty. And to say the truth, no knowledge of political States, no
Science Geographicall of the round Worlds Orb, no speculation Astronomicall of
the Heavens lights or motions, nor Art of speech, reason or works, is
comparable to this Learning, but a man destitute hereof, is dead and buried in
a living grave, stinking before God and Angels. Wherefore this being my
opinion, and I trust the syncerity of my judgment touching Gods living works,
it may serve for a reason for the undertaking of these labors; because as
Xenophon writes upon another case, Ek toon ponoon malaka gignetai, out of
these pains are begotten many pleasures.

But whereas some think that there is knowledge enough of those creatures by
their outsides, and the noise of their names, is a complete Lecture for humane
understanding, I would but refer them to Philo Iudaeus, writing in his
Questions upon Genesis in this manner; Sicut caeci tractant tantum ipsam
corporis spissitudine^ tactu, non decus colorum, non formas, non figuras, non
aliud quicquam eximiae qualitatis testimonium praebens: Sic minus docti, and
inertis animae oculi, nihil in historijs intrinsecus cernere possunt.
Wherefore, seeing that blind men cannot be comforted so much by their groping
feeling, as other which enjoy the commodity of all their senses, no man shall
justly blame the Printers and my labor, if we set forth Gods works five times
more plainly, pleasantly, and largely, then ever before they were in any
language of Christendom.

I have therefore now adventured to put abroad into the World, the second
Book of Liuing-creatures, which entreats of Serpents, and all venomous
Worms of the Earth and Waters; which for their Maker had the Son of GOD as
well as men, for their antiquity, were from the beginning before men; for
their wit and disposition in nature, come nearest to men; for their seat and
habitation, dwell in one and the same Element with men; for their spirits and
inclination, are most unreconcilable enemies to men; and for their use and
commodity, very beneficial to men: Therefore their knowledge is from God,
their continuance from Heaven, their natures worth our study, and the fruit
serviceable to mankind. Aeque pauperibus prodest, locupletibus aeque.
Aeque neglectum pueris, senibusque nocebit.


I could therefore arrogate to my self that Virgilian praise, Pandere res alta
terra and caligine tectas: but I will not, for if I have deserved well, let
another man's mouth speak it, and if the present envious world will not,
posterity I know will glorify God for me. For my conscience being free from
the rust of vaine-bragging, I dare be bold to pray with Nehemiah, Recordare
mei Domine in bonitate, secundum omnia quae feci huic, populo: And therefore,
if I be not buried till I be naturally dead, I will never die in idleness, nor
carry about my body, to contain a living man's Sepulture.

Although (I trust) it shall appear to you R: W: that there is store and
variety of matter comprised in this thin Volume of Serpents, insomuch as it
is needless for me (if not impossible) to say much more, yet pardon me
(according to your accustomed clemency) if I range a little in this point of
Divinity, which is the cognizance I wear, and the robe where-withall it has
pleased my Savior Jesus Christ to clothe me, that I should be the man and the
mean, (although the meanest of a thousand now alive) to declare and publish to
this present, and all succeeding ages of our Countrymen, the secrets which
God has registered in the indelible natures of living creatures.

I have oftentimes admired the frequent mention of Serpents, which you know
(better then my self) is more then once remembered by GOD in Holy-vvrit: but
especially there are three memorable things concerning Serpents recorded;
First, a History, the second; a Figure, the third; an Allegory. The History, is
the seduction of our first Mother by a Serpent. Whereof Authors write
diversely, enquiring whether it were a true Serpent, or a false created Serpent,
or the Devil, (which our Savior terms a Serpent in trope,) were also so
called by Moses: but the answer is made, that it was a true Serpent, and that
(as Peter Lombard writes) he was only permitted by GOD to take the Serpents
body to do that thing, his words Lib: 2. Sent: did: 21. Cap: 2. are these;
Serpentem autem animal ex omnibus delegit, tum quia rationali creaturae omnis
irrationalis subiecta erat: tum quia per solum serpentem id facere a Deo
permissus est diabolus, non autem per columbae formane, quod fortasse
maluisset, vt melius fraudem subesse in satanae verbis, Homo ex eo
subolfaceret, quod Serpens loquebatur. Et clarius ipsius tentatoris, id est,
diaboli natura, per colubru^ illum tortuosis anfractibus mobilem, ac proinde
magis operi isti congruum, significaretur. Which opinion (as you know very
well) was before him given by S. Austen, Lib: De Ciuit: Dei, 14: and cap. 11.

Josephus writes, that before that time, the Serpent was very familiar with
man, and that the devil chose him for that purpose, by false friendship to
deceive him, wherefore God in the Judgment after the fall committed, took
away from him his legs, and makes him creep upon the earth. But seeing
there is no such thing reported in Genesis, especially that the Serpent lost
any members, I will not auerre that for truth: but rather add unto Peter
Lombard, that the Serpents subtlety, above all the residue of creatures, was
the cause that the devil entered into him. Whereunto Epiphanius in his
Treatise against the Ophitae, agrees. But in this action, the Serpent was but
the devils trunk, neither served it for any other purpose but to cover him;
so as the words which were spoken, were the words of the devil, and that S.
Austen De Gen: ad lit: writes, Serpentem, dum cum Eua loqueretur, neque
intellexisse quid diceret, neque rationalem animam habuisse. But as he
speaks by phanaticall men, so did he out of the Serpent. And yet GOD
(because he was the devils instrument) has taken from him his voice, leaving
him only hyssing; and instead of those smooth words where-withall the woman
was beguiled, he has given him poison under his tongue, to which the
Scripture alludeth, Psalm. 140. 3. Romans 3. 13. as Josephus also affirms, Lib:
1. cap. 3. Antiq. And for this cause also was it punished to grouell and creep
upon the earth, and to suffer the enmity of man. For according to the Lords
saying, that has no power but to byte our heels, and lower parts, and we on
the other-side, make all force to bruize his head. I shall not need to
allegorize this story, it is better known to you then to my self, and I list
not write those things which are impertinent to the matter. And therefore thus
much shall suffice for this first record of the Serpent in holy Scripture, and
so I will proceed to the second.

Another memory of the Serpent is, the type of Christ Jesus, represented in the
Brazen Serpent, erected at the Lords own commandment, for the curing of the
Burning-serpents poison in the Wilderness. Many such statues of Serpents I have
remembered in the discourse following, differing only in the end and benefit.
This working miraculouslie those things, because it represented Christ
crucified, which those could not do, being but the inventions of man: yet of
this Saint Austen makes this elegant allusion to Christ, in John 3. Tract: 12.
Magnum hoc Sacramentum and qui legerunt nouerunt etc. This, says he, is a
great Sacrament, and they which have read it, know it. For what are the
fiery-byting-Serpents, but sins arising out of the mortality of flesh? What
is that same Serpent lifted up? but the death of our Lord upon the Cross. For
because death came by the Serpent, death is figured in the form of a Serpent.
The biting of the Serpent was deadly, the death of our Lord was lively. The
Serpent is looked upon, that it might not be harmfull, death is looked upon
that it might be of no force. Sedcuius mors, mors vitae, si dici potest mors
vitae, imo quia dici potest, mirabiliter dicitur. Shall not that be spoken
which was to be done? Shall I be scrupulous to say that, which my Lord did not
disdain to do? Was not Christ life? and yet he was on the Cross. Was he not
life? and yet he dyed. Sed in morte Christi mors mortua est, quia vita mortua
occidit mortem, plenitudo vitae occidit mortem, absorpta est mors in Christi
corpore. But as they which did look upon the Brazen Serpent, did not perish
although they were bytten; so they which by faith look upon Christ crucified,
are saved from the perrill of their sins: but with this difference betwixt
the type and the person represented, that they were saved from a temporal
death, and the faithful from an eternal. Thus far Saint Austen, and thus
much of the Serpent in figure.

The third and last mention of Serpent that I apprehend, is that allegorical
precept, or instruction of our most blessed Savior, where he exhorts us to
be wise as Serpents, to be innocent as Doves. Which words have often driven me
into the serious consideration of the Serpents nature: that so I might at one
time or other, attain our Saviors meaning, for surely I thought of them, as
that Learned-man did of the Jews, Hosts sunt in cordibus, suffragatores in
libris: and because of Christ's reference, whatsoever the Serpents are in their
nature and inclination to us, yet in their wisdom (as in a Book) they are
our instructors and helpers. And certainly, seeing there are no virtues of
that worth to a Christian life, as are Innocence and Wisdom, I could never
satisfy my self in their diquisition, how we should go to creatures so far
different in nature, betwixt whom is no concord, and take out their several
virtues, to marry them together in one humane breast. Well I knew the worth of
those virtues, and the necessity of their imitation, yet how to make use of
them in a Christian life, was Hic labor, hoc opus.

The Serpent in the earth, and the Dove in the air, does it teach us that with
wisdom we must dwell below on earth, and with inocencie, as with the wings of
a Dove, fly up into heaven above? Or that in our policy while we live, we
may wind and turn in worldly affairs like a Serpents path, but in heavenly,
keep a straight and swift course, like as the Doves do in their flight? Or
that we be ever armed to defend our selves, as the Serpent is with poison,
never unfurnished, and yet be without heart and courage, as is a Dove? Or that
there were no man in nature so wise as Serpents, or so innocent as Doves?
Surely these thoughts drove me to look upon the Fathers, the best Expositors
of this Text, for my satisfaction; that at least, if I could never attain to
the perfect science of Wisdom and Innocence, yet I might show my loving
endeavor unto both. They told me with one consent, that forasmuch as men desire
wisdom without innocence, our Savior to reprove that affection, teaches
to conioyne both together, for Prudentia sine simplicitate, malitia,
simplicitas, sine prudentia stultitia: and therefore, Ne machinemur dolos,
habeamus simplicitatem Columbae, et ne ab alijs supplantemur, astutiam
Serpentis: to this effect you know they all write. But yet this did not
satisfy me, for me thought there was yet a more eminent meaning, or deeper
secret, like some new Mercurius, or Elixar vitae, contained in those words.
Wherefore I sought further, and so I found, that Serpents defend their head, so
must men their faith; that they cast their skin, so must men their sins;
that they stop their ears against Inchaunters, so must men their ears against
the devils tentations; that they byte at men's lower parts or heels, so must
we at the root of our unlawful desires; that for hatred of men they seek
peace among thorns and briars, so must good men fly the society of those
things which might endanger their souls; that they swym keeping their head out
of the water, so ought men not to be drowned in pleasure; that they eat dust,
according to the sentence of the Almighty, so must we be content with
whatsoever estate God shall send us: and to conclude, says S. Austen Solertiam
habent in foetuum aeducatione, in latibulorum aedification, in nutrimentorum
acquisitione, in vulnerum medicatione, in nociuorum euitatione, in mutationis
temporum prae cognitione, and suorum comparium dilectione. These are high
points of wisdom for men to imitate, and I know not what more can be added
unto them, if they were general, except I should reckon the vicious affections
of Serpents, which have far more disciples then their virtuous inclination.

The Serpents spirit is a lofty and high spirit, reaching not only after men,
but also after the birds of the air, not being afraid of the Elephants.
Herein many follow them, for Omnis cura viris vter esset Induperator.


And it is true, as writes Seneca, Animi hominu^ sunt ignei, and provide
sursum tendunt. It was the poesy of Pompey, Semper ego cupio, praecellere, and
esse supremus. And of Caesar, Malem in appido primus esse quam Romae secundus.
Another vice in Serpents is their desire of revenge, for even to the loss of
their lines, and when they are more then half dead, they kill other. Even so
it is become a noble evil to shed blood, or at the least to disgrace and
disable other to the point of death. S. Austen says, that as a vessel is
corrupted with the sharp Vinegar it contains, so is the body and mind of
man, by the wrathful revenge it takes. The inhabitants of Dinantium, a Town
of Burgundy, to despite their Duke Charles, for some injuries to them done,
made his picture of vvood, with all his Arms and Coats of honor upon it,
and so brought the same to a Town of his called Bouinium, where they set it in
a filthy stinking poole, full of Toades and Frogs, and other venomous beasts,
and cried out to the Bouinians, Hic sedet magnus bufo Dux vester. To whom the
Bouinians sent a man with dehorting persuasions, to remove their minds from
that undutiful disloyalty of contempt and rebellion, which they showed
against their Prince; but that messenger they instantly killed: afterward they
sent a little boy, with Letters to persuade them to make peace, sue for
pardon, and to turn away the rage of war which the Duke was preparing
against them; as soon as the little boy had delivered the Letters, they tore
him in pieces like so many Wolves.

Thus they took their revenge; and shortly after came the Duke with his royal
Army, and razed down their City to the ground, killed and executed many of
the inhabitants; the residue he cast by couples into the River Mosa, where they
all perrished, men, women and chyldron, so that the third day after it was
said, Hic fuit Dinantium. The Duke himself, for this great revenge enforced by
rebellion and murder, escaped not scotfree, but was the last of his race, and
left the Duchy to another Family. Thus if in men there reign the wrath of
Serpents, they must also look for the ruin of Serpents, and become like
brute beasts that perrish.

I omit to speak of their flattery, embracing while they sting; their
treachery, lying in wait in the dust or grass to do harm; their venom
where-withall they are ever armed to spoil; their ingratitude, when they kill
them that nourish them; their voracity, when they kill much more then they can
eat; their hostility, whereby they bid battle to all living creatures; their
contempt of the reverend visage of man, whereby they neither spare vicious nor
virtuous; and their desire to live alone, destroying all other to multiply
their own kind; like our English-Enclosers, who do herein follow the wisdom
of the Serpent, but not the innocence of the Dove. Of all these and many more,
if I did write to a man of mean knowledge, I would enlarge and apply in
several examples, but to you R: W. it is as needless as to light a Candle at
noone day.

To conclude therefore, I only affect three things in the Serpents wisdom,
whereof two have been practiced by the Church already, and the third remains
now for us to imitate. First, in the beginnings of the Church, all the
haeresies did chiefly tend against the doctrine of the Trinity, or Unity, or
Deity, or true humanity of our Savior Christ: as you know the Simonians,
Cerinthians, Arrians, and other detestable beasts did invent. Against them all
the noble Christian Bishops and Fathers did oppose themselves, and defended
their head, viz. Jesus Christ, to be true GOD, and true man; and so at one time
were wise as Serpents, and innocent as Doves, dying for his sake that dyed for
them.

Secondly, when by the corruption of time, and long current of many continued
evils, the Church grew ouer-worne with many superstitions, so as the face
thereof was disfigured, and the pure wedding garment which Christ put upon it,
ouer-growne, and covered with the beggers-cloake of humane inventions; then God
made his instruments to follow the Serpents wisdom, in passing through a
narrow passage of persecution, death and fire; and so stripped off that
ouer-growne skin, whereby the Prime decour, and comeliness of the Churches
party-colored coat of fine Needle-worke, resembled in the Serpent, is again
manifested. Thus far they proceeded. And thus we have seen the
correspondence of figure to figure already performed.

But the third and last thing, is that part of the Serpents wisdom, whereby
she forsakes society of men, and Cities or places of pleasure, and dwells
alone in the hedges, wilderness, or desolate Rocks. It was a true experimental
saying of him that wrote, Extrema Religionis, vel in superstitione^, vel in
profanitatem recidunt. Now we have ouer-passed Superstition, I am out of fear
that the Church shall neuer-more have a thick skin: we have fallen into open
profaneness, and contempt of one another, (if not of God,) which must be
remedied by the Serpents wisdom. And I think we must depart out of the ciu
ill and worldly ways, and affairs of men, and betake our selves to more
private and secure habitations, where the open enemy can neither so soon find
us, or wound us. I need not prosecute this matter, or at the least, if I
should, I must exceed the limits of a Dedication, only this I say, that if the
Church and Churchmen, could put on one mind and join together in this action,
whereby men might be esteemed for their worth, and not for their wages, I know
the people would hunt after us in devotion, where now they tread upon us in
profaneness. For we being made poor, base and contemptible before their
eyes (which are the living organs of grace,) they tread upon all the residue,
even to the blood of the New-Couenaunt: and therefore, once more I pray that
the sons of Levy may speak one thing.

I have now said my full, and here I present unto you my Second Treatise of
living Creatures, having collected all that is written of this Argument, out of
several Authors into one Volume and method: so that whatsoever Gallen gave to
Piso, Aristotle to Alexander, Oppianus to Antoninus, Bellonius to Cardinal
Castillion, Fumanellus to the Senate of Verona, Cardan to Madrutius the Prince
of Trent, Grinaeus to Collimitius, Gesner to Grauius, Caronnus to Sir Horatio
Pallaut^ino, Maiolus to Heberus, or any other that ever writ of Serpents, or
venomous Beasts, that do I here dedicate to you, as the everlasting pledge of
my love, honor, and service unto you. Which I shall entreat you to entertain
and accept while it may honor you, because it has Gods work for a subject,
and refuse it not, when it shall any way eclipse or dazzle your light with
Prince or people. And for my self, let me be bold to conclude with this my
unfeigned protestation.

Sum tuus, and sine fine tuus Decane Manebo,
Cum socijs, quorum sine fell and candida nosti
Pectora, sic in te sibi constatura deinceps.
De te nil dubite, si tu tamen ambigis, istas
En, desiderij pignus, pius aspice chartas.
Edw: Topsell.

To the Reader.
GEntle and pious Reader, although it be needless for me to write any more of
the publishing of this Treatise of Venomous beasts, yet for your better
satisfaction and direction, briefly take this which follows.

After the publishing of the former book of Foure-footed Beasts, I understood
of two things much misliked therein, wherein I also my self received a just
offense. First, the manifold escapes in the press, which turned and sometimes
ouerturned the sense in many places, (especially in the Latin:) which fault as
it may in part concern me, so yet it touches another more deeply, yet are
both of us excusable: He, in wanting the true knowledge of the Latin tongue;
and I, because of my employment in my pastoral charge, and both of us
together, because we were not so thoroughly estated, as to maintain a sufficient
Scholar to attend only upon the press. Wherefore, in this second Book, we
have removed away that blot, and used a more accurate diligence, and I trust
there is no escape committed perverting the sense, and not very many altring
the letters.

The second exception taken against the former Treatise, was the not englishing
or translating of the Latin verses, which thing I purposed to have done if I
had not been ouerhastened in the business; for it had been to the work an
ornament, and to the History a more ample declaration: This fault I have now
amended in the setting forth of this second Book of Living Creatures. Al
therefore that can be said for your direction, I could wish the Historye more
complete for the manifestation of the most blessed Trinities glory, whose works
are here declared; and for the better revelation of the several natures of
every Serpent. I may fail in the expressing of some particular, yet I suppose
that I have omitted no one thing in their Narration, which might be warranted
by good authority or experience. And therefore, although I cannot say that I
have said all that can be written of these living Creatures, yet I dare say I
have wrote more then ever was before me written in any language.

Now therefore Ask the Creatures (after God,) and they will tell you: For,
says S. Austen, Interrogatio creaturarum profunda est consideratio ipsarum:
responsio earum, attesta ipsarum de Deo, quoniam omnia clamant, Deus nos fecit.
The askeing of the Creatures is a deep and profounde consideration of their
several natures: their answer is, their attestation or testimony of God,
because all of them cry out The Lord has made us. Wherefore, seeing it is most
true, incognita non desiderantur, things unknown are not desired, to the
intent that all true English Christians may hereafter more affectionately long
after and desire, both the mystical vision of God in this world, and also his
perfect sight in the world to come, I have (for my part) out of that weak
ability wherewith I am endued, made known unto them in their own mother
tongue, the wonderful works of God; for the admiring of Gods praise in the
Creatures, stands not in a confused ignorance not knowing the beginnings and
reason of every thing, but rather in a curious and artificial inuestigation
of their greatest secrets.

Therefore, let all living men consider every part of divine wisdom in all
his works; for if it be high, he thereby terrifieth the proud; by the truth he
feeds the great ones; by his affability he nourishes the little ones, and so
I will conclude my preface, with the words of the three Children: O all ye
works of the Lord, praise him and magnify him for ever.

EDWARD TOPSELL.

A Table of the several Serpents, as they are rehearsed and described in this
Treatise following.
A
ADder. 50 Ammodyte. 53 Arge, Argolae. 54 Aspe. 54
B
Be. 64 Bee-Drone. 78 Bee-waspe. 83 Bee-Hornet. 92 Boas. 111
C
Cantarides. 96 Cankers. 102 Caterpillars. 102 Chamaeleon. 113 Cockatrice. 119
Cordyll. 126 Crocadill. 126 Crocadile of Egypt. 140 Crocodile of Bresilia. 141
Crocadile of the earth, called a Scinke. 141
D
Darte. 145 Dipsas. 147 Doublehead. 151 Dragon. 153 Dragon winged. 158 Dryine.
174
E
Elephants. 176 Elops, Elopis. 176
F
Frogs. 176 Green Frogge. 185 Crooked Frog, or Paddock 186 Toades. 187
G
Green serpent. 194
H
Haemorrhe. 193 Horned serpent. 198 Hydra. 201 Hyaena. 200
I
Innocent Serpents. 203
L
Lizard. 203 Lizard green. 209 Locust, vide Caterpiller.
M
Molure. 203 Myllet or Cencryne. 211 Myagrus. 203
N
Neute, or Water Lyzard. 212
P
Pagerina. 203 Pareas. 203 Palmer-worme vide caterpiller. Pelias. 214 Porphyre.
214 Prester. 214 Python vide Dragon.
R
Red Serpent. 216
S
Salamander. 217 Scorpion. 222 Scytall. 232 Sea-serpents. 233 Seps or Sepedon.
236 Slow-worme. 293 Snake. 240 Spiders. 246, 259 Stellion. 276
T
Tire. 280 Torteyse. 281, 285, 287
V
Viper. 290
W
Worms. 306
A General Treatise of Serpents, DIVINE, MORAL, AND NATURAL.
Of the Creation and first beginning of SERPENTS.
THere is no Man that can justly take exception that this History of Serpents
begins at their Creation: for seeing our purpose is, to set forth the works
of GOD, by which as by a clear glass, he endeavors to disperse and
distribute the knowledge of his Majesty, Omnipotency, Wisdom and Goodness,
to the whole race of Mankind, it seems most proper that the first stone of
this Manichees and Marciontes, have Augustine, Epiphan.
also subscribed, though not directly, for they account the Creation of these
venomous and all hurtful beasts an unworthy work for the good GOD, because
they could never see any good use of such creatures in the World.

Yet we know the blessed Trinity created the whole frame of this visible World
by it Zanchius.
all creeping things after their kind: And least that any man should doubt,
that under the general name of creeping things, Serpents and other Venomous
beasts, were not intelligibly enough expressed, it is added Cap. 3, 1. That the
Serpent was more subtle then all the Beasts of the field which God had made.
The Prophet David also, Psalm. 148, 7. among other things which are exhorted by
the Prophet to praise their Creator, there are named Dragons, which are the
greatest kind of Serpents. Unto this also alluded S. James, cap. 3, 7. saying:
That the whole nature of Beasts, and of Birds, of creeping things of the sea
is tamed by the nature of man: for Man, which is next unto God, has authority
and power, to rule over all his

And herein it is fit to show, what wonders men have wrought upon Serpents,
taming and destroying them rather like Worms and Beasts, no ways enemies to
mankind, but friendly, and endued with sociable respect, or else as weaklinges
commanded by a superior power. Such an one was Atyr a notable Inchaunter, who
by touching any Serpent Textor.
brought it into a deadly sleep; according to these verses.

Nec non serpents dire exarmare veneno,
Doctus Atyr: tactuque graves sepire chelydros:
In English thus;

The cunning Atyr, serpents fierce, of poison did disarme,
And Water-snakes to deadly sleep, by touching he did charm.
Aluisius Cadamustus, in his description of the new World, tells an excellent
history of a Lygurian young man, being among the Negroes travailing in
Afric, whereby he endeavors to prove, how ordinary and familiar it is to
them, to take and charm Serpents,

Frigidus in prat is cantando rumpiter anguis.
that is,

The cold-earth-snake in Meddowes green,
By singing, broke in pieces may be seen.
The young man being in Affricke among the Negroes, and lodged in the house of
a Nephew to the Prince of Budoniell, when he was taking himself to his rest,
suddenly awaked, by hearing the unwonted noise of the hissing of innumerable
sorts of Serpents; whereat while he wondered, and being in some terror, he heard
his Host (the Princes Nephew) Lygurian young man his ghest expected. And when
he had returned, he asked his ghest if he did not hear the immoderate hyssing
of the Serpents? and he answered, that he had heard them to his great terror:
Then the Princes Nephew (who was called Bisboror) replied, saying; they were
Serpents which had beset the house, and would have destroyed all their Cattle
and Herds, except he had gone forth to drive them away by a Charm, which

The Lygurian young man, hearing him say so, maruailed above measure, and said,
that this thing was so rare and miraculous, that scarcely Christians would
believe it. The Negro thought it as strange that the young man should be
ignorant hereof, and therefore told him, that their Prince could work more
strange things by a Charm which he had, and that this and such like, were
small, vulgar, and not to be accounted miraculous. For when he is to use any
strong poison upon present necessity, to put any man to death, he puts
some venom upon a sword, or other piece of Armor, and then making a large
round circle, by his Charm compels many Serpents to come within that
circle, he Negro did earnestly persuade the young man to see an experiment
hereof, promising him to show all as he had related, but the Lygurian being
more willing to hear such things told, then bold to attempt the trial, told
him, that he was not willing to see any such experiment. And by this it
appears, that all the Negroes are addicted to Incantations,

And seeing I have entered into this passage of Charming, being (no doubt) an
invention of Man, and therefore argues his power to tame these venomous
Beasts, according to the former saying of Saint James, although I condemn such
courses utterly, yet it is lawful to prosecute the same, seeing the holy
Ghost, Psalm 58, verse 4, 5. arffirmeth a practice against Serpents, a
dexterity and ripenes in that practice, and yet an impossibility to effect any
good, except the voice of the Charmer come to the ear of the Adder: For thus
he writes; Their poison is like the poison of a Serpent, like a deaf Adder
that stops his ear. 5. Which hears not the voice of the Inchaunter,
though he be most expert in cunning. Upon which words, Saint Augustine, Saint
Ierom, and Cassidorus writing, say; that when the Charmer comes to Inchaunt
or Charm, then they lay one of their ears to the earth so close, as it may
not receive sound, and their other ear they stop with their tail. I will
therefore yet add somewhat more of this taming of Serpents.

I have heard a Gentleman of singular learning, and once my Worshipful good
friend, Ma: Will: Morley of Glynde in Sussex.
own knowledge and eyesight, that being at Padua in Italy, he saw a
certain Quacksaluer, or Mountebacke upon a stage, pull a Viper out of a box,
and suffered the said Viper to bite his flesh, to the great admiration of all
the beholders, receiving thereby no danger at all. Afterward he put off his
doublet and shirt, and showed upon his right arm a very great unwonted blew
vein, standing beyond the common course of nature; and he said, that he was of
the lineage of Saint Paul, and so were all other that had such veins, and that
therefore (by special virtue to that Family given from above) no Viper nor
Serpent could ever annoy or poison them: but withal, the fellow drank a
certain compound water, or antidote, for fear of the worst, and so at one
time vented both his superstitious

But I have since that time also read, in Matthiolus his Commentaries upon the
sixth Book of Dioscorides, that there were wont to be many such Iuglers in
Italy, carrying in their bosoms living Serpents, of whose fraudulent
Impostures he speaks in this sort. They take Serpents in the Winter time,
when they grow dead and stiff through cold, and yet for their better defense
against their venomous biting, they defend themselves by a certain
experimental unguent, known to be practiced in this sport, made of the Oil
pressed out of vvilde Radish, the roots of Dragonwort, the juice of Daffodill,
the brain of a Hare, the leaves of Sabine, sprigges of Bay, and some other few
things thereunto added. As soon as they have taken them, they instantly all
to spette upon their heads, for Paul, who cast a Viper off from his hands, as
we read in the holy Scripture.

It was an invention of ancient time among the wise Magitians, to make a pipe
of the skins of Cats legs, and there-withall to drive away Serpents; by
which it appears, that the sovereignty of Man over Serpents, was given by
GOD at the beginning, and was not lost, but continued after the fall of man,
(although the hand that should rule be much weaker) and practiced by the most
barbarous of the world, necessity of defense forcing a violence and hatred,
betwixt the Serpent, and the Woman's seed. For this cause we read of the
seven daughters of Atlas, whereof one was called Hyas, whose daily exercise
was hunting of venomous Beasts, and from her the Hyades had their
denomination. And for a conclusion of this Argument, I will add this one
story more out of Aelianus. When Thonis the King of Egypt had received of
Menelaus, Helen to be safely kept, Aethiopia, it happened that the King fell in
love with her beauty, and oftentimes endeavored by violence to ravish her;
then, it is also said, that Helen to turn away the Kings unlawful lust,
opened all the matter to Polydamna the wife of Thonis, who instantly fearing
her own estate, least that in time to come, fair Helen should deprive her of
her husbands love, banished her into the Island of Pharus, which was full of all
manner of Serpents, and yet taking pity on her for her simplicity, gave her
a certain herb, whereby she drove away all Serpents. For (it is said) when
the Serpents and venomous beasts do but smell the same herb, they instantly
hide their heads in the earth. Helen coming into that Island planted the same
there, and was therefore called by the inhabitants, after her own Name
Helenium, which the skillful Herborists at this day affirm to grow in Pharus.

Unto this discourse of the taming of Serpents, I may add yet more strange
things, if any thing be strange in the nature of this World. And those are some
histories of the familiarity of Men, Women and Serpents. Alexander was thought
to be begotten of a Serpent, for it is said, that one a time there was found a
great Serpent upon his Mother Plutarch.
Olympia as she was sleeping; and some say (for the honor both of the Mother
and the Son, that this Serpent was Jupiter, turned into the likeness of a
Serpent, as we read he changed himself into many other shapes. And the like
story unto this, is alleged of Scipio Affricanus his mother, who long time
remained barren without the fruit of the Ca: Oppius Iul: Higinus
womb, insomuch as that P: Scipio her husband, utterly dispaired of
posterity. It happened one day, as she was in her bed, her husband being
absent, there came a great Snake and lay beside her, even in the presence of
the servants and family, who being mightily astonished Gellius.
thereat, cried out with loud voices for fear, whereat the woman awaked, and
the Snake slidde away inuisibly. P: Scipio hearing this report at his return
home, went to the Wisards to understand the secret or signification of this
prodigy: who making a sacrifice, Scipio Affricanus.

We read also in Plutarch of certain Serpents, lovers of young Virgins, who
after they were taken and ensnared, showed all manner of lustful, vicious, and
amorous gestures Pierius.
of uncleanness and carnalitie; and by name, there was one that was in love
with one Aetolia a Virgin, who did accustom to come unto her in the night
time, slyding gently all over her body never harming her, but as one glad of
such acquaintance, tarried with her in that dalliance till the morning, and
then would depart away of his own accord: the which thing being made
manifest unto the Guardians and Tutours of the Virgin, they removed her unto
another Town. The Serpent missing his Love, sought her up and Pierius.
fast to her sides, did softly with his tail beat upon her backer parts.
Whereby was collected, some token of his chastisement unto her, who had wronged
such a Lover with her wilful absence and disappointment.

It is also reported by Aelianus, that Egemon in his verses, writes of one
Aleua a Thessalian, who feeding his Oxen in Thessaly, near the Fountain
Haemonius, there fell in love with him a Serpent of exceeding bigness and
quantity, and the same would come unto him, and softly lick his face and
golden hair, without doing him any manner of hurt

These, and such like things, do evidently prove, that Serpents are not
only involuntarilie tamed by Men, but also willingly keep quarter with them,
yielding to the first ordinance of the Creator, that made them subjects and
vassals to men. And thus much shall suffice to have spoken in this place,
concerning the first creation of Serpents.

Of the natural Generation of SERPENTS, and their several Originalls.
IT being thus cleared, that Serpents were at the beginning created by GOD,
and are ruled by Men, it now follows, that we should in the next place talk
of the matter of their beginning, and the means of their continuance ever
since their Creation.

First therefore it is most plain in Genesis, that the Earth, (by

As concerning their constitution, it is held to be most cold, above all other
living Creatures; Pliny. Gallen.
and therefore Pliny writes, that they have neither heat, nor blood, nor
sweat. Hereunto subscribeth Galen and Rasis; yet Auicen seems to affirm
the contrary. Mercuriall decideth this controversy, and proves that Serpents
are extremely cold, and their bodies outwardly moist. First, because those
which are stunge and poisoned by Serpents, are oppressed with an unnatural
cold, which overcomes natural heat, and distendeth all their parts, vexing
them intollerably. Secondly, there can be assigned no other reason Isidorus) by
this, that when they slide along upon the Earth, (which way soever

By this therefore it is confirmed, that they are of the Earth and of the
Water, as afterward we shall show in the description of their kinds. But yet
there are prodigious beginnings of Serpents, whereof some seem to be true, and
other to be fabulous. The first sort Plutarch. Pierius. Textor.
are those which Pliny affirms to be engendered of the marrowe in the
backe-bone of a man, and that indifferently, out of the dead bodies of good and
evil men. Yet some more modest, thinking it unreasonable, that the remnants of
a good meek man, should beget or be turned into so barbarous, venomous, and
cruel a nature; rather taking it for granted, that peace and quietness is the
reward of such persons, attribute these beginnings or alterations to the bodies
of wicked men, as a just deserved punishment of their former evils, Ovid
speaks.

Sunt quae cum clauso putrefacta est Spina sepulchro,
Mutari credunt humanas angue medullas.
Which may be thus englished;

Some think the putride backe-bone in the grave racked,
Or marrow changd, the shape of Snakes to take.
In Egypt, as Frogs and Mice are engendered by showers of rain, so also are
Serpents: Autcen says, that the longest hairs of women are easily turned into
Serpents. Nicander Macrobius Caelius Rho:
dreameth; that all venomous beasts are engendered of the blood of the Tytans
or Giants. Acusilaus, of the blood of Typhon. Apollonius Rhodius of the drops
of blood which do distill from Gorgons. Virgilius says, that dung being laid
in a hollow place, subject to Pliny.
receive moisture, engendereth Serpents. Of the Gorgons drops, Ovid writes
thus.

Cumque super Lybicas victor penderet arenas,
Gorgonei capitis guttae cecidere cruentae,
Quas humus exceptas, varios animauit in angues,
Vnde frequens illa est infestaque cerra colubris.
Which may thus be Englished:

And as he ouer-flew
The Lybicke sands, the drops of blood that from the head did sewe
Of Gorgon being new cut off, upon the ground did fall,
Which taking them, and as it were conceiving them withal,
Engendered sundry Snakes and worms: by means whereof that Clyme
Did swarm with Serpents ever since, to this same present time.
But most strange of all other, are the succeeding Narrations. For it is
reported that when L. Scipio, and C. Norbanus were Consuls, that the mother of
Clusius in Hetruria, brought forth a living Serpent in stead of a child, and
the said Serpent by the command of the Wisardes was cast into a River,
nevertheless it would not drown but swimmed against the stream. And Pliny
says, that at the beginning of the Marsycke war, there was a mayd-seruaunt
that brought forth another Serpent. And Faustina Obsequent.
the Empress dreamed that she brought forth Serpents, when she was with
child of Commodus and Antoninus, and one of these Serpents seemed more fierce
then the other, Commodus was so voluptuous and tyrannous, that he seemed like a
Serpent to be borne for nothing, but for the destruction of mankind.

In the year of the Lord 1551. there was a little Latin book printed at
Vienna, wherein was contained this History following. In this Summer (says the
Book) about S. Margarites day, there happened most rare and admyrable
Accidents: for near a Village called Zichsa, by the River Theose in Hungaria,
there were many Serpents and Lisards bred in the bodies of men, very like to
such as are bred in the earth, whereupon they fell into exquisite torments: and
there dyed of that calamity, about three thousand, and some of the bodies being
laid against the Sun gaping, the Serpents came forth of their

There was (says mine Author) found in a mow or rycke of corn, almost as
many Cease to prosecute your devise, for you shall not be able to accomplish
our burning, for we were not bredde by Nature, neither came we hither of our
own accord, but were sent by God to take vengeance on the sins of men. And
thus much for the true and natural beginninges of Serpents.

Now we read in holy Scripture, that the rod of Moses was turned into a
Serpent by divine miracle, whereby he was assured of the power that God would
give him to deliver his people Israel out of Egypt, which land abounding with
Serpents, both natural bredde in the earth, and moral, such are crafty and
polliticke Princes and people: yet Moses should take them as he did his
Serpent by the tail, and cause them to bend unto him like as it were a wand,
or else some other little walking staff: and also that his power should be
irresistable, because his Serpent devoured others. The Magitians or Sorcerers,
(as Iannes and Iambres) resisted him, and also turned their rods into Serpents.
But Moses did it by true piety, they by diabolical delusions, as false
Christians many times work miracles by outward signs of true piety, and
therefore Moses rod ouer-came the Sorcerers Serpents, because the end of
fraud and falsehood is, to be overcome by truth and piety.

From this changing of rods into Serpents, came the several metamorphosing of
sundry other things into Serpents also, as that tale of Orpheus head, after he
was torn in pecces by the Thrasian women; and the same thrown into a River,
was taken up in Lemnos.

Hic ferus exposito peregrinis anguis arenis
Os petit, and spar sos stillanti rore capillos
Lambit, and hymniferos inhiat diuellere vultus:
Tandem Phoebus adest: morsusque infer parantem
Arcet, and in Lapidem rictus Serpentis apertos.
Congelat, and patulos vt erant indurat hiatus.
In English thus;

No sooner on the foreign coast now cast a-land they were,
But that cruel natured Snake did straight upon them fly,
And licking on his ruffled hair, the which was dropping dry,
Did gape to tire upon those lips that had been wont to sing
The heavenly hymns. But Phoebus straight preventing that same thing,
Dispoints the Serpent of his bait, and turns him into stone,
With gaping chaps. etc.
So Isacius Tzetzes writes, that when Tiresia found Serpents in carnal
copulation in Cithaeron, he slew a femall, who presently after death was turned
into a Woman, then also he slew a male, who likewise being dead, was in the
same place and manner turned into Cadmus was sent by his Father, to seek out
his sister Europa that was ravished by Jupiter, with straight charge not to
return back again except he could find her, having spent much time in
seeking her, to no purpose, because he could not find her, and not daring to
go back again to his father; he was warned by the Oracle that he should
go into Baeotia to build a City. Coming thither, he sent his companions to
the Fountain of Mars that was in the Country to fetch water, where a great
Serpent came and killed them; at the last, Cadmus not finding their return,
went likewise to the same Fountain, where he found all his men slain, and the
Serpent approaching to assail him, but he quickly killed it. Afterward he was
admonished by Pallas, to strew the teeth of the same Serpent upon the ground,
which he performed, and then out of those teeth (says Ovid) arose a multitude
of Armed-men, who instantly fell to fight one with the other, in Pallas) were
preserved to be the Fathers of the people of Thebes. And so Apollonius faineth,
that with the help of men bred of Serpents teeth, came Jason to obtain the
Golden-Flecce.

They feign also, that Achelous when he strove with Hercules about Deianira,
turned himself into diverse shapes, and last of all into a Serpent, or as some
say; into a River. So likewise Cadmus aforesaid, being overcome with the
sight and sense of his own miseries, and the great calamities that befell to
his Daughters and Nephews, forsook Thebes, and came into Illyrium, where it
is said, that he earnestly desired of the Gods to be turned Antipater faineth
Jupiter to be turned into a Serpent, and Medusa refusing the love of Neptune,
is also fained by Ovid to be turned into a Serpent, when he writes;

Hanc pelagi rector templo vitiasse Minerua,
Dicitur, aversus est and castos Aegide vultus
Nata Iouis texit: neue hoc impune fuisset,
Gorgoneum crinem turpes mutauit in Hydros.
Nunc quoque vt attonitos formidine terreat hosts,
Pectore in aduerso, quos fecit sustinet angues.
In English thus;

It is reported how she should abusde by Neptune be,
In Pallas Church, from which foul fact, Jove's daughter turned her eye:
And least it should unpunished be, she turned her seemly hair
To loathsome Snakes, the which the more to put her foes in fear,
Before her breast continually she in her hand does bear.
Pierius writes, that the myrtle rod was not lawful to be brought into the
Temple of Necates, and that a Vine branch was extended over the head of her
sign: and whereas it was not lawful to name wine, they brought it into her
Temple under the name of milk, and that therein continually lived harmless
Serpents. The reason of all this was, because that her own father Faunus fell
in love with her, whom she resisted with all modesty, although she were beaten
with a myrtle rod, and made to drink Wine; but at last the beastly father
was transformed into a serpent, and then he oppressing her with

Then thus having expressed the original of serpents in their creation, it
follows now to add the residue of this Chapter about their generation. It is
a general rule Pliny. Aristotle
that all beasts wanting feet and have long bodies, perform their work of
carnal copulation by a mutual embracing one of the other, as Lampreys and
serpents: And it is certain, that two serpents in this action seem to be one
body and two heads, for they Aelianus.
for any other manner of copulation. When they are in this action they send
forth a rank savor offensive to the sense of them that do perceive it: And
although like unto many Fishes, they want stones, yet have they two open
passages wherein lies their generatiue seed, and which being filled, procures
them to their veneriall lust, the seed it self being like a milky humor; and
when the female is under the male, she has also her passages to receive the
seed, as it were into the celles of her womb, and there it is framed into an
egg, which she hides in the earth an hundred in a cluster, about the quantity
of a Birds egg, or a great bead, such as are used sometime by women.

And this is general for all serpents except Vipers, who lay no eggs, but
hatch in their Ambrose and other anncient Writers have believed the same, yet
Athaeneus, and of late days P. Iouius, have learnedly and sufficiently
declared by vnanswearable arguments the clean contrary. The serpents love
their eggs most tenderly, and do every one of them know their own, even
among confused heaps of the multitude, and no less is their love to their
young ones, whom for their safeguard, sometime they

Of the Names of Serpents, and their several parts or Anatomy.
BY Serpents we understand in this discourse all venomous Beasts, whether
creeping without legs, as Adders and Snakes, or with legs, as Crocodiles
and Lizards, or more nearly compacted bodies, as Toades, Spiders and Bees;
following herein the warrant of the best ancient Latinists, as namely
Cornelius Celsus, Pliny Apuleius do call Lyce Serpents, in that their relation
of the death of Pherecydes the Sirian, who was the Praeceptor of Pythagoras, of
whom it is said, Serpentibus perijsse, to have perrished by Serpents, when on
the contrary it is manifested he was killed by Lyce. Aristotle and Galen define
a Serpent to be animal sanguineu^ pedibus orbatum and ouiparum, that is, a
bloody Beast without feere, yet laying eggs; and so properly is a Serpent to
be understood.

The Haebrewes call a Serpent Nachasch. Darcon and Cheueia by the Chaldees: so
also Thaninim and Schephiphon, by the Hebrews, as Rabbi Solomon, Munster and
Pagnine write. The Graecians, Ophidi and Ophis, although this word do also
signify a Viper in particular, even as the Latin, Serpens, or serpula do,
sometime a Snake, and sometime an Adder. Haie and Hadaie, for all manner of
serpents. And Testuh or Tenstu, or Agestim for serpents of the wood; likewise
Apartias and Atussi. The Germans Ein schlang: which word seems to be derived
from Anguis by an usual figure, and after the German fashion, proposing Sch.
The French call it Un serpent, the Italians Serpe and serpente: and Massarius
says, that Scorzo and Scorzone, are general words for all manner of Serpents
in Italy, which strike with their teeth. The Spaniards call them Sierpe. The
Graecians call the young ones in the Dammes belly, Embrua: and the Latins
Catuli. And thus much for their Names in general, which in holy Scripture is
englished a Creeping thing.

Now it follows, that I should set down a particular description of all
the outward parts of Serpents; and first of all, their color is for the most
part like the place of their habitation Ovid writes:

-- Longo caput extulit antro,
Caeruleus serpens horrendaque sibila misit.
that is;

The greenish Serpent extolld her head from den so steep,
And fearful hyssing did send forth from throat so deep.
The frame of their bodies does not much varry in any, except in the feet and
length, so that with a reservation of them, we may express their universal
Anatomy in one view: for almost all of them are of the same proportion that is
seen in Lyzards, if the feet be excepted, and they made to have longer
bodies. For they are enclosed in a kind of shell or crustie skin, having
their upper parts on their back, and the nether parts on the belly like a
Lizard; but they want stones, and have such manner of places for copulation as
fishes have, their place of conception being long and cloven. All their
bowels, by reason of the length and narrownes of their bodies, are also long
and narrow, and hard to be discerned, because of the dissimilitude of their
figures and shapes. Their artery is long, and their Boas. Yea, Aristotle
makes mention of a Serpent that had 2. heads, and Arnoldus, of a Serpent in
the Piraeney Mountains, slain by a soldier, that had three heads, in whose
belly were found two sons of the said soldier devoured by him, and the
backbone thereof was as great as a man's skull, or a Rams head. And such an
one we read in our English story was found in England, in the year 1349. And
the 23 year of Edward the third, there was a serpent found in Oxfordshire,
near Chippingnorton, that Holinshed.
had two heads and faces like women, one being shaped after the new attire of
that time, and another after the manner of the old attire, and it had great
wings, after the manner of a Bat.

The Tongue of a Serpent is peculiar, for besides the length and narrowness
thereof, it is also cloven at the tippe, being divided as it were with very
little or small nails points. It is also thin, long, and black of color,
voluble; neither is there any beast that moves Isidorus shows, for they
deceive by the nimblenes thereof. Their ventricle is large, like their maw, and
like unto a dogs, also thin, and uniform at the end. The Heart is very small,
and cleaves to the end of their artery, but yet it is long, and shows like
the reins of a Man: wherefore sometimes it may be seen to bend the tippe or
lap thereof to the breast ward. After this follows the Lights, but far
separate from it, being simple, full of fibers, and open holes like pipes, and
very long: The Liver long and simple; the Melt small and round as in Lizards.
The Gall is for the most part as in fishes, but in Water-snakes it is joined to
the Liver: in other Serpents to the stomach or

Aristotle says, that as their eyes be small, so also they have the same good
hap that befalls young Swallows, for if by chance they scratch or rend out
their eyes, then it is said they have other grow up naturally in their places:
In like manner their tails being cut off, grow again. And generally,
Serpents have their heart in the throat, the gall in the belly or stomach, and
their stones near their tail: Their eggs are long and soft, and in their
teeth they carry poison of defense and anoyance, for which cause they desire
above all other things to save their heads. Their sight is but dull and dim,
and they can hardly look Aelianus. Isidorus.
atone side, or backward, because their eyes are placed in their temples, and
not in their

Their teeth are like sawes, or the teeth of Combs joined one within the
other, that so they might not be worn out by grinding or grating together; and
yet they bend inward, to the end that they may the better hold their meat in
their mouths, being without all

Although they be great raueners, yet is their throat but long and narrow, for
help the Mountebancks or Iuglers, break that bladder, that they may keep
them without poison, but within the space of twenty four hours, they are
recollected, and grow anew again.

Their bodies are covered over with a certain skin like a thin bark, and
upon Serpents it supplieth the place that scales and hair do upon Beasts and
Fishes; for indeed it is a pure skin, and in most things they are like to
Fishes, except that they have lights, and Fishes have none: the reason is, they
live on the Earth, and the Fishes in the Sea, and therefore have finnes and
gilles in stead thereof. The little Serpents have all their bones like thorns,
but the greater, which stand in need of greater strength, have solid bones
for their firmitude and better constitution. It is questionable whether they
have any melt or Gregorius Macer a Physician wrote to Gesner 1558. by his own
dissection as follows, saying.

As I lay at rest in a green field, there came unto me a great Serpent
hyssing, and holdding up her neck, which I suddenly with a piece of vvood
amazed at a stroke, and so slew without perrill to my self. Afterward,
sticking her fast to a pale, I drevv off her skin, which was very fast and
sharp, and I found betwixt the skin and the flesh, a certain little thin
skin, descending all upon the body with the outward skin, and this was
somewhat fat. And when I came unto the place of excrements, I found it like a
Fishes, but there issued forth certain filth, far exceeding in stinking
savor the excrements of a man. After I had thus pulled off the skin, it was
easy for me to look into the inward parts, which I found to answer the
inward Anatomy of Fishes and Fowls in some parts, and in other things, there
appeared a proper disposition to the Serpent it self. For the artery Trachaea
was about three or four fingers long, turned about with little round circles,
and so descended to the lights, unto which the heart and the bladder containing
the gall, did adhaere or cleave fast. Then the liver was long like the fish
Lucius, and so a white caul or fatnes covered both the liver and stomach,
which was half a spanne long: The guts began at the chappes, and so
descended down to the place of excrements, as we see they do in Fishes.

Beneath the liver were the guts, upon either side descended a certain neruy
or hard vein, unto which the eggs did cleave: which were covered with such
little skins as Hens eggs are before they be laid, but yet they were
distinguished in seat or place because of their multitude; for upon either
side I found two and thirty eggs. The tongue Trachaea, heart and lights, it
agrees with Birds; in the liver, guts and caul, it resembles a Fish, but
in the place of the gall, and disposition of the eggs, it differs from both.
And thus far Macer, with whose words I will conclude this Chapter of Serpents
Anatomy.

Of the quantity of Serpents, and their abode, food, and other accidents.
SO great is the quantity of Serpents, and their long during age increases
them to so great a stature, that I am almost afraid to relate the same, least
observed, and assured answer for all future Objections, of ignorant,
incredulous, and unexperienced Asses. Wherefore as the life of Serpents is
long, so is the time of their grows and as their kinds be many, (as we
shall manifest in the succeeding discourse) so in their multitude, some grow
much greater and bigger then other.

Gellius writes, that when the Romans were in the Carthagenian war, and
Attilius Regulus the Consul had pitched his Tents near unto the river
Bragrada, there was a Serpent of monstrous quantity, which had been lodged
within the compass of the Tents, and therefore did cause to the whole Army
exceeding great calamity, until by casting of stones with slings, and many
other devises, they oppressed and slew that Serpent, and afterward fleyed off
the skin and sent it to Rome, which was in length one hundred and twenty
feet. And although this seems to be a Beast of unmatchable stature, yet
Possidonius George, which was as is reported so great, that eight Oxen were but
strength enough to draw him out of the Silena.

There is a River called Rhyndacus near the Coasts of Bythinia, wherein are
Snakes of exceeding monstrous quantity, for when thorough heat they are
forced to take the water, for their safeguard against the sun, and birds come
flying over the poole, suddenly Mela. Pliny. Megasth.
they raise their heads and upper parts out thereof, and swallow them up. The
Serpents of Megalauna, are said by Pausanias to be thirty cubits long, and all
their other part answerable. But the greatest in the world are found in India,
for there they grow to such a quantity, Solinus. Textor. Strabo. Aelianus.
that they swallow up whole Bulls, and great Stagges. Wherefore I do not
marvel that Porus the King of India, sent to Augustus Caesar very huge Vipers,
a Serpent of ten cubits long, a Torteise of three cubits, and a Partridge
greater then a Vulture. For Alexander

Among the Scyritae, the Serpents come by great swarms upon their flocks of
sheep and cattle, and some they eat up all, others they kill and suck out
the blood, and some part they carry away. But if ever there were any thing
beyond credit, it is the relation of Volateran in his twelfth book of the
Newfound Lands, wherein he writes, that there are Alosius. Gillius. Scaliger.
Cardan.
Serpents of a mile long, which at one certain time of the year come abroad
out of their holes and dens of habitation, and destroy both the Herds and
Heard-men if they find them. Much more favorable are the Serpents of a Spanish
Island, who do no harm to any living thing, although they have huge bodies,
and great strength to accomplish their

In the kingdom of Senega, their Serpents are so great that they devour whole
beasts, as Goats, and such like, without breaking any one of their bones. In
Calechute, they are as great as their greatest Swine, and not much unlike them,
except in their head, which does far exceed a Swines. And because the King
of that Country has made a Law, that no man kill a Serpent under pain of
death, they are as great in number as they are in quantity: for so great is
his error, that he deemeth it as lawful to kill a Man, as a Serpent.

All kinds of Serpents are referred to their place of habitation, which is
either the earth, or the waters of the earth; and the serpents of the earth,
are more in number then the P. Fagius.
Rabbines, that the serpents of the Sea, are fishes in the likeness of Dragons.
Now Venetus. Hatthonus
the places of Serpents abode being thus generally capitulated, we must enter
into a farther narration of their habitations, and regions of their native
breeding. In the first place, India nourishes many and diverse sorts of
Serpents, especially in the Kingdom of Morfilium, and Alexander the Emperor,
found among other Beasts, sundry kinds of serpent^ in a long Desert, which is
on the North-side of India. But all the Nations of the World may give place to
Ethiopia for multitude and variety, for there they gather together on heaps,
and lie in compass like round hills, visibly apparent to the eyes of them that
behold Pi^rius.
them a far off. The like is said of all Africa, for in Numidia, every year
there are many men, women and children, destroyed by Serpents. The Island
Pharus, is also (by the testimony of the Egyptians) filled with serpents: The
Coasts of Elymais are annoyed by serpents; and the Caspians are so annoyed by
serpents which come swymming in the floods, that men cannot sail that ways
but in the Wintertime. For from the beginning of the Spring, or aequinoctiall,
they seem (for their number) to approach fauening, Ophiusae insulae, named
after Solinus. Aelianus.
Ophis a serpent, for the multitude bred therein: And there are serpents in
Candy, Ephesus, and all hot Countries; for this privilege has GOD in nature
given to the colder Countries, that they are less annoyed with serpents, and
their serpents also less nocent and hurtful: and therefore the serpents of
Europe, are fewer in number, lesser in quantity, Cor. Celsus. Pierius.
and more resistable for their weakness and strength.

There were a people in Campania called Osci, because of the multitude of
serpents bred among them. Likewise there are great store in Lombardy and
Ferrara. And whereas we have said, that the most nocent and harmfull serpents
are bredd^ in the hotest Regions, where they engender more speedily, and also
grow into greater proportions, yet is it not Sc^liger.
to be understood of any special property appertayning to them alone, for I
read in Olaus Magnus, his description of the Northern Regions, of serpents of
as great quantity as in any other place of the World; but yet their poison is
not half so venomous and hurtful, as in the hoter Regions, especially the
Affrican serpents. In Botina near Liuonia, there Olaus Mag:
are great store of great serpents also, so that the Heard-men are at
continual war and contention with them for defense of their flock: Likewise,
in the Mountains of Heluetia and Auergne, whereof there are many wonders
reported in the world, which I will not stand upon to relate in this place. We
read also, that some places have been disinhabited, and dispeopled by
serpents, such were the people of Scythia, called Neuri, who before the war of
Darius, were constrained to forsake their soil, because they were annoyed, not
only Buditani. The City Amyclae in Italy, (as M: Varro writes) was
destroyed also by serpents. And there be certains places of the world, which
have received their denomination from serpents, besides the Ophiusae near
Creete.

The Island Tenos, was called Hydrussa and Ophiussa, so were Cremiuscos,
Aepolium, and the Mountains Macrocremnij, Rhodus, and the long Islands Ophiades
in the Arabian coast, Eupolides.
which after it had remained a long time desert, was purged and cleared from
serpents by the Kings of Egypt. Nicaenetus also calls Cyprus, Ophiodia. And
in Pausanias, we read of a place name Opheos Kephale, the Serpents head. The
like might be said of Rivers, as of Orontes, called also Ophites and Ophis in
Pontus, which deuideth a sunder Colchis, and the Diod: Sicul.
Country Thiamica. Ebusus nourishes no serpents, and the earth thereof has in
it a secret virtue to drive away serpents, wherefore it is much desired of all
men to carry about them, for that it has been often proved, that never any
venomous beast durst adventure upon any man possessed thereof. The like is said
of Ireland, as our own Chronicles Arrianus. Suetonius. Pliny.
do plentifully declare, and therefore I will spare to enter into any
narration thereof.

To come therefore to the more particular abode of Serpents, especially, of such
as are known to us, we must leave of the talk and nominaton of Kingdoms, and
descend to dens, holes, caves, dunghils, sheep-coats, valleys, rocks,
hollow-walls and trees, woods, green pastures, hedges. and such like places,
wherein they make their most abode: And and so preserves the leaves of it from
falling off: Wherefore in ancient time, the ignorant multitude, seeing a
Birch-tree with green leaves in the Winter, did call it our Ladies Tree, or a
Holy tree, attributing that greenenesse to miracle, not knowing the former
reason, or secret of Nature. Solinus reports of such a like wood in a part
of Africa, wherein all the Winter time, the leaves of all the Trees abide
green, the cause is as before recited, for that the Serpents living at the
roots of the trees in the earth, do heat the^ with their breath. Neither
ought any man to wonder that they should so friendly live together, especially
in the winter and cold time, seeing that by experience in England, we know that
for warmth they will creep into bed-straw, and about the legs of men in
their sleep; as may appear by this succeeding discourse, of a true history
done in England, in the house of a worshipful Gentleman, upon a servant of
his, whom I could name if it were needful.

It happened on a day as his Master leaned at his Parlour window, he saw a great
Snake to slide along the house side, and to creep into the chamber of this
lame man, then lying in his bed (as I remember,) for he lay in a low
chamber, directly against the Parlour window aforesaid. The Gentleman desirous
to see the issue, and what the snake would do in the chamber, followed, and
looked into the chamber by the window; where he

When they perceive that winter approaches, they find out their resting places,
wherein they lie half dead four months together, until the Spring-sunne
again communicating her heat to all Creatures, reuiueth, and (as it were)
raises them up from death to life. During which time of cold and vvinter, as
Seneca writes, Tuto tractari pestifera serpens potest, non desunt tunc illi
venena, sed torpent: They may be safely handled, without Epist. 5.
fear of harm, not because they want poison at that time, but because they
are drouzie, and deadly astonished. But there is a question, whether when they
be in this secrecy or Olaus Magnus affirms of the Northern serpents, that
they eat not at all, but are nourished with sleep. Cardan says, that they
take some little food, as appears by those which are carried up and down in
boxes to be seen, and are fed with branne or cheasill. But this may be
answered, that serpents in boxes, are not so cold as those in woods and
deserts: and therefore, seeing cold keeps them from eating, the external
heat of the boxhouse, or humane body which bears them about, may be a cause,
that enclosed serpents feed in Winter as well as in Summer, and yet the
serpents which run wild in the fields, eat nothing at all, during the time of
their Chias or Ehiaus, that is, their lying hid.

Greuinus that learned man proponeth this question, Si serpents calidi sunt,
qui fit vt in regros tres aut quatuor menses, id est toto illo tempore qu^
delitescunt absque cibo vivunt? If (says he) Serpents be hot, how comes it
to pass that they can live three or 4. months without all food, that is, all
the time of their lying secret? He makes (in my opinion) a sufficient answer
to this question, which for me shall conclude the cause, saying; Does it not
fall out with Serpents as it does with some women, who being full of humor,
and thick phlegmatic matter, have but a little and weak natural heat,
(yet proportionable to the said humor) do live a great time by reason thereof
without food or nourishment. And for this cause, all the hoasts of
Philosophers do define, that serpents do also abstain from eating a long
season. For Nature has clothed them with a more solid skin, and lived them
with a more thick and substantial flesh, to the intent that their natural
heat should not easily vanish away and decay in their bodies, but remain
therein permanent, for the feeding and preserving of life. When they sleep,
they seem to sleep with open eyes, which is elegantly described by Philes in
these Greek verses.

Opo^s katheude kai dokei^ palin blepin
Ophis te kai ptox kai thumou pleres leon
Epipetatai gar he chlamys ton ommaton
Allou tinos Chitonos apaloterou.
Phrorountos autois os dioptras, task-oras.
Which may be englished thus;

How can the Hare, the Serpent, and the Lion bold,
Both sleep, and see together at one time?
Within their eyelids, a soft skin their sight does fold,
Shielding their apples, as glass does weakened eyne.
The food of Serpents that is permitted them by God, is the dust of the earth,
as may appear by that first and just sentence, which GOD himself gave upon
them, for seducing our first Parents Adam and Eve, Gene: 3. 14. Because thou
have done this thing, thou art accursed above all the Beasts of the field, for
thou shall go upon thy belly, and eat dust all the days of thy life. And
again, Esaias 65. 25. Dust shall be meat to the Serpent. And least that we
should think that this curse has not taken hold upon the Serpent, we may
find the express practice hereof, Michae. 7. 17. Where it is said of Gods
enemies, that, They shall lick the dust like the Serpent. Yet Aristotle
affirms truly, that Serpents are Omninori, that is, deuourers of flesh, fish,
herbs, or any other things; howbeit, herein they

We have showed already, how they eat and devour men, women and children,
oxen, sheep, and goats, but whatsoever they eat, they retain nothing but
the moisture of it, and the residue they eiect whole and undigested.
Whatsoever is offered them, that they take, either a bird, or a small chicken,
or an egg, having it, they take hold but of one end, as of the head of a
chicke, or small end of an egg, and so set it directly before them; then do
they gather themselves together in as short a compass as may be, that so their
bodies which seem long and small, being extended, may appear great and wide,
reduced into a short and compacted frame. And surely, hereby they open and
make wider their passage

The Serpents of the North, do in the Summer time eat the flesh of birds, and
herbs, and after the eating of them, they taste of a little water, or milk if
they can attain it, or else wine. For this cause they will suck the vdders of
Kine, or Goats, or sheep, as has been seen in England. Yet is their
appetite to drink but smally, as is in all other Creatures, whose livers are
fungous, and soft like Spunges; and so are all beasts and creatures which
Italy they set pottles of wine to entrappe Vipers: for if once they smell the
wine, they enter the vessel gladly and speedily, and the wine or milk
whereof they drink, is poisoned by them. But in those places of Afric where
it never raineth, they eat a kind of black moist worm, which has many
legs, as is said by Theophrastus. And to conclude, their meat and drink is
so small, that it is received for truth, Nullum venenatum perit fame vel siti,
that no venomous beast perrisheth by hunger or thirst.

The voice of Serpents is called Sibilus, a hyssing, and their voice differs
from all other beasts hyssing, in the length thereof: for the hyssing of a
Torreise is shorter and more abrupt. Of this hyssing voice speaks Lucan,
saying;

Quod strident vlulant que ferae quod sibilat anguis.
In English thus;

Gnashing and howling is the voice of wild beasts,
Long hyssing in Snakes and Serpents does rest.
Among other things notable in a Serpent, this is one, because it easteth off
his old age every year, whereof the Graecians tell this fabulous reason. Once
Mankind strove earnestly with the Gods, by supplication for a perpetual
youth, that they might never wax old: and obtaining their desire, they laid
the same to be carried upon an Ass The silly beast waxing sore athirst in his
travail, at last came unto a water, and thereof endeavored earnestly to
drink; but the keeper of the same water being a Serpent, denied leave to the
Ass to drink thereof, except he would grant him his carriage, which was
Perpetual youth: The poor Ass ready to perrish for thirst, easily
condiscended thereunto. Whervppon the Serpent changes her age for youth, and
men their youth for old age; and the

But to leave fables, and to come more near the mark, the Latins call the
casting of their skin, Anguina senectus, spolium serpentis, and vernatio: the
Graecians, Opheos derma, suphar, leb^ris and geras: the Arabeans, Geluc and
Genlut, and Fulcalhaileb: the Italians, Spoglia delle serpi: and the Spaniards,
Pelle de la culebra. About this Snakes skin there is great difference among
Authors, some affirming it to be the very skin. Other, that it is nothing but
a kind of hard Leprosy, grown upon them during the Winter time while
Aelianus. Greuinus. Olaus. Mag. Textor. Pliny.
they lie hid. Some again say, that they cast it twice a year, first in the
Spring, and then secondly in the Autumn. But by conference of all together it
appears, that while the Serpents lie hid, by reason of their drought now in
the beginning of the Spring when Secondine does a Serpent come out of his
skin.

As concerning their eyesight, they naturally do take the juice of Fennel,
which they eat, and by that recover their seeing again: and if it happen that
they cannot find sufficient, they rub their dim eyes there-vpon. And if it
happen that any of his scales Mercurialis
be bruised or fall senseless, then do they rub themselves upon the thorns
of Iu^per. And whereas it is thought that they cast their skins again in
Autumn, that is to be attributed Pliny.
are long before they cast, and so it falls off in Harvest or Autumn the
first time, which by reason of the vnseasonablenes, is thought to be a second
coat. And this have I my self often found here in England in the Summer
time. The casting of this skin is thus elegantly described by Tibullus:

Crudeles Diui serpens novus exuit annos
Formae non vllam fata dedere moram
Anguibus exuitur tenui cum pelle vetustas
Cur nos angust a condition sumus.
Which may thus be englished;

O, cruel Gods, since Serpents change their yearly age,
And Fates delay not to refine their form,
Since snakes with tender skin excuss'd their years enlarge,
Why unto worser hap is Mankind borne?
Of the inward disposition of Serpents, and of their concord and discord with
other Creatures.
IT is ever to our woe to be remembered, that which the Lord himself has left
recorded in Genesis, that, The Serpent was more subtle then all the beasts
which God had made. By which is expressed, the natural disposition of this
beast above other to subtlety and policy; For I cannot approve the saying of
them, who think Be wise as Serpents, be innocent as D^ues. For if there had
not been naturally, some extraordinary faculty of understanding in this
beast, as there is of meekenes in a Dove, his wisdom would never have sent us
to a serpent possessed with a devil, but rather to some other ingenious Beast,
whereof there were great store in the Balaams Ass, but rather by nature or
creation.

And yet concerning this last sentence of our most blessed Savior, I cannot
but express the words of Tzetzes, who writes thus upon it, Seruate capita
vestra, quemadmodum serpens qui insidijs petitus vapulansque ad mortem,
omnimodo caput suum abscondit, sic vos a tyrannis and impijs cruciati, caput
seruate mihi, fidem vestram, and ne Deum negetis vsque ad ipsam mortem: That
is, it is as much as if our Savior Christ would say; Even as when a serpent is
set upon and strooken, by all the means she can she hides her head, and
exposes all her other parts to blows, reserving that sound; so you, when you
are persecuted by Tyrants, preserve your head, that is, your faith, and deny
not your God to death. And Pliny says, that if his body be cut off but two
fingers length from his head, he will go away as if he had no harm at all,
and live longer.

Paulus Fagius writing upon Genesis, says; It is the opinion of some Haebrues,
that the Serpent at the beginning did go upright, and was endued with all the
affections of men: but this Jewish fable is not worthy to be confuted, because
humane affections cannot proceed but from a reasonable soul, which to ascribe
to the serpent, were blasph^mous and absurd. Besides, that then the soul might
die, and that God had created such a soul, otherwise then by breathing into
the body the breath of life.

Serpents have many Epithets given unto them, as illiberall, perfidious,
treacherous, venomous, poysonfull, stinging, implacable, furious, savage,
merciless, deuouret, and such like: And indeed the holy Writers, by a Serpent
do understand implacable fury: For they are Immitissimum animalium genus, a
most ungentle and barbarous kind of all creatures, as may appear by the rage
of a little Snake, one of the least of Serpents kind: for when he perceives
that he is hurt or wounded, he never cease casting out his poison, until he
have done harm, or die for madness.

Two things I find to be notable in Serpents, the first is proper to their
kind, the second is common to them with Swine, Rats and Mice. First, they are
above measure kind, not only to their young ones, but also to their eggs.
For Funckius confidently swears, Lostorfium he saw a serpents egg taken and
cast into a hot furnace, and when it began to fry in the same, whether by
natural instinct, or by smell thereof, the old Serpent came, and would have
run into the fire to fetch it out, but that he and other strangers by
hindered her by killing her. And so likewise, if in a Wood one of them be set
on fire, all the Serpents that are within the savor thereof, or within the
hearing of the hyssing, will ista^tly gather unto it, even as Beasts when they
hear one another roar. And so great is their love one toward another, (as
Pliny and Textor write) that it was a vulgar saying, Serpentium morsus non
petit serpents, one serpent will not bite another. And Iuuenall writes;

Sed iam serpentum mayor concordia
Scilicet, quam hominum inter se.
That is to say;

Better do serpents with serpents accord,
Then Man with Man, who should be their Lord.
I cannot conceal a most memorable history as ever was any in the world, of a
fight Schilt^ergerus, a Ba^arian, who knew the same (as he writes) while he
was a captive in Turkey, his words are these. In the kingdom called Genycke,
there is a City called Sampson, about which while I was prisoner with Baiazeta
King of Turks, there pitched or arrived an innumerable company of Land and
Water-serpents, compassing the said City a mile about. The Land-serpents came
out of the vvoods of Trienick, which are great and many, and the Water-serpents
came out of the bordering Sea. These were nine days together assembling in
that place, and for fear of them there was not any man that durst go out of
the City, although it was not observed that they hurt any man, or living
creature Baiazeta by Letters after

But I have been too long in this first and proper affection of Serpents,
namely, their mutual concord; and this example of the Land and Water-serpents,
does not break the common promised rule, because it is to be understood of
serpents that live in the sam^element. The second property of Serpents is to
presage pestilence, rottenness of air, famine, floods, and ruin of those
places wherein they are commorant, and have their abiding: Aelianus.
so do they know to choose a good air, and fore-knowe fertility of fruits,
earthquakes, and great tempests. When Helice was destroyed, five days before,
the serpents, snakes, rats, mice and vvesills, departed all out thereof, being
wiser then men, that misdeeming

Of the friendship and enmity which Serpents keep with other Creatures.
EVer since the devil entered into the Serpent, it became hateful to all, or
the most part of the Beasts of the field, so that it may as truly be verified
of the Serpent as it was of Esau, that the hands of all of the serpent, he
loosed him out of danger, and did him no harm. The Serpent being released and
free from death, instead of other recompense for so good a turn, told the Man
that he had been therein long time enclosed, and was very hungry, and
therefore was forced (against his will) to make the best of his fortune, and
therefore must needs eat the Man, and bad him prepare himself for death. The
man astonished at this motion, replied to the serpent, that he hoped he would
not deal so with him, having delivered him from death, now to put his
deliverer to death: and said moreover, that he would not be the Judge of his
own case, but refer the same to the next they found: and the serpent also
yielded to that judgment, being assured that no creature would quit the man,
least he should cast his own life into perrill. Forth then they went and met
with an ass,

The Fox having heard them both, (desirous to end the matter for the man's
benefit) would needs go with them both, to the place where the serpent was
enclosed, and so all parties consented. And when the Fox came thither, he bade
the Serpent go into the same place again, that so he might the better judge
of the whole matter. The serpent went in again betwixt the stones, and was so
enclosed as he was before, for he could not stir neither backward nor
forward. Then the Fox asked the man if this were the serpents case, from which
he had delivered him? The man answered yea, in all points. Then he bade the
serpent come out again, as he said he could, without the help of the man.
But the

Some say there is a kind of love betwixt Serpents and Cats, whereof I find
this story in Ponzettus. There were certain Monks, who all of them fell sick
upon a sudden, and the Physicians could not tell how or whence this sickness
came, except from some secret Ponzettus
the Monks table, to play with a serpent; and thereby it was coniectured, that
the serpent having in his sport, lost or left some poison upon the Cats
skin, the Monks by stroking of the Cat were infected therewith. And the
cause why the Catte was not harmed thereby, was for that she received the
poison from the sport, and not from the anger of the serpent.

And this thing surely is not so maruailous, seeing that little Mice and Rats
do also play with Serpents, and herein Politicians play the serpents, who
hold correspondence and peace both with the Catte and the Mouse: that is, with
two sworn and natural enemies together. The like peace and league they are
also said to keep with Eeles, as may more Rodolphus a Will Monachus
Capellensis.

There was (as this Monk affirms) one of his fellow Monks, which did often
tell him, that being a little boy, and using to sport himself by the water
side, he happened to catch an Eele, which he attempted (for his own pleasure)
to carry to another water, and by the way as he went, he passed thorough a
vvood, at which time when he was in the vvood, the Eele began to hiss and cry
mainelie, at the hearing wheteof, there gathered together very many serpents
round about him, insomuch that he was afraid, and set down his basket fast
pinned and ran away; afterward he came again and sought for his basket, but
he found not the Eele therein, wherefore it was supposed, that the Serpents
delivered the same Eele out of the basket, by some sleight of nature: the only
doubt is, whether Eeles do hysse or not, seeing they are fishes, and Omnes
pisces m^ti, all fishes are mute or dumb. But for answer to this objection, it
is most certain that Ecles have a voice, as all they know which use fishing
in the night; for I my self, have not only heard such a voice in the night
time in Rivers, and other waters where Eeles abounded, but have had

But moreover, it is said that they love some plants or herbs above measure,
as the Fenell and Iuy; and for this latter, both Pliny and Textor, do not
without great cause wonder, that ever there was any honor ascribed or given to
the Iuy, seeing that serpents (the most unreconcilable enemies of mankind)
delight so much therein. But herein the devil Priapus, or the Tartars, which at
this day worship the devil, to the end that he should do the^ no harm. Thus
much I can only say of the friends and lovers of Serpents, by the multitude
whereof we may conjecture, how among other parts of the curse of God upon
them, they are held accursed both by man and beast.

Now then it follows, that we enter into a more particular description, or
rather a relation of that hatred which is between them and other creatures,
and first I will begin with their arch enemy, I mean Mankind. For when
GOD at the beginning did pronounce his sentence against the Serpent, for
deceiving our first Parents, among other things he said, I will put enmity
betwixt thee and the Woman, betwixt thy seed and the woman's seed. Whereby he
did signify that perpetual war, and unappeasable discord, which should be
for ever (by his own appointment) betwixt them. And the truth hereof is to be
seen at this day, for by a kind of secret instinct, and natural motion, a man
abhors the sight of a Serpent, and a serpent the sight of a man. And as by
the tongue of the serpent, was wrought man's confusion, so by the spettle of a
man's tongue, is wrought a serpents astonishment. For indeed such is the
ordinance of God, that men and Serpents, should ever annoy and vex each other.
And this, Erasmus says shall continue, as long as meminerimus illius
inauspicati pomi, we shall remember that unfortunate Apple.

Isidorus says, that serpents are afraid of a man naked, but will leap upon,
and devour a man clothed. Which thing is also affirmed by Olaus Magnus, for he
says, that when he At Seauenoake in Kent, which now belongs to Sir Raphe
Bossevile, Knight. etc.
the Spring and Summer time, to wash my self with other my colleagues, in
certain fish ponds, wherein I have seen and met with diverse water-snakes,
without all harm; and I did never in my life, hear of any harm they did to
any of my fellows being naked, neither did I ever see any of them run away
so fast on the Land, as they did fly from us in the water; and yet are not the
vvater-snakes less hurtful then the Land-Adders. And this was well known to
many.

About the beginning or Fountain Springs of Euphrates, it is said, that there
are certain serpents which know strangers from the people of the Country,
wherefore they do Aelianus. Pliny.
Euphrates in Syria, they also do the like; saving that if they chance to be
trod upon by any of the people of those parts, they bite (like as a dog
does) without any great harm; but if any other, forrainer or stranger annoy
them, they also repay him with malice, for they bite him, and intollerably vex
him; wherefore the Countrymen nourish them, and do them no harm. Such as
these are also found in Tirinthus, but they are very little ones, and are
thought to be engendered of the earth.

The first manifestation in nature, of man's discord with serpents, is their
venom; for as in a serpent there is a venom which poysoneth a man: so in a
man, there is the venom of his spittle, which poysoneth a serpent. For if the
fasting spittle of a man, fall into the jaws of a serpent, he certainly dies
thereof. And of this, thus writes the Poet Lucretius.

Est vtique vt serpens, hominis quae tacta saliuis.
Disperit, ac sese mandendo conficit ipsa.
In English thus;

As serpent dies when spittle of man he tastes,
Gnashing his teeth to eat himself he wastes.
The cause of this, the Philosophers (which knew nothing of Adams fall, or the
forbidden Apple) do assign to be in the contrariety, betwixt the living
souls or spirits of these Creatures: for the Serpents life is cold and dry,
and the humane life hot and moist, wherefore either of both abhors one the
other; and the serpent leapeth as far from a man's Pierius.
spittle, as it would do out of a vessel of scalding water.

Agatharcides writes, that there was a King in Afric called Psyllus, whose
Sepulcher was preserved in the greater Syrtes. From this King there were
certain people named Psyllians, in whose bodies there was a certain inbred
and natural power to kill, or at the least to astonish Serpents, Spiders,
Toades, and such like, and lay them for dead, even by the savor or smell of
them. And the manner of these men, to try the chastity of their wives, was to
take their children newly borne, and to cast them unto direful Serpents, for
if they were of the right line, and lawfully begotten, then did the serpents
die before them, but if they were adulterous, and the children of strangers,
the serpents would eat and devour them. Pliny affirms, that even in his
days, there were some of those people alive among the Nasomons, who destroyed
many of them, and did possess their places; yet some running from death,
escaped. Generally, such people were called Marsi and Psilli, for the Marsi
were a people of Italy, descended of Circes (as is said) in whom there was a
virtue to cure all the stinging of serpents, by touching the wounded places.
Such says Crates Pergamenus, are in Hellespont, about the River Parius. And
some are of opinion, that at the beginning they were Ophiogenes, borne or bred
of Serpents; or that some great Noble man, father of that country, was of a
serpent made a man. And Varro says, that in his time there were some few men
alive, in whose spettle was found that virtue, to resist and cure the poison of
venomous beasts.

But having named Ophiogenes, or Anguigenae, that is, men bred of serpents or
snakes, I see no cause why it should be judged, that those which cure serpents
poison, should be so misiudged; for to cure poison, is not the work of poison,
but of an Antidote, or contrary Ophiogenes, that is, serpents brood: but
rather, that term belongs more justly to those people, whose nature is
sociable with serpents, and serpents agree with them, as they would do with
their own kind. Such an one was Exagon the Ambassador at Rome, who at the
commandment of the Consuls, (for their experience) was cast naked into a
vessel or tun of snakes, who did him no harm, but licked him with their
tongues, and so with great miracle, he was let forth again untouched: and yet
there is no more reason to say, that this man was borne of the lineage of
serpents, because those Men-enemies did not hurt him, then it was to say, that
Daniell was borne of Lions, because that the Lions did not Romulus and Remus
were borne of the kindred of Wolfes, because a she Wolf did nourish the^. We
do read of many people in the world, which were surnamed of Serpents, all which
may as well be deemed to be descended of such creatures, because of their name,
as well as the other, who were by GOD, for their innocence preserved from
death.

Ebusus was called Colub^^xia, and the people thereof Ophiussae, and in Arabia
we read of the Ophiades, both which are derived from Serpents, called in
Greek Opheis. Eustathius also relates a story of a man called Ophis. I omit
to speak of the Ophitae and others; yet thus much I must needs say, that
commonly such names have been given to Serpents, for some cause or accident,
either fainedly or truly derived from Serpents. So we read of Ophion, a
companion of Cadmus, and a builder of Thebes, who was said to be made by Pallas
of a Dragons tooth. Likewise the Spartanes were called Ophiodeiroi by Pythius,
because Caelius Rho^
in a famine they were constrained to eat Serpents.

S. Augustine makes mention of certain blasphemous Haereticks, who were
called Ophitae, because they worshipped a Serpent, and said that the serpent
which deceived our first Adam and Euah, was Christ. Wherefore they kept a
Serpent in a Cave, whom they did nourish and worship, which at the charm of
the Priest would come out of his Cave, and lick the oblations which they set
upon his den; rolling and folding himself round about them, and then would
go in again: then did these abominable Haereticks break these oblations
into the Eucharist, and receive them as sanctified by the serpent. And such
also is the story of Caelius Rhod: where he terms the great devil
Ophioneus, whom both holy Scripture, and ancient Heathen say, that he fell
out of Heaven. But all these things are but by the way, upon occasion of that
unnatural conceit of those men called Ophiogenes: that is, descended or
begotten by Serpents. Therefore I will return where I left, namely, to the
hatred of Men to Serpents, and of Serpents to Men again:

Hercules being but an Infant, (as Poets feign) killed those two serpents
which Juno sent to his cradle to destroy him; for Juno is said to be much
offended at his birth, because he was begotten by Jupiter upon Al^mena: and
therefore there was reserved the Image of Diod. Sicul.
Hercules at Athens, strangling a serpent. But Pierius makes of this fiction a
good moral or Hieroglyphick, when he says, that by Hercules strangling of the
serpents in his cradle, is understood, how those men which are borne for any
great enterprises, should kill their pleasures while they be young. I need not
to stand long upon this point, for it is evident, that to this day there are
many Hyades, both men and women, which are not afraid to kill the Serpents
brood. But such as have perrished by serpents, I mean men of any note, are
Ovid writes of A^lacos the son of Priamus and Alixothoes, who following the
Nymph Hesperia, (with whom he was in love) was suddenly killed by a snake
biting his foot. So were Apaesantus, Munitus, Eurydice, Laocoon, Opheltes the
son of Lycurgus King of Nemea, Orestes, Idmon and Mopsus, were slain by
serpents: vvherof Opheltes, by the negligence of his Nurse Hypsiphiles, leaving
him unguarded in his cradle.

It is recorded by Aelianus and Pliny, that when a serpent has killed a man,
he can never more cover himself in the earth, but in punishment of so vile an
offense, wandereth to and fro subject to infinite miseries and calamities,
being not acknowledged by his female if he be a male, nor yet by the male if
it be a female; and is forsaken of all his crew or society. The earth it
self, not dayning to entertain a man-murtherer into her bowels, but

What monsters therefore are they which have serpents in their delights, and
admire that in them which should be hated of all men. And how base were those
minded Graecians, Aelianus.
which worshipped the Serpent for a God? Or the Athenians, which kept a Serpent
in their Temple, for an opinion that the same did conserve their Tower or
Castle from all Herodotus Aeneas Syl:
enmity. Jupiter was also worshipped in many places in the shape of a Serpent.
And the ancient Borussians, worshipped a natural Serpent of the earth. It is
strange to consider Calechut, who does as severely punish the slaughter of a
Serpent, as he does the slaughter of a Man; and not only restrains his
subjects from harming them, but also builds for them little coats, wherein
they safely lodge in the winter time. And the cause of this error, is their
conceit, that they think serpents are Divine powers dropped out of Heaven,
which they prove, because when they sting fiercely, they quickly kill, and
dispatch their enemy suddenly. Wherefore they think that no creature can kill
so speedily, except an Angel of God. Some of the Heathen, had their
Ophiocephale beasts with Serpents heads, which they did worship for a God. And
the Poet Virgil has an excellent description of Aeneas, his sacrificing to the
ghost of his Father Anchises. Gellius.


-- adytis tum lubricus anguis ab-imis
Septem ingens gyros septena volumina traxit
Amplexus placide tumulum lapsusque per aras
Ceruleae cui terga notae, maculosus and auro
Squammam incendebat fulgor: ceu nubibus ar^us
Mill trahit varios aduerso sole colores
Obstupuit visu Aeneas, ille agmine longo
Tandem interpateras, and laeuia pocula serpens
Libauitque dapes, rursusque innoxius imo
Successit tumulo, and depasta altaria liquit.
Which may be thus englished;

Then from the hollow holes, a slyding snake appeared,
Which seven ways did wind and turn, and dead-mans tomb embrace,
Glyding along the Altar from, and back, with color cleared,
By sunne-shine-light, like spots of gold each varied to the face
A thousand hiewes, whereat Aeneas maruayled: but yet at last,
This snake the holy dishes, and smoothest cups of choice
Did have to touch, like as it would the sacreds taste,
And so sunck down from Altar clean, without both harm or noise.
And to make an end of this Section, of the Antipathy betwixt Men and Serpents,
that whosoever is of the Woman's seed, may profess himself an enemy to the
Serpent, let him but consider how that hateful monster Heliogabalus, having by
the help of the Marsicke-Priestes Pampridius
gathered together many serpents, one day in the morning, when the people were
gathered together to see some rare and unheard of spectacle, suddenly he let
loose the Tzetzes tells another story, of a devise or warlike stratagem, how
serpents by slings or trunks, were sent abroad among the Camps of their
enemies. So does Galen, of serpents included in an earthen pot, and cast like
darts among the Tents of the Romans. And so did Anniball show to Antiochus,
how in a battle by sea, he might shoot serpents among the Mariners to his
enemies, and hinder their rowing: for when he did follow the same devise at
Prusiae, he went away Victor and Conqueror. And thus I will conclude this
part, with the Emblem of Alciatus, which he wrote unto the Duke of Millan,
upon his Arms, being an Infant proceeding out of a Snakes jaws. Pierius.


Exiliens Infans sinuosi e faucibus anguis,
Est gentilitijs nobile stemma tuis.
Talia Pelleum gessisse numismata regem.
Vidimus, hisque suum concelebrasse genus
Dum se Ammone satum, matrem anguis imagine lusam.
Diuini and sobolem numinis esse docet.
Ore exit, tradunt sic quosdam enitier angues,
An quia sic Pallas de capite orta Iouis.
In English thus;

Out of the mouth of winding snake,
Great Duke, this is thy Crest,
A leaping Infant making escape
From jaws, a woeful rest:
The like Coat did Pelleus King
Upon his silver press,
As we have seen, the fame to sing
Of Kindreds worthiness.
For whiles of Jove he glories.
Descended of his race,
He faines his Mother like a snake,
Borne of Diuinest grace.
But why proceeding from the mouth?
Some Serpents so are bred,
Or else, that Pallas issues
Out of great Jove his head.
And the like by the same Author is expressed upon this theme, That the wisdom
of man, is foolishnes with GOD; therefore upon the unnatural conjunction of
two mortal enemies, framed into one body, he thus writes elegantly:

Quid dicam quodnam hoc compellem nomine Monstrum?
Biforme quod non est homo, nec est draco.
Sed sine vir pedibus, summis sine partibus anguis
Vir angui-pes dici, and homiceps anguis potest:
Anguem pedit homo, hominem ructauit and anguis
Nec finis hominis est initium, nec est fera.
Sic olim Cecrops doctis regnauit Athenis.
Sic and Gigantes terra Matter protulit
Haec vafrum species, sed and religione carentem
Terrena tantum quique curet, iuduat.
That is to say;

What shall I call? or how this Monster rightly name?
Biformed, which nor man nor dragon, in all the same.
But man vnlegged, and snake vnheaded: doubtful parts,
Man-snake, snake-man, exceeding humane arts.
Man's tail breeds snake, and snake a man vp-casteth,
On end is not of man, nor other of wild beast tastes.
Such one was Cecrops, learned Athens King,
And Giants such did earthly mother bring.
Misshapen then, an earthly mind expresses,
Deuoyde of grace, for worlds good only wishes.
Thus then I will leave to talk of our most just (and by GOD ordained)
hostility, betwixt men and serpents, and descend to a particular discovery,
how Serpents and other beasts, are for man's sake at the like enmity. And
first of all I will begin with the Fowls, and so descend to foure-footed
Beasts, and insects, or imperfect creatures.

Eagles are alwaie in war with Serpents, from an high they espy them, and
suddenly fly down upon them, with a great noise or cry, tearing out their
bowels, and casting aside their venom or poison. And some (as Albertus) say,
that they will in particular deal with Vipers, Tygres and Dragons, when she
sees them hunting those small beasts or birds which are her pray. This fight
is thus described by Virgill, how the Eagle griping the serpent in her talant,
flies up into the air.

Vtque volans alte raptum cum vulua dracone^^
Fert Aquila, implicuitque pedes, atque vnguibus haesit
Saucius et serpens, sinuosa volumina versat,
Arrectis horret squaemnus, and sibilat ore.
Arduus, insurgens: illa haud minus vrget adunc^
Luct antem rostro, simul aethera verberat ali^
In English thus;

As Eagle flies on high, and in her claws a Dragon bears,
Folded within her feet, wounded, dying to her talants cleaves.
The serpent fierce now windeth round, and with her head erected,
Hyssing out threats, rough scales vpsetteth that were dejected,
To fright her fo: but all in vain, for she with beak does strive,
And beat the air with wings of force, till Dragon cease to live.
There is in the seventh Book of Aelianus history of living Creatures, a
notable and elegant story, of an Eagle which was almost overcome by a Serpent,
and yet preserved and ad pereundum quam ad perdendum, that

In the Mountains of Morfilium, there are great store of great Serpents, which
are very dangerous, but there are also great white Eagles, which do eat and
destroy them. Some say that the Vulture does also destroy serpents, but herein
I cannot be satisfied, for all Eagles do not hunt after this game, but only
the lesser sort of them. Eagles when they build their nest to breed in, they
seek out a certain stone called Aetites, the virtue whereof P. Uen^tus
A^^stotle Philostratus
keeps serpents from their young, and also make their eggs fruitful, so as
it is a very rare thing for Eagles to have a rotten egg.

All kinds of great Hawks, Bussards, and Kites, are also enemies to serpents,
snakes, and Adders, and the Kites will eat them, if they find the^ alive or
dead, as I my self have often seen by experience. The Storkes also do hunt
after serpents, wherefore in Thessalie, Solinus.
it is as unlawful to kill a Storke as to kill a man; for they have many
devises to catch Serpents, and all venomous beasts, and thereof to eat without
harming themselves: and not only eat themselves, but give thereof to their
young ones, as Iuuenall witnesses.

-- Serpente ciconia pullos nutrit
Et inuenta per deuiarura lacerta.
In English thus;

The Storke her young ones, according to kind,
In Serpents and Lizzards, do their meat find.
Sometime they fight together irefully, and the serpent strangleth the storke
by twyning about her neck; again, the storke kills the serpent by pecking
upon her head, and so sometimes they are both found dead together. As the
Eagle has the stone Aetites, so has the storke Lychnites, to defend herself
and her young ones from the rage of serpents. There is (as Oppianus writes in
his Ix^nticis) this vulgar story in Italy. There was a certain serpent, which
came two years together to the nestes of diverse storkes and destroyed their
young ones, neither could all the storkes make sufficient force against her
with all soon as the young ones were hatched, out comes the Serpent from his
hole, and begins to assail the nests of the storkes, but the guardian bird,
(according to the trust committed to her) resisted the serpent, and pecked at
her mortally with her sharp beak. The serpent to end his adversary, nimbly
advanced himself upright, and endeavored to reach the bird; but the wary
bird, soared so high above his reach, that the langrell serpent could not catch
him, and so they continued in fight, till at last the bird killed the serpent,
after that the serpent had once only fastened his venomed teeth upon the bird,
which afterward so wrought upon this bird, that all her feathers did fly off
from her back.

But of all other Fowls enemies to serpents, there is none greater or more
deadly, then the bird called Ibis, which the Egyptians do wonderfully honor;
for when swarms of Philes Marcedi. Simocratus Diodorus Zoroaster.
Egypt out of the Arabian gulfes and fennes, these birds meet and destroy
them: and there is such an admirable feate in serpents of these birds, that
they do not only tremble, and fall senseless at their sight, but also at the
sight of their feathers: they do harm to no other living thing, except Locusts
and Caterpillars, wherefore they are worthily nourished, and called Inimicae et
populatores serpentum, enemies and destroyers of serpents.

All kind of Pullen, as Cocks and Hens, are likewise enemies to the brood of
serpents. And a good courageous cock, (as Columella says) is able to kill and
resist a serpent. For, (as Rondoletius says) he has found in the croppe or
craw of pullen, young serpents devoured by them. But from whence Albertus had
his relation, that a Hen cannot be hurt that day by a serpent wherein she
lays an egg, I cannot tell, and therefore leave it

And it is also said, that the flesh of hens applied to the bitings of
serpents, does cure Crescentius
them, or else cause a hen to sit upon the wounded place; but if the beast
which is wounded, be a cow with calfe, or any such other femall with young, how
soever it fares with the old one, surely the young ones shall perrish.

There is also another bird, which for his combatting with serpents, is termed
Ophiomachus, a fighter with serpents. Although Gesner be of opinion, that
Ophiomachus never signifies Textor.
a Bird. Of this Bird the Septuagints make mention, Leuit. 11. but many of the
better learned, do interpret it for a Lizard, or a Locust, or an Ichneumon.
The Peacocke Oppianus
and serpents: Wherein, although they kill the serpent, either in their own
defense, or else for raven and pray, yet may we admire the prudence of the most
mighty Creator, who has so disposed of his power, that he causes the fowls
of heaven, to revenge man's quarrel upon the serpents of the earth, by whose
subtlety man was plucked from heaven, and they made subject to corruption.

In the next place, God has also framed an opposition betwixt serpents, and
the beasts of the earth and water, which live with serpents in the same
Element, that so they might be both annoyed at home and abroad. I will
therefore begin with the dog, who is a notable enemy to the serpents, as I
my self have seen many in England, for he will shakes it about his ears
as before, and so never gives over till it appear dead: but they sildome kill
them, only they astonish them, and so may a young child knock out their
brains. Howbeit, when they fight in defense of their Masters, then they kill
them, by biting them in pieces. And yet is it more safe for them, to astonish
them, and leave them for dead, by shaking them about their ears, then by
biting them in pecces, for that commonly then, while they share them asunder,
they are stung or bitten by the serpent. And this I have seen often in mine
own experience. But one of the greatest enemies of Serpents, are Hearts, a
timorous beast of all other, and yet greedy to combat with the serpent,
wherefore I will briefly describe this their war and hatred, out of Solinus,
Aclianus, Plutarch, and Oppianus.

The Heart will greedily follow out the path of the serpent, and finding it
lodged in his den or hole, by the virtue of his nose draws it out of the
earth, and thereof some have derived Elaphos a Heart, of Elanein tous opheis,
that is, driving away of serpents. And herein I think it not reason to follow
the opinion of Aclianus, who entreating of Hearts drawing serpents out of the
earth, says; that the serpent is enticed and allured out of her hole, by the
breath of the Heart, as by a Philtre or Cup of love; for seeing that there is so
great an hostility, and antipathy in nature, betwixt their whole disposition,
how can it come from any secret sympathy, that the serpent (which is the
subtillest of all beasts) should be bewitched with the love of his enemies
breath? But if it be said that Serpents, which are by nature very cold, can
easily be drawn forth by a warmer breath, as it were by the sweet

But the true cause of this extraction of serpents out of their lodgings, is as
I conjecture, Oribasius and Gunterius, do subscribe unto this opinion, and
take it for most consonant to reason and truth, and therefore I will not follow
it any further: for by the self same manner do the Sea-Rammes draw the Sea
calfes out of their lodgings among the Rocks under the earth, for when they
have found the Calfe, they keep them from air, and prevent their
refrigeration.

When the serpent sees himself so drawn forth by his adversary, he being
above measure incensed to rage, flies away, and makes his poison more
noisome, violent and powerful, for which cause, there was wont to be a
prouerbiall caveat or warning: Cave ne incideris in serpentem, quum extracta a
latebris anhelitu cerui, effugerit, tum enim propter iracundiam vehementius ei
venenum est. Take heed least you meet with a serpent flying away from the
Heart, after she is drawn out of her den by her breath, for then, by reason
of her rage, her poison is more sorcible. But I will proceed to the more
strange and wonderful combat betwixt serpents and Hearts. For when the serpent
perceives the unavoidable danger, and that she must needs fight for her life,
she hysseth strongly, lifting up her head from the earth, even to the throat of
the Heart, and thereat catches and gnasheth with

But the most strange combats, are betwixt the Hearts and Serpents of Libia,
where hatred has his deepest footing, for there the serpents watch the Heart
when he lies down to sleep upon the ground, and being a multitude of them,
set upon him altogether, fastening their poysonfull teeth in every part of his
skin, some on his neck and breasts, some on his sides and back, some on his
legs, and some hanging upon his privy parts, biting him with mortal rage,
to end and overthrow him. The poor Heart being thus oppressed with multitude,
and assailed without any warning to the battle, in vain attempteth to run
away, for their cold earthy bodies, winding tails, and pinching teeth, hinder
his wonted pace, and ouer-charge his strength: whereat being forced to quite
himself in the best manner he can, enraged with teeth, feet and horns,
assaileth his enemies,

But what is the cause of this hostility betwixt Hearts and serpents? is it for
meat, or for medicine and cure? Surely they would abhor to eat them, if it
were not for health and natural medicine, for sometimes the pores of their
body are dulled and shut up, sometimes the worms of their belly, do ascend up
into the roof of their mouths while they chew the cudde, and there cleave
fast; for remedy whereof, the Heart thus afflicted, runs about to seek for
serpents, for the eating of a serpent cures this malady. Pliny says, that
Like as the Heart desires the water springs, so longs my soul after my GOD.
But for the ending of this question, we must consider and remember, that there
are two kinds of Hearts, one eats serpents, and feeling the poison to work,
straightway by drinking casts up the poison again, or else cures himself
by covering all his body over in water. The other kind only by nature kills
a serpent, but after victory forbeareth to eat it, and returns again to
feed in the Mountains. And thus much for the discord betwixt Hearts and

In the next place, great is the variance betwixt Serpents, Dragons and
Elephants, whereof Pliny and Solinus write as follows. When the Elephants,
called Serpent-killers, meet with the Dragons, they easily tread them in
pieces, and overcome them, wherefore the Dragons and greater serpents, use
subtlety in stead of might, for when they have found the path, and common way
of an Elephant, they make such devises therein to entrap him, as a man would
think they had the devise of men to help them, for with their tails they so
ensnare the way, that when the beast comes, they entangle his legs as it
were in knots of ropes; now when the beast stoopeth down with his trunk to
loose and untie adversaries, and so by his death kill them at his fall and
overthrow, whom he could not overcome being alive. And whereas Elephants
(for the most part) go together in flocks and troops, the subtle serpents
do let pass the foremost of every rank, and set only upon the hindermost,
that so one of the Elephants may not help another; and these serpents are said
to be thirty yardes long.

Likewise, forasmuch as these Dragons know, that the Elephants come and feed
upon the leaves of trees, their manner is to convey themselves into the trees,
and lie hid among (...)
the boughs, covering their fore-parts with leaves, and letting their hinder
parts hang down, like dead parts and members: and when the Elephant comes
to brouze upon the Tree-toppes, then suddenly they leap into his face, and
pull out his eyes, and because

It is reported that the blood of Elephants is the coldest blood in the world,
and that the Dragons in the scorching heat of Summer, cannot get any thing to
cool the^ except this blood: for which cause they hide themselves in Rivers
and Brooks, whether the Elephants come to drink, and when he puts down
his trunck they take hold thereof, and instantly in great numbers leap up
into his ears, which only of all his upper parts, are most naked and unarmed,
out of which they suck his blood, never giving over their hold till he fall
down dead, and so in the fall, kill them which were the procurers of his
death. So that his and their blood is mingled both together, whereof the
Ancients made their Cinnabaris,

The Cat also, by Albertus is said to be an enemy to serpents, for he says
she will kill them, but not eat thereof; howbeit, in her killing of them,
except she drink incontinently, she dies by poison. This relation of
Albertus, cannot agree with the Monks of Mesven their relation about their
Abbey-cat. But it may be that Albertus speaks of vvildcats in the woods and
mountains, who may in ^auine for their pray kill a serpent, which follows
with them the same common game.

The Roes or Roe-bucks do also kill serpents, and the Hedge-hogge is enemy unto
them,

The Wesills also fight with serpents with the like success; the cause is, for
that one and other of them live upon juice, and so for their pray or booty,
they fall together in mortal Aristotle Peroitus Isi^orus. Aelianus.
war. Herein the Wesill is too cunning for the Serpent, because before she
fights; she seeks Rue, and by eating thereof, quickly discomforteth her
adversary. But some say, that she eats Rue afterward, to the intent to
avoid all the poison she contracted in the combat.

The Lion also and the Serpent are at variance, for his rufling mane is
discouraged, by the extolled head of the Serpent to his breast. And therefore
as S. Ambrose says, this is an admirable thing, that the snake should run
away from the Hurt, the most fearful of all other ^easts, and yet overcome
the Lion, King of all the residue.

The Ichneumon or Pharoes Mouse is an enemy to serpents, and eats them, and
because he is too feeble to deal with a snake alone, therefore when he has
found one, he goes Egyptians will signify weakness, they paint an Ichneumon.
The Peacock is also a profested Pellonius Orus.
terror and scourge to Snakes and Adders, and they will not endure near those
places where they hear their voice. The Sorex and Swine, do also hate and
abhor serpents, and the little Sorex has most advantage against them in the
Wintertime, when they are at the weakest. To conclude, the horse is
wonderfully afraid of all kinds of Serpents if he see them, and will not go
over, but rather leap over a dead snake. And thus I will end the war betwixt
serpents, and foure-footed beasts and fowls.

Now least their curse should not be hard enough unto them, God has also
ordained one of them to destroy another, and therefore now it follows, to
show in a word, the mutual discord betwixt themselves. The Spider (although a
venomous creature) yet is it an enemy to the serpent, for when she sees a
serpent lie under her tree in the shadow, Pliny.
she weaueth or twisteth a thread down from her web upon the head of the
serpent, and suddenly byteth into his head a mortal wound, so that he can do
nothing but only roll to and fro, being strooken with a Megrim, whereby he
has not so much power, as to Erasmus
The Cockatrice is such an enemy to some kind of serpents, that he kills
them with his breath or hyssing.

The Lyzard, a kind of serpent, is most friendly to man, and very irefull
against serpents, to the uttermost of his power, whereof Erasmus (in his book
of friendship) tells this story: I saw (says he) on a day, a very great
Lyzard fighting with a serpent in the very mouth of a Cave, at the first sight
whereof I maruailed at the matter, for the serpent was not visible our of the
earth: there was with me an Italian, who said, that surely the Lyzard had some
enemy within the Cave. After a little while the Lizard came unto us, and showed
Erasmus.

Again, in the same place he says, that when a Lyzard saw a serpent lie in
wait to set upon a man being a sleep, the Lyzard ran to the man, and never
ceased running upon the man's face, scratching his neck and face gently with
his claws, until he had awaked the man, and so discovered to him his great
danger. The Locust also fights with a serpent, and kills him when he
lusts, for he gets hold with his teeth upon his lower chappe, and so
destroys him; but this is not to be understood of every kind of Locust, but
only of one kind, which for this cause is called Ophiomachum genus.

The Serpent is also an enemy to the Chamaeleon, for in the extremity of
famine, she Aelianus.
sets upon them, and except the Chamaeleon can cover herself from his rage,
he has no defense but death. Albertus calls a certain worm, Spoliator
colubri, because (as he says) it will take fast hold upon a serpents neck
underneath his jaws, and never give over till he has wearied and destroyed
his adversary. The Torteises are enemies to Serpents, and will fight with
them, but before they enter combat, they arm themselves with wild Marioram or
Peniroyall.

But there is not any thing in the world that fights more earnestly against
serpents then Sea-crabbes and Creuises, for when the Sun is in Cancer,
serpents are naturally tormented with pains and feauers, and therefore if
swine be stunge or bitten with serpents, Thrasillus Pliny. Aelianus
Ephesus, at the one side whereof there is a Cave full of many noisome and
irefull serpents, whose bytings by often probation, have been very deadly both
to men and beasts. These serpents do oftentimes endenour to crawl over the
poole; now on the other side there are great store of Crabbes, who when they
see the serpents come crawling or swimming, they instantly put out their
crooked legs, and as it were with tongues or pynsars, reach at the slyding
serpent, where-withall the serpents are so deterred, that through their sight,
and often remembrance of their unhappy success with them, they turn back
again, and never dare any more adventure to the other side. Where we may see
the most wise providence of the Creator, who has set Sea crabs, the enemies of
serpents, to guard both men and cattle, Ebusus and Creete, as some say,
although Bellonius say, that there are Scolopendraes Vipers, and Slow-wormes in
Creete, yet he says they are without venom: and there are very few in
England and Scotland, but none at all in Ireland, neither will they live if
they be brought in thither from any other Country. This antipathy with
Serpents, proceeds from living to dead and vegetable things, as trees,
herbs, and plants, as may be seen by this discourse following.

There is such virtue in the Ashe-tree, that no Serpent will endure to come
near either the morning or evening shadow of it, yea though very far distant
from them, they do so deadly hate it. We set down nothing but that we have
found true by experience: If a great fire be made, and the same fire encircled
round with Ashen-boughes, and a serpent put betwixt the fire and the
Ashen-boughes, the serpent will sooner run into the fire, then come near the
Ashen-boughes: Thus says Pliny. Olaus Magnus says, that those Northren Pliny.
Callimachus says, there is a Tree growing in the Land of Trachinia, called
Smilo, to which if any Serpents do either come near, or touch, they
foorth-with die. Democritus is of opinion, that any Serpent will die if you
cast Oken-leaues upon him. Pliny is of opinion, that Alcibiadum, which is a
kind of wild Buglosse, is of the same use and quality; and further, being
chewed, if it be spet upon any serpent, that it cannot possibly Aelianus.
Constantinus
live. In time of those solemn Feasts which the Athenians dedicated to the
Goddess Ceres, their women did use to lay and strew their beds, with the
leaves of the Plant called Agnos, because serpents could not endure it, and
because they imagined it kept them chaste, Whereupon they thought the name was
given it. The herb called Rosemarie, is terrible Aelianus
to serpents.

The Egyptians do give it out, that Polydamna, the wife of Thorris their King,
taking pity upon Helen, caused her to beset on shore in the Island of Pharus,
and bestowed upon her an herb (whereof there was plenty) that was a great
enemy to serpents: whereof the serpents having a feeling sense (as they say)
and so readily known of them, they straightwaies got them to their lurking
holes in the earth: and Helen planted this herb, who coming to the knowledge
thereof, she perceived that in his due time it bore a seed that was a great
enemy to serpents, and there-vpon was called Helenium, as they that are
skillful in Elecompane in English.
Plants affirm; and it grows plentifully in Pharus, which is a little I Will
against the mouth of Nylus, joined to Alexandria with a bridge. Rue, (called of
some Herb of grace) especially Lybia, is but a back friend to serpents, for
it is most dry, and therefore causing serpent soon to faint and loose their
courage, because (as Simocatus affirms) it induces a kind of heaviness or
drunkenness in their head, with a vertiginie or giddines through the excess
of his dryness, or immoderate sticcitie. Serpents cannot endure the savor of
Rue, and therefore a Wesill, when she is to fight with any serpent, eats Rue,
as a defensatiue against her enemy, as Aristotle, and Pliny his Interpreter,
are of opinion.

The Country people leaving theirvessels of milk abroad in the open fields,
do be-smeare the^ round about with garlic, for feast least some venomous
serpents should creep into them, but the smell of garlic, as Erasmus says,
drives them away. No serpents were Trifolie, or Three-leaued-grasse, as
Aedonnus would make us believe. And Cardan the Physician has observed as much,
that serpents, not any thing that is venomous, will neither lodge, dwell or
lurk privily near unto Trifolie, because that it is their bane, as they are to
other living creatures: and therefore it is sown to very good purpose, and
planted in very hot countries, where there is most store of such venomous
creatures. Arnoldus Villanouanus says, that the herb called Dracontea kills
serpents. And Florentinus affirms, that if you plant woormwood, Mugwort, or
Sothernwood about your dwelling, that no venomous serpents will ever come near,
or dare enterprise to invade the same. No serpent is found in Vines when they
flourish, bearing flowers or blossoms, for they abhor the smell, as Aristotle
says. Auicen an Arabian Physician, says, that Capers do Galbanum kills
serpents only by touching, if oil and the herb called Fenell giant be mixed
withal. There is a shrubbe called Therionarca, having a flower like a Rose,
which makes serpents heavy, dull and drousie, and so kills them, as Pliny
affirms.

Albertus and Kyranides affirm, that there is a certain Tree in Asia called
Hyperdiocis, which sounds as much as, Against the right hand, with whose
sweet fruit Doves are delighted; but there are serpents which are sore enemies
to the Doves: so lying in wait for them, and not being able to abide the
smell and shadow of the Tree, the Doves notwithstanding very safely do there
in the Tree seek their refuge, and find food wherewith to sustain
themselves. Rasis (who practiced physic one hundredth years) affirms, that if
any man do melt Sal Almoniack in his mouth, and then spet it into a serpents
mouth, that he will die of it.

Of the Medicines made and taken out of SERPENTS.
IT is manifest, that if any man be wounded of a Serpent, though Remedies to be
had and taken from serpents.
the wound seem incurable, that the bowels or inward parts of the same
serpent, being applied to the wound, will cure the same; and those that have
eaten the liver of a boiled Viper at any time, shall never after be wounded of
any serpent. Neither is a snake venomous, unless at sometimes of the Moon,
when she is thoroughly moved or angered. And a live snake or serpent being
caught, if the bitten place be bathed, soked or washed with the Pliny says)
they are dedicated to Aesculapius.

Auicen says, that if any be troubled with the Leprosy, he is to be cured by
taking a black serpent, and being excoriated, he must be buried so long till
there breed worms of him, and then he is to be taken forth of the earth and
dried, and so to be given to the leprous person for three days together, the
quantity of one dram at every time, with syruppe of honey. Pliny, and with
him agrees Cornelius Celsus, affirms, that if any one do eat the middle
part of snakes or serpents, casting away the heads and tails, they cure
Str^mes, Elephantia, or Elephantiasis, which is a kind of Lepry proceeding of
Melancholy, choler and phlegm, exceedingly adust, and makes the skin rough,
of color like an Elephant, with black wannish spots, and dry parched scales
and scurffe: This disease (I say) so grievous, and Strumes, are exceedingly
helped by eating often of Vipers and serpents, as John Taganet, in his first
Book Institut. Chirurg. has assured us.

Pliny says, that if you take out the right eye of a serpent, and so bind it
about any part of you, that it is of great force against the watering or
dropping of the eyes, by means of a rhume issuing out thereat, if the serpent
be again let go alive. And so he says, that a serpents or snakes heart, if
either it be bitten or tied to any part of you, that it is a present

Paulus Venetus, in his second book, chap. 40, writes, how that in the
Province of Caraiam, there be serpents of exceeding greatness, which being
killed, the inhabitants of the Country do pull out their gall, which they use
to prize at a very high rate when they sell any of it, for it is very
medicinal: so that they which are byt of a mad dog, if they take inwardly
in any drink but the quantity of a penny weight of this gall, they are
presently cured. And if a woman be in her travail of childbirth, if she taste
never so little of this gall, the birth will be the more speedy. So, if any be
troubled either with the Pyles or Haemerrhoides in the fundament, if that the
place be anointed with this gall, after a few Hippocrates gives the seed of
serpents as a remedy against the suffocation of the belly.

Nicholaus Myrepsus preseribeth this medicine against strains and hardnesses.
Take a dead serpent, and put him into a new pot, luting it very well with
Gypsum, then set it in a furnace that it may be burnt, after that, commixe the
ashes of a serpent with an equal portion of the seeds of Fennegreke, so being
wrought up with Attick-hony, and thoroughly disgested, annoint the place
affected. And with him agrees Pliny, who expressly affirms, that the ashes of
snakes and serpents; being anointed upon Strumes, either with oil or wax,
is a singular medicine. And likewise to drink the ashes of a serpent, that is
burrit to powder in new earthen pot, is very good: but it will be the more
effectual, if the serpents be killed between two tracks or forrowes that are
made with Cart-wheeles. The ashes of a serpent burnt with salt in a pot, being
put with oil of Roses into the contrary ear, helps the toothache.

An unguent against the Morphue, prescribed by Olaus Magnus. Take of the ashes
of a serpent burnt in a new pot and well covered, two ounces, Lytarge,
Galbanum, Ammoniacum, Opponax dissolved in Vinegar, three ounces, boil them
until the Vinegar be consumed, then strain them, putting to them of
Turpentine three ounces, Frankincense, Masticke and Sarcocolla three ounces,
Saffron two ounces, working them with a Spathulor till they be cold. The powder
of a burnt serpent, is likewise good against Fistuloes. The fat of a snake or
serpent mixed with oil, is good against Strumes, as Pliny says. The fat of
snakes mixed with Verdegrease, heals the parts about the eyes that have any
rupture. To which agrees the Poet, when he says:

Anguibus ereptos adipes ^rugine misce,
Hipoterant ruptos oculorum iungere parts.
Which may be thus englished;

The fat of snakes mingled with yron-rust,
The parts of eyes does mend, which erst were burst.
It is certain that barrenness comes by means of that grievous torment and
pain in childbirth; and yet Olympias of Thebes is of opinion, that this is
remedied with a Bulls gall, the fat of serpents, and Verdegrease, with some
honey added to them, the place being there with anointed before the coming
together of both parts. When a Woman is not able to conceive by means of
weakness in the retentiue virtue, then there is no doubt, but there must
needs grow some membrane in the bellies entrance, for which it Hippocrates in
lib. de Sterilibus.

Gesner had a friend who signified to him by his Letters, that the fat of a
Serpent was sent to him from those sulphurous Bathes which were near unto
Cameriacum, and was sold at a very dear rate, namely, twelve pounds for every
ounce, and sometimes deerer. They use to mix it with the emplaister of John de
Vigo, that famous Surgeon) for all hardnesses, nodes, and other privy and
unseen (though not unfelt) torments proceeding of the Spanish-poxe. They use
it yet further, against leprous swellings, and pimples, and to smooth and
thin the skin. Matthiolus says, that the fat of a black Serpent, is mixed
to good purpose with those ointments that are prepared against the French or
Spanishpox. Pliny mixeth their fat with other convenient medicines, to cause
hair to grow again. The suffumigation of an old serpent, helps the monthly
course. Michaell Aloisius says, that oil of Serpents decocted with the
flowers of Cowsleps, (ever remembering to gather and take that which swimmeth at
the top) is singular to annoint podagricall persons therewith.

Now follows the preparing of Serpents. Take a Mountaine-Serpent, that has
a black back, and a white belly, and cut off his tail, even hard to the
place where he sends forth his excrements, and take away his head with the
breadth of four fingers, then take the residue and squise out the blood into
some vessel, keeping it in a glass roasted, as it may not be burnt, and yet
that it may be brought into powder, and the powder thereof must be eaten
together with other meat, because of the loathing, and dreadful name, and
conceit of a serpent: for being thus burned, it preserves a man from all
fear of any future Lepry, and expels that which is present. It keeps
youth, causing a good color above all other Medicines in the world; it
cleereth the eyesight, gardeth surely from gray hairs, and keeps from the
Falling-sicknes. It purges the head from all infirmity, and being eaten (as
before is said) it expels scabbines, and the like infirmities, with a great
number of other diseases. But yet such a kind of Serpent as before we have
described, and not any other, being also eaten, freeth one from deafenes.

You may also finely mince the heads and tails of Serpents, and feed
therewith chickins Noli me tangere, it will tame and master the pain, causing
it to putrefie more easily and gently, and scarcely leaving behind any
cicatrise or skarre. And if a woman being in extremity of pain in
childbirth, do but tie or bind a piece of it on her belly, it will cause the
birth immediately to come away. So the skin being boiled and eaten,
performs the same effects that the Serpent does.

The blood of a Serpent is more precious then Balsamum, and if you annoint your
lips with a little of it, they will look passing read: and if the face be
anointed therewith, it will receive no spot or fleck, but causes it to have
an orient and beautiful hue. It represseth all scabbinesse of the body,
stinking in the teeth and gummes if they be therewith anointed. The fat of a
serpent, speedily helps all rednes, spots, and other infirmities of the eyes,
and being anointed upon the eye-liddes, it cleereth the eyes exceedingly.
Item, put them into a glassed spot, and fill the same with Butter in the Month
of May, then lute it well with paste (that is, Meal well kneaded) so that
nothing may euaporate, then set the pot on the fire, and let it boil
wel-nigh half a day; after this is done, strain the Butter through a cloth,
and the remainder beat in a mortar, and strain it again, and mix

Hippocrates says, that a Heart or Stagge having eaten any Serpents, the worms
in their guts are thereby expelled. And Absyrtus has the same words, that
Hearts by eating of a Serpent, doc kill and expel worms from their guts.
Hierocles, to a certain medicine which he prepared for the Strangulion in a
horse, mingled the dung of a Lyzard, and Stear herpetou, (that is, as I
interpret it) the fat of a serpent, the blood of a Dove, etc. Laurence Rusius
says, that it is good to give the flesh and decoction of Serpents, to mad,
beating and striking horses. And that the fat of a Serpent, etc. does cure
the puffing or swellings that arise in horses backs, which come by means of
any compression, or close sitting and thrusting down.

Item, the unguent that droppeth from a Serpent, whilst he is roasted on a spit,
is highly commended for Fistuloes that are in horses hoofes. Galen and Rasius,
doc counsel us to cut in pieces a snake or serpent, and to lay the fat there
of upon a stick, and to anoint the outward parts of the hoof of any horse.
Horseleaches, live Mise, the green Lyzard being burned, if they be given to a
Hawke in her meat, they do cause a speedy mutation of

Item, the Serpent that is speckled, and of diverse and sundry colors, of all
others has the least poison, and in the German tongue it is called Huf,
(peradventure it is that which we call a snake) if, (I say) you take this
serpent, and boil it with Wheat, and give the same Wheat to a Hen to feed
upon, being mingled amongst her meat and drink with the venim of a Serpent,
a Hawke being fed with the flesh of such a Hen, forthwith casts her
sick feathers, and is freed from any other disease, if she have any at all, as
Albertus says.

The old skin of an Adder or Snake, that he casts off in the Springtime, if
it be rubbed upon the eyes, cleereth the sight, as Pliny says. And Galen
bids us, if any be troubled with blood-shotten eyes, to take the old
cast-skinne of serpents, and being beaten with Seawater', to annoint them
there-withall. And Cardan says, that the cast-skin of a snake, if the eyes be
rubbed therewith every morning, that they will never be very dim of sight, nor
yet ever have any pin or web in them. Amongst compositions that are made
for Diocles affirms; adding further, that the old age, or cast-skinne of a
snake being boiled in wine, is an excellent help for pain in the ears, if
a little thereof be dropped into them. Boil the cast skin of a snake with
tops of Poppy, and drop a little thereof into the cares, if any be troubled
with pain thereof, and this is an excellent remedy, as Galen in his third
Book, De Composit. medicam. sec. loca, has taught us, having himself learned
the same from Archigenes. The cast-skinne of serpents being burned in a pot, or
on a hot burning tyle-shard, if it be mingled with oil of Roses, and so dropped
into the ears, is proved to be very effectual against all sores, and
sicknesses of the ears; but especially against the stinking savor of them: or
if they be puralent or full of matter, then to be mixed with vinegar. Some use
to mingle

Marcellus says, that if you take the gall of a Calfe, with a like quantity
of Vinegar, and mix them with the cast-skinne of a serpent, if then you dippe
a little wool into this medicine, and put it into the ear, that it helps
very much, especially if with a sponge being soked in warme-water, you first
foment the ear. Dioscorides and Galen do affirm, that the cast-skinne of a
serpent, if it be boiled in Wine, does cure the toothache, if the pained place
be washed therewith. But yet, in intolerable pains of the teeth, this is
proved more singular. Take the cast-skinne of a Serpent and burn it, then
temper it with oil, till it come to the thicknes or consistence of hard Honey,
and cover the tooth (being first scoured and cleansed therewith, annoynting all
the near places to the same, and put some of it Archigenes says, if you lay
the cast-skinne of a snake unto the teeth, not being burnt, they will all fall
out. It cures likewise the lousy evil, called Phthiriasis. And Galen
prescribes this cast-skin of snakes or serpents, for a remedy against the
Cholick, if it be put into a brass pot with some oil, and so burnt to powder,
if then it be dissolved in oil, and the place therewith anointed, it is of
great virtue. And if it be boiled in a Tin vessel with some oil of Roses,
it remedieth the the Bloody-flixe, and such as be troubled with Tenesmas, which
is, a great desire in going to stool, and yet can do nothing.

Arnoldus de villa noua, in his Breuiarie says, that if you take the cast-skin
of a serpent, Opopanax, Myrrh, Galbanum, Castoreum, yellow Sulphur, Madder,
Pigeons or Hawks Cardan lib. de Subtle. says, that the cast-skin of a
serpent burned in the full of the Moon, and entering into the first degree of
Aries, if the ashes thereof be sprinkled on the head, that thereby terrible and
fearful dreams will follow. And if the face be anointed or washed
therewith being first laid in water, that it will cause one to look very
fearfully and horribly: and if it be held under the tongue, it will make one
very wise and eloquent: and if it be kept under the soles of the feet, it
makes one very gracious among Princes, Magistrates and great men. And another
says, that this cast-off-skin being puluerised when the Moon is in her
increase, and in the first degree of Aries, if the Galen) Goats that have
eaten of the boughs and leaves of Tamariske, and I have found them without a
spleen: also I have seen other Goats that have lickt up serpents after
they had cast their skin, and I have proved, that after that, they have
grown very white, and to have kept their young years a great while; so that
it was long before they waxed old.

Of the way to drive away Serpents. Of their poison and bytings.
A certain and sure way to cure those, who either have been poisoned,
envenomed, or bitten by them.
TO expel and drive far away any venomous Creatures, we use Suffu^^igations
to expel Serpents.
to make fumigations of the root of Lyllies, Harts-horne, and the horns and
hoofes of such beasts as be clouen-footed: likewise of Bay-leaues and berries,
Calamint, Watercresses, and the ashes of the Pine Tree. The leaves of Vitex,
Bitumen, Castorium, Melanthium, Goates-hornes, Cardamomu^, Galbanum, Propolis,
which may be called Bee-glew, the herb called Horstrange, Panax, Opopanax,
Fleabane, the shauings or scrapings of the Cipres or Ceder Sagapinum, the herb
called Poley, Fern, and all other things that have a strong or vehement ill
savor, being cast on the coals for a fumigation, do with their vapor chase
away venomous beasts. For whereas all venomous creatures have the passages or
pores of their bodies weary straight and narrow, they are very easily filled and
stuffed, and are quickly stopped and suffocated by such like sents and smells.

Aetius in his 13. Book, sets down an excellent fume after this manner.
Take of Galbanum, of Sandaracha, Butter, and of Goates-fat, of every one a like
much, make them into Pills, and use them for a Fumigation. Nicander in
Theriacis sets down some for the same intentions, in these verses.

Ceruinique graui cornu nidore fugabis:
Et sic cum accendens Gagatae quandoque lapillum,
Quem consumentis non exedit impetus ignis:
Multifidam filicem crepitantibus inijce flammis,
Aut imas viridis libanotidos accipe fibras,
Tantundemque acris nasturci: his junge duobus
Aequali capre^ iam jactum pondere cornu,
Aut exic^ant em nares cerebrumque nigellam,
Interdum Sulphur, faedum quandoque Bitumen,
Vt-su^pta aequali pendantur singula part.
Praeterea graveolens candentibus indit a prauis
Galbana, et ignitum faciens vetica dolorem,
Dentatisque cedrum maxillis sectile lignum,
Omnibus invisum serpentibus eff^at odorem.
In English thus;

By Hart-horne-fu^^ do serpents slide away
When stone Gagates burning's put thereto:
Which heat of fire does not clean destroy;
Then int' those flames cast many-leaued Fern also.
Of green hogs-^ll, take the lowest by a^ches,
Of Nosewort sharp, so much (...) to them join
A like proportion of Roes horn, in ^aight and kantches,
Or else Nigella, drying nose and brain,
Or Brimstone, called fil^^y Sulphur,
So all be equal in weight and parts to cure.
Besides, Galbanum rank, laid on burning coals.
Or Nettles, which do cause a fiery pain,
And Cedar cut, all burned d'bout serpents holes,
Them overcome, and make them fly amain.
The breath or vapor that issues from Serpents, is so pestilent, that it
kills all young chickins, as Columella says; and for preventing of this
mischief, it is good to burn Harts-horne, Women's baire, or Galbanum.

Vis et mirificos cautus perdiscere odores,
Accensis quibus arcetur teterrima serpens,
Aut Styracem vras, aut atri vulturis alam,
Vel nepetam aut frondem rigidae stirpemque myricae.
In English thus;

If thou would learn what odours for thy skill
Were best to scarre the serpent fierce away,
Burn Styrax, or black Vultures winged quill,
Or Neppe, green leaves, or stock of Tamariske assay.
And Pliny and Sextus agreeing with him, do say; that if you burn the
feathers of a Media and Paeonia, (as Aristotle testifies) wherein there is a
stone found, with whose fume serpents are chased away: whose property is such,
that if any man cast water on it, it will burn, and burning, if with any Fan
you go about to make it to flame, it is straightway quenched; and thus being
extinguished, it sends forth a savor stronger then any Brimstone. And to
this subscribeth Ni^ander in these words.

Vel tu Threicium flamma succende lapillum,
Qui licet irriguis mersus tamen ardet in vndis,
Expressaque statim restinguitur vnctus oliua,
Hanc quem fluctisoni mittant de littore Ponti,
Qui, rude vulgus, ibi vescentes carne magistri
Pascendi pecoris suapost armenta sequntur.
In English thus;

Or take the Thracian stone, which set on fire
Will burn in water, yet quenched is with oil.
This cast from Pontus shore, Heard-men desire,
The better to feed their flocks, and serpents foil.
The powder of a Cedar tree, puts to flight venomous Serpents, as Virgil in
the Georgicks witnesses.

Disce et odoratum stabulis accendere Cedrum,
Galbaneoque agitare graves nidore chelydros.
Which may be englished thus;

Learn how of Cedar, fire in thy foldes to make,
And with Galbanums savor, put to flight the snak.
Things that are strewed or laid under us, both in our houses and in highways
or beds, will likewise defend and keep us from venomous creatures, as for
example; Sothernwood, Of such things as are laid under us, that will expel
serpents.
Dittander; Fleabane; Calamint; Gentian; Hastula regia; Sage; Nightshade; S.
Iohnsvvort, called of some Fuga damonum; Margerom; Origan; Wilde-Rue;
Wilde-Time; Bay-leaues; the shauings or tops of the Cypres or Cedar-tree;
Cardamomum; Penyroyall; Wormevvood; Mugwoort; Lysimachia, called in English
Loose-strife; and Rosemarie. And if we cannot lie upon such a bed:

Tunc nixta virides sinuosi vorticis alueos,
Amnicolam nepetam per obesas collige ripas.
Aut tibi cast a salix, pulchro quae flore renidet,
Praebeat, instrata securum fronde grabatum.
Sic quoque montanum polium, cuius grave spirans
Horret odor, nomenque suum quae debet echidnae
Herba, et ab Euxina quae fertur origanus vrbe,
Quaecunque illarum decerpitur obuia, prodest.
Quin etiam multo per aprica cacumina flore
Ridens abrotonus, pecorique ingrata petitum
Pabula serpillum, molli quod pascitur horto.
Praestat item exiguam circumlustrare conyzam,
Vrticeasque comas, et spinosas anagyros:
Sic et punicea sectis ex arbore ramis.
Regalisque amplis licet hastae frondibus vti.
Accipe item innocuo medicantem frigore strumum,
Atque invisa pigris Scyra prima aestate bubulcis. Nicander.
In English thus;

Then by the winding banks of crooked streams
The Water-neppe take up, which underfoot is tread,
Or the chaste Osier, whose fair flower has beams
And leaves, secure from serpents make thy bed.
The Mountain Poley, whose strong-smelling breath
The snakes abhor, and that which does the Hydraname,
The Origan which comes from Euxinus earth,
Do profit all against serpents, if you bear the same.
The smyling Sothernwood, which grows on tops of hills,
Wild-Marioram, to beasts abhorred food,
Conyza strewed, the haunt of serpents spills,
The Nettle-croppes, thorny Anagres stay their mood,
So do Pomegranate branches out from tree:
And the broad leaves of Kingly Hoosta use,
Strume, healing strumes in harmless cold I see,
And Scyra, which in Summer Neatheards do refuse.
In like sort, to sprinckle the place with water, wherein Sal Ammoniacum is
dissolved, drives away Serpents, as Auicen affirms.

If any one annoint himself, either with Deares-sewit, the fat of Elephants or
Lions, Of unguents and things borne about us, from which serpents will run
away.
Serpents will shun that person: and there be some, (as Pliny says) that for
fear of Serpents, do annoint their bodies with the seeds of Juniper. The
juice of the black Vine Nicander compoundeth this ointment. Take two Vipers
about the end of Springtime, Deare-sewit thirty drammes, Vnguenti rosati
thirty six drams, crude oil of Olives as much, commix them with nine ounces
of Wax, boil the Serpents till the flesh fall from the bones, which you must
cast away because they are venomous.

They that will yet be more assured, let them annoint their bodies with a
thin cerate, made of Wax, oil of Roses, a little Galbanu^, some powder of
Harts-horne, or else Cummin-seede of Ethiopia. etc. Aetius. If a man carry about
him the tooth of a Stag, or those small bones which are found in his heart, he
shall be secured from serpents. If any one do Greuinus is of the mind, that
the Iet-stone, beside other manifest qualities, has yet this as peculier to it
self, that he which carries it about with him, need neither to fear
serpents, nor any other poisons.

Now for venomous beasts, which are found in any houses, the best way is to
power scalding water into their dens and lurking-holes. And if any man
(constrained by necessity) can find no other place to sleep, but such a one
as where Salamanders, the Spyders called Phalangia, or the like serpents do
abound, it is good to stop the holes and corners with Garlic beaten with
water, or some of those herbs which before we have spoken of. But yet men now
adays hold it the safest course, to power unquenched Lime sprinkled with
water, into their dens and secret corners.

As they that are bitten by a mad dog, so all such persons as be wounded by
venomous creatures, are in exceeding great danger, unless at the first they
receive speedy help and succor: The safest way therefore to cure the poison,
is by attractiues, which dravve from the more inward parts to the surface, and
not to make too much post-hast in closing Dioscorides writes) to vomit often:
but if any be wounded by biting, then it is best to use scarification, and to
fasten Cupping-glasses upon the place affected, to draw out the poison. Some
use to suck the venom out, and others to cut off and dismember the part. And
this is to be observed, that if any one will undertake to suck out the venom,
the party that attempteth it must not be fasting: and besides, he must wash
his mouth with some Wine, and after that, holding a little oil in his mouth,
to suck the part, and to spet it presently forth. And before Cupping-glasses be
applied, the part must first be fomented with a Spung, then scarified deeply,
that the venomous matter may the more speedily be drawn out from the more
inward parts; and yet cutting of the flesh round in

But if the place will admit no section or incision, then cupping-glasses, with
deep scari^ication, with much flame, must needs be used: for by attraction of
the blood, and other humors with windines, the poison it self must of
necessity follow. And Aetius in his 13 Book and tenth chapter, counsels
that the sick person be kept from sleep, and so sit still, until he find
some ceasing or release from his pain. Besides, the member which is enuenomed,
ought to be bound round about, that the poison may not too easily convey it
self, and penetrate into the more noble and principal parts, as the hatt,
liver or brain. And in this manner having applied your Ligature, you must by
the advice of Fumanellus, set on your Cupping-glasses, and they being removed,
apply the herb Calamint upon

A Dove or Pidgion being divided in the midst, and applied hot to the place
affected, attracteth poison to it self, and heals. And the same effect and
virtue have other living creatures, as namely, hens and chickins, young
Kiddes, Lambs and pigges, if they be set to in the beginning, immediately after
the cupping-glasses be removed, for being as yet hot and warm, they draw out
the poison and mittigate pain. But if neither any one for love or money can be
found, that will or dare suck out the venim, and that no cupping-glasse can be
provided, then it is best that the patient do suppe of mutton, veale, or goose
broth,

The learned Physician Matthiolus, in his comment upon Dioscorides, says;
that to avoid the danger that comes by sucking out the venom, men now a-dayes
use to apply the fundament of some Cock or Hen, or other Birds after the
feathers are pulled off, to the wounded place, and the first dying, to apply
another in the same order, and so another and another, until the whole
venomous matter be clean driven away, whereof one may be certainly assured,
if the last hen or byrd so applied, do not die. Auicen the Arabian says,
that the Physicians of Egypt, (in which Country there be infinite store of
venomous burning medicaments, to finish this cure, as says Hieron. Mercurialis
in his first Book D^ Morb. Venenatis writes, and John Tagault, Institut.
Chirurg. lib. 2. says, that the wound must first be seared with a hot yrou (if
the place can endure it) or else some caustic and vehement corroding medicine
must be used: for all such wounds are for the most part deadly, and do bring
present death, if speedy remedy be not given; and therefore, according to
Hyppocrates counsel, to extreme griefs, extreme remedies must be applied;
so that sometimes the safest way, is to take or cut off that member, which has
either been bitten or wounded.

Neither am I ignorant (says Dioscorides) what the Egyptians do in these
cases: For when they reap their Come in Haruest-time, they have ready at hand
prepared, a pot with Egypt abounds with such venomous and poysonfull
creatures. When as therefore they have wounded either the foot or any other
part, they that are present, do put the string into the pot of pitch, and
binding the place, they fall to cutting it with some instrument round in
compass as the string is tied, after this is done, they power in of the pitch
a sufficient quantity, then untying and loosing the band, they lastly annoint
it with Garlic and Onions.

A certain Countriman being bytten of a Serpent, perceived by and by his
foot to swell, and by little and little the force of the poison to swell up
higher, and nearer to the heart, the Castle of life: who being taught and
instructed of an old woman, to bury his foot under Theriaca and Honey tempred
in Ale, and so after a few hours, fell on a great and continual vomiting, by
which means he was perfectly freed from the pains of the upper parts of his
body, his feet notwithstanding continuing in their former swelling: which was
also taken clean away, only by

But yet afterward by chance, washing himself in a hot sunnie day in a
certain River, and sitting upon the bank, his feet hanging down into the
water, and he falling fast a sleep, (he knew not well how long time he so
continued) at length awaking, he plainly perceived the water that was near,
on all sides to be filthy, stained and polluted with much stinking matter, and
as it were, dreggie refuse and ful^ulencie, and from that time forwards, he
remained well and lusty, and as sound as a Bell.

Another time a Maid being bitten of a Serpent, laid presently upon the wound
some Fresh-cheese, made of the milk of a white Goat, and pouring or
sprinkling her foot with the milk of the same Goat, as a defensatiue for
that part, was by this means restored to her former health, as a certain
learned man testified in his Letters written to Gesner.

Vegetius affirms, that if any living creature be bytten and wounded of
venomous Beasts, the place which is hurt, must first of all be suffumigated
with hens egge-shels burnt, which first ought to be infused in Vinegar, with a
little Harts-horne, or Galbanum. After fomentation, the place must be
scarified, and the blood must be let out, or else the place must be seared with
a hot iron, so far as the venom stretches. And this care must be had, that
the Cauterre be never applied and laid, either above the joints, or in sinewie
parts at any do gently and easily provoke sweating with warm clothes cast
upon him, and afterward to walk up and down, and to take Barley-meale in his
meat, with some leaves of the Ash-tree, and the white Vine added to it. And to
the wound it is good to apply Attick-Honie, or Comin heated and patched, and so
mixed with old Wine. Some use to mix new Hogs-dung and Attick-honny tempered
together with wine, and so being warmed, to apply it as a Cataplasme, adding
to it some urine of a man.

I have said before, that young chickins, being dissected or cut in pieces
when they are warm, ought to be laid to the stinged part: and some there be
that yield this reason why they should be good for this purpose, because (say
they) there is a natural antipathy betwixt them, and venomous creatures. But
this reason is reasonlesse, and I think rather,

Now, after we have described the general method of curing this mischievous
evil, we

Theriaca Andromachi applied plaister-wise, is notable for this purpose. So
there be other vehement strong plasters, whose virtue is to attract, expel,
and discuss venime, of which are those which are made of Salt, Niter,
Mustard-seede, and Rosemary-seedes, Dittanie, or Dittander, and the root of
Chamaeleon: and this that follows is of singular virtue. Take of the scumme,
froth or spume of silver, one pound, Ceruse, and of the best Turpentine, of
either as much as of the former, old oil three pounds, wax six ounces,
Ammoniacum Thymiama, four ounces, and of Galbanum as much: boil the Ceruse,
the scumme of silver, and the oil so long, that they will not cleave unto the
hands, then melting the other ingredients, incorporate them all together, and
use them when need is for any bytings, etc.

There is an Emplaister fathered upon one Epigonus, and bearing his name: for
this Epigonus being in close prison, and condemned to die, for revealing this
Medicine had his pardon granted him, and was freely discharged, because he
therewith healed the daughter of the Emperor Marcus: for being sorely
wounded by a Serpent in her breast, and all other Physicians dispayring of
help, yet with this she was recovered. It is also good for all new and old
Ulcers, and for such as are either bytten by men, or by any kind of venomous
creeping worms and serpents. Take of Squamma aeris, (which is the scales and
offall of Brass, blown from it in melting) of Ammoniacum, Aloes hepatica,
Verdegrease, of Aes vstum, of Frankincense, Sal ammoniacum, Aristolochia
rotunda, of every one half an ounce, Turnep-seedes three scruples, of the
root of Dragonwort half an ounce, seeds Colophonia one pound, old oil three
ounces, sharp Vinegar half a spoonefull, Mustard-seede three scruples, Spodium
nine scruples, Stone-Allom and Opopanax, of either half an ounce: Infuse the
metalline ingredients for three days space in Vinegar, and beat and powder
them together, melting those that are to be melted, then sprinkle on those that
are dry; and all of them being thoroughly wrought and made up, according to the
form of an Emplaister, use them where necessity requires.

Antonius Fumanellus a late Physician, prescribes an experimented, and (as he
calls it) a divine oil against any poison taken into the body, or the biting
of any venomous beasts and serpents, whether it be received inwardly by
drinking it down, or anointed outwardly upon the body, and this is it that
follows. Take of oil of Olives one pound, the flowers and the leaves of the
herb called S. Iohnswort bruised, boil them for the space of three hours and
strain them, then boil again other fresh flowers and leaves of the same
herb and strain them hard, and do so again the third time, then add to
them of the roots of Gentian and Tormentill, of either one ounce, boil and
strain them as you

Andreas Matthiolus in his Commentaries upon Dioscorides, does exceedingly
commend oil of Scorpions, because being anointed upon the pulses outwardly,
it is (as he affirms) a singular remedy, not only against any poison taken
inwardly into the body by the mouth, but for the bytinges and stinginges of
any venomous creature whatsoever. The way to prepare and make it, he describes
at large, in his Praeface upon the sixth book of Dioscorides, which I think
needless here to describe to avoid tediousnes; therefore if any one be
desirous to know the composition of it, let him read Matthiolus in the place
before cyted. Unquenched Lyme, mixeth with Honnie and oil, and applied to the
place the thick-nes of a cerote, is good against the wounds that come by any
venomous beasts

Now I think it meet to set down those simple medicaments which are
outwardly to be applied, either by laying on, or by anointing, against the
sting and venomous biting of Serpents. It is best first to foment the sore
place with hot vinegar, wherein Catmint has been boiled, and in stead of
Vinegar, one may take Salt Water, or Sothern-wood, Maidenhaire, and Garlic,
either in drink, meat, or to be used as an ointment. The root of Aram, and
of Astrologe, and the leaves of the true Daffadill, and oil of Balm, is most
effectual: also Beellium, and the root either of the white or black Beete, is
good against the bytings of Serpents.

Betonie, Coleworts, especially the Wild-coleworts, Calamint, the leaves of
the wild Enula Campana, Barly-meale, the Day-lilly, Hisop, the
Flower-deluce-roote, Horehound, Balm, Watercresses, Basil, Origan, Plantine,
Leekes, Turnips, Madder, Rue, Verven, Mustard-seede, Scabiose, and S.
Iohnswort, all these plants are greatly praised amongst the Writers of
Physic, for the mischiefs abouesaid.

Pliny is of opinion, that the bowels or entralls of Serpents themselves,
being applied, will surely cure the wounds of all other Serpents, although
they seem incurable. A live serpent being caught, if it be bruised, beaten and
stamped in water, and the hurt place fomented therewith, will assuredly help
and do much ease.

Quae nocuit serpens, fertur caput illius apt
Vulneribus jungi, sanat quae sauciat ipsa,
Vt Larissea curatus Telephus hosta. Qu. Serenus.
Which may be thus englished;

What Serpent hurts, men say by long experience,
His head applied does cure: for where the wound,
The help is also made, as in Telephus sense,
Harmd by Larissus spear, by it was cured found.
And Guil. Varignana says, divide or cut a serpent, and lay it upon the place,
and it will Thraspi and of Tithimal (which is a kind of spurge) is greatly
used for this. Aut Tithimallus atrox, vulnus quae tuta pervngat. Some Serenus
besides these, do put the root of black Hellebor into the wound, because it
draws out the poison, as I by mine own experience can testify, says
Matthiolus.

There be also sundry Antidotes and preservatives which are taken inwardly,
that are very effectual against the bytings of serpents and venomous beasts,
as namely that, which is called Theriaca Andromachi, or Methridate, and the
like compositious. Galen in his book De Theriaca ad Pisonem, prefers
Theriaca Andromachi before all other medicines either simple or compound, for
virulent wounds; because it performs that effect for which it is ministered.
For it was never as yet heard, that ever any one perrished of any venomous hurt
or biting, who without any delay foorth-with drank this medicine: and if any
man had taken it before he received any such dangerous hurt, if he were set
upon and assailed by any poisonous creature, it has not lightly been heard
that he has dyed of the same. There be many Antidotes described by the
Ancients, which they set down to be admirable Auicenna terms Theriaca
mirabilis, whose composition is as follows. Take of Opium and of Myrrh, of
either of them a dram, Pepper one dram and a half, the root of
Aristolechia longa and Rotunda, of each of them three drammes, Wine two
drammes; make them up with Honey and Rocket water, so much as is sufficient for
an Electuarie: the quantity to give, is four scruples, relented in some fit
and convenient decoction.

King Antiochus, surnamed Magnus, had a kind of Theriaoa which he used
against all poisons, which is described of Pliny in his 20 book and last
chapter in this wise. Take of Wild-time, Opopanax, and the herb called
Gromell, of each a like much, two drammes, Trifolie one dram, of the seeds
of Dill, Fennel, Smallage, Anise, and Ameos, of every Orebus twelve drammes:
all these being powned and finely searsed, must with wine a sufficient
quantity, be made into Trochisces, whereof every one must weigh one dram,
give thereof one dram at a time in a draught of wine. There is another Antidote
and preservative against any poison, described by Paulus Aegineta, much like
unto this, which is thus. Take of Bryonie, Opopanax, of the root of Iris
Illirica, and of the root of Rosemarie, and of Ginger, of each of these three
drammes, of Aristolochia five drammes, of the best Turpentine, of wild Rue, of
each three drams, of the meal of Orobus two drammes; make them into
Torchisches with Wine, every one weighing one scruple and a half, or two
scruples to be given also in wine.

Galen in his second book De antidotis, chapter 49. discourses of a certain
Theriacall Zopyria antidotus, (so taking the name of one Zopyrus) which was
notable against all poisons, and bytings of venomous creeping creatures. This
Zopyrus in his Letters written unto Mithridates, solicited him very much, that
he would make some experiment of his Antidote: which as he put him in mind he
might easily do, by causing any one that was already condemned to die, to
drink down some poison aforehand, and then to take the Antidote: or else
first to receive the Antidote, and after that to drink some poison. And put
him in remembrance, to try it also in those that were wounded any manner of way
by Serpents, or those that were hurt by arrows, or Darts, anointed or
poisoned by any destroying venime: So all things being dispatched according to
his praemonition, the man (notwithstanding the strength of the poison) was
preserved safe and sound Zopyrus.

Matthiolus in his Praeface upon the sixth book of Dioscorides, entreating of
Antidotes and preservatives from poison, says; that at length, after long
study and travail, he had found out an Antidote, whose virtue was wonderful
and worthy admiration: and it is a certain quintessence extracted from many
simples, which he sets down in the same place. He says it is of such
force and efficacy, that the quantity of four drammes being taken either by
it self, or with the like quantity of some sweet-senting Wine, or else with
some distilled water, which has some natural property to strengthen the
heart; if that any person has either been wounded or strooken of any venomous
living thing, and that the patients life be therewith in danger, so that he
has lost the use of his tongue, seeing, and

There be besides these compounds, many simple Medicines, which being taken
inwardly, do perform the same effect, as namely the Thistle, where-vppon
Serenus has these verses following.

Carduus et nondum doctis fullonibus aptus,
Ex illo radix tepido potatur in amni.
That is to say;

The root of Teasill young, for Fullers yet unfit,
Drunk in warme-water, venom out does spit.
That Thistle which Qu. Serenus here understands, is properly that plant
which of Greeks is called Scolymos. Yet it is taken sometimes for other prickly
plants of the same kind, as for both the Chamaeleons, Dipsacos, or Labram
veneris, Spina alba, Eryngium, and some other. But Dioscorides attributes the
chiefest virtue against poisons, to the Thistles called Chamaeleon albus, and
to the Sea-thistle, called Eryngium marinum, which some call Sea-hull or
Huluer: for in his third book and ninth chapter, entreating of Chamaeleon
albus, he says thus. The root of it taken with Wine inwardly, is as good as
Treacle against any venime: and in the 21 chapter of the same book, Eryngium,
is (says he) taken to good purpose with some wine, against the biting of
venomous creatures, or any poison inwatdly taken. And the same Serenus,
adscribeth the same virtue to the Hearts curd

Cervino ex foetu commixta coagula vino
Sumantur, quae res membris agit atra venena.
In English thus;

Wine mixed with rennet taken from a Heart,
So drunk, does venom from the members part.
He means a young Heart, being killed in the Dammes belly, as Pliny affirms
also the same in his 8. book and 30 chapter in these words; The chiefest
remedy against the coagulum of a Fawn, killd and cut out of the belly of his
damme. Coagulum, is nothing else but that part in the belly which is used to
thicken the Milk.

Proderit et caulem cum vino haurire sambuci. Qu. Serenus.
Which may be englished thus;

In drink, the powder of an Elder-stalke,
Against poison profits, as some men talk.
That virtue which Serenus here gives to the stalk of Dwarfe-Elder, (for that
is meant in this place) the same effect Dioscorides attributes to the root,
in his fourth book, and Pliny to the leaves. The herb called Betony is
excellent against these foresaid affects, and by good reason, for the greatest
part of poisons do kill through their excess of coldness, and therefore to
overcome and resist them, such means are necessary, by which natural and
lively heat is stirred up and quickened, and so the poison hindered from
growing thick together, and from coagulation.

Again, all men do agree, that those medicines are profitable which do
extenuate, as all those do which have a property to provoke urine, and
Betonie is of this quality, and therefore being taken with Wine, it must
needs do good in venomous bytings, and that not only in the bytings of men
and Apes, but in Serpents also. Radish also has the same quality, being
taken with vinegar and water boiled together, or else outwardly applied, Serenus
affirms.

Sieve homo, seu similis turpissima bestia nobis
Vulnera dente dedit, virus simul intulit atrum,
Vetonicam ex duro prodest assumere Baccho.
Nec non et raphani cortex decocta medetur,
Si trita admorsis fuerit circumlitor membris.
In English thus;

If man, or Ape (a filthy beast most like to us)
By biting wound, and therein poison thrust,
Then Betony in hard wine steeped long,
Or rind of Radish sod as soft as pappe,
Do heal, applied to the member strong.
There be certain herbs and simples, as Wild-lettice, Veruen, the root
called Rhubarb, Arabians, Indians, the Galls (now termed Frenchmen) and
Scythians, were wont to poison their arrows, as Paulus Orosius in his third
book testifies of the Indians, where he writes, how Alexander the Great,
in his conquering and winning of a certain City, under the government of
king Ambira, lost the greatest part there of his whole Army with envenomed
Darts and quarrels. And Celsus in his fifth Book says, that the ancient
Galls were wont to annoint their arrows with the juice of white Hellebor,
with which they did great mischief. Pliny Scythian Nation. The Scythians
(says he) do annoint their arrow-heads with the corrupt, poisonous, and
filthy stained dreggie blood of Vipers, and with man's blood mixed together: so
that the wound seems to be incurable. And to this alludeth Quintus Serenus.

Cuspide non quisquam, longa neque caede sarissae,
Fulmine non gladij, volueris nec fell sagittae,
Quam cito Vipereo potis est affligier ictu:
Quare aptam dicamus opem, succosque manentes.
Which may be thus englished;

There is no man with spear or lances point,
Sharp edge of sword, or swift arrows might,
To kill so soon, as Vipers force does dint:
Then fit is the aid and means that it acquit.
There is a certain kind of people to whom it is naturally given, either by
touching or sucking, to cure the wounding of venomous Serpents, called Psylli,
(a people of Libia) and Marsi people of Italy, bordering upon the Samnites,
and Aequiculania, and those that were called by the ancient Writers
Ophiogenes, which dwelt about Hellespont, as both Pliny, Elianus, and Aeneas
Siluius do witness.

Callias in the tenth Book of the history which he wrote of Agathocles the
Syracusan, says, that if any man were bytten of a Serpent, if either a Lybian
by birth, or any Psyllus, whose body was accounted venom to serpents, was
either purposely sent for, or came that way by chance, and saw the wound but
indifferently and not very sore tormenting the patient, that if he did lay but
a little of his spettle upon the biting or stroke, that presently the aching and
pain would be mittigated. But if he found the sick patient in great and
intolerable anguish and pain, he took this course in his curation, that
first he would suck and draw up into his mouth a great deal of water, and
first rinse and wash his own mouth therewith, and after this, pouring it all
out of his own mouth into a cup, he would give it to the poor wounded person
to suppe of. Lastly, if the malignity and strength of the Nicander Colophonius
is sufficient authority, whose verses I will here describe.

Audiui Libycos Psyllos, quos aspera Syrtis
Serpentumque ferax patria alit populos,
Non ictu inflictum diro, morsuue venenum
Laedere: quin laesis far et opem reliquis,
Non viradicum, proprio sed corpore juncto.
Which is in English thus;

The people Psylli bred in Lybia Land
Near Syrtes, where all serpents do abound,
Are never stunge nor bitten by that band
Unto their harm, or any bodies wound:
But straight one naked man another hurt does heal,
No roots, but bodies virtue danger does repeal.
Some of the Greeks have left in writing, that the Idolatrous Priests and
Prelates of the God Vulcan, that dwelt in the I Will Lemnos, had a special virtue
given them to cure those who were wounded by Serpents: whereupon it is said,
that Philoctetes being wounded by a serpent before the Altar of Apollo, went
thither to be remedied of his hurt. Cornelius Celsus says flatly, that the
people called Psylli had no such peculiar gift in healing the^ that were hurt
of serpents, either by sucking or touching the place, but being boldly
aduenturous, had presumed thereby to attempt and do that, which others of less
courage had no

Galen in his book De Theriaca ad Pisonem, manifestly shows, that the Marsi,
who lived in his days, had no such special quality against the poison of
Serpents, but that with their crafty dealing, and knauish tricks, they beguiled
the common people. For (says he) those Iuglers and Deceivers, do never hunt
Vipers at any convenient time, but long after the Prime of the year and
Spring, wherein they cast their skins, when as they are weak, and have lost
their strength, and are very faint: then do they take them, and so by long use
and continuance, teach them, and invre themselves one to another, and bring it
so to pass, that they will feed them with strange and unaccustomed meats to
their nature; yea they

Matthiolus also, a Physician of late days, agrees with him in this point,
affirming expressly, that these kind of trumperies and crafty fetches, are much
put in practice in these Paul, wherein they show themselves notorious liars.
etc. Thus far Matthiolus.

Serpents do sometimes creep into the mouths of them that are fast asleep,
where-vppon a certain Poet says;

Non mihi tunc libeat dorso jacuisse per herbam.
Which may be englished thus,

Then would I not upon the grass,
Lie on my back where Serpents pass.
For if a man sleep open-mouthed, they slilie convey themselves in, and wind
and role them round in compass, so taking up their lodging in the stomach,
and then is the poor wretched man, miserably and pitifully tormented; his
life is more bitter then death, neither feels he any release or mittigation
of his pain, unless it be by feeding this his unwelcome guest in his
guest-chamber, with good store of Milk, and such other meats as Serpents best
like of. The only remedy against this mischief, is to eat good store of
Garlic, as Erasmus in his Dial. De Amicitia says. Cardan says, how that it
was reported for a certain, that a Viper entering into a man's mouth being
asleep and gaping with his mouth, the venomous worm was expelled only with
burning of Leather, and so receiving the stinking sum at his mouth, the Viper
not enduring it, he escaped with life. But of this more in our discourse of
the Viper.

A certain man called Cissus, being very devout in the service, and much
addicted to the worship of the God called Serapis, being trecherously wound in
and intrapped, by the All this medicinal description of Serpents, was written
by Tho Bonham Doctor in Physic.
and thrust his hand into the vessel or place where it was kept and preserved;
which he forthwith did, and the Lamprey caught fast hold on his hand, biting
hardly, and holding fast by the teeth: and at length, when she was pulled from
her fast hold, the sickness and grievous torment of his body, was plucked
away, and he freely delivered from that threatening danger. Thus far Aelianus.

The Conclusion of this general Discourse of SERPENTS.
Having thus discoursed of the medicinal qualities in Serpents, and the
remedies which Almighty GOD in nature has provided against their venom, now
for a conclusion, I will add some other natural uses of them, and shut up all
in moralities, and in sundry ways to take them.

There were certain Amazons, as Pierius notes, that in their warre-like
preparations and Arms, did use the skins of Serpents. And to the intent that
this may not seem strange, the Troglodites Herodotus Mela. Pliny.
did eat Serpents and Lyzards, for they lived in Caves in stead of houses, and
their voice was not a significant voice, but a kind of scrietching, like
gnashing. And for these causes, Serpents are very much afraid of any one of
this Nation. Likewise certain of the Candeans were called Ophiophagi, that is,
Eaters of Serpents, and one part of the people of Arabia eat Snakes. But in
India, Ethiopia, and an Island in the Ocean, found out by Iambolus, there are
Serpents which are harmless, and their flesh very sweet and pleasant to be
eaten: So are there in Macinum, a Province of Asia. In Manzi in the upper
India, and Solinus. Scaliger. Boemus
Caraia, they sell the flesh of Serpents in open Markets. These serpents are
called Iuanae, and the common people are forbidden to eat them, because they
are very delicate, even as Pheasants, Partridges and Peacocks are in France.
Yet is there but one way to dress them, which is, to roll them in Lard, and
so to sees them. For first they bowell them, then wash them and fold them up
together round, putting them into a pot no bigger then Aeneas Syl: Nicander
Venetus. P. Martyr
to receive their quantity; upon them they cast Pepper with water, and so
sees them upon wood and coals that will not smoke. With this Lard there is
made a broth sweeter then any Nectar, which they use in many bankets of great
account.

But for the taking of Serpents, I will yet add one or two more experiments,
wherein the Ancients revenged themselves upon these irreconcilable enemies of
mankind. They Florentinus
they enclosed all that were taken, and so making a great fire, east the said
part of venomous serpents into the same, which consumed them all. Otherwise,
they took a living Serpent, and dug in the earth a deep Well or pit so
steep, as nothing at the bottom could climb up to the top thereof, into this
pit they would cast the serpent, and with her a brand of fire, by means
whereof the enclosed Serpent would fall a hyssing for her life, at the hearing
whereof, her fellows of the same kind, were thereby easily invited to come at
her call to give her relief, (as we have showed elsewhere) who finding the
noise in the bottom of the pit, do slide down of their own accord, whereby
they likewise entrap themselves in the same pit of destruction.

But the Iuglers or Quacksaluers take them by another course, for they have a
staff slit at one end like a pair of tongs, those stand open by a pin, now
when they see a serpent, Viper, Adder or Snake, they set them upon the neck
near the head, and pulling forth the pin, the serpent is ineuitably taken,
and by them loosed into a prepared vessel, in Caelius Rhoi Aelianus
herself together, but if she be so strooken the second or third time, as one
delivered from her astonishment and fear, she recollecteth her wits and
strength, and slydeth away. The Constantinus
like observation unto this, is that of the Ancients, that a serpent cannot be
drawn out of her den by the right hand, but by the left, for they say, if
one lay hold on her tail by the right hand, she will either slide farther into
the earth from him, or else suffer herself to be pulled in pieces, never
turning again: and therefore says mine Author, Non cedit trahenti, Pliny.
Textor
sed elabitur fugiens, aut certe abrumpitur, she yields not to him that
draws her, but slideth away, flying from him, or else suffers herself to
be pulled in pieces in the

The sundry Hieroglyphics, statues, figures, Images, and other morrall
observations about Serpents, are next here to be expressed, which the
Ancients in their Temples, Shieldes, Banners, Theaters and public places had
erected for their honors and dignity. And first of all, in the Temple of
Delphos, near the Oracle, there was placed the Serpent which provoked Apollo
to fight with him, wherein it was by him slain. And the Plutarch. Pierius.
Hermopolitans, did reserve the Image of Typhon, in a Seahorse, whereupon sat
fighting a Hawke and a Serpent: by the Seahorse they signified the Monster
Typhon, by the other beasts, as namely the Hawke and the Serpent, how by his
principality and government, which he had gotten by violence, he troubled both
himself and others.

Hercules had in his shield certain Serpents heads, pictured with these verses.

Bis sena hic videas, stridentibus effer a flammis
Coll^, venenato vultu maculosa draconum.
Tum magis offenso spirantia gutture virus
Quam magis Alcides offuso sanguine pugnat.
Which may be englished thus;

Of Dragons heads twice six here may thou see,
Raging amongst the flames with poysond spotted face:
Casting most venom forth when they enraged be,
As when Alcides saw his blood distill apace.
And so Virgill says of Auentinus.

-- Clypeoque insigne parentum.
Centum angues, cinctamque gerit serpentibus, Hydram.
That is to say;

His shield an hundred snakes, his Fathers crest
An Hydra in their compass is entest.
Oscus which reigned among the Tyrrhenians, gave in his Standard and Coat of
Arms Osci (from whom it may be he was sprung and derived) lived Pierius.
in Campania in Italy, as we have showed already.

In ancient time we read, that when hostility began to be compounded, they
had Herolds and Ambassadors of peace, which they called Caduceatores, which
carried upright a certain Rod or staff called Caduceus, this Rod was very
straight, and at the either side, Suidat.
were artificially joined two serpents figures, winding and crooking into each
other as the manner of Serpents is. This Rod was so sacred, that it was a
great offense to violate or offer any injury unto it: for by the straight Rod,
was signified Perfect and Upright reason or understanding; by the two crooked
serpents at either side thereof, was figured the two Armies inuading and
assailing the same Vpright-vnderstanding, yet not prevailing: For this passed
thorough and betwixt them without harm, by truce and entreaties of Peace. This
Rod was therefore consecrated to Mercury, the tails of the Serpents reaching
down to the handle or half of the Rod, where they were adorned with vvings.
Alciatus made these Emblematicall verses upon the Caduceus.

Anguibus implicitis, geminus Caduceus abis,
Inter Amaltheae cornua rectus adest.
Pollentes sic mente viros, fandique peritos
Iudicat, vt rarum copiae multa beet.
In English thus;

Twixt Ceres horns the Rod of Peace does stand
Upright, with winding snakes, and double-winged tails,
To show that minds and tongues with Learnings brand,
Are blessed with plenty in all worldly vayles.
But having thus entered into the Hieroglyphicall Emblems, if I should say so
much as I Malus deus mali mundi, an evil God of an evil world, should be
termed and expressed by a Serpent. The cause says Pierius, is linguae motatio,
the continual and never ceasing motion of a Serpents tongue: and so the
continual and euer-working persuasions of diabolical tentations, and a true
mixture and limb of this old Serpent, speaks otherwise with his tongue, then
he thinks with his heart. Therefore it is also said, that a natural serpent
has a cloven or twisted tongue.

Clemens says truly, that Serpents do also signify men given over to sins,
and fraudulent impostors or malices, Onos hybristes, ho akotastos, bukos agrios
ho pleonecticos, kai ophis ho apatroon, that is, An insolent and an intemperate
Ass. There is a raging wolf which is covetous, and there is a serpent which
is an impostour and fraudulent. The same learned man says, that riches are
like to a serpent: For as when an ignorant man thinks to take a Serpent
without harm by the tail, she turns back again and biteth him, but if he
take her by the neck, she cannot execute any part of her malice: even so when
a wise man has the managing of riches, by virtue of his discretion he so
charmeth them, that there is not in them any harm at all: but the foolish man
is mortally stung by his imprudent possession and dispensation of them.

OF THE ADDER.


IT falls out in the particular Discourse of Serpents, that I express the
England in the first place, according to Alphabeticall order, that is, the
Adder. For although I am not ignorant, that there be which write it Nad^re, of
Natrix, which signifies a Water-snake, yet I cannot consent unto them so
readily, as to depart from the more vulgar received word of a whole Nation,
because of some likelihood in the deriuation from the Latin: For whereas
Naders may seem not improperly to be derived of Natrix, and Natrix of Natando,
that is, swimming in the water, the first coniecturall deriuation is destroyed
by the latter, because this Serpent whereof we now entreat, haunteth not the
waters, except for drink in her time of thirst, and therefore I mislike the
writing of Nadere for Adder: and rather take that word to signify a land
snake. And yet if there be any good argument of deriuation of English from
Latin, I would not have the Reader think, but that the Adder may as well be
derived a terra, from the earth which it uses, or of ater, black, which is
the color that it bears, or from atrox fierce, (for there is no serpent of
that quantity, more fierce, angry, or hurtful,) as well as nadere from
natrix.

The Latins do express this kind of serpent by the word Coluber, whereof
some give sundry reasons, either because colit vmbras, it haunteth and lives
in hedges and shadowye Isidorus.
places, or else a lubricis tractibus, of his winding pace or path. Gelenius
deriueth it of the Greek word R^lobouros, which signifies wanting a tail,
because the snakes which are about houses, are sometimes found without tails,
which have been struck off my men; but this opinion has no reason for the
Adder, which is not domestical. Indeed I confess that Pliny uses Coluber
for a general word for serpents, when he says, Coluber in aqua viuens, which
deceived Theophr^stus and Gaza, applying it to the water Serpent. And so
Erasmus and others, translate Ophis coluber, that is, the general greek word
for a Serpent, an Adder. There is also Colubra, as in Lucilius, Varro, and
Nonius Marcellinus appears; Horace, Virgill, and Cornelius Celsus. The
Italians call this serpent Lo Scorzone, scorsoni Colubra, la scorzonara la
scorsona. The French, Colenure. The Spaniards, Culebra, and at this day, the
Grecians Nerophis. And thus much for the name, except I may add these verses
of Virgill in his Georgicks.

Aut tecta assuetus Coluber, succedere and vmbrae
Pestis acerba boum, pec^rique aspergere virus
Fouit humum. Cape saxa manu, cape robora pastor.
Tollentemque minas, and sibila colla tumentem.
Deijce, iamque fuga tumidum caput abdidit alte;
Cum medij nexus, extremaque agminae caudae
Solvuntur, turdosque trahit sinus vltimas orbs.
In English thus;

Or when the Adder using house or shade
Bred in the earth, the bane of sheep and neat,
Then shepherd take both stone in hand and blade,
To quash his swelling neck and hissing threat.
Or when his fearful head he puts full deep in earth
To fly thy wrath, him sunder in the midst,
Or cut his tail, if no part else appears,
For that will stay his pace, while on it thou treadest.
This is usual, to call a water-Adder, a house-Adder, a Land-snake, and such
other, but catachrestically confounding one kind with another. And thus much
for the name of this Serpent. The parts differ not from the general
description before recited, it is long like an Eeele, and has many Epithets,
as virides colubri, green Adders, long, rough, venomous, diverse colored,
swelling, slyding, winding, blew, terrible, secret, hurtful, Medusaean,
Cyniphian, Gorgonean, Lybissine, biting, spotted, wreathing, black, bending,
heavy, scaly, and diverse such other, as the Gramarians have observed. But
concerning the color hereof, it is most commonly black on the back,
sometimes greenish and yellowish. Thebane Adders, that they had a certain
appearance of horns upon them, as we shall show more at large in the story of
Cerastes, or the horned serpent.

Victorius, speaking of the great worms which are bred in men's bellies, does
call them Caecas Colubras, blind Adders; but otherwise, the Adder which is
proper to the earth, is not blind, but sees as sharply as any other serpent
either by day or by night. They are hoter then the snakes, and therefore live
more in the shadows, and lie for the most part round, folded up together like
a rope, as the Poet notes, saying;

Hirtus and vt coluber, nodoso gramine tectus
Ventre cubat flexo, semper collect us in orbem.
In English thus;

As the rough Adder in knotty grass is covered,
Lies on her belly, and round in circle gathered.
They are a crafty and subtle venomous beast, biting suddenly them that pass
by them, Jacob said that his son Dan should be Coluber in via, an Adder
biting the horse heels. When she has bitten, with her forked or twisted
tongue she infuseth her poison, whereof, and the remedy seming thereunto,
there is this history in Ambrosius Paraeus. At what time (says he) Charles the
ninth lay at Melines, I and Doctor Le Feure the Kings Physician, were sent for
to cure a certain Cook of the Lady Castropersees, who was bitten by an Adder,
as he was gathering wild Hops in a hedge. The Cook as soon as he was bitten
in the hand, sucked the wound with his mouth, thinking thereby to mittigate the
pain, and draw out again the poison; but as soon as his tongue touched the
wound, presently it so swelled that he could not speak: and besides, is arm
or shoulder Aqua vitae; then also I caused the arm to be scarified all over,
and launced the place where the Adder had bitten him, out of which flowed
abundance of corrupt mattery blood. Then we washed the vvound with Triacle and
Mithridate, in Aqua vitae; so we caused him to be laid into a warm bed,
there to sweat, and commanded to keep him awake, which was done accordingly;
and so the next day the swelling was abated, and the malignant symptoms were
all euacuated:

It agrees with all other serpents in the changing or putting off the skin;
for after that by fasting it has made his flesh low and abated, then by
slyding thorough a narrow passage, whereof Virgill thus writes.

Qualis vbi in, lucem coluber, mala gramina pastus,
Lubrica conuoluit sublato pectore targa
Frigida sub terra, tumidum quem bruma tegebat:
Arduus ad solemn and linguis micat ore trisulcis
Nunc positis nouus exuuijs, intidusque iuventa.
Which may be englished thus;

Even as the Adder in the spring ill fed and lean
Moves her winding limbs, holding up her breast,
Whom winters cold whiles hyd in earth made swell,
In sunshine with her treble tongue expressed
Does lick and make to shine her skin, neat youth
Renueth, and casts old coat, for heat ensues.
S. Ierom says, that when the Adder is thirsty and goes to drink, she first
of all at the Herodo^us.
seldom heard. And it is said, that when Craesus undertook to wage war
with Cyrus, the suburbs of Sardis were all filled with Adders, which were
devoured afterward by horses in the pastures. Whereat the King and people
were not a little moved: But the Priests, after consultation with the Oracle,
told them that it signified, how strangers should deuoite the people of that
City; because that Adders were bred in those coasts, therefore they took
them to signify natural inhabitants, and because horses came from other
Countries, therefore strangers, (as Cyrus and his soldiers) should be thereby
signified. And this is to be noted, that the enemies of this serpent, are the
same that are common to other, and the Heart above all other beasts of the
earth. Yet this Serpent (says S. Ambrose) will kill a Lion, and run away
from a Heart.

The Medicines arising out of this beast, are briefly these; The water wherein
an Pliny Silnius.
Pliny also affirms, that if a man which hunteth Crocodils, beat about him
any part of the fat of an Adder, or the gall mixed with the herb
Potamigiton, he cannot be hurt by that beast.

Serpents and Adders, especially deaf Adders, signify vntepentant wicked men,
and also discord, as the Poet describes it, when Alecto sent a Serpent, Snake
or Adder, to Virgill.
move contention in the family of Amata. Libro 7. Aenead. And thus much for
the Adder.

OF THE AMMODYTE.
THis Serpent I call after the Greek name, Ammodytes, an Ammodyte. It is also
found to be called Ammodyta, and Cenchrias, or rather Centrias, or Centrites,
because of the hardness of their tails, which are also cloven on the upper
side. The Italians call it Aspido del corno, because it has upon the upper
chap a hard warte like a horn. The head of this Serpent is longer and greater
then a Vipers head, and her chappes vvider, besides the late expressed
difference upon the upper lip: and yet it may well be termed a kind of Viper.
It is Immanis fera, a fierce wild beast, in length not above a cubite, having
diverse Olaus Mag: Auicenn^.
the back. The color of the other parts is ever like the sand wherein it
keeps and makes abode, according to these verses of Lucan.

Concolor exustis, atque indiscretus arenis
Ammodytes.
In English thus;

The Ammodyte, indiscreete on the Land,
Does hold the color of the burning sand.
The Countries most of all annoyed with these Serpents, are Lybia, Italy, and
Illiria, Gortinium, and the Mountains of Lampidia. Their harms are not
inferior to the stinging and poison of Aspes, for Matthiolus writes, that he
has known some to die thereof within three hours after the wound received.
And if they do not dye within short time, then does the blood issue forth in
abundant manner out of the hurt, and the wound swells. Afterward, all is
turned into matter, and then follows dulnes in the head, and distraction in
the mind; they live long which endure it three days, and it was never known
that any lived above seven days: this also being observed, that those that
be hurt by a femall do dye soonest. For together with their biting, they
infuse

I find the cure hereof in Aetius to be thus, first of all Triacle must be
given to the sick person to drink, and also laid upon the wound, also drawing
or attractiue playsters, and such poultesses which are fit for running ulcers.
But first before the playsters, scarifie all the places about the hurt, and
bind the upper parts hard, then lance the sore a little with a Penknife, and
let him drink sweet water with Rungwort, Gourdes, Castoreum, and Cassia.
Auicen prescribes in the cure of these Serpents venorn: Castoreum, Cinnamon,
the root of Centory, of each two ounces with Wine, and the root of long
Hartwort, of Assoasier, the juice of the root Gentian. And for emplaister,
Honey sod and dried, and so pounded, the roots of Pomgranats, and Centory, the
seed of Flax, and Lettuce, and wild Rue: And so I conclude with Doctor
Gesner, Percussus ab Ammodyte festinet ad remedium sine quo nemo affugere, He
which is hurt by an Ammodyte, let him make have for a remedy, without which
never man escaped death.

OF THE ARGES AND ARGOLAE.
THere is mention in Galen and Hippocrates, of a Serpent called Arges: Now
Arges signifies in Greek white, swift, idle, ill mannered: of this Serpent
Hippocrates tells this story. There was (says he) a young man drunk
Galenus. Hippocrates.
which lay asleep upon his back in a certain house, gaping: Into this man's
mouth entered a serpent called Arges, the young man perceiving it in his mouth,
striued to speak and cry but could not, and so suddenly gnashing his teeth,
devoured and swallowed down the Serpent: After which he was put to
intolerable pains, his hands stretching and quiuering like as a man's that is
hanged or strangled, and in this sort he cast himself up and down and dyed.
It seems therefore that this Serpent has his name from Mercury was called
Argiphon, for killing of Serpents.

THe Argolae are only mentioned by Suidas, for he says, that Alexander
brought them to Alexandria from Arges, and cast them into the river to expel
and devour the Aspes: where they continued a long time, till the bones of the
Prophet Jeremy were brought out of Egypt unto Alexandria which slew them, (as
the same Author writes:) And thus much of these two kinds of Serpents.

OF ASPES.


IN Hebrewe as appears Deuteronomy. 32. the Aspe is called Pethen, in Psalm. 58.
Akschub, in Isa. 59. and Ier. 8. Zipheoni, an Aspe or a Cockatrice, worse then
a Serpent. The Arabians Hasyos, Hascos: the Greeks Aspis, the Italians Aspe,
and Aspide, the Spaniardes Biuora, the French Vnaspic, the Germans Ein sclang
genannt, and the Latins Aspis. About the notation or deriuation of this word,
there is some difference among Writers. Aristophanes deriueth it from Alpha, an
intensiue Particle, and Spizo which signifies to extend; either by reason of
his sharpe-shrill hissing, or for the length of his body. Others derive Aspis
from Hios, which signifies venom or poison, and therefore says the
Scripture: The poison of Aspes, because that is a predominant poison. The
Latins call it Aspis, quod venenum aspergit morsu, because it sprinkleth
abroad his poison when it biteth. Besides we read of Aspis a Buckler, an Island
in the Lycian Sea, a Mountain in Affrike, and there is fashion of camping
Soldiers in the field called Aspides.

The Epithets declaring the nature of this pestiferous Serpent are, Iocheeira,
rejoicing in poison, Elikoessa, winding, Lichmores, putting out the tongue,
Smerdalee fearful, Phoinessa, cruelly killing. Likewise in Latin, dry,
sleeping, drouzy, deadly, swelling, and Aspis, Pharia, a Pharian Aspe, so
called of the Island Pharus, where they abound. It is said Call: Rhod.
Egypt did wear the Pictures of Aspes in their crowns: whereby they signified
the invincible power of principality in this creature, whose wounds cannot
easily be cured: And the Priests of Egypt and Aethiopia, did likewise wear
very long caps, having toward their top a thing like a Navel, about which
are the forms of winding Aspes, to signify to the people, that those which
resist GOD and Kings, shall perish by Diodorius, Pierius.
irresistable violence. Likewise by an Aspe stopping his ear, was figured and
understood a rebel obeying no laws or degrees of the higher power: But let us
leave this discourse of moralities, and come nearer to the natural description
of Aspes. There are many kings Aelianus.
of Aspes after the Egyptian division, for one kind is called Aspis Siua, a dry
Aspe. This is Asilus, which does not only kill by biting, but also with
spetting, which it sends forth while it sets his teeth hard together, and
lifts up the head. Another kind is called Irundo, because of the similitude
it keeps with Swallows, for on the back it is black, and on the belly
white, like as is a Swallow. We read also in Albertus of Aspis Hypnalis, and
Hippupex, but it may be that both these names signify but one kind. This
Hypnale kills by sleeping, for after that the wound is given, the patient
falls into a deep and sweet sleep, wherein it dies: and therefore
Leonicenus says; Illam fuisse, ex cuius veneno sibi Cleopatram suauem mortem
consciuit, that it was the same which Cleopatra bought to bring upon her self
a sweet and easy death. There is also an Aspe called Athaes, which is of
diverse colors: But I do consider that all the kinds may well be reduced
Aetius. Aegmeta. Pliny.
to three, that is, Ptyas, Charsaea, and Chelidonia. Ptyas hurts by poisoning
men's eyes, by spetting forth venom, Chaersaea lives on the Land, and
Chelidonia in the waters.

The Aspe is a small Serpent, like to a Land Snake, but yet of a broader back,
and except in this differs not much from the Snake, their Necks swell above
measure, and if they hurt in that passion, there can be no remedy, for the
stroke of their eyes are exceeding red and flaming, and there are two pieces
of flesh like a hard skin which grow out of their foreheads, according to these
verses of Nicander;

Praeterea geminae, calli instar front carunclae
Haerent, sanguineis scintillant lumina flammis.
That is to say;

As hard as Brawne two bunches in their face
Do grow, and flaming-bloudy-eyes their grace.
And the dry Aspe so called, because it lives in mid-landes, far from any
water, has a vehement strong sight, and these eyes both in one and other are
placed in the Temples of their head. Their teeth are exceeding long, and grow
out of their mouth like a Boares, and thorough two of the longest are little
hollowes, out of which he expresses his poison: They are also covered with
thin and tender skins, which slide up when the serpent Nicander;

Quatuor huic intra marillae concaua dentes,
Radices fixere suas, quas iuncta quibusdam,
Pelliculis tunica obducit, triste vnde venenum
Effundit, si forte su^ se approximet hosti.
In English thus;

Within the hollow of their cheeks fiery teeth are seen
Fast rooted, which a coat of skin does join and ouer-hide,
From whence sad venom issues forth when she is keen,
If that her foe she chance to touch as she does glide.
The scales of the Aspe are hard and dry, and red, above all other venomous
Beasts, and by reason of her exceeding drought, she is also accounted deaf.
About their quantity Aelianus says, that they have been found of 2. cubits
length, and their other parts answerable: Again, the Egyptians affirm them to
be four cubits long: but both these may stand together, for if Aelianus say
true, then the Egyptians are not deceived, because the greater number
contains the lesser. The Aspe Ptyas is about two cubits long: the Chersaen
Aspes of the earth, grow to the length Aetius. Auicenna. Arnoldus. Strabo.
of five cubits, but the Chelidonian not above one, and this is noted, that the
shorter Aspe kills soonest, and the long more slowly: one being a pace, and
another a fathom in length. Nicander writes thus;

Tam proceram extensa querunt quam brachia duci,
Tantaque crassities est, quantum missile telum,
Quod faciens hastas docta faber expolit art.
Which may be thus englished;

As wide as arms in force outstretched,
So is the Aspe in length,
And broad even as a casting Dart,
Made by a wise Smythes strength.
The color of Aspes is also various and diverse, for the Irundo Aspe, that is,
the Chelidonian resembles the Swallow: the Ptyas or spetting Aspe resembles
an ash color, flaming Aetius. Olaus.
like Gold, and somewhat greenish: the Chersaen Aspe of an ash color or green,
but Pierius says, that he saw a yellow Aspe near Bellun: of these colors
writes Nicander:

Squalidus interdum color albet, saepe virenti,
Cum maculis saepe est cineres imitante figura,
Nonnunquam ardenti veluti succenditur igne,
Idque nigra Aethiopum sub terra quale refusus
Nilus saepe lutum, vicinum in Nerea voluit.
Thus otherwise;

Their color whitish pale, and sometime lively green,
And spots which do the ash resemble,
Some fiery red: in Aethiop black Aspes are seen
And some again like to Nerean mud,
Cast up by flowing of the Nilus flood.
The countries which breed Aspes, are not only the regions of Affricke, and
the confines of Nylus, but also in the Northern parts of the world (as writes
Olaus Magnus) are many Aspes found: like as there are many other Serpents
found, although their venom or Am^paraeus.
poison be much more weak, then in Africa, yet he says that their poison will
kill a man Spain also there are Aspes, but none in Bellonius
France, although the common people do style a certain creeping thing by that
name. Lucan thinks that the original of all came from Africa, and therefore
concludes, that Merchants for gain have transported them into Europe saying;

Ipsa caloris egens, gelidum non transit in orbem;
Sponte sua, Niloque tenus metitur arenas.
Sed quis erit nobis lucri pudor? Indepetuntur,
Huc Lybicamortes, and fecimus aspida merces.
In English thus;

The Aspe into cold Regions not willingly does go,
But near the banks of Nilus warm, does play upon the sands,
Oh what a shame, of wicked gain, must we then undergo?
Which Libian deaths, and aspish wares have brought into our lands.
Their abode is for the most part in dryest soyles, except the Chelidonian, or
water Aspe, Nylus all the year long, as in a house and safe Castle, but when
they perceive that the water will over flow, they forsake the banks sides, and
for safeguard Aeli^^us*
of their lives, betake them to the Mountains. Sometimes also they will ascend
and climb trees: as appears by an Epigram of Anthologius. It is a horrible,
fearful, and terrible Serpent, going slovvly, having a vveake sight, alvvayes
sleepy and drowzy, but a shrill and quick sense of hearing, whereby she is
warned and advertised of all Giltius.
noise, which when she hears, presently she gathers her self round into a
circle, and in the midst lifts up her terrible head: Wherein a man may note
the gracious providence of almighty GOD, which has given as many remedies
against evil, as there Nicander.

Formidabile cui corpus, tardumque volumen,
Quandoquidem transuer sa via est prolixaque ventris
Spira, veternosique niuere videntur ocelli.
At simul ac facili forte abseruarit aure
Vel minimum strepitum, segnes e corpore somnos
Exoutit, and teretem sinuat mox aspera tractum,
Horrendumque caput, porrectaque pectora tollit.
In English thus;

This feared Aspe has slow and winding pace,
When as her way, on belly she does trauerse,
Her eyes shrunk in her head winking, appear in face,
Till that some noise her watchful ear does ravish,
Then sleep shook off, round is her body gathered,
With dreadful head, on mounted neck up lifted.
The voice of the Aspe is hissing, like all other Serpents, and seldom is it
heard to utter any voice or sound at all, except when she is endangered, or
ready to set upon her enemy. Whereupon says Nicander;

-- Grave sibilat ipsa
Bestia, dum certam vomit ira concita mortem.
In English thus;

This beast does hiss, with great and lowdest breath,
When in her mood she threateneth certain death.
That place of David Psalm. 58. which is vulgarly read, a death Adder, is more
truly translated A deaf Aspe, which when she is enchanted, to avoid the
voice of the Charmer, she stops one of her ears with her tail, and the
other she holds hard to Vincentius Belluacensis. Virtute quorunda^ verborum
incantatum aspis, ne veneno interinat, vel vt quidam dicunt vt quieta capi
possit, and gemma de front eius auferri, quae naturaliter in eo nascitur, that
is to say, The Aspe is enchanted by virtue of certain words, so as she cannot
kill with her poison, or as some say, be taken quietly without resistance, and
so the Gemme or precious stone be taken out of her forehead, which naturally
grows therein. And from the words of the Psalm a, foresaid, not only the
certainty and effectual use of charming is gathered by Pierius, but also by
many justified in the case of Serpents. Whereof I have already given mine
opinion in the former general Treatise, unto the which I will only add thus
much in conclusion, which I have found in a certain unnamed Author: Daemones
discurrunt cum verbis ad serpents, and infectione interiori hoc faciunt, vt
serpents ad nutum eorum moueantur, ac sine laesione tractabiles exhibeantur:
Which is thus much in effect; Devils run up and down with words of
enchauntment to Serpents, and by an inward or secret infection, they bring to
pass that the Serpents dispose themselves after their pleasure, and so are
handled without all harm. And indeed, that it may appear to be manifest that
this incantation Peritissimos mussitantium incantationes, the most skillful
Charmers. Now if it came from the irresistable power of almighty God, it should
pass the resistance of them or devils; but being a fallacy of the devil,
the serpent (wiser in this point then men that believe it) easily turns tail
against it: and in this thing we may learn to be wise as Serpents, against the
inchaunting temptations of the devil or men, which would beguile us with
shadows of words and promises, of no valuable pleasures.

If we may believe Pliny, Elianus, and Philarchus, the Egyptians lived
familiarly with Aspes, and with continued kindness wanne them to be tame. For
indeed among other

The holy kind of Aspes, they call Thermusis, and this is used and fed in all
their temples of Isis with the fat of Oxen or Kine. Once in the year they
crown with them the Image of Isis, and they say that this kind is not an enemy
to men, except to such as are very evil, whereupon it is death to kill one of
them willingly.

It is reported of a certain Gardener making a ditch or trench in his
Vineyarde, by chance and ignorantly, he set his spade upon one of these
Thermusis Aspes, and so cut it Elianus) continued a while in this superstitious
fury and disease of the mind, his kindred and acquaintance brought him into the
house of Serapis, making request unto that fained God

This kind of Aspe they also say is immortal and never dies, and besides, it
is a revenger of sacrilege, as may appear by such another history in the same
place. There was a certain Indian Peacock sent to the King of Egypt, which for
the goodly proportion and feature thereof, the King out of his devotion
consecrated to Jupiter, and was kept in the Temple. Now there was (says he) a
certain young man which set more by his belly, then by his GOD, which fell
into a great longing for to eat of the said Peacocke: and therefore to attain
his appetite, he bribed one of the Officers of the Temple with a good sum of
Money to steal the said Peacocke, and bring it to him alive or dead. The
covetous wretch enraged with the desire of the Money, sought his opportunity to
steal away the Peacock, and one day came to the place where he thought and
knew it was kept, but when he came, he saw nothing but an Aspe in the place
thereof, and so in great fear leaped back to save his life, and afterward
disclosed the whole matter. Thus far Aelianus.

The domestical Aspes understand right and wrong, and therefore Philanthus
tells a story of such an Aspe which was a Female, and had young ones: in her
absence one of Egypt, called Herculia, whose love to the said Boy was so
Aelianus
fervent, that the Male of the said Aspe grew jealous thereof. Whereupon one
day as he lay asleep, set upon him to kill him, but the other seeing the danger
of her love, awaked and delivered him.

There is much and often mention made of Aspes in holy Scripture, beside the
forenamed Psalm. 58. as in Esaias. 59. the Jews are compared to Aspes, and their
labors to Spiders webs. And Esa. 11. The sucking child shall play upon the
hole of the Aspe. Whereupon a learned man thus writes: Quicunque ex hominibus
occulto veneno ad nocendum referti sunt, sub regno Christi mutato ingenio fore
vel pueris innoxios: that is, whosoever by secret poison of nature are apt to
do harm to other in the kingdom of Christ: their nature shall be so changed,
that they shall not harm sucklings, not able to discover the^. Great is the
subtilty and foreknowledge of Aspes, as may appear by that, in Psalm. 58.
against the Charmers voice. Also it is strange, that all the Aspes of Nilus do
thirty days before the flood remove themselves and their young ones into the
Mountains, and this is done yearly, once at the least, if not more often.

They sort themselves by couples, and do live as it were in marriage, Male and
Female, so that their sense, affection, and compassion, is one and the same:
for if it happen that one of them be killed, they follow the person eagerly,
and will find him out, even in the midst of many of his fellows: that is,
if the killer be a beast, they will know him among beasts of the same kind:
And if he be a man, they will also find him out among men: and if he be let
alone, he will not among thousands harm any but he: breaking thorough all
difficulties (except Water,) and is hindered by nothing else, except by swift
Pliny.
flying away. We have showed already, how the Psyllians in Asia, cast their
Children newly borne to Serpents, because if they be of the right seed and
kindred to their Father, no Serpent will hurt them, but if they be Bastards of
another race, the Serpents devour Suidas.
destroyed by the Argolae, which Alexander brought from Argos to Alexandria,
and therefore those are to be reckoned their enemies. Shadows do also scare
away and terrify Aspes, as Seneca writes. But there is not more mortal
hatred or deadly war betwixt any, then betwixt the Ichneumon and the Aspe.
When the Ichneumon has espied an aspe, she first goes and calls her
fellows to help her, then they all before they enter fight do vvallow their
bodies in slime, or wet themselves, and then wallow in the sand, so harnessing,
and as it were arming their skins against the teeth of their enemy: and so
when they find themselves strong enough, they set upon her, bristling up their
tails first of all, and turning them to the Serpent till the Aspe bite at
them, and then suddenly ear the Aspe Ichneumon, then is he overcome, but if the
Ichneumon first lay hold on the Aspe, then is the Aspe overcome. This hatred
and contention is thus described by Nicander;

Solus eam potis est Ichneumon vincere pestem,
Cum grave cautus ei bellum parat, editaque oua,
Quae fouet in multorum hominum insuperabile lethu^,
Omnia fracta terit, mordaceque dente lacessit.
That is to say;

Ichneumon only is of strength, that pest to ouerquell,
Against whom in wary wise his war he does prepare,
Her eggs, a deadly death to many men, in sand he does out smell,
To break them all within his teeth, this nimble beast does dare.
Pliny, Cardan, and Constantine affirm, that the Herb Arum, and the root of
Winterberry, do so astonish Aspes, that their presence lays them in a deadly
sleep: And thus much of their concord with other creatures.

Galen writes, that the Marsians do eat Aspes without all harm, although as
Mercuriall says, their whole flesh and body is so venomous, and so repleate
with poison, that it never enters into medicine, or is applied to sick or
sound upon any Physical qualification: the reason of this is given by himself
and Fracastorius, to be either, because Aspes under their Climate or Region are
not venomous at all, as in other Countries, neither Vipers nor Serpents are
venomous: or else because those people have a kind of simpathy

The poison of Aspes says Moses, Deuteronomy. 32. is crudele venenum, a cruel
poison, and Job. 20. Cap. expressing the wicked man's delight in evil, says:
That he shall suck the poison of Aspes. For which cause as we have showed
already, the harm of this is not easily cured. We read that Canopus, the
Master of Menelaus ship, to be bitten to death by an Toxtor.
Aspe at Canopus in Egypt. So also was Demetrius Phalareus, a Scholar of
Theophrastus, and keeper of the famous library of Ptolomaeus Soter. Cleopatra
likewise to avoid the triumph that Augustus would have made of her, suffered
her self willingly to be bitten to death by an Aspe. VVhereupon Properitius
writes thus:

Brachia spect aui sacris admorsa colubris,
Et trachere occultum, membra soporis iter.
In English thus;

Thus I have seen those wounded arms,
With sacred Snakes bitten deep,
And members draw their poisoned harms,
Treading the way of deaths sound sleep.
We read also of certain Mountebankes, and cunning Iuglers in Italy, called
Circulatores, to perish by their own devises, thorough the eating of Serpents,
and Aspes which Aelianus.
they carried about in Boxes as tame, using them for ostentation to get Money,
or to sell away their antidotes. When pompeius Rufus was the great Master of
the Temple-works at Rome, there was a certain circulator or Quacksaluer, to
show his great cunning in the presence of many other of his own trade, which
set to his arm an Aspe, presently he sucked out the poison out of the wound
with his mouth: but when he came to look for his preservative water, or
antidote, he could not find it; by means whereof the poison fell down into
his body, his mouth and gummes rotted presently, by little and little, and so
within two days he was found dead. The like story unto this is related by
Amb: Paraeus of another, which at Florence would feign sell much of his
medicine against poison, and for that purpose suffered an aspe to bite his
flesh or finger, but within four hours

Now therefore it remains, that we add in the conclusion of this history, a
particular discourse of the bytings and venom of this serpent, and also of such
remedies as are appointed for the same. Therefore we are to consider, that they
byte and do not sting, the Mercuriall. Aetius.
femalls byte with four teeth, the males but with two, and when they have
opened the flesh by biting, then they infuse their poison into the wound. Only
the Aspe Ptyas, kills by spetting venom thorough her teeth, and (as Auicen
says) the savor or smell thereof will kill, but at the least the touching
infecteth mortally. When an Aspe has bitten, it is a very difficult thing to
epsy the place bitten or wounded, eue^ with most excellent eyes, as was
apparent upon Cleopatra aforesaid; and the reason hereof is given to be this,
because the poison of Aspes is very sharp, and penetrateth suddenly and
forcibly under the skin, even to the inmost parts, not staying outwardly, or
making any great visible external appearante. Yet Gallen writing to Piso,
affirms otherwise of the wound of Cleopatra; but because drowsinesse and
sleep follows that poison, I rather believe the former opinion: and
therefore Lucan calls the Aspe, Somnifera, that is, a sleepe-bringing
Pictorius also subscribeth hereunto.

Aspidis et morsu laesum dormire fatentur
In mortem, antidotum nec valuisse ferunt.
Which may be englished thus,

He that by rage of Aspes tooth
is bitten, or is wounded,
They say does sleep until his death
curelesse, he is confounded.
The pricks of the Aspes teeth, are in appearance not much greater then the
prickings Nicander to cry out, perimitque virum absque dolor, it kills a man
without pain. His color is all changed, and* appears greenish like grass.
His face or forehead is bent continually frowning, and his eyes or eye-liddes
moving up and down in drowsines without sense, according to these verses
following,

Nec tamen vlla vides impressi vlnera morsus,
Nec dignus fatu tumor ictum corpus adurit
Sed qui laesus homo est, citra omnem fata dolorem
Claudit, and ignano moriens torpore fatiscit.
Which I translate thus;

Wounds of impressed teeth, none can thou see,
Nor tumor worth the naming, smitten body burning,
But yet the hurt man painlesse takes destiny,
And sleeping dies, sluggishly him turning.
The true signs then of an Aspes biting, is stupour or astonishment,
heaviness of the Ptyas, have blindness, pain at the heart, deafness, and
swelling of the face. And the signs of such as are hurt by the Chalidonian or
Chersaean Aspe, and the Terrestrian are all one, or of very little difference,
except that I may add the Crampe, and the often beating of the pulse, and
frigiditie of the members or parts, or pain in the stomach, but all of them in
general, deep sleep, and sometimes vomitting. But by this, that the blood of
the place by the^ bitten turns black, it is apparent and manifest, that the
poison of the Aspe mortifieth or kills the natural heat; which is overcome
by the heat of the poison outwardly, and the darkness or blindness of the
eyes, proceeds of certain vapors which are infected, and ascend up to the
Ponzettus
To conclude, so great is the tabificall effect of this poison of Aspes; that
it is worthily accounted the greatest venom, and most dangerous of all other:
for Aelianus says, Serpentum venenum cum pestiferum sit, tum multo aspidis
pestilentius, the poison of all serpents is pestiferous, but the venom of the
aspe most of all. For if it touch a green wound, it kills speedily, but an
old wound receives harm thereby more hardly. In Alexandria, when they would
put a man to a sudden death, they would set an aspe to his bosom or breast,
and then after the wound or biting, bid the party walk up and down, and so
Galenus.
immediately within two or three turns he would fall down dead. Yet it is
reported by Pliny, that the poison of Aspes drunk into the body does no harm
at all, and yet if a man eat of the flesh of any beast slain by an Aspe, he
dies immediately.

But concerning the cure of such as have been, or may be hurt by Aspes, I will
now entreat, not spending any time to confute those, who have wrote that it
is incurable: on Dioscorid. Actuarius Aegineta
even the searing iron to the very bone. For so the occasion being taken away
from the poison to spread any further, it must needs die without any further
damage. Then also the holes in the mean time before the eiection, must be
drawn, either with cupping-glasse, or with a Reed, or with the naked rumpe of
a Ringdoue or Cock; I mean the very hole set upon the bitten place. And
because the place is very narrow and small, it Mercurialis.
like. And because the poison of Aspes does congeale the blood in the veins,
therefore against the same must all hot things made thin be applied, as
Mithridatum and Triacle dissolved in Aqua vitae, and the same also dissolved
into the wound; then must the patient be used to bathings, fricasing or
rubbing, and walking, with such like exercises. But when once the wound
begins to be purple, green, or black, it is a sign both of the
extinguishment of the venom, and also of the suffocating of natural heat,
then is nothing more safe then to cut off the member, if the party be able to
bear it. After Cupping-glasses, and Paraeus
scarifications, there is nothing that can be more profitably applied then
Centory, Myrre, Oppium, or Sorrel after the manner of a plaster. But the body
must be kept in daily motion and agitation, the wounds themselves often
searched and pressed, and Sea-vvater used for fomentation. Butter likewise, and
the leaves of Yew, are very good to be applied Aetius
to the bytings of Aspes. And in the Northern Regions, (as witnesses 'Olaus
Magnus,) they use nothing but branne like a plaster, and their cattle they
annoint with Triacle and salt all over the bunch or swelling. And thus much for
the Chirurgicall cure of the biting of Aspes. In the next place, we may also
relate the medicinal cure, especially of such things as are compound, and
received inwardly.

First, after the wound, it is good to make the party vomit, and then afterward
make him drink juice of Yew and Triacle, or in the default thereof, wine, as
much of the juice as a Zythum, until he vomit, or else Opponax in wine allayed
with water: also Origan dry Mercuri:
and green. After the vomit, the former antidoticall medicines may be used.
And the northern people use no other Triacle then Venetian. Whereas there are
abundance of all Andreas.
manner of Serpents in the Spantsh Islands, yet never are any found there to
use Triacle, neither do they account of it as of a thing any whit virtuous,
but in stead thereof they use the bearded Thapsia, Gilliflowers, and red
Violets, and the herb Auance, boiled in wine Amb: Paraeus, it is much better
for the patient to drink thereof fasting, and before meat two hours, three
ounces at a time. And by the help of this notable experiment, the Inhabitants
of those Islands, are nothing afraid to offer their bodies to be bitten by the
most angry Aspes. And thus much for compound medicines in general.

It is said, that the first and chiefest easy remedy for such as are bitten
by Aspes, is to drink so much of the sharpest Vinegar, as he can sensibly
perceive and feel the same upon the right side of his midreffe, because that
poison first of all depriueth the liver of sense. Aetius.
For Pliny says, that he knew a man carrying a bottle of Vinegar to be bitten
by an Aspe, whiles by chance he trod thereupon, but as long as he bore the
Vinegar and did not set it down, he felt no pain thereby, but as often as to
ease himself he set the bottell out of his hand, he felt torment by the
poison, which being related to the Physicians, they knew thereby that Vinegar
drunk into the stomach was a sovereign antidote against poison. Yet some
say, that the first knowledge of this virtue in vinegar, grew from the
necessity Cor. Celsus.
it is poured on the earth, because it yields a froth, and therefore when it
comes into the stomach, it disperseth all the infected humors.

The Northern Shepherds do drink Garlic and stale Ale against the bytings
of Aspes. And some hold opinion that Anniseede is an antidote for this sore.
Other use Hart-wort, Olaus. Mag.
Apium seed, and wine. Aron being burned, has the virtue to drive away
serpents, and therefore being drunk with oil of Bays in black wine, it is
accounted very sovereign against the bytings of Aspes. The fruit of Balsame,
with a little powder of Gentian Castoreum, with Lignum Cassiae, and some the
skin of a Storkes stomach or mawe. There be certain little filthy and
corrupt worms bred in rotten wood or paper, called Cimices, these are very
profitable against poison of Aspes, or any other venomous biting beast, and
therefore it is said that Hens and other pullen, do earnestly seek after
these worms, and that the flesh of such foul as have eaten thereof, is also
profitable for the same purpose.

Athaeneus also writes, how certain thieues were condemned to be cast to
serpents to be destroyed, now the morning before they came forth, they had
given them to eat Cytrons; when they were brought to the place of execution,
there were Aspes put forth unto Clematis or Periwinke drunk in vinegar, is
very good against the poison of Aspes; so likewise is Corrall in Wine, or the
Pliny. Orpheus
leaves of Yew. Henbane bruised with the leaves thereof, and also bitter Hoppes
have the same operation. The urine of a Torteyse drunk, is a medicine against
all bytings of wild beasts, and the urine of a man hurt by an Aspe: as Marcus
Varro affirmed in the eyghtieninth year of his age, according to the
observation of Serenus saying;

Si vero horrendum vulnus ferafecerit aspis
Vrinam credunt propriam conducere potu:
Varronis fuit ista senis sententia, nec non
Plinius vt memorat sumpti iuvat imber aceti,
Which may be englished thus;

If that an Aspe a mortal wound do bite,
It Is thought his urine well does cure again,
Such was the saying of old Varro hight,
And Pliny to, drink vinegar like drops of rain.
But it is more safe to agree with Pliny in the prescription of man's urine, to
restrain it to Ptyas, and Matthiolus out of Dioscorides says, that the
quintessence of Aqua vitae, and the usual antidote both mixed together and
drunk, is most powerful against the venoms of the deaf Aspe. And thus much
for the antipathy and cure of Aspes biting venomous nature, whereunto I will
add for a conclusion, that prouerbicall speech, of one Aspe borrowing poison
of another, out of Tertullian against the Heretic Marcion, who gathers many
of his absurd impieties from the unbelieving Jews. Desinat nunc haereticus a
Iudaeo, aspis quod aiunt a vipera mutuari venenum, that is, let the haereticke
now cease to borrow his venom of a Jew, as the Aspes do borrow their poison
from Vipers. And true it is, that this proverb has especial use, when one
bad man is help or counseled by another; and therefore when Diogenes saw a
company of women talking together, he said merrily unto the^, Aspis par'
echidnes pharmacon daneizetai, that is, the Aspe borrows venom of the Viper.
Thus much of the Aspe.

Of the Description and differences of BEES.


AMongst all the sorts of venomous Insects, (or cut-wasted creatures) the
sovereignty and pre-eminence is due to the Bees, who D: Bonhan his discourse
of Bees, wasps and Drones.
only of all others of this kind, are made for the nourishment of mankind,
all other (cut-wasted) serving only for medicinal use, Deborah. The Arabians
term them, Albara, Nahalea, and Zabar. The Illirians and Sclauonians, Wezilla.
The Italians, Ape, api, vna sticha, moscatella, ape or sc^ppa, pecchi. The
Spaniards, Abcia. Frenchmen, Mousches au miel. The Germans, Eenymbe, apen.
Names.
The Flemmings, Bie. The Polonians, Pztzota. The Irishmen, Camilij. In Wales a
Be is called Gweniv. Amongst the Graecians they have purchased sundry names,
according to the diversity of Nations, countries and places, but the most
vulgar name is Melissa, and in Hesiodus, Melie. Othersome call a Be Plastis, a
fingendo, of framing. Some again, Anthedon: Zanthai. Of their offices and
charge, Egemones, ab imperando, from governing. Sirenes, a suam cantu, from
their sweet voice. The Latins call them by one general name, Apis and Apes.
Varro sometimes terms them Aues, but very improperly, for they might better be
named Volucres, not Aues. So much for their names, now to the definition.

A Be is a cut-wasted living creature, that can fly, having four wings, and
bloudles, Apum definitio
the only Crafts-master of Hony-making. Their eyes are somewhat of a horny
substance, hid deep in their bodies, as is also their sting: they want neither
tongue nor teeth, they have Deseription of their parts.
4. wings, being of a bright and clear color, growing to their
shoulder-blades, whereof the two hindermost are the lesser, because they might
not hinder their flying: and out of their short feet or stumps, there grow
forth as it were two fingers, wherein they carry a little stone, for the
peizing and making weighty their small bodies in stormy, tempestuous,
blustering, or troublesome weather, for fear least they might be driven from
their house and home, by the contrary rage and violence of the winds. They do
not breath (by Plinies No respiration in Bees.
good leave) but either pant, move, or stir (as the heart or brain does) and
by transpiration

Bees even by nature are much different: for some are more domestical and
tame, and Differences of Bees from nature.
others again are altogether wild, vplandish, and agrestiall. Those former
are much delighted with the familiar friendship, custom and company of men,
but these can in no wise brook or endure them, but rather keep their trade of
hony-making in old trees, caves, holes, and in the ruders, and rubbish of old
walls and houses. Of tame Bees again, some Fuci, that is drones; either because
they would seem to be laborers, when indeed rhey are not: or because that
under the color and pretense of labor (for you shall sometimes have them to
carry wax, and to be very busy in forming and making hony-combes,) they may
eat up all the honey. These Drones are of a more blackish color, somewhat
shining, and are easily known by the greatness of their bodies. Besides some
Bees are descended of the kingly race, and borne of the blood Royal: where of
Aristotle makes two sorts: a yellow kind, which is the more noble, and the
black, garnished with diverse colors. Some make three Kings, differing in
color, as black, red, and diverse colored. Menecrates says, that those who
are of sundry colors are the worser, but in case they have diversity of color
with some blacknes, they are esteemed the better. He that is elected Monarch
Caesar, and captain general Description of the King.
Differences in regard of sex*
populer and inferior sort in his comeliness, beauty, and honor. The Prince
of Philosophers confounds the sex of Bees, but the greatest company of
learned Writers do distinguish them: whereof they make the feminine sort to be
the greater. Others again will have them the lesser, with a sting: but the
sounder sort (in my judgment) will neither know nor acknowledge any other
males, besides their Dukes and princes, who are more able and handsome, greater
and stronger then any of the rest, who stay ever at home, and very seldom
Venus, and ever to be ready at the elbowes of their loves to do them right:
Experience teaching us, that these do sit on eggs, and after the manner of
birds, do carefully cherish and make much of their young, after the thin
membram or skin wherein they are enclosed is broken.

The difference of their age is known by the form, state, and habit of
their bodies. Of age.
For the young Bees have very thin and trembling wings, but they that are a
year old, as they that are two or three years of age are very trim, gay,
bright-shining, and in very good plight and liking, of the color of Oil.

But those that have reached to seven years, have laid away all their
flatnesse and smoothness, neither can any man afterward, either by the figure
and quality of their bodies or skins, judge or discern certainly their age
(as we say by experience in Horses:) For the elder sort of them are rough,
hard, thin and lean scragges, staruelinges, loathsome to touch and to look
upon, somewhat long, nothing but skin and bone, yet very notorious and goodly
too see to, in regard of their gravity, hoarenes and aunciency.

The place likewise alters one whiles their form, and sometimes again their
nature, (as their sex and age do both.) For in the Islands of Molucea, there
be Bees very like to The difference of the form of Bees, according to the
place.
winged Pismires, but somewhat lesser then the greater Bees, as Maximilian
Transiluanus, in an Epistle of his, written to the Bishop of Salspurge, at
large relates it. Andrew Theuet in his Book that he wrote of the newfound
World, Cap. 51. amongst other matters reports that he did see a company of
Flies or Hony-bees about a tree named Vhebehason, Bees of Amo^ca.
which then was green, with the which these Hony-bees do live and nourish
themselves: of the which trees there were a great number in a hole that was in
the tree, wherein they made Honey and Wax. There is two kinds of the
Hony-bees, one kind are as great as ours, the which comes not only but of
good smelling flowers, also their Honey is very good, but their Wax not so
yellow as ours. There is another kind half so great as the others: their honey
is better then the others, and the wild men name them Hira. They live not with
the others food, which to my judgment makes their Wax to be as black as
coals, and they make great plenty, specially near to the River Vasses, and of
Plate. The Bees called Chalcoides, which are of the color of Brass, and
somewhat long, which are said to live in the Island of Creta are implacable,
great fighters and quarrellers, excelling Aelianus says) in the Mountain Ida.
Thus much of the differences of Bees, now it remains to discourse of the
Politic, Ethicall, and oeconomicke virtues and properties of them.

Bees are governed and do live under a Monarchy, and not under a tyrannical
state, admitting and receiving their King, not by succession or casting of
lots, but by respective The government of bees.
advise, considerate judgment, and prudent election; and although they
willingly submit their necks under a kingly government, yet notwithstanding
they still keep their ancient liberties and privileges, because of a certain
prerogative they maintain in giving

The King as he is of a more eminent stature, and goodly corporature (as before
we have touched) then the rest: so likewise (which is singular in a King) he
excels in mildness and temperatenesse of behavior. For he has a sting,
but makes it not an instrument of revenge, which is the cause that many have
thought, their king never to have had any. For these are the laws of Nature,
not written with Letters, but even imprinted and engraven in their conditions
and manners: and they are very flow to punish offenders, because they have the
greatest and Sovereign power in their hands. And although they seem to be
slack in revenging and punishing private injuries, yet for all that they
Dionysian Tyrants in Sicilia; Clearchus in Heraclea, and Apollodorus the
Thief, Pieler and spoyler of the Cassandrines? And who would not detest the
ungraciousness of those lewd clavv-backes, and Trencher-parasites, and
flatterers of Kings, which dare impudently maintain, that that a Monarchy is
nothing else but a certain way and rule for the accomplishing of the will, in
using their authority as they list, and a science or skillful trade, to have
wherewith to live pleasantly in all sensual and worldly pleasure: which ought
to be far from a good Prince, who whilst he would seem to be a man, he show
himself to be far worser then these little poore-winged-creatures. And as
their order and course of life is far different from the vulgar sort, so also
is their birth; for they of the kingly race are not borne after the manner of a
little Worm, as all the comminalty are, but is forthwith winged, and amongst

The King prescribes laws and orders to all the rest, and appoints them
their rules and measures: for some he straightly charge and commands, (as
they tender his favor, and will avoid his displeasure) to fetch and provide
water for the whole Camp. He enioyneth others to make the Hony-combes, to
build, to garnish and trim up the Aristole says, that Bees have many Kings,
which I would rather term Vizeroyes or Deputies, sithence it is certain (as
Antigonus affirms) that as well the swarms do dye and come to naught, by
having of many Kings, as none at all. And thus to have spoken of good Kings
let this suffice. Evil Kings are more rough,

Namque duae regnum facies, duo corpor a gentis.
Alter erit maculis auro Squallentibus ardens,
Et cutilis clarus squamis, insignes and ore.
Faedior est alter multo, quam puluere abacto
Quum venit and sicco terram spuit ore venator:
Disidia latamque trahens inglorias alum -- Hunc
Deed neci, melior vacua sine regnet in aula.
In English thus;

The two aspects of kingly Bees, two nations do disclose,
One of them, Golden spotted red, burning with pale hew,
And having scales both red and clear, and great about the nose,
The other filthy to behold like dust, for it is true,
Which hunters spit upon dry land, when all is crushed and pressed,
In sloth belly broad, does travail worser then the least,
Him kill, let the other reign
Alone, in empty Court, do not disdain.
And thus hitherto have we spoken of their kings and Dukes: now will we bend
our discourse to the common sort of Bees.

Bees are neither to be accounted wild, nor altogether calm and quiet
creatures, but of a nature betwixt both: and of all other they are esteemed
most serviceable and profitable. Their sting gives both life and death to
them, for being deprived of it, they surely die: but having it, they repel all
hostility from their swarms. Of these there are none Idle, although they be
not all Honny-makers, neither are the most sluggish of them all, like unto the
Drones in their inclination and manners: For they do not corrupt and mar the
honie-combes, neither do they lie in wait by treachery and deceit to filt^h
honey, but are nourished by flowers, and flying forth with their fellows, do
get their living with them; although some of them want the skill to make and
lay up the honey finely and safely, yet notwithstanding every one has his
proper charge and business to use and practice, for

The elder sort if they be of a strong and robustious constitution, are chosen
for the guard of the kings person, as the fittest persons to be about him, in
respect of their approved worth, faithful dealing, and uprightness of
conscience, for the ordering and disposing of all matters. Some give Physic
to those that are sick, by making and giving to them a medicinal aliment of
honey, that is drawn from Annise, Saffron, and Hiacinthes. But if any thorough
age or sickness chance to dye, then they whose office it is to carry forth the
dead bodies to burying, do forthwith flock together, carrying the dead body
of their brother on their shoulders, as it were on a Beer, least the pure
Honny-combes might be fainted with any vncleanlinesse, stink, or nastinesse.

Bees have also their Ambassadors and Orators, sent with commission or
authority, and put in trust to deal in their Princes affairs, their old
beaten Soldiers, their Pypers, Trumpetters, horne-winders, Watchmen,
Scout-watches, and Sentinels. Likewise Soldiers even in a readiness to
defend, and look to their hony-wealth and goods, as if it were a City
committed to their trust and valiancy, and these do punish, torment, and throw
to the ground all flying Thieves and Worms, that dare invade secretly by any
cunning passage, or mine into their mansions. And that they might bear the
world in hand, that they are no privy or secret Thieves in their flying, they
make a noise and humming, which together with their flight, is heard both to
begin and end: Which sound, whether it proceeds from the mouth, or from the
motion of their wings: Aristotle Hesychius, do much vary and contend.

Their Pipers and horn-blowers do aedere Ziggon, as Hesychus says (the
Englishmen term it Sing) and that they make to be the watchword and privy
token, for their watch and ward, sleep, and daily labor. They love their King
so entirely, that they never suffer him to go abroad alone, but their Army
being divided into two parts, and by heaps winding themselves round, they do
as it were enclose and fence him on all sides^* If in any journey the King
hap to wander from his company, and cannot be found, being driven away by
the force of some stormy winds or weather, they all forthwith make a privy
search, and with their quick-senting, pursue and follow the chase so long,
until he be certainly found; and then, because he is tired with flying, and
the tediousnes of tempests, the common sort lift him upon their wings, and so
triumphantly convey him home as it were in a Chariot. But if he die by the way,
then they all mournefully depart, every one to his own place seperating
themselves, or peradventure for a while, they work up their hony-combes not
yet finished, but never make any more honey; So that at length, growing to be
lazy, sickly, wasted, consumed and distained with their own filth and
corruption,

When the King by flying away has left his Bees, they fetch him again, and
being a fugitive from his kingdom, they follow him amain by his smell, as it
were with live and Aristotle's mind, who affirms that the King never comes
abroad, but when the whole swgrme does, which is seldom seen. But if by
reason of his tyranny, cruelty and violent rule, they be forced to seek some
other dwelling places, then a few days before the time appointed, there will
be heard a solitary, mournful, and peculiar kind of voice, as it were of some
trumpet, and two or three days before, they fly about the mouth of the Hiue;
so when all things are in a readiness for their flight, being all assembled,
they fly all speedily away, and kill the Tyrant (whom they left behind) if he
attempt to follow

Whilst they have a King, the whole swarm and company is kept in awful order,
but he being gone, they go under the protection of other Kings. They have not
many kings of sword in a just battle. Oftentimes again they wrangle about
their hony-combes and dwelling houses, but then the deadly and unappeasable
war is, when the contention is about the life, crown and dignity of their
King, for then they bestirre themselves most eagerly, defending him most
valiantly, and receiving the darts or stings that are bended against him, with
an undaunted courage, by the voluntary and thick interposing of their own
bodies, betwixt the darts and the person of their king.

Neither are Bees only, examples to men of political prudence and fidelity,
but also presidents for them to imitate in many other virtues. For whereas
Nature has made the^ Zooa agelaia, that is, creatures living in companies and
swarms, yet do they all things for the common good of their own route and
multitude, excepting ever the Drones and

Flies and dogs do far otherwise, whose impudency is such, that having no
regard of times, persons, or places, they will not give place, or be disioyned.
Yea the Massagets Herodotus writes) having their quiver of arrows on their
carts, they dealt with their vviues very unseasonably, and though all men
beheld it, yet they most impudently contemned it. And that which is worser,
this beastly fashion is crept amongst the usurpers, or at least professors of
the Christian name, who shame not openly to kiss and embrace, yea even to play
and meddle with filthy whores and brothelly queanes. Bees surely will condemn
these kind of people of bestiall impudency and wanton shamelessness; or causing
them to blush if they have any grace, will teach them repentance. Neither are
they altogether such creatures as cannot endure or away with music, (which is
the princess of delights, and the delight of Princes) as many unlearned people
cannot, but are exceedingly delighted with tune in any harmony wherein is no
iarring, so the same be simple and unaffected.

And although they have not the skill to dance according to due time, order
and proportion in Music, as they say Elephants can, yet do they make swifter
or slovver their flight, according to the Trumpettors mind, who with his sharp
and shrill sound causes them to bestirre themselves more speedily; but beating
slowly and not so loud upon his brazen instrument, makes them more slow, and
to take more leisure. Neither has Nature made the^ only the most ingenious of
all living creatures, but by discipline has made them tame and tractable. For
they do not only know the hand and voice of the honyman, or him that has the
charge and ordering of the same, but they also suffer him to do what likes him
best: which every man must needs confess to be an argument of a generous and
noble disposition, thus to undergo the rule of their ouer-seers and
Surveiors,

As for oeconomicall virtues they excel also, and namely for moderate
frugalitie and temperance, not profusely and prodigally wasting and devouring
the great store of honey which they gathered in the Summer season, but they
sustain themselves therewith in winter, and that very sparingly: And so whilst
they feed upon few meats, and those of the purest sort, they purchase long
life, (the reward of sobriety.) Neither are they so higgardlie and sordidous
minded, but when as they have gathered more honey then their number can well
spend, they communicate and impart some very liberally amongst the Drones. As
for their clenlinesse these may be certain Arguments, that they never
exonerate nature within their hiues, (except constrained thereto by some
sickness, foul weather, and for

They kill not their enemies within their hiues, they drink none but running
water, and that which is thoroughly defecated: they will not dwell in houses
impure and foul, sluttish, black, or full of any feculent or dreggy refuse,
and the excrementes of the laborers and sickly, they gather on a heap without
their pauilions, and as soon as their leisure serves; it is carried clean
away. Concerning their temperance and chastity, (although it has been partly
touched before,) yet this I will add, that it is wonderful what some men have
observed. For whereas all other creatures do couple in the open sight of men,
the Elephant only excepted, and Waspes likewise not much differing in kind, do
the same: yet Bees were never yet seen so to join together, but either within
their hiues very modestly they apply themselves to that business, or else
abroad do it without any witnesses. And they are no less valiant, then modest
and temperate, Dum corpora bello obiectant, pulchramque petunt per vulner a
mortem. Their war is either civil or foreign. Of the former

They kill them most of all, when as they have no great store of young Bees to
plant any new colonies, overthrowing and spoiling withal their hony-combs (if
they have any.) They execute also Thieves and Drones, so often as they have not
room enough to do their business in, (for they hold the more inward part of the
Hiue,) so taking from the^

In the which bicketing, if the short be Conquerors, it will be an excellent
Swarm, but if fortune smile on the long Bees side, they live idly, making
never any good Honny. Whosoever gets the day, they are so given to rapine
and revenge, as they take no prisoners, nor leave any place to mercy, but
commit all to the sword. Now concerning their foreign wars, I must say that
they give place to no other living creature, either in fortitude, or hardy
venturing: and if either men, Foure-footed-beasts, Birds, or Waspes, do either
hinder, disquiet, or kill any of them, so that they be not well contented,
against

If any Soldier loses his sting in fight, like one that had his Sword or
Spear taken from him, he presently is discouraged and dispaireth, not living
long, through extremity or grief. Going forth into the field to fight, they
stay till the watchword be given, which being done, they flock in great heaps
round about their King (if he be a good one) ending all their quarrel in one
set battle. In their order of fighting, how great virtue, courage, strength,
and nobleness, these poor creatures show, as well we our selves can
testify, and they better who have assured us by their writings, that whole
armies of armed men have been tamed by the stings of Bees, and that Lions,
Bears, and Horses, have been slain by means of them. And yet (how fierce
and warlike soever they seem to Virgil: Particulam auru^ diuinae, but also
haustus mentis aethereae, and (liceat Pythagorice errare,) the Metempsuchoosis
of that ingenious Philosopher. For after that they are enclosed in a clean and
a sweet hiue; they gather out of gummie and moist licqour-yeelding trees, a
kind of glutinous substance, thick, clammy and tough, (called of the Latins
Comosis, and of the Greeks Mitys,) especially from Elmes, Willowes, Canes or
Reeds, yea even from stones; and this they lay for the first foundation of
their work, so covering it all over as with a hard crust at first, bringing to
it afterward another layer of Pissocera, which is a kind of juice of Wax
and Pitch, made with Gum and Rosin, and over that again they lay Propolis,
which we call Bee-glew.

In this same threefold tilie, and sure groundwork thus artificially
begun, they Archimedes in respect of them seems to be no body. For first of
all they set up the cells of their Kings and Princes, in the higher place of
the hony-combes, being large, fair, sumptuous, stately and lofty, being
cunningly wrought, of the most tried, purest, and refined Wax, trenching them
round for the greater defense of the regal Majesty, with mound and enclosure,
as it were with a strong Wall, Bulwark, or Rampire.

And as Bees in regard of their age and condition, are of three sorts, so
likewise do they divide their Cells: for to the most ancient they appoint
houses next to the Court, (as those that are the fittest to be of his privy
counsel, and garders of his person) next to these are placed the young Bees,
and those that be but one year old. And they of middle years and stronger
bodies, are lodged in the uttermost rooms, as those that are fittest and best
able to fight for their King and country. Yet Aristotle says, that Bees in the
making of their Tents or Cells, do first of all provide for themselves, and
next for their King and his Nephews, and lastly for the Drones. And as in the
fabricature of their hony-combes, they make the fashion according to the
magnitude and figure of the place, fashioning it either orbicular, long,
square, sword-like, or foote-like, etc. according to their own liking,

The whole comb contains four orders of Celles; The first the Bees occupy;
the next the Drones possess; the third, those that are called of the Greeks
Chadoones, of the Latins, Apum soboles, (call them if you please Schadones.)
The last is appointed for the room of honey making. There be some who
constantly auerre, that the Drones do make combs in the same hiue the
laboring Bees do, but that they lack the skill and power of mellification,
it being uncertain whether this comes to pass either through their grossnes
and bigbellied fatnes, or through their settled and natural lazines. And if
through

In some places, as in Pontus, and in the City of Amisus, Bees make white
honey, without any combs at all, but this is sildome seen. And if a man would
consider the rare and admirable contexture and fabric of their honie-combes,
far excelling all humane Art and conceit, who would not subscribe with the
Poet, Esse Apibus partem diuinae mentis, et haustus aethereos? who will deny
them (I say) either imagination, fantasy, judgment, memory, and some
certain glimse of reason? But I will not dispute of this, neither am
Pythagoras mind, who conceited that the souls of wise men, and of other
ingenious creatures, departed into Bees. But whosoever will diligently examine
how they divide their labors, as some to make up the combs, some to gather
honey, to heap together their meat, to trim and dress up the houses, to
cleanse the common draught, to vndershore the ruinous walls, to cover those
places wherein any thing is to be kept, to draw out the very strength of the
honey, to digest it, to carry it to their Cells, to bring water to the thirsty
laborers, to give food at set and appointed hours to the old Bees that
sit, to defend their King with such ouer-sight and painful regard, to drive
away Spyders, and all other enemies, to carry forth the dead, (that no stink
or ill savor hurt,) every one to know and go to his own proper cell, and
generally, all of them not to stray far from home to seek their living; and
when the flowers are spent near their lodgings, to send out their espialls to
look for more in places further distant, to lie with their faces upward under
the leaves when they have set forth any voyage by night, least their wings
being much moistened by the dew, they should come tardie home the next day, to
balance and peize their light bodies with carrying a stone in stormy weather,
and when there is any whirlewind, to fly on the further side of the hedge, for
fear least either they might be disturbed,

I had almost omitted to speak of that natural love which they bear to their
young, a great virtue, and sildome seen in the parents of this age. For Bees
do sit upon their combs (when they have laid their increase) almost like
unto birds, neither will they stir from thence but in case of pinching hunger,
returning out of hand to their breeding place again, as though they were
afeard least that by any long stay and absence, the work of

Whereas the Almighty has ^ared all things for the use and service of (...),
so especially The uses of Bees.
among the rest has he made Bees, not only that they should be v^ us
patterns and presidents of political and oeconomicall virtues, (of the which
before I have discoursed) but even Teachers and Schoolemaisters instructing us
in certain divine knowledge, Mars, many conspiracies and tr^^ons were intended
against the state at Rome, with which the commonwealth was well-nigh deceived,
ensnared, yea and overthrown. In the days of Seuerus the Emperor, Bees made
their combs in the Ensigns, banners and standerds of the soldiers, and most
of all in the camp of Niger, after which ensued diverse conflicts betwixt the
Armies of Seuerus and Niger, Fortune for a time imparting her favors equally
to them both, but at length Seuerus side carried away the bucklers. Swarms of
Bees also filled the Statuaes which were set up in all Hetruria, representing
Antonius Pius, and after that they fell in the camp of Cassius, and what hurly
burlies after that followed, Julius Capitolinus will resolve you. At which time
also a great number of Romans were intrapped and slain by an ambush of
Germans in Germany, P: Fabius and Q: Elius being Consuls. It is written that
a swarm lighted in the tent of Hostilius Rutilus, who was in the Army of
Drusus, and did there hang after such a M: Lepidus and Munatius Plancus being
Consuls. Also in the consulship of L: Paulus and Caius Metellus, a swarm of
Bees flying up and down, presignified the enemy at hand, as the Soothsayers
well diuined. Pompey likewise warring against Caesar, when for the pleasuring
of his friends he had set his Army in array, going out of Pyrrhaciu^, Bees met
with him, and darkened even the very ancients with their great multitude. We
read in the histories of the Heluetians, how that in the year of our Lord God
1385. when Leopold of Austrich prepared to go against Sempach with an host of
men, being yet in his iourny, a swarm of Bees fled to the town, and there
rested upon a certain great tree called Tilia: whereupon the vulgar sort
rightly foretold the coming of some Virgill in the 7. book of his Aeneades,
seems to describe the coming of Aeneas into Italy after this manner.

-- Lauri
Huius Apes summum densae (mirabile dictu)
Stridore Nigenti liquidum trans aethera vectae
Obsedere api^em et pedibus per mutua nexis
Examen subito ramo frondente pependit,
Continuo vates: externum cernimus (inquit)
Adventure virum.
that is,

A tale of wonder to be told, there came a swarm of Bees,
Which with great noise within the air a Bay Tree did attain,
Where leg in leg they cleaped fast, and top of all degrees
O're-spread, and suddenly a hiue of them remaind
There hanging down: whereat the Prophet said,
Some stranger here shall come to make us all afraid.
Which thing also Herodotus, Pausanias, and diverse other Historiographers, have
with greater observation then reason confirmed. Laon Acraephniensis, when he
could not find the Oracle of Trophonius, by a swarm flying thither he found
the place. In like sort, the Jupiter Melitaus, Hiero the Siracussan, Plato,
Pindarus, and Ambrosius, were nourished by honey, which Bees by little and
little put in their mouths, as Plutarch, Pausanias, and Textor are Authors.
Zenophon likewise in his Oeconomicks, terms hony-making the shop of virtues,
and to it sends mothers of households to be instructed. Poets gladly compare
themselves with Bees, who following Nature only as a Schoole-mistres, uses no
Art. So Plato says, that Poets ruled by Art, can never perform any notable
matter. And for the same reason Pindarus makes his brags, that he was
superior to Bacchilides, and Simonides, having only Nature, not Art to his
friend. Bees unless they be incensed to anger, do no hurt at all, but being
provoked and stirred up they sting most sharply: and such is he disposition and
natural inclination of Poets; and therefore in his Minoe strictly enioyne^,
that those who love their own quiet, must take great heed that they make no
wars ^ythe^ with Poets or Bees. Finally, they have so many virtues which we may
imitate, that (...)* Egyptians, Chaldaeans and Graecians, have taken diverse
Hieroglyphics from them. A^^ he that will read over Pierius, shall there
find store of Emblemes of them.

The Country people in like manner have learned of them Aeromantie, that is,
divination of things by the air, for they have a fore-feeling and
understanding of rain and winds aforehand, and do rightly prognosticate of
storms and foul weather; So that then, they fly not far from their own
homes, but sustain themselves with their own hony-suck already provided.
Which being true, we must then think it no strange matter, that Aristaeus,
Philistius, Aristomachus Solensis, Menus the Samnite, and six hundred others,
that have writ of the Nature of Bees, bidding adue to all those pleasures and
delicacies that are found in Cities, for fyftie and eight years space
together, inhabited the woods and fields, that they might more exactly come to
the knowledge of their order of living, and natural dispositions, leaving it
as a monument for posterity to imitate. But what their bodies do work in
ours, I judge worth the labor and pains taking to let

First therefore, their bodies being taken newly from the hiues and bruised,
and drunk Medicinal uses.
with some diareticall wine, cures mightily the Dropsy, breaks the stone,
opens the obstructed passages of the urine, and helps the suppression
thereof. Being bruised, they cure the wringings and grypings of the belly, if
they be laid upon the place affected: and if any have drunk any poisonous
honey, Bees being likewise drunk do expel the same. They mollify hard ulcers
in the lips, and being bound to the part, they cure a carbuncle and the
Bloody-flixe, amending also the cruditie of the stomach, and all spots and
flecks Hollerius, Alexander, Benedictus and Pliny have written.

Galen affirms, that if you take live Bees out of their combs, and mix them
with honey wherein Bees have been found dead, you shall make an excellent
ointment to be used against the shedding and falling of the hair in any place
of the head, causing it to grow again, and come afresh. Pliny again wills
us to burn many Bees, commixing the ashes with oil, and therewith to annoint
the bald places; but we must (says he) take great heed that we touch no
other place near adjoining. Yea he affirms, that Honey wherein is found dead
Bees, is a very wholesome medicine, serving for all diseases. Erotis cap: 61. De
morb: muliebrib. commends highly the ashes of Bees beaten and tempered

Bees also are very profitable, because diverse living creatures are nourished
by, and do feed full sauerly on their honey, as the Bear, the Badger or
Brocke, Lizards, Frogs, serpents, the Woodpecker or Eate-bee, Swallows,
Lapwings, the little Titmouse, which of some is called a Nun, because his
head is filletted as it were Nun-like, the Robin-redbreast, Spyders and Waspes,
as Bellonius has well observed.

But to what end (you will say) serves their sting, against whose poison Pliny
knew no remedy? I must needs confess truly that which cannot be denied, that
the stings of Bees are sometimes venomous, but that is when either they are
mad and raging, and be exceedingly disquieted by means of anger, or some
vehement Fever, for otherwise they do not sting, but prick but a little: and
therefore Dioscorides never made mention of the Nicander writes in his
Theriacis. In like manner the people of the old World (that we may prove the
sting of Bees to be converted to some good use) did (as Suidas writes) punish
those persons who were found guilty of coosenage, and deceitful counterfeiting
of merchandise after this sort: First they stripped the offender stark naked,
anointing his body all over with honey, then setting him in the open sun with
his hands and feet fast America at this day, (now called the West Indies) who
are under their rule and government, not for justice sake, (as those Ancients
did) but for satisfaction and fulfilling of their barbarous wills, and beastly
tyranny, that they might seem to be more cruel, then cruelty it self.

Noninus says, that if the herb Balm (called Apiastrum) be beaten, and
anointed with oil upon the stinged place, that there will ensue no hurt
thereby. Florentius counsels the gatherer of honey, to annoint himself with
the juice of Marsh-mallowes, for by that means he may safely and without fear
take away the Combs. But the juice of any Mallow will do as much, and
especially if it be mixed with Oil: for it both preserves from stinging, and
besides it remedieth the stinged. But admit that Bees by their stinging do
vex and disease us, yet notwithstanding the dead Bees so found in the honey,
do speedily bring cure to that hurt, if they be duly applied, abating and
taking away all Merula says, that Varro gathered yearly five thousand pound
weight of Honey: and that in a small Village of Spain, not exceeding one Akre
of ground, he was wont to gain by Honey there gathered, ten thousand
Sesterties, which is of our English coin about fifty pounds. We Sandaracha,
Bee-glevv, combs, and dregs of wax, which no Commonwealth can well spare.
To speak nothing of the examples of their virtues and noble properties, being
no less wholesome for the soul, then these others are for the good provision
and maintenance of our life, and for nourishment of our bodies necessary and
commodious.

Now for the conservation of Bees, it is very meet (as Pliny writes) that we
come by them lawfully, and by honest means, that is, either by gift, or by
buying of them, for being taken away by theft, they will not prosper with us:
even as the herb called Rue being stolen, will very hardly or never grow.
Furthermore, to keep these good Pay-maisters, and to make them in love with
you, you must remove from their Hiues mouths,

Now the signs of their vnhealthines, as of all other living creatures, are
known by Virgill has very elegantlie, but confusedly touched some part, in
the fourth Book of his Georgickes, in these following verses.

Si vero (quoniam lapsus Apibus quoque nostres
Vita tulit) tristi languebunt corpora morbo,
Illud non dubijs poteris cognoscere signis.
Continuo est agris alius color, horrida vultum
Deformat macies, tum corpora luce carentum
Exportant tectis, et tristia funera ducunt.
Aut illae pedibus connexae ad limina pendent,
Aut intus clausis cunctantur in adibus omnes,
Ignauaeque fame, et contracto frigore pigrae
Tum sonus auditur grauior, tractimque susurrant.
Frigidus vt quando siluis immurmurat auster,
Vt mare solicitum stridet refluentibus vndis,
Aestuat aut clausis rapidus fornacibus ignis.
In English thus;

The life of Bees is subject unto fall,
Their bodies languish with diseases sad:
This by undoubted signs discern you shall,
Their body's then with other color is clad.
A leanenesse rough does then deforme their face,
Then does the living bring dead bodies out,
And for their fellows make a funeral place,
Mourning sad exequies their dwellings all about.
Or else with feet in feet they hang upon
The threshold of their Hiue, or else abide
Close within doors, not looking on the sun
Till sloth by cold and famine their life up dryde:
Then also is their sound and voice more great,
Drawing soft, like Southern wind in woods,
Or fire enclosed in burning furnace heat,
Or as int' Seafalls back the flyding floods.
And so the sicknesses of Bees being evidently known, plainly perceived and
cured, they will live many years, although Aristotle, Theophrastus, Pliny,
Virgill, Varro, Columella, Cardan, and finally all Authors, would make us
believe that they ^^ldome attain to nine years, but never to ten. Although
we know by good experience, knowledge of place, and the credible attestation of
men worthy belief, that they have lived 30. years. Which only reason has
induced me to believe, that Bees (even by Natures appointment) are long lived,
and that only with Albertus I only doubt, whether they dye by means of old
age.

I am not ignorant how they are made away with the rage and violence of
diseases, and other enemies, but if they have all things furnished fit for the
preservation of their life, and prolongation of health, and the contrary far
from them, I know no reason but that I should conclude them long lived, yea
more durable then any other living creature, and never to dye, but that I may
not deny their time and turn to be mortal. For they only do feed upon
honey, that immortal Nectar, sent from heaven, and gathered from a divine dew
(the very life and soul of all herbs, fruits, trees and plants.) Of whose
nature, use, and excellency, if you would know more, I must refer you to the
learned writings of Physicians.

Of Bees called Drones and THIEVES.
ADrone or a Dran in English, is of the Latins called Fucus, of the Greeks
Kephen, and Thronaz. Of the Illirians Czeno, of The names.
the Germans Traen. Of the Belgies Besonder strael. Of the Spaniards Zangano.
Of the Italians Ape che non famele. Of the French Baradon, and Fullon. Of the
Pannonians (now Hungarians) Here. Of the Polonians Czezew. This kind of Be is
called Fucus, as some think Quasifur, because he does furtim mella deuocare,
devour Honny by stealth: although it be more agreeable to truth, that it is
termed Fucus, because he does Apibus fucum fraudemque facere: And through the
color and pretense of keeping warm the Hiues, he spends their stock, and
undo all their hony-making. And therefore for some to derive Fucus the Latin
word, from Phagomai the Greek, seems to be far fetched: Some again will
draw Fucus, a fouendo, quia incubando apum iuuant faeturas, and this in my
mind is as harsh as the former.

Many men make the Drone to be one of the 4. sorts of Bees, which is very
unadvisedly done, as some would make us believe: Because they bestow no pains
in gathering the The description.
Honey, nor labor it thoroughly to have it perfectly wrought. He is twice so
great as the common Be, and greater then the Thief, so that in bigness he
eueneth, yea, surpasses the King himself: and yet he attaineth unto this
greatness, not by the gift of Nature, but by his custom and trade of life.
For whereas Bees do prepare and make their celles for the breeding of Drones:
they make them lesser then the Drones, and not here and there through the
Hiue, but only in the uttermost, and as it were in the banished or most
outcast place of all in the whole Camp and lodged Army. Besides, the small
Worms of the Drones, are far smaller at their first bringing forth, then those
that are of the kingly

Further this is to be added, that the Drone is of a more shining black color,
then the true laboring Be, he is also greater then the greatest, without
sting, sluggish, idle, slothful, without heart or courage, cowardous and unapt
to war, not daring to venture life and limb in manly Martial trade, as the
true Ligitimate Bees will.

Aristotle says, that they breed and live amongst the true Bees, and when
they fly abroad, they are carried scatteringly, here and there aloft in the
air as it were, with some violence or tempest; so exercising themselves for a
time, they return from whence they came, there greedily feeding upon the honey.
Now why the droues may be compared with the Dukes and Princes, in respect of
their corporature, and Bees like unto them in their sting, let us hear
Aristotle's reason. Nature would (says he) there should be some difference,
least always the same stock should increase one of another confusedly, without
order or consideration, which is impossible: For so the whole stock would
either be dukes or Drones. And therefore the true Bees in strength and power of
engendering and bree-ding, are comparable to their Dukes, and the Drones only
in greatness of body resemble Cothouroi, because he puts not forth any
sting: whereof Arist. l. 3. de^ener. Anim. c. ^0.
Hesiodus has these verses thus interpreted;

Hinc vero Dij succenset and homines, quicunque ociasus;
Viuat, fucis ac aleo-carentibus similis studio,
Qui apuni laborem absumunt ociosi
Vorantes.
In English thus;

Both God and men, disdain that man
Which Drone like in the hiue,
Nor good, nor ill, endeavor can
Upon himself to live,
But idle is, and without sting,
And grieves the laboring Be
Devouring that which he home brings,
Not yielding help or fee.
So that either he has no sting at all, or else makes no use of it for
reuengement. Pliny says flatly, that they are stinglesse, and would have them
called imperfect Bees, and the famous Poet Virgill styles them, Ignauumpecus:
that is, idle and unprofitable, good for nothing. Columella makes them a race
or stock of a larger size, very like unto Bees, and accounts them very aptly
to be placed in the rank of ordinary sorts of Creatures, of the

Pliny does not express their nature and quality. The Drones are stinglesse,
and so to be reckoned imperfect Bees, and of the basest sort, taking their
original from tired and worne-out Bees, and such as be past labor and
service, living only upon a bare pension^ we may call them the very slaves and
bondmen of the true Bees, to whom they owe all due homage and subjection,
wherefore they exercise their authority over them, thrusting

Sometimes the Drones remain like banished persons, before the entrance of
the hiue, and dare not venture to press in. For three causes specially the
Bees do drive and cast out the drones: either when they multiply above measure,
or when they have not place enough left for their laborers, or that they be
pinched with hunger and famine, for lack of Honey. And as they carry a deadly
hatred against the Drones, so to make it more apparent, they will not hurt such
persons as offer either to take away with their bare hands any of the drones,
and to cast them away, yea, though they be in the greatest heat of their fight.
Aristotle in his ninth Book De histo. Animal. Cap. 40. affirms, that Bees
are engendered apart one from another, if their Captain lives: but in case
their King and Captain dies, some say they breed in the Bees celles, and that
of all others of this kind,

The young drones are bred without any King, but the true younger Bees never:
for they derive their original and petigree from the kingly stock. Some will
say that the Their generation.
young drones do fetch their original from the flowers of the Herb Cerinthe
(described by Pliny, which is a kind of Honey suckle, having the taste of the
Honey and Wax together) from the Olive tree and Reed; but this opinion is
weakly grounded, and stands upon small reason.

Aristotle affirms, that they proceed from the longer and bigger Bees, yea,
and those that are termed Thieues: which without question he received either
from the Ancient Philosophers, or some others that had the charge and were
skillful of ordering Honny, that lived in his time. Some will have them to
breed and come from putrefaction, as Isidore from stinking and putrified Mules:
Cardan from Asses, Plutarke and Seruius from Horses. Othersome are of opinion,
that they first proceed of Bees, and that afterward they degenerate
bastardlike from them, after they have lost their stings, for then they become
Drones: neither are they afterward known to gather any Honny, but being as
it were

Some again hold the contrary side, assuring us upon their knowledge, that
the true laboring Be fetches his beginning from the Drone, because long
experience (the Masters of wisdom) has taught us, that there is yearly
known to be the greater swarm, when there is the greater multitude of Drones.
But this to me seems rather the devise and invention of some curious brain,
then any true grounded reason. For because that many Drones breed (as it
comes always to pass in good and plentiful years) therefore there should
be greater Swarms is no good consequent: but contrariwise, because the
multitude of Bees do greatly increase through the moderatenes of the pure air,
Pliny lib. 11. c. 11. says) conferring upon them a lively heat, fit for their
increase and prospering. Some divide them into male and female, and that by
coupling together they make a propagation of their kind, although (as Athenaeus
writes) neither drones nor Bees were ever yet seen of

But whereas Waspes, Hornets, and other Cut-wasted creatures that make any
combs and breed in the same, have been sometimes (though seldom) seen, both
by us and Aristotle, to join together, I can surely see no cause why we should
utterly take from them the use of Venus, though in that respect they be very
modest and moderate.

I have before in the discourse of their generation said, that the Bees do make
the male kind, and the Drones to be but the female; but since that in the time
of Hony-making, they punnish them so sharply after they have eiected them from
possession first, so that afterward they put them to death, I can hardly be
enduced to believe that the drones are but the female kind, considering that
one thing would eclipse and ouercast all those resplendant Virgill in the
fourth book of his Georgiks thus describes them;

Immunisque sedens aliena ad pabula fucus.
That is to say;

The Drone as free and bold does sit,
And wast of others food commit.
Where Festus takes Immunis, for lazy, idle, unserviceable, unprofitable, and
such

But the most approved Authors set down diverse good uses of drones. For if
there Their uses.
be but a few of them among the Bees; they make them the more careful about
their affairs, and to look more duly to their task: not by their good
example, (for they live in continual idleness) but because they might
continue their liberality toward strangers, they work the more carefully in
their Honnie-shoppe. And (if Bartholemaeus do not deceive us) these Drones be
not altogether idle: but they imploie themselves about the building of the
Kings House, which they make large, stately, and very sumptuous in the higher
and middle part of the Combs, being very fair to see too in respect of their
covering.

So then they are but lazy, in respect of Hony-making and gathering: but if
you look toward their Art or science of building, they are to be accounted
excellent deuisers of the

The Lockers or holes of the vp-growne Bees, are somewhat to large, if you
respect the quantity of their bodies, but their combs lesser, for those they
build themselves, and these other are made by the Bees, because it was not
thought convenient and indifferent, so great a portion of meat to be given to
such vile laborers and hirelings, as was due to their own

Tzetzes, and some other Greeks do besides affirm, that the Drones are the
Bees Butlers or Porters to carry them water, ascribing moreover to them a
gentle and kindly heat, with which they are said to keep warm, cherish and
nourish the young breed of the Bees; by this means as it were, quickening
them, and adding to them both life and strength.

The same affirms Columella in these words. The Drones further much the Bees
for the procreation of their issue, for they sitting upon their kind or
generation, the Bees are shaped and attain to their figure, and therefore for
the maintenance, education, and defense of a new issue, they receive the more
friendly entertainment. And Pliny lib. 11. c.

In sum, except they should stand the Bees in some good stead, the Almighty
would never have enclosed them both in one house, and as it were made them
freemen of the same City. Neither doubtless would the Bees by maine force
violently break in upon them, as being the Sworn and professed enemies of
their commonwealth, except when their slavish multitude being to much
increased, they might fear some violence or rebellion,

This disease is by the Author of Geoponicon thus remedyed. Moysten with Water
either destroy them quite, or else if you please, take away what number you
list your self. And if you will take away withal their young, who are not yet
winged, and first pulling off their heads throw them among the other Bees, you
shall bestow on them a very welcome dinner. But what the dreaning of Drones
portended, and what matter they Minister in the Hieroglyphicall Art, let
Apomasueris reveal and disclose out of the Schools of the Egyptians and
Persians. I think I have discharged my duty, if I have set down their true
Uses, true Nature, generation, degeneration, description, and names.

Fur in Latin, or Thief in English, is by Aristotle called Phoor, of
Hesychius Phoorios: from whence I take the Latin word Fur to be derived. Some
have thought that thieves Of Bees called thieves.
are one proper sort of Bees, although they be very great, and black, having a
larger belly or Bulk then the true Be, and yet lesser then the Drones, they
have purchased this theeuish name, because they do by theft and robbery
devour Honny, belonging to others, and not to them. The Bees do easily endure,
and can well away with the presence of the drones, and do as it were greet and
bid one another welcome, but the Thieves they cannot endure, in regard that the
Bees do naturally hate them, for in their absence the Thieves privily and by
stealth creep in, there robbing and consuming their treasure of Honny, so
greedily and hastily (without chewing) swallowing it down, that being met
withal by the true Bees in their return homewards, and found so unweildy by
means of their fullness, that they cannot get away, nor be able to resist, but
are ready to burst again,

These neither gather Honey, nor build houses, nor help to bear out any mutual
labor with Bees: for which cause they have Watchmen or Warders appointed to
observe and ouersee by night such as are ouerwearied by taking great and
vndefatigable pains in the day time, to secure them from the Thieves and
Robbers, who if they perceive any Thief to be stolen in a doors, they
presently set upon him, beat, and either kill him outright, or leaving him
for half dead, they throw him out. Oftentimes also it happens,

Aristotle appoints no office, charge or business to the Thief, but I
think that he is ordained for this end, that he might be as it were a spur to
prick forwards, to whet and Their uses.
quicken the courage of the true Bees, when the other offer them any injury:
and to stir and encourage them to a greater vigilance, diligence, and doing
of right and justice to every one particularly. For I cannot see to what other
purpose Thieues should serve in a Christian commonwealth, or what use might be
made of such as lie in weight to do displeasure,

OF VVASPES.
AWaspe of the Chaldeans is termed Deibrane: Of the Arabians Zambor. Of the
Englishmen a Waspe. Of the Germans Eine VVespe. Of the Belgies Harsel. Of the
Goths Bool Getingh. D. Bonham.
The common people of Italy term it Vespa, and some of them do usually call
it Muscone, and the Bononians Vrespa. The French Guespe. The Spaniards Abispa,
and Vespa imitating the Latins, who call it Vespa. The Polonians Ossa. The
Woss. The Hungarians Daras. Calepine says that it is called Vespa, qui vesperi
muscas venatur in cibum. The Greeks do also name them diversely, for commonly
they are called Sphekes. The Scholiast of Nicander calls them Lucospades, and
Suidas Dellides, and Delithes. Of Hesychius Auletaj, and Passaleres, and Gaza
nicknameth them Authrenaj: for these ought rather to be called Bees. Eustathius
deriueth Tous spekas, apo Tes diasphagon, because they seem to be so much
cut-asunder in the Wast or middle, as that they seem to gape and to be clean
cloven asunder, as by the figure here set before your eyes you may plainly
perceive. A Waspe is a kind of insect, that is, swift, living in routes Pollio
would needs have it called Diachrusos.

The body of a Waspe seems to be fastened and tied together to the midst of
the breast, with a certain thin fine thread or line, so that by means of
this disioyned, and not well compacted composition, they seem very feeble in
their loins, or rather to have none at all. Whereupon Aristophanes the Greek
Poet, in his Comedy, entitled Spheres or Waspes, terms all those Maids
which are fine, slender, and pretty small in the Spherodeis, resembling them to
Waspes, as if one should call them Waspe-wasted-wenches, whom Terence very
quaintly and elegantly terms Iunceas, that is, slender, long, and small,
like to a Bulrush. I think that all the whole pack of them have stings in
general, although I am not ignorant that some Authors hold the contrary,
affirming that the breeding female Waspes do want them: but thus much I can
say of my own knowledge, that on a time finding a Waspes nest, and killing
them every one by pouring hot scalding liquor into their holes, because I would
boult out the truth, I plainly perceived by long viewing of their bodies, that
there was not one of them all but had a sting, either thrust out evidently,
or closely and secretly kept and covered. So that:

-- Quid nobis certius ipsis
Sensibus esse potest, quo ^era ac falsa notemus.
In English thus;

What can more certain be then sense,
Discerning truth from false pretense.
They make a sound as Bees do, but more fearful, hideous, terrible, and
whisteling, especially Lucret (...).
when they are provoked to wrath; from whence Theocritus fetches this proverb,
Sphex bomboom tettigos enantion, that is, Scilicet obstrepita^s argutae vespa
cicadit: and this old said saw may well be applied to those who being
themselves unlearned, will not In Hoedeporis.
as be weak, feeble, and impotent persons able to do nothing, that will
offerto contend with their betters and superiors with their brawling speeches,
and spiteful raylings. And this latin proverb carries the same sense,
Catulus leonem adlatrans.

If you will have the gifts and ornaments of their minds described, you must
consider that a Waspe is a creature that lives in companies together, one with
another, subject to a civil government under one King or Ruler, industrious,
mutual friends one to another, ingenious, crafty, subtle, quick, and
cunning, of a very quarrelsome nature, and much subject to anger and
testiness. This is a good Argument of their civil and political manner of
life, in that they live not solitarily in a desert or Wilderness where no man
keeps, but they build for themselves a City, both excellent and admirable
for the notable buildings and houses in it, where they spend their time (for
the most part) according to the mutable and never failing laws of Nature,
observing and keeping ever the Golden mean, as well in their daily taskes, as
in their dispositions and affections of mind.

Besides, they are governed with a kingly, not with a tyrannical government,
(as Aelianus says) although by nature they are great fighters, eger,
bioysterous, and vehemently tempestuous: and he is led to say this, because
their Dukes or generals are stinglesse, or rather having stings as their
Subjects, they will not use the same to the hurt of their inferiors, by
thrusting it forth, or striking in passion.

Now although they be twice so great, and harder or rougher then the other
Waspes, yet are they not unfurnished of the virtue of patience and clemency, or
gentle and debonaire behavior, by which means they keep in order, and
contain in their lists, as it were by gentle language, their unruly rout, and
mutinous companies. There is no man but will confess, that this is an evident
token and Argument of their mutual love, and Aelianus. The Phaselites in times
past were constrained to forsake their City, for all their defense, munition,
and Armor, only through the multitude, and cruel fierceness of the Waspes,
wherewith they were anoyed.

Again, this manifestly proves, that they want not a hearty and fatherly
affection, Neoptolemus, Pyrrhus, Hector, Achilles, or Agamemnon himself, the
Captain general of all the whole Graecians if he were present. Yea the Divine
Poet Homer, in 12. Lib. of his Iliades, when he would express the haughty and
generous spirits of the Greekish Chiefetaines, he likeneth them to Waspes in
these words, Spekessin ajolois cradien kai Thumon echousaris, that is, having
the hearts and stomachs of Waspes, when they are to fight for their private
dwellings, their dear Progeny and offspring. The love that Bees carry to their
issue is great, but it cannot be greater then that of waspes, neither can they
have a greater promptitude, alacrity, or desire to defend Homer in his Iliads
lib. 12. insinuates by the example of the chasing God Jupiter, who took it
marvelous angry, and much repined at the sturdy stomachs of the Graecians,
adding that the Greeks did defend themselves as valiantly, and endured the
shock and assault of their enemies, as ever Waspes of Bees would in defense of
their children or issue: in these verses following;

-- Non enim ego putaui heroas Achiues
Sustentaturos nostrum robur, and manus inuictas
Illi autem quasi vespae acres atque apes,
Quae nidos faciunt ad viam puluerulentam,
Neque deserunt cauam domum: sed expectantes,
Viros venatores pugnant pro filijs.
That is to say;

I did not think our noble Graetian Lords, could bear
Our force, and with unconquered hands maintain
Our right: but they like Waspes and Bees deuoyde of fear,
Which by highways their houses use to frame,
Do not for sake their hollow dusty homes,
What ^re they be that come to hunt them out:
Fighting with valor, (not fearfully like Drones)
To rid their young ones both from death and doubt.
Besides this, they further build for them very large dwellings, with Chambers
and floores, in a round and orbicular form, with rooms one above another,
finely and wittily compacted, so that there is space enough of ingresse and
regresse, and very defensible

Some affirm, that the matter of their Combs is confused, rude, and
^fauouredlie heaped up, full of bark and sand, but I could never as yet see
it otherwise then light, slender, and thin like paper, dry, transparent,
gummy and thin, as though it were thin leaves of gold, shaken very easily
hither and thither with the wind, and rising many times from the foot or
foundation very small, and broad above like unto a top. The

But in case they have a General or Duke, then they make their nestes under
the earth, their Cells or Chambers being formed with six angles or corners,
much like unto Bees. They make their Combs ^ound, much after the fashion of a
broad Toadestoole, from whose centers there goes forth as it were a short
stalk or tying, by which the Comb eleaueth, and is fastened hard to thearth,
or some Tree, or peradventure to some other Comb. They have such a tender care
over their females, (especially at such time as they

All which forecited particulers, if a man would duly enter into
consideration of them, he must needs confess, (will he nill he) the
admirable industry, diligence, wit, prudence, Art, sweat, and labor that is in
these poor vermin. Their natural inclination to anger, and the hasty
fumishnesse of Waspes, not only Cocks, which do scratch and scrape up with
their spurs their nests, do find implacable, but even all other disturbers
Sphekian erithizein, which the Latins, as Plautus almost in the same sense
uses, I^ritare erabrones: For Crabro among the Poets, is used sometimes for a
Hornet, and other-whiles for a Waspe.

In like manner, Clemens Alexandrinus, Stromaton 2. when he would express and
declare the foulness and abominable hurt of such sins that do lie in
wait, as it were to deceive, and watch to do displeasure to the life of man,
has these words, Houtoi gar (inquit) oi ant agonist ai pacheis koij
Olumpicoi, sphaecon hos eipein eisi drimuterai, kai malist a ^edone. That is,
these fat, dull, gross and Olimpicall enemies of ours, are worset then
Waspes, more cruel and displeasant, and especially sensual and worldly
pleasure. Yea, Cadmeam victoriam reportare, loose more then he shall get, whet
his sword against himself, and return home by weeping cross, considering
that besides the noblenes of their stout stomachs, and armed stinges, they are
withal so stiff and obstinate, as that they will never give over.

They (...) in their first breeding, stock, sex, place, feeding, and manner
of labor. Isidore says, (although perhaps not so truly) that Waspes do
first proceed from the rotten carcasses of dead Asses: for all hold opinion,
that the black Flies called Beetles, do take their original from them. But I
am rather moved to think, that they were first bredde from the dead body of
some warlike and fierce Horse, and so also thinks Pliny, in his eleventh
book and twentieth chapter. And the Graecians have usually this famous and
vulgar verse in their ordinary talk.

Hippoimen sphekon genesis, Tauroi de melisson,
Equi enim vesparum generatio, Tauri vero Apum.
In English thus;

Waspes do first come from Horses, and Bees are bred from Bulls.
And surely, their incredible swiftness in their flight, their ardent and
burning desire they have to fighting, are sufficient inducements to move me to
think, that they took their first beginning from some gallant Horse, and not
from Asses, Oxen, or Cowes, and much less from the fearful Dear. For dame
Nature has sildome been so indulgent and friendly to any one beast besides an
horse, as to excel both in swiftnes of pace, quickness of spirit, courage of
stomach, and magnanimity. And I rather lean to this side, because else I do
not know what sense I should give to that Aristotelean proverb:

Chairete aellopodoon thugateres ippoon,
Saluete volucripedum filiae Equorum:
Which may be englished thus;

All hayle ye daughters of swift-footed Horses.
For besides the truth that lies in the bare words, I take the morrall of it
to be uttered as a witty check, or a figurative flout, conceitedly to rebuke
and hit in the teeth, those shrewd women, cursed and scolding wives, which are
so peevish that they will not be pacified, who are like unto waspes in their
sullen displeasant humors, tempestuous madness,

Some waspes do proceed from the stinking carcass of a Crocodile, if we may
give any credit to the Egyptians and their fellows; and for that cause, when
they imagine or think a waspe, they paint and draw out the shape and form of
a Crocodile or a Horse. From hence Hierom Cardan would make this collection,
that of every corrupted living creature, another does proceed: which in my
conceit is very absurd and against all reason. For this being granted, the
generation of waspes would be infinite, and daily experience would read a
Lecture of contradiction against him, upon the progress of Natures works.
Many times waspes do breed by the mutual company of the male and female
together, which though Athaeneus counts but a fable, yet for all that, since
the Philosopher De generat. Animal. cap. 16. and in his ninth book De histor.
Animal. cap. 41.) I will wholly incline to his judgment. But what manner of
beginning they have by joining together, and how it is perfited and
accomplished, let us a little lend our listening ears to Aristotle, and Pliny
his Interpreter.

The Princes or Ringleaders of the waspes, when they have made choice of a fit
place for themselves under the earth, either in the holes, chincks, or clefts
of the Rocks, or in thatched houses, (as I have often seen) there they make
there combs in the beginning of Summer, fashioning their small cells with
four little doors, wherein small worms do breed, who when they are more
grown, they make yet other greater doors or hatches, joined and couched
together, for otherwise they would increase after the same sort in all respects
as the common waspes do.

The excrement is only in the small worms, and their young increase remains
immovable without any stirring before they be able to fly, and whilst they
are covered as it were with a thin membrane, and yet in the same season of
the year, and in the space of one day, you shall manifestly perceive a great
difference: for one flies out, another sticks still as it were in the shell,
another rolleth and tumbleth, and a fourth cannot stir one whit. All these have
their beginning and increase for the most part in Autumn, not in the Spring,
and specially in the full of the Moon. This one thing here is to be noted,
that waspes do not swarm, and that in Sommer-time they are subject to Kings,
and in Guuaicocrateia, the females regiment, or Muliebre imperium prevails.
And when they have renewed and repaired their issue with a great supply, and
that they be fresh and lusty, the Empire again returns to the Masculine
kind, and yet it is but a short, brittle, and ruinous Empire not able to bear
up it self, although by Natures immutable decree, orderly ruled, and
rightfully governed.

Aristotle says that it is not likely that the young waspes are brought forth
as a brood, because they be so great in bulk, as that in reason it should not
seem probable, that so small a fly as a waspe, should have such great young
ones. But this is a bare and weak reason, not beseeming the dignity of so
great a Philosopher. For what can any man allege to the contrary, why Nature
in a lawful birth and breeding, should not as soon, and as Aristotle, to have
relied but upon a weak proppe, having scarce probability to stand on his side
for the maintenance of his opinion. His credit therefore at this time must not
be sufficient to bar us the liberty of contradicting him.

The same Aristotle, the monarch of our modern learning, says, that the ^^al
worms Hippocrates calls E^lai, that breed in flesh called (as I judge)
^^ggots, but in our country, Gentiles: and these waspish worms are somewhat
white, known and easily discerned by their slits or dashes, the hinder part of
their body being very thick and grosie, having a black list or line running
along their backs, without feet, not creeping, but rolling and tumbling
themselves this way and that way confusedly. When they have disburthened
themselves of their breed, they close up their cells with a certain thin small
skin, which again being broken when they come to any perfection or growth,
they get themselves our of doors into the clear light, and at two days end
will be able to fly round about. The Philosopher makes two kinds of waspes,
the one wild and fell, the other more meek Francis Drake himself had been
there, although he was (as Meteranus a stranger, (and so impartial) in his
Belgic History right truly observed,) Omnium ducum nostri seculi fortissimus
ac famosissimus, yet I make no doubt, but he would have taken my part, and
been a companion with me in this my fearful flight.

Some of these vvaspes, as well those of the crueller kind as those of the
gentler, do lack a sting, (or rather I think they use it not.) Othersome
again of both sorts, are furnished with stinges, and those that want them, are
ever the lesser and weaker, neither revenging themselves any way, nor offering
to make resistance. Contrariwise, those who have stings are greater, stronger,
more quarrellous, concentious, stubburne and eager. Some account these the
males, and those other stinglesse to be the females. Many of those which have
stinges, do for-goe and quite loose them when Winter draws on, as some make
reckoning, but it was never my hap to see this, says the Philosopher, in his 9
book De hist: Animal: capit. 41.

If you catch a Waspe, holding her fast by the feet, suffering her to make her
usual

But yet for all that, their Dukes or principal Chiefetaines, are seen all
the winter long to lie hid in their lurking holes under the earth: and indeed
many men when they plowed or broke up the ground, and dug in winter, have
found of this sort. But as for the laboring waspe, I never as yet heard of any
that could find them. Their Principal or Captain, is broader, thicker, more
ponderous and greater then the male waspe, and so not very swift in flight, for
the weightines of their bodies is such an hinderance to them, that they cannot
fly very far: whereby it comes to pass, that they ever remain at home in
their hiues, there making and devising their combs, of a certain glutinous
matter or substance, brought unto them by the worke-waspes: thus spending their
time in executing

Waspes are not long lived, for their Dukes (who live longest,) do not exceed
two years. And the laboring, that is the male waspes, together with Autumn,
make an end of their days. Yea which is more strange, whether their Dukes or
Captains of the former year, after they have ingendered and brought forth new
sprung up Dukes, do dye, together with the new waspes, and whether this do
come to pass after one and the selfsame order, or whether yet they do and
may live any longer time, diverse men do diversely doubt. All men hold the wilder
kind to be more strong of nature, and to continue and hold out the longer. For
why, these other making their nests near unto common highways and beaten
paths, do live in more hazard, lie open to diverse injuries, and so more

The brouity of their life, is after a sort recompensed, and some part of
amends made by the rare clammy glewishnes of the same: for if you separate
their bulkes from the head, and the head from the breast, they will live a long
while after, and thrust out their sting almost as strongly as if they were
vndeuidable, and free from hurt and deaths harm.

Apollonius calls waspes Omoboroi, and Aristotle, Meloboroi, although they
do not only feed on raw flesh, but also on pears, plummes, grapes,
reysins, and on diverse and sundry sorts of flowers and fruits; of the juice of
Elmes, Sugar, Honey, and in a manner of all things that are seasoned, tempered,
made pleasant, or prepared with either of these two last rehearsed.

Pliny in his 11. book capit. 53. is of opinion that some waspes, especially
those of the wilder and feller kind, do eat the flesh of Serpents, which is
the cause that death has sometimes ensued of their poisonous stinging. They
also hunt after great flies, not one whit sparing the harmless Bees, who by
their good deeds have so well deserved. According to the nature of the soil
and place, they do much differ in their outward form and fashion of their
body, and in the manner of their qualities and dispositions of their mind: for
the common waspes being acquainted, and familiarly used to the company of men
and beasts, are the gentler, but the Hermites and solitary waspes, are more
rude, churlish, and tempestuous: yea Nicander terms them Olaus, that is,
pernicious. They are also more unhappy, dangerous, and deadly in very hot
countries, as Ouidius reports, and namely in the West Indies: where both in
their magnitude and figure, there is great difference betwixt theirs and ours,
so that they are accounted far more poisonous and deadly, then either the
English, French, Spanish, or Barbarian waspes. Some of these dangerous
generation do also abound in exceeding cold Countries, as Olaus Magnus in his
22. book tells us.

Their use is great and singular: for besides that they serve for food to
those kind of Hawks which are called Kaistrells or Fleingalls, Martinets,
Swallows, Owls, to Brocks or Badgers, and to the Cameleon: they also do
great pleasure and service to men sundry ways, for they kill the Phalangium,
which is a kind of venomous Spyder, that has in all his legs three knots or
joints, whose poison is perilous and deadly, and yet waspes do cure their
wounds.

Raynard the Fox likewise, who is so full of his wiles and crafty shifting,
is reported to lie in wait to betray waspes after this sort. The wily thief
thrusts his bushie tail into the waspes nest, there holding it so long,
until he perceive it be full of them, then drawing it slily forth, he
beats and smyteth his tayle-full of waspes against the next stone or

Pliny greatly commends the solitary wasp to be very effectual against a
Quartaine-Ague, if you catch her with your left hand, and tyeor fasten her to
any part of your body, (always provided, that it must be the first waspe that
you lay hold on that year. Mizaldus memor. Cent. 7. attributes great virtue
to the distilled water, and likewise to the decoction Mizaldus
of common waspes, affirming expressly, that if any part be therewith
anointed, it straightwayes causes it to swell monsterously, and to be puffed
up, that you would imagine them to be sick of a Dropsy: and this course
craftie-drabbes and queanes use to persuade

When you are minded to defend the Bees from the invasion and spoil of
waspes, you must set a pot with some pieces of flesh in it near the Hiue,
and when the waspes (in hope of some prey) are entered, suddenly clappe over
the cover, and so destroy them, or else by pouring in some hot water at the
top, you may scald them all to death in the pot. In like sort, some do
gently breath upon Raisins, fruits, Sugar, Honey, Oil, by which, either the
waspes are chased away, or by tasting the oil do die. And again, some do
mix corrosiues with Honey, (as for example, Sublimate, Vitrioll,
Auripigmentum, etc.) that they by taking this venomous or poyson-infected
drink, may suffer condign punishment for their intemperate and insatiable
gluttony.

Of the stinging of vvaspes, there do proceed diverse and sundry accidents,
passions

I will now set before your eyes and ears one late and memorable example of
the danger that is in VVaspes, of one Allens wife, dwelling not many years
since at Lowick in Northamptonshire, which poor woman resorting after her
usual manner in the heat Allens wife
of the Summer to Drayton, the Lord Mordants house, being extremely thirsty,
and impatient of delay, finding by chance a black Jack or Tankerd on the
table in the Hall, she very inconsiderately and rashly set it to her mouth,
never suspecting or looking what might be in it, and suddenly a Waspe in her
greediness passed down with the drink, and stinging her, there immediately
came a grea^tumour in her throat with a rednes, puffing and swelling of all
the parts adjacent; so that her breath being intercepted, the miserable
wretch whirling herself twice or thrice round, as though she had had some
vertiginie

Now, for fear least I should loose my self in this troublesome and vast
Ocean of Natures admirable fabricature, I will now discourse of such medicinal
means, as will defend from their furious malice. The virtue of Mallows, and
of Althea, (called Marsh-mallowe) is notable against the prickings of Waspes.
For the softest and most emollient herb, is applied as a contrary to a watlike
and hurtful creature, whose juice being anointed with oil, either abateth
the rage of vvaspes, or so blunteth and dulleth their sting, that the pain is
not very sharp or biting. Pliny lib: 21. capit: 171. And of the same Auicen:
Waspes (says he) will not come near any man if he be anointed with oil and
the juice of Mallows. For as a soft answer does frangere iram, and as the
Graecians have a saying; Edus Megiston estin orges, pharmakon logos: So also in
natural Solomon.
Philosophy we see, that hard things are quailed, and their edge even taken
off with soft and suppling: as iron with a fine, small, and soft feather, the
Adamant stone with blood, and the stinge of vvaspes, Hornets and Bees, with
oil and Mallows.

What is softer then a Caterpiller? and yet if Aetius credit be of
sufficience, the same being beaten with oil, and anointed upon any part
preserves the same from the wounds and stinges of vvaspes. And of the same
virtue is the herb called Balm, being stamped and mixed with oil. The same
symptoms or accidents do follow the stinging

Against the stingings of vvaspes diverse medicines are prescribed by
Physicians, but I will speak of such only as I have made proof of, and such
as are confirmed by long experience. The curation of their stings.
Gilbert the Englishman, says, that vvaspes being bruised and applied to the
place affected, do cure their own wounds very strangely. The same virtue
peradventure, not only the Scorpion, but the greater part of Insects have, if
any one would make Gilbertus Anglus.
any dilligent trial thereof. If a man be stinged of any venomous vvaspes
(which is easily known by the blewnes of the place, madness, rauing and
fainting of the party, and coldness of the hands and feet) after you have
given him inwardly some Alexipharmacall medicine, the place agrieued must be
launched, or rather opened with a Cauterie, so being thus enlarged and opened,
the venom must be well sucked out, and the paring or shauing of that earth
wherein the waspes build their nests, must be wrought and kneaded with Vinegar,
and so applied like a Cataplasme.

A plaster also made of VVillow-leaues, Mallows, and the comb of waspes, is
very medicinable for the same, as by the counsel of Haly Abbas I have
experimented. The English-Northerne-men, do prepare most excellent emplaister
worth gold, against all Haly Abbas
stinges of waspes, only of that earth whereof their Ouens are made, having
vinegar and the heads of Flies commixed therewith. Let the place be very well
rubbed with the juice of Citrulls, and withal, let the party that is pained
drink of the seed of Margerom beaten to powder the quantity of two drammes: or
thus. Take of the juice of Margerom two ounces, of Bole Armony two drammes,
with the juice of unripe Grapes so much as is sufficient, make an emplaister.
Another. Annoint the place with the juice of Purcelane, Beetes, or sweet Wine,
and Oil of Roses, or with Cowes blood, or with the seeds of the Spirting or
wild Cucumber (called Nolime tangere) beaten with some Wine. Thus far
Galen. Barley Meal wrought up with Vinegar and the Milk or juice of a
Fig Tree, brine, or Sea water, are excellent for these griefs, (as Dioscorides
lib. 8. Cap. 20. writes) if the wound be often fomented, bathed, or soked with
any of them. To drink, give two drammes of the young and tender leaves of
Bays with harsh wine, and if the part affected be only anointed with any of
these, they are much available. In like sort the decoction of Marsh-mallowes
drunk with Vinegar and water, are much commended, and outwardly salt with
Calves fat: Oil of Bays draws out the poison of VVaspes. The Aetius says)
being bruised and applied, do perform the same.

The juice of Rue or Balm, about the quantity of two or three ounces drunk
with wine, and the leaves being chewed and laid on with Honey and Salt, or with
Vinegar and Pitch, do help much. VVater-cresses, Rosemarie, with Barley meal,
and water with vinegar sod together, the juice of Iuy leaves, Marigolds, the
blood of an Owl, all these are very affectuall against the stinging of waspes:
as Pliny lib. 31. Cap. 9. tells us. The buds of the wild Palm Tree, Endive
with the root, and wild Timbe being applied playsterwise, do help the
stinging of VVaspes. After the vemine is drawn out by sucking, the place
effected must be put into hot water the space of an hour, and then suddenly
they must Rhazes says, Rhazes.
that the leaves of Nightshade, or of Sengreene, do very much good in this
case. And in like sort Bole Armony with vinegar and Champhire, and nuts beaten
with a little vinegar and Castoreum.

Also take the Comb with Honny applying to the place, and hold the grieved
place near the fire immediately, and laying under them a few ashes, bind them
hard, and forthwith the pain will be swaged. Serapio says, that Sauorie, or
Cresses applied, and the Serapio.
seed thereof taken in drink, and the juice of the lesser Centory mixed with
wine, are very meet to be used in these griefs, he also commends for the
same purpose the leaves of Basil, the Herb called Mercury, and Mandrakes, with
Vinegar. Ardoynus is of opinion Ardoynus.
cease, especially that which proceeds by waspes. Let the place be anointed
with Vinegar and Champhire, or often fomented and bathed with Snow-water. Take
of Opium, of the seed of Henbane and Champhire, of each alike much, and
incorporate them with Rose water, or the juice of VVillowes, and lay it upon
the wounded place, applying on the top of it a linne^ cloth, first thoroughly
wetted in wine. Johannes Mesue (who of some Mesue.
is called Evangelist a medicoram) prescribes this receipt of the juice of
Sisimbrium two drammes and a half, and with the juice of Tartcitrons make a
potion. The juice also of Spina Arabica, and of Margerom are nothing inferior
to these forementioned. Aaron, Aaron.
would in this grief have water Lintells (called by some Duckes meat) to be
stamped with

Constantine assures us, that Alcama tempered with Barley meal and vinegar,
and so Constanti.
bound to the place, as also Nuts, leaves of vvall-nuts, and Bleetes, are very
profitable in this passion. Item, apply very warm to the wound a Spiders web,
bruised with a white Onion, and sufficient Salt and vinegar, will perfectly
cure it. Guil: Placentinus will warrant, Guliolmus. Placentinus. Gordonius
that a Plate of cold Iron laid upon the wound, or Lead steeped in vinegar,
will do the deed. Gordonius counsel is to rub the place with sage and
vinegar, and afterward to foment it with water and vinegar sod together.
Varignana would have us to apply Chalk in powder, and inwardly to take the
seeds of Mallovves boiled in wine, water, and a little Uarignana.
vinegar.

Matthiolus much commends Sperage being beaten and wrought up with Honey, to
Matthiolus
anoint the place. Likewise Flies beaten and anointed on the place, vvinter
Sauoury, VVater-cresses, with oil of Momerdica, give most speedy help.
Arnoldus Villanouanus Arnoldus de villa noua.
assures us, that any fresh earth, especially Fullers earth, is very
auayleable, and the herb called Poley used as an unguent, or else Goats Milk.
And Marcellus Empiericus is not behind Marcellus.
his commendations for the use of Bullockes dung, to be applied as a poulteisse
to the stinged part.

These and many others any man ascribe that has had but an easy taste of the
infinity of Physickes speculation, for the storehouse of Nature, and truly
learned Physicians, which way soever you turn you, will Minister and give
sufficient store of alexyteriall medicines for the expulsing of this grief. In
conclusion one and the self same medicament will serve indifferently for the
curation of waspes and Bees, saving that when we are stung with Waspes more
forceable remedies are required, and for the hurts that Bees do us, then
weaker and gentler are sufficient. In the hundredth and nintith year Capua, (as
Julius witnesses) and lighted on the temple of Mars, all which when with great
regard and diligence they were gathered together and solemnly burnt, yet for
all that they presignified the coming of an enemy, and did as it were foretell
the burning of the City, which shortly after came to pass. And thus much for
the History of the Waspe.

OF HORNETS.
AHornet is called of the Hebrews Tsirhah. Of the Arabians Zabor, and Zambor.
Of the Germans Ein hornauss, Horlitz, Froisln, Ofertzwuble. Of the Flemminges
Horsele. Of the The names.
Frenchmen Trellons, Troisons, Foulons. Of the Italians Calauron, Crabrone,
Scaraffon, and Galanron. Of the Spaniards Tabarros o Moscardos. Of the
Illirians Irssen. Of the Slauonians Sierszen. Of us Englishmen Hornets, and
great waspes. The Graecians call them Anthrenas, and Anthrenous, because with
their sting they raise an Anthrar or Carbuncle, with a vehement inflammation of
the whole part about it. The Latins call them Crabrones peradventure of
Crabra, a Town so named in the territory of Tusculanum, where there is great
plenty of them: or it may be they are termed Crambrones of Caballus (a horse)
of whom they are first engendered: according to that of Ovid 15. Metamorphos.

Pressus humo bellator equus Crabronis origo est.
That is to say;

When war horse dead upon the earth lies,
Then does his flesh breed Hornet flies.
Albertus terms a Hornet Apis citrina, that is a yellow or Orange colored
Be. Cardan Plutarke is of opinion, that they first proceed from the flesh of
dead Horses, as Bees do out of a Bulls belly: and I think that they have their
breeding from the harder, more firm and solid parts of the flesh of Horses,
as Waspes do from the more tender or soft. Hornets are twice so great as the
common Waspes, in shape and proportion of body much resembling one Their
description.
another. They have four wings, the inward not being half so large as the
outward, being all joined to their shoulders, which are of a dark, brownish,
and of a Chestnutlike color, these wings are the cause of their swift flight:
they have also six feet of the same color and hew, that their breast and
shoulders are of. Their is somewhat long, of the color of Saffron, their eyes
and looks are hanging or bending downwards, crooked every one of them being
much like unto a small triangle, besides they have certain clefts or slits on
both sides, both before and behind, by which they can at their pleasure when
they list, either shrink up themselves, or draw and gather themselves
together, and with the same again lengthen and stretch out their bodies. They
have also near to their belly on both sides four black spots, and in their
tail they are armed with a strong piercing sting, and the same very venomous.
They make a sound or a buzzing strange noise, more hydeous and dreadful then
waspes do. They are shrewd, fierce, and cruel, quickly angry and wrathful,
and although they live in companies together, yet notwithstanding they are ever
known to be but of an homely, rude, curft, and intractable disposition and
nature, and will never be brought by any Art or fashioning to lay aside their
vplandish wildenesse, (as some Herbs will do that are transplanted into
Gardens.)

They are besides this of such a mischeeuous malignity and venomous quality,
that as some affirm, nine of their stings will kill a man, and three time nine
will be able to kill a strong Horse; especially at the rising of the Dog Star
and after, at which time they have a more fiery, hasty, and inflaming nature,
and men at that season, by reason of their large exaltation and sending forth
of spirits, grow more weak and faint.

And therefore it is no marvel though in holy Scripture, they are compared or
likened to most fierce and cruel enemies, which should put and cast forth the
Cananites, Hettites, and Cheuits, Exodus 23. 28. So likewise Ovid in the
eleventh Book of his Metamorphos. has these words, Spicula carbronum
ardentia. The burning stings of Hornets: And Virgill Georgiks, calls them
Asperrima, most sharp and violent. Terence (the most eloquent of all Comicall
Poets) in his Comedy entitled Phormio, and Plautus in his Amphytrio, have this
Proverb: Irritaui crabrones, I have provoked or incensed the great Waspes to
anger: which I suppose they used as a byword against the properties, natures,
and froward behauiours of women, who being in their wonted sumish mood, if
once you go about to overthwart them, or a little to contrary their
wilfulness, you shall pull an old house over your own head by a further
provocation, and perhaps if you get you not the sooner out of their sight and
reach of their Clutches, you may chance have somewhat more flying about your
ears then you would.

It is good therefore if you have a Wife, that is, Calcata immitior hydra,
unquiet and contentious, to let her alone, not to wake an angry Dog: and when
a mischief is well Pliny lib. 11. cap. 21. dream to the contrary: which in
proportion and quantity are far greater (if you respect the bodies of other
Hornets) then either the captains of the Bees or Waspes, are in comparison of
their subjects. These also spend their time within doors, as the captains of
Waspes do, not having many but one head to guide and Tully says) or other
mutiny might arise to their final destruction. They are great vexers and
troublers, and even like such as had sworn the death of In bellis ciuilibus
omnia sunt misera* Tul. in ep sam^*
their enemies, Robbers, and Thieues: And yet at home they nourish peace,
excelling even the very Bees themselves in their painful, earnest, and
willing desire to maintain their stock and common society.

For neither do they chide, braule, or contend, nor yet make any stir or
rustling when any is promoted to any office or place of preferment in their
corporation; neither are they distracted into diverse minds with their
businesses, neither yet do they raise any tumult,

Neither do they yearly drive and expel forth of the doors to seek new
habitations, where they can, (as some Bees deal very churlishly and unnatural
with their young) but they contrariwise cherish in their bosom, defend and
keep warm, their new springed up progeny and race, building for them greater
Houses, and raising of more Sellers and flores, bording and planking the same in
case of necessity, never ceasing till they be fully reard and made fit for
their defense and safety. But as for their King and captain (whom they
exceedingly honor and highly esteem) they make choice of such a one, as
neither seems to be a King without a kingdom, nor a Prince without people
and possessions, and yet he so behaueth himself, and carries himself so
euenly, as though he had but little to do in this his Empire. And yet in
largeness of body and greatness of his heart, in stoutnesse and stateliness of
stomach and person, he staineth all the rest, carrying away

They enlarge their Combs exceedingly, by adding more and more unto them, so
that of a strong and healthy stock of Hornets, it has been known they have
gathered three or four Treyes or baskets full of Combs. If any Hornets stray
from their own home, they repair to some tree, l and there in the top of it
makes their Combs, so that one many times may very easily and painely perceive
them, and in these they breed one captain general, or great commander, who
when he is grown to be great, he carries away the whole company, placing them
with him in some convenient lodging. Wild Hornets (as Pliny says) do live in
the hollow trunkes and cauities of trees, there keeping themselves close all
the winter long, as other Cut-wasts do.

Their life is but short, for they never exceed the age of two years. Their
combs are wrought with greater cunning, more exquisite Art, and curious
conceit, then those either of Waspes or Bees, and these excellent deuisers do
make them one while in the trunkes of trees, and sometimes again in the earth,
increasing them at their pleasure with more floores and buildings, according to
the increase of their issue, making them smooth and bright, decking and
trimming them with a certain tough or binding slime or Gelly gathered from the
gummy leaves of plants. Neither do any of the little mouths or entries of
their Cells look vpwardes, but every one bends downewardes: and the bottom
is placed upwards, least either the rain might soke thorough them in long
shewers, or the head of them being built vpwardes, they might lie open and be
the more subject,

If you eye well their nestes, you shall find them all for the most part
exactly sex angular or six cornered, the outward form and fashion whereof is
divided with a murry colored pertitions: and their membranous substance is
much like unto the rind or bark of Byrch, which in the patching heat of Summer
cleaves and opens it self into chaps. The stinging of Waspes is for the
most part accompanied with a Fever, causing withal a carbuncle, swelling, and
intolerable pain.

I my self being at Duckworth in Huntingtonshire, my native soil, I saw on a
time a great Waspe or Hornet making after and fiercely pursuing a Sparrow in
the open street of the Town, who at length being wounded with her sting, was
presently cast to the Aristotle, whom I so greatly reverence, and at whose name
I do even rise and make courtesy, knows not of a surety how Hornets do
engender, nor after what manner they bring forth their young breed. But since
we are assured of this that they bring forth their young by the sides of their
Cells, as Waspes and Bees, we need not doubt, but that they do all other
matter after their manner, and if they couple together, they do it by night,
as Cats do, or else in some secret corner, that Argus with his hundredth eyes
can never espy it.

Hornets gather meat not from flowers, but for the most part they live upon
flesh, whereby it comes to pass, that you shall often find them even in the
very dunghills, or other ordure. They also proule after great Flies, and hunt
after small Birds, which when they have caught into their clutches, after the
manner of hungry Hawks, they first wound them in the head, then cutting it
asunder, or parting it from the shoulders, carrying the rest of the body with
them, they betake themselves to their accustomed flight. The greater sort of
them dye in the hard winter, because they store not themselves sufficiently
Aristotle enformeth us. In like sort Landius has well observed, that Hornets
both day and night keep watch and Ward besides the Hiues of Bees, and so
getting upon the poor Bees backs, they use them in stead of a wagon or carry
age: for when the silly Be labors to be discharged of his cruel Sytter:
the Hornet when he has sucked out all his juice, and clean bereft him of all
his moisture, vigor, and strength, like an unthankful Guest, and the most
ungrateful of all winged creatures, he spares not to kill, and to eat up his
fosterate and chief maintainer.

They feed also upon all sweet, delicious, and pleasant things, and such as
are not Indian Hornets are so ravenous, and of such an insasiate gluttony (as
Ouidius reports) that they fly upon Oil, Butter, greasy Cooks, all sorts
of sharp sauce used with meats, and all moist and liquid things, not sparing
the very Napkins and Table clothes, and other linen that is any way soyled,
which they do filthily contaminate with the excrements of their belly, and with
their Viscous laying of their eggs.

But as they get their living by robbery, and purloining of that which others
by the sweat of their brows, by their own proper wits and invention, and
without the aid and help of any do take great pains for: so again they want
not a revenge to punish, and a provost Marshall to execute them for their
wrongful dealings: termed of some a Gray, Broch, Their uses,


Neither do they only minister food to this passing, profitable, and fat
beast, but they serve in stead of good Almanackes to country people, to
foretell tempests and change of weather, as Hayle, Rain, and Snow: for if they
fly about in greater numbers, and be oftener seen about any place, then
usually they are wont, it is a sign of heat and fair weather the next day.
But if about twilight they are observed to enter often their nestes, as though
they would hide themselves, you must the next day expect rain, wind, or some
stormy, troublesome or boisterous season: whereupon Auienus has these verses,

Sic and crabronum rauca agmina si volitare,
Fine sub Autumni conspexeris athere longo,
Iam vespertinos primos cum commouet ortus,
Virgilius, pelago dices instare procellam.
In English thus;

So if the buzzing troops of Hornets hoarse to fly,
In spacious air bout Autumnes end you see,
When Virgill star the euenings lamp epsy,
Then from the Sea some stormy tempest sure shall be.
Furthermore, since it is most certain that those remedies which do heal the
stingings Remedies against their stings.
of Waspes, do also help those wounds and griefs which hornets by their cruel
stinging cause, yet notwithwanding as Aggregator has pronounced, the Zabor is
the Bezoar, or proper antidote of his own hurt, if he be oftentimes applied
with Vinegar and Water, Oil and Cow Dung tempered together. In like sort all
manner of soiles and earths that are myry and muddy, are much commended in this
case, such as Bacchus applied to bald Selenus, who was wounded with Hornets,
when longing for a little Honey, he iogged and shaked their nests, thinking he
had lighted upon some Bees Honey, which Ovid most elegantly 3. Fastocum has
described in these verses;

Millia crabronum coeunt, and vertice nud^
Spicula defigunt, oraque prima notant.
Ille cadit praeceps, and calce feritur aselli:
Inclamatque socios, anxiliumque vocat.
Concurrunt Satyri, turgentiaque ora parentis
Rident, percusso claudicat ille genu.
Ridet and ipse Deus, limumque inducere monstras;
Hic paret monitis, and linit ora luto.
In English thus;

Of Hornets thousands on his head full bare,
And on his face their poysond spears stick fast,
Then headlong down he fell, and Asses foot him smote,
Whiles he for help his voice to fellows cast,
The Satyrs flock came run apace, and did deride
Their sires swellen mouth, whiles Ass had made him lame,
The God himself did laugh, yet showed an earth to hide
The wound which he received, and so did heal the same.
If any one be desirous of more medicines against the perilous and
transpeircing stinging of these horne-mad Hornets, he shall find store of them
digested together in the History of Waspes: for their remedies are common,
belonging as well to the one as to the other, there being no other difference
but this, that here they must be given in a greater measure or quantity, and
their use ought longer to be continued. And let this suffice to to have spoken
thus much of such insectes or Cut-wasted vermin as are winged, and live

OF CANTHARIDES or Spanish Flies.
THis kind of Cut-wast is called of the Graecians Kantharis, Cantaride. Of the
Italians Cantarella. Of the Spaniards Cubillo. Of the Germans Grune Kefer,
Goldkaefer. Amongst the Belgies or Netherlanders, it is termed Spaensche
Vlieghe, and of us Englishmen Cantharides, and Spanish Flies. I have seen two
sorts of Cantharides, the one great, and the other small. Of the greater sort
some are thick, and long bodyed, which are found among wheat, and these are
thick, gross, and unwieldy like unto Beetles, they are also of sundry
colors, and changeable hew, with

The greater sort also are not always of a glistering green color, but
otherwhiles you shall have them somewhat reddish or murrey colored, but yet
all of them of a glittering brightness, and marvelous shining gloss,
piercing the eyes with singular delight. The lesser sort are not so common as
the greater, somewhat differing from them in shape and proportion of body, but
in virtue, quality, and manner of breeding: there is no disagreement at all to
be found.

Those of the lesser sort have their bodies and heads somewhat long and
hooked, their eyes very black, and hanging out, their wings growing out from
the midst of their Loins, being marked with two Silver speckes or pricks,
and some few white spots.

They are commonly found in the Summer season, in the Herb that is called
Cicutaria, or wild Hemlocke. Their feet and Legs are very small and long,
finely decked

The third sort have their Head and Shoulders all one, being so closely and
confusedly joined together, as if they were but one thing, and could not by any
means be separated, unless in imagination, and these are of a rusty color,
and their small pinke eyes as black as Iette, their wings as well as their
heads are nothing differing in color, saving that their wings do glister
with some strakes of the color of Gold, their feet also are short, and as
black as Pitch.

The fourth is very like to the third sort, but it is rather of a greenish,
then of a rusty Iron color, but in all other respects there is no difference
to be seen, saving in their magnitude, for this last described is the least
of them all. But th^se ^indes of Cantharides as well the greater as the lesser,
do first proceed not from any beasts, as some have thought, but they rather
take their Original from some to ten, stinking, and corrupt moisture and
siccity, Ticteta^ gar en tois toon puroon lei^is kai tais ageirais, kai tous
Sukais proseti to toon Kantharidoon phulon, the meaning whereof is, that the
whole stock and kindred of Cantharides do bring forth or lay their young in
the vile, base, and imperfect force of heat or warmth: and further in moist
Figs, as Aelianus in his ninth Book and thirty nine Chapter, word for word
has exscribed out of Aristotle.

They do also breed from a certain little Worm which is found in the sponge
of the Dog bryer (called of the Physicians Bedeguar) and from Catterpillets
of the Fig Tree, Popler, Peare-tree, Ash, Oliue-trees and Roses: for in all
these there be found certain Worms, the very Founders and Parents of
Cantharides, but yet in the white Rose these Worms are of much lesser force,
power, and sufficiency, then in the former.

Cantharides do couple together and generate, but yet not any living creature
of their own kind, but only a little small Worm. They feed upon all manner
of pulse and Corn, but especially Wheat, and then they are best for medicinal
Uses. They smell like unto Tar, and in their taste they much resemble the
Cedar-tree, as Nicander reports. Dioscorides says, to gnaw or eat into, to
raise blisters, exulcerate and raise an inflammation, for which respect, they
mix them with such medicaments as are appointed to heal Leprosies, any
dangerous Tetters and Ring-wormes, or those that be cancerous.

They are applied to hard, Scuruy, or Mangy Nails, being first tempered with
some fit playsters or Cerotes tending to the same purpose, taking them so
clean away, that they fall of by the roots. Some use also to temper them with
such conuenyent medycines as are warranted to take away Wartes, Corns, or any
hard knobbes or pieces of flesh growing in the hands or feet. Some again use
to puluerife Cantharides, and then required, least at any time by their
causticke faculty they exulcerate too deep into the flesh.

Cantharides mingled with Lime, serve in stead of a Pen knife to eradicate and
take away those little hard and red swellings rising chiefly in the Crown of
the head, armepittes, or privy parts, called of some Physicians Pani: and some
there be again that will adventure a little of the^ in powder, to give with
such Medicines whose property is to provoke Urine: But yet there is hard hold
and tough reasoning on both sides, whether they ought to be given inwardly with
Dioretikes or no, considering that being so drunk, they are accounted amongst
strong poisons, tormenting the Bladder without any ceasing: othersome again
hold the contrary, assuring us upon their own experience, that

Just a pari premitur veluticum pondere libra,
Prona nec hac plus part sedet nec surgit ab illa.
That is to say;

As when an even seal with equal weight is peized,
Nor falls it down this way, or is it that way raised.
But being mingled and wrought up with the juice of Vna Taminea, (which is a
Ampelos angria, a kind of Bryonie) sheeps or Goats sewet, there is no doubt
but that they do great good. Some of my masters (says Galen, the prince of
all Physicians next to Hippocrates) did use to put Cantharides amongst such
medicines as they prepared to move urine, taking only their wings with the
feet, but I (says he) am wont to take Cantharides wholly, as well as some
parts of them, and so I judge them the more safe to be used and prepared this
way, especially I miss not to make choice of such as are found among Corn,
and have as it were a yellow circle or enclosure crossing overthwart their
wings, lib. 3. and lib. 11. de Simplic. facult.

Being applied rightly, they do also provoke the monthly terms, and that
very effectually, and put into Antidotes, they are thought of many to help
Hydropicall persons, as not only Hippocrates and Dioscorides, but also Gallen,
Auicenna, Rhazes, Pliny, and other Physicians of best note and worth have
witnessed: I cannot here sufficiently enough commend their assured, tried, and
approved use, being commixed with Leaven, Salt, and Gum Ammonialum, for the
diuersions of Rheumes or Catarrhes, the taking away of all goutish pains, out
of the ha^ch or hippe (called the Sciatica of the Populer sort,) whilst they
draw forth and donsume from the center of the body, (being there thoroughly and
deeply impacted) to the surface the matter or offending humors

They are also good against the vemine of a Salamandra, as Pliny in his 29.
Book and 24. Chapter assuteth us. They are also highly esteemed of some,
being duly prepared and orderly mixed with certain other medicines, to take
away and correct the remiss negligence, falling-faintnesse, and heartlesse
casting down of the Virile part, yea they do (as they say) very much provoke
too venetous incitements.

But here I would counsel each one not to be to knack-hardy bold, in meddling
with them, for these or the like intentions for as they bring both health and
help, being duly commixed, and orderly tempered, not exceeding their dose and
first quantity; so again, if you fail in their due and skillful applycation
or propmation, they induce and John Langius sets down a true and very
pleasant story, which in this place, because it makes greatly for out matter
in hand, I will not refuse breefely to describe it.

There was (says he) at Bononie in Italy, a certain rich and noble young man
of France (which Gallus, to use his own words, was Gallo quouis gallinaceo
salacior) who falling extremely in love with a certain Maid in the same
City, prevailed so far at length through his earnest importunities and
incessant solicitations, that at length they appointed and agreed upon the
time and place of their meeting, to keep their Reuelles for one night. So this
lusty Gallant being thus ensnared in the inextricable laborinth of her
beauteous Physnomy, fearing deadly, least his heart should turn into Liver, or
that he might faint and loose his courage before he should attain to his
iournies end; in this his doubtful coaping, and dangerous
skirmishing-conflict, like a Wiseman fearing the worst, casting all dangers
aforchand what might ensue, would needs know of a fellow Soldier, and
Countryman of his, who had as one may guess borne a standard in Venus,
what were best to be done, to move him to a more vygorous courage, and to
keep his credit for that time, least either he should turn Crauen like an
ouertyred Jade, or else be utterly nonsuited which was worst of all: who
presently wished him to take some Cantharides in his Broth, which the other at
all adventures forthwith did.

But it was not long before this jolly Yonker felt an itching about his lower
parts, then being frolike above measure, supposed it to be the operation of
his medicine that caused this Colt-euill, he without any more ado hyed him to
his Love, minding there indeed to draw the matter to a set battle, and to end
all controversies by dynt of sword.

Tunc animis opus, Aenea tunc pectore firmo.
In English thus;

Of courage then indeed,
Then of stout breast is need.
But yet for all this, in the still of the night, when every one besides were
at rest, my restless Frank selt his whole body to be pockily torn, and
miserably rent with sundry cruel prickinges and stinginges, feeling moreover a
strange taste in his mouth, like the juice or liquor that yssueth from the
Cedar-tree, stamping and staring, raging and faring like a furious, mad,
frantike Bedlam, being all most besides himself thorough Mercurialis,
Mallows, and the roots of Althaea decocted, wherein was dissolved Cassia,
with Oil of Violets and Lyllies. After the administering of this, I commanded
him to take a good draught of Cowes or Goats milk once in every hours space,
and if Milk could not be had, then I willed him to take an Almond, Milk
made Exnucleis pinea, secdes of Mellons, Guordes, and Poppy bruised with the
distilled Water of Mallows, and Alkeakengy, and this would I have given to him
in good quantity in stead of the Milk if it were wanting.

But after that my fiery Frenchman had recovered his former health with these
and the like remedies, and that the unadvised Author of this rash counsel had
very humbly

Thus far Johannes Langius in his first Book Epistela. Medicinal. forty
eight.

There is also very profitable use to be made of Cantharides, for if you beat
them to powder, and convey a little of it into Apples, Pears, Plummes, Figs,
Peaches, or Quinces: especially those that be fairest and ripest, and those
that hang the lowest, finely closing it up again with the pill, which if any
Thieves or Robbers of Orchards shall taste of, they fall within a while after
into an intolerable burning in their Urine and strangury, making it only in
dropping-wise, whereby their theft is soon found out, and they well rewarded
with sour Sauce for their sweet meat: And this is an excellent night-spell,
and therefore I was loath to pretermit it, but to make you acquainted withal.

There is also another excellent medicinal use of Cantharides, if they be
duly, and according Pessuli infirmit as, yet I may not set it down in
English, because I would have but a few acquainted with secrets. Habeo enim ego
singular quoddam contra, penis Languorem remedium, quo cum promiscue vterer,
vtranque multis nobilibus (qui veneris vulgo studiosiores videntur) animos and
vires adauxit absque noxa. Vni tamen inter caeterossic obfuit, vt a venere (cui
nimium litarat) sanguinem continuo mingeret, and lipoithymia frequenti laboret.
Sane nisi lactis copia in procinctu fuisset, omnino interijsset venereus
pullus, and meritas salacitatis cupidinisque paenas luisset.

And let this suffice to have spoken of their medicinal virtues and qualities:
Now will Ovid when he wished ill unto, or cursed his enemy writ this:
Cantharidum succos dante parente bibas. lib. Trist. Cicero ad Parum, in the
ninth Book of his familiar Epistles, has these words, Ca^^s accusante L.
Crasso, Cantharidas sumpsisse dicitur, as if he purposed by that way to make an
end of himself by death. Galen in his third book De Simplic. medicam. facult.

If they be taken inwardly into the body, though but in small quantity, and
mixed with other convenient correctories, they do mightily provoke urine, and
sometimes corrode and fret the bladder, so that it is as clear as the
noonday, that what things soever do overthrow nature, by reason of their
extreme frigiditie, if they be taken but in a very small quantity, yet will
nourish the body: so on the other side, whatsoever is contrary, repugneth or
goes against human Nature, by means of corrupting or any putrifactiue
quality like unto Cantharides, can never do so. Bartholomeus Montegnana a
learned Physician, assures us, that he once knew one Francis Bracca a
Citizen of Paduay in Italy, who having but outwardly applied Cantharides to
his knee, yet their poison spreading to other inward parts, he voyded five
pintes of blood by way of urine: Montegnana Consil. 182. Cap. 10.

The same accident has also befalne them, who to be remedyed of rough, hard,
mangy, or lepros-like nails, have adventured to apply them to their great toe.
So that Cantharides must not rashly be applied and used, as common deceivers,
blind-empiricks, and cousening Land-lopers would make plain country people
believe. Pliny relareth a story of one Cossinus a Roman Knight, who was
dearly beloved of Nero the Emperor, who having a very dangerous Tettar (a
disease in times past was peculiar to the people of Egypt) a Physician of that
country in stead of curing, did kill him by giving him Cantharides

But I should rather think that Cossinus dyed by the outward applycation of
Cantharides, because by their burning and causticke quality, they clean eat
and consume away filthy Tetters or Ringwormes, Manginesse, scuruinesse,
Lepries, and all hard Callous warts, Corns, or pieces of flesh that grow in
the hands or feet; for I can see no reason why any would be so wilfully
blind, as to give them inwardly for the curation of any Tetters or such like
griefs: or at leastwise I must think that the right use of Cantharides was
unknown to the ancient Physicians of the old world, as by Galen it may appear
in his eleventh book de Simplic. Med. fac. and in his fourth book de victa
Acut.

The same Pliny (in his twenty nine book and fortith Chapter) witnesses, that
Cantharides were reprochfully laid to Cato vticensis charge, and that he was
sorely blamed for offering to make a price of poisons, and to sell them openly,
as in port-saile to any that would give most, so that their price rose to
threescore sesterties. Being drunk in too large a quantity, or else apply
outwardly to any part, either too long or too deep, they produce these or the
like symptoms, accidents, and effects.

The party to whom they are any way given, feels apricking, pain and torment
in his bowelles and inward parts, extending from the mouth down to the lower
parts about the Bladder, Raines, and the places about the Wast and short
ribs: they doc also vlcerate the bladder very dangerously, inflaming the
yard, and all other parts near the same with a vehement apostimation: after
this, they piss blood, and little pieces of flesh.

Otherwhiles there will follow a great laske and a bloudy-flyxe, fainting and
swounding, a numnesse or dullness of moving or feeling, debilitation, our
feebleness of the mind, with alicnation of the wit, as though they were
bestraught, likewise lothing or abhorring of meat with a disposition to
vomiting, and often an ordinary desire to make Dioscorides, and the first
Chapter. And out of Galen Lib. de Theriaca ad Pisonem Cap. 4. and lib. 3. de
Temperam. cap. 3. And out of ancient Rhazes (who practiced Physic one
hundredth years, if truth be truly related) Tit. 8. Chap. 17. If any one be
either affected or infected with any accydents, by means of Cantharides,
Dioscorides does thus cure them, as you may readily find in the book and
chapter before cited.

First of all he causes them to vomit often and much: and after that he
prescribes Glysters to be made for the scouring of the belly with Niter, and
to pres^rue the bladder Psyllum: and then he would have the matter of Glysters
to be somewhat different from those which were taken in the beginning; as
namely to be made of Barley Water, Marsh-Mallowes, the white of an Egg, the
Musciling of Line-seedes, Water of Ryce, the decoction of Fennigreeke,
Hydromell, satte Broathes, Oil of Almonds, the fat of a Goose, and the yelkes
of Eggs. And inwardly to take at the mouth, he bids them to use Cowes
Milk, Hydromell, the Grains or fruit of the Pitch-tree, both the greater and
the lesser sort, Wine sodde to the half, Duckes fat, a decoction with some
diureticall seeds (namely with the four greater cold seeds, which are
Cucumbers, Guords, Citruls, and Melons) and likewise some decoction made of
Figs, with sirup of Violets. Oil of Quinces is hyely commended of Terra
Samia.

Rhazes counsel is, after the taking of some Glysters made of any fat
broathes, to make an iniection into the yard with Oil of Roses, and the sick
person to sit in a warm Bath. Tit. 8. Chapter 17. The Writers and Authors of
Physic and Philosophy cannot agree, in what part of the Cantharides their
poison cheefely lurketh: for some will have it to be principally in the head
and feet, and others again will none of that: And yet they all agree upon
this point, that in what part of the body soever their poison is seated, that
their wings are a sovereign remedy and preservative, and if they be wanting,
that their poison is deadly: so that although they be never so poisonous, yet
Pliny in his eleventh book and 35 chapter.

And peradventure for the same cause, Galen in his eleventh Book which he
entitled De Simplic. Medicament. facultatibus, advises us expressly and
learnedly, that Cantharides should be taken whole as they are, and so to be
used either for inward or outward uses. For why it is far better, even in the
outward applycation of them, that they should more gently and slowly corrode,
gnaw, or fret asunder, and that their burning virtue and quality should be a
little corrected and weakened, then to perform their full effect to the great
danger of the patient, and many times to his utter undoing and destruction.
Therefore they are clean out of the way, who when they would use them for any
inward cause, The error of (...) medi^-giuers.
do cast away their wings and feet, whereas indeed they ought to take all
of them, not rejecting any one part of them. For being given whole, they need
not so much any correctiues

The safest course is to use all, and every part of them without exception,
unless you would have them to corrode, fret, inflame, or burn any part. Lycus
Neapolitanus is of opinion, that Purcelane is their proper counter-poyson,
which virtue Pliny in his twentieth Book, Chapter 13. ascribes to the Herb
called wild Basil: who also many ways commends Acetum Scylliticum, Oleum
Oenanthium, Cowes milk and brothes made of Goats flesh for these intentions,
in his 23. Book, Chapter the second and fourth, and likewise in his 28. Book
and tenth Chapter. And for our History of Cantharides, let this for this time
suffice, which I much wonder that the famous learned Gesner

Many more authorities could I have alleged concerning this my discourse of
Cantharides, but that I supposed it a labor as endless in toil, as needless
in use; the one savoring of too much curiosity, the other of a fryuolous
affectation: so that I hope even amongst the whole College of Physicians,
wheresoever in England (if their ears be not to dainty) to find some few
graynes of their good words, and such courteous construction, as that I may
neither be charged with partiality of concealing (where it is meet I should
be mute) nor be suspected of insufficiency, for not pursuing where I can find
no

OF CATERPILLARS, OR PALMER Worms, called of some Cankers.
NOw I am come to speak of Caterpillars, sometimes the destroiers and wasters
of Egypt: as well in regard of the great difference that is found in their
several sorts, as for their great dignity and Their name.
use, wherein some of them are most notable and excellent. Some Eruca, which is
Englished a Catterpiller, has his deriuation Ab erodendo, which is not
altogether improbable: For they gnaw of and consume by eating, both leaves,
boughs, and flowers: yea, and some fruits also, as I have often seen in
peaches.

Ouidius the famous Poet, styleth them by the name of Tineae agrestes:

Quaque solent canis frondes intexere filis,
Agrestes Tineae, res obseruata colonis,
Feraci mutant cum papilione figuram.
In English thus;

And those wild mothes by husbandmen observed,
Which fold themselves in hoary springing leaves,
Against force of famine, and storm to be preserved,
A shape from fruitful Butterflyes receives.
The Graecians call a Catterpiller Kampe, by reason of his crooked, winding or
bending pace in wauing sort, whereby in creeping they bow, wry, and lift up
themselves. Of the Hebrews it is termed Ghazain, because it sheareth, pilleth,
and deuoureth the fruits of the earth, as Kimhi upon the first of Ioell
writes. The Italians call it Rugauerme, and Brucho, for so Marcellus Virgilius
upon Dioscorides says expressly, that in his time all the people of Italy,
named it Erucae, Bruchi. The Spaniards term it Oruga. The Frenchmen,
Chenille, and Chattpleuse. Of the English they are commonly called
Catterpillers, of what kind soever they be of. But the English-Northren-men,
call the hairie Catterpillers, Oubuts, and the Southern-men usually term them
Palmer-wormes. Of the Polonians it is called by the name of Ruphansenka. In the
German tongue Ein Raup, in the Belgian, Ruipe. Gasienica. And Siluaticus will
have it called Certris, and Cedebroa.

If I should go about to describe and set down all the differences and
varieties of Catterpillers, Their differences.
I might perhaps undertake an endless and tedious labor. I think it
therefore fittest to bend my slender skill, and to employ my best forces, in
speaking of such as are more notable and common with us in this Country: For
some of them in touching are rough, hard, and stiff; and other-some again,
are soft, smooth, and very tender. Some are horned, either in the head or in
the tail, and again, others have no horns at all. Some have many feet, and
some fewer, and none at all have above sixteen feet. Most of them have a
bending swift pace, and like unto waves, and others again keep on their way
very plainly, softly, by little and little, and without any great have. Some
change their

Many of these Catterpillers are bred of the eggs of Butter-flyes: and some
again do breed in the leaves of trees, of their own proper seed, being
left there in the time of Autumn, included in a certain web, or else by
means of the dew or air, therein shut and putrified, as commonly the little
hairie Cankers or Caterpillars which are so full of feet, do breed. Besides,
some of them do feed on leaves, some on flowers, and there

All smooth Catterpillers which are not hairie, are of a yellow or green
color: some again are found of a reddish color, or brownish, or else they be
of sundry hewes. But of all others, the most excellent is the green colored
Catterpiller, which is found upon that great bushy plant, usually termed
Priuet, or Primprint, which has a circle enclosing round both his eyes and all
his feet, having also a crooked horn in his tail: these Catterpillers are
blackish-redde, with spots or streakes going overthwart their sides, being
half white and half purpelish, the little pricks in these spots are inclining
to read: The rest of their body is altogether green.

There is another Catterpiller feeding altogether upon Elder-trees, not much
differing

There is also a third sort of green Catterpillers, which when Autumn or the
fall of leaf draws on, are turned into a certain sheath or case, being of
a very hard and hornie substance, of color very brown, and this feeds
altogether upon pot-herbes, especially those that be soft, as Lettuce:
whereupon it may not unfitly be termed, Eruca Laotucaria.

Lastly, there is to be seen another sort, of a green color, which is the
least of them all, and this kind lives and feeds upon trees, (especial in
the Oak) there drawing out all die in Winter, and all these have ten feet,
as all they have that go bending themselves upwards. But to leave the green,
and come to them that are yellow, there is to be found a certain Catterpiller
called Vinula, being as the word sounds, a very elegant and fine insect to
look upon, and passing beautiful: and this kind have I often found amongst
Willowes, full sauourly feeding upon their leaves. His lyps and mouth are
somewhat yellow, his eyes black as a cole, his forehead purple colored, the
feet and hinder part of the body, of a green grassie hue, his tail
two-forked, and somewhat black. The whole body is as it were stained and dyed
with thick Red-wine, which runs along the neck and shoulders blades, as
it were in form of a Burgonian cross, or of the Letter X made crosse-wise
down unto the tail with a white line, adds no small grace to the

There is yet another Catter-piller of yellow-blackish color, called
Porcellus, we may in English call it Pigges-snoute, in respect of the fashion
of the head, especially the greater sort of these, for the lesser have round
white specks upon their sides, and these live and are altogether to be found
amongst the leaves of the Marsh Trifolie, which they consume and devour with
an incredible celeritie. In the wild Nightshade, (which the Italians call
Belladona) there is found a smooth Catterpiller, of a yellow-greenish color,
having a horn in his forehead the length of a finger, which Hierom Cardan the
learned Physician, reports that he had often seen.

The hayrie Catterpillers are most mischievous and dangerous amongst them all,
and Pityocampe, whose biting is poison: and this is ever found in the
Pine-apple-tree, being The description of Piryocamp^es.
as thick as three little fingers, and three fingers long being laid
a-crosse. They consist of eleven slyts or cuts betwixt the head and the tail,
and they have sixteen feet, according as all other hayrie Palmer-wormes have.
That is to say, near the head on both sides, three, in the midst of their
body on both sides, four, and at the end of the tail on both sides, one.
Their former feet are crooked and small, with which they feel, try and assay
the way whether it be passable or no, their other feet are broader, with many
iagges and notches like a savve, to take the faster hold, and stay with surer
footing upon smooth and slippery leaves. Their head is much like a Pismires,
and the rest of their bodies like other

Their skin is black, which is soon seen, their hayres being cut or taken
clean away. All their hayres are but small, and yet they sting more vehemently
then any nettle, whereby is caused intolerable pain, burning, itching, a
fever, and much disquietnesse: when as their poison is suddenly in a moment,
sent and conueighed without any manifest appearance, or sense of any wound to be
judged by the eye, unto those parts that are next to the entralls, as the harr,
liver, and the rest. They weaue their webs after a fine and

There is great plenty of them to be found in the Mountain of Athos, situate
betwixt Macedonia and Thrace, in the woods of Trident, and in diverse valleys
beyond the Alps, in which places there is store of these forenamed Trees, (as
Matthiolus says.) They are doubtless most poisonous and venomous vermin,
whether they be crushed outwardly with the hands, or taken inwardly into the
body: yea they are so known, manifest, and so never failing a poison, and so
esteemed of in times past, as that Vlpian the famous Lawyer, interpreting the
Law Cornelia De Sicarijs, or privy murderers, that he in that place, calls
and esteems the giver of any Pityocampie in drink or otherwise to any one,
to be doomed a murderer, and their punishment to be equalized. Sect. Alium.
ff. ad Leg. Corn. de sie.

As soon as this kind of Catterpiller is received into the body, there
follows immediately a great pain, extremely tormenting the mouth and palate;
the tongue, belly, and stomach are grievously inflamed by their corroding, and
gnawing poisonous quality, besides the intolerable pain the receiver
feels, although at first the party seems to feel a certain pleasant
itching, but it is not long before he perceives a great burning within,
loathing and detesting of meat, and a continual desire to vomit and go to
the stool, which nevertheless he cannot do. At length, unless speedy
succor be given, they so miserably burn and parch the body, that they bring a
hard crustines, skurffe or scald upon the stomach, as though the sides thereof
had been plaistered with some hard shardes, or other like things, after the
manner of Arsenicke, as Dioscorides, Aetius, Pliny Celsus doc assure us. In
like manner Galen in his eleventh book Simp. cap. 50. And Auicen 505. cap. 25.
have testified the same.

And for this cause Aetius and Aegineta do say, that it is nothing wholesome
for any to sit down to meat, to spread the Table, or make any long tariance
under any Pine tree, least peradventure through the savor or smell of the
meats, the reeke or vapor of their broathes, or noise of men, the
Pityocampies being disturbed from their homes and usual resting places, might
fall down either into their meats beneath, or at leastwise cast down, or
let fall any of their seed, as poisonous as themselves. They that receive hurt
by them, must have recourse to those preservatives and medicines, as were
prescribed to those that were poisoned by Cantharides, for by them they are to
be cured, and by no other Dioscorides and Aetius. They are generated, or to
speak more aptly, they are regenerated (after the manner of Vine-fretters,
which are a kind of Catterpillers, or little hayrie worms with many feet,
that eat Vines when they begin to shoot) of that Autumnall seed of theirs,
left and reserved in certain small bags or bladders within their webbes.

There is another sort of these Catterpillers, who have no certain place of
abode, nor yet cannot tell where to find their food, but like unto
superstitious Pilgrims, do wander and stray hither and thither, (and like
Mise) consume and eat up that which is none of their own: and these have
purchased a very apt name amongst us Englishmen, to be called Palmer-wormes, by
reason of their wandering and rogish life, (for they never stay

There are sundry other sorts of these Cankers or Catterpillers to be found, in
the herbs called Cranes-bill, Ragwort, Petie-Mullen, Hoppes, Coleworts,
Hasells, Marigolds, Fenell, Lycorice, Basil, Alder, Night shade, Water-Betony,
Garden-spurge, and other sorts of that herb; in Elme-trees, Peare-trees,
Nettles, and Gilliflowers. Yea there is not any plant to be found, which has
not his proper and peculiar enemy and destroyer: all which Corradus Gesner, in
these words following. This stinking Catterpiller (says he) is very like to
those that are horned, but yet it wants horns, differing from them all in
color. I first espied it creeping upon a wall toward the end of August. Anno.
1550. there comes from it a loathsome and an abominable savor and smell, so
that you would verily believe it to be very venomous. It went forwards very
frowningly, and with a quick, angry, and despightfull countenance, as it were
in bending wise, the head always stretched up aloft with the former two feet:
I judge her to be blind. She was the length and breadth of a man's finger, with
a few scattering and rugged hayres, somewhat bristly and hard both on her
back and sides, the back was very black. The color of her belly and sides
was somewhat read, enclining to yellow, and the whole body was distinguished,
divided, and easily discerned with fourteen joints or knots, and every joint
had a certain furrow like a kind of wrinckle running all along the back. Her
head was black and

The learned man Vergerus, took it to be a Pityocampe, and others thought it a
Scolopendra: but that could not be, by reason of the number of her feet. I
could hardly with much ado endure her vile smell, till I had drawn out her
description. She so infected two hot-houses with her abominable savor and
stink, that my self and they that were with me, could not endure in the
place. Thus far Gesner, as I have to show out of certain scroles of paper of
his, never as yet imprinted.

Now will I proceed to discourse of the original, generation, aliment, and
metamorphosis of Catterpillers.

Chare liber nostrum test is benefide laborum,
Ne tua purpureo suffuderis or a rubore
Agrestes abacis tine as si expressere nostris,
Vermiculosque leuem qui in the came vellera mutant.
Hi siquidem artificis prudenti pollice Dij
Finguntur, tenui qui non tenuatur opella
Et qui vermiculis, dextrae miranda potentis
Signa suae prodit, potius quam corpore vasti
Molifero Barnhi, tumido vel robore Ceti
Equam antisque alijs, qui lata per aequoratentant
Fulmine as sine mente minas: et nostra profundo
Lintea qua mergant, large mare gutture ructant.
Which may be englished thus;

Dear Book, a witness of my labor true,
Be not ashamed to write of little worms,
Nor Catterpillers, which from base things ensue,
And into easy cases again returns:
For these are framed by hand of GOD most wise,
Never abased in any work so small:
For out of Worms his wonders do arise,
As well as from great beasts so tall.
Tower-bearing Elephant, huge Whale,
And other monsters swimming in the Seas,
Irefull beasts, in hills and deepest dale,
Death threatening to all that them displease.
For so I think it best to begin with the verses of a good Poet, who indeed
did see as themselves, and to be blinded with the mascarados of absurdities.
And first, if we will begin to rifle in the monument of former times, I will
here produce Aristotle's opinion in his fifth book, Histor. cap. 19. who there
expressly says, that they take their beginning from the green leaves of
herbs, and namely of Radish and Coleworts, by means of their small seed of
generation, being like unto Millit-seede, which is there left about the end of
Autumn, from which, femall worms proceed: and of these little worms in the
space of three days a Catterpiller is formed, about the Spring time, or toward
the latter end thereof, which growing to their due quantity, and well fed
withal, they cease at length from any further motion, and when Autumn
begins, they change both form and life.

Pliny is of this mind, that Catterpillers fetch all their pedigree, raze,
parentage and birth, from a dew thickened and incrassated by the heat of the
Sun, and so still left behind in leaves: and Arnoldus de Villa noua is of the
same judgment. Othersome derive them wholly from Butter-flyes, and will have
them to proceed of no other beginning, which as soon as they are crept out of
their hard shells or scabbards, wherein they had lien as it were dead all the
Winter, as soon as Summer and warm weather draws on, they cast certain
eggs either under or above the leaves of certain herbs, which eggs
according to the quantity of their bodies, are either greater or lesser, and
some of these shelles wherein they are included, are of a sky color; others
yellow, white, black, green, or read: and so being at length about
fourteen days quickened and nourished with the

But I am of opinion; that not only this, but by diverse other ways and means
they may proceed and increase, for although the doctrine of Aristotle in this
point seems to be unsavory, and nothing relishing diverse tastes, because he
affirms that that little worm which is found upon Coleworts, does turn into
a Catterpiller: yet for all that, it is not so much without smack of salt, or
so abhorrent to reason as they would make some That, is more by a great deal
now, then before it was. For a worm dies not, that a Catterpiller may thereby
spring, but to the old body, Nature adds a greater magnitude: as for example,
feet, colors, wings: so that whilst life remains, it acquireth other
parts, and other offices.

There be some also that deride the opinion of Pliny, because he contendeth
that Catterpillers Passive, as the matter or subject for the heat of the sun
is different from that of the fire: for it either quickneth and inspireth with
life, or at leastwise conserueth and maintains our life, by means of
likeness, proportion, or symmetry, wherein our lives and spirits respect each
other. Besides, there is nothing more nourishing then Dew, for with it only
some certain small creatures are fed, and do thereby live: which thing the
divine Poet very well observed, when he uttered these words; Quantum nos nocte
reponit.


So that in respect that it is humor, it is matter, in respect it is thin, it
pierces and easily enters in, and in respect it is attracted and thoroughly
concocted by the Sun, it is the apter made to generation. For the preparation
of the form, carries with it the matter or stuff, as his mate and companion:
So these two meeting together, there consequently follows the quickening or
taking life of some one creature. And not only are some Catterpillers the
offspring and breed of dew, as common experience can witness, but even the
greatest part of Catterpillers do fetch their stock and pedigree from
Butter-flyes, unless it be those that live upon Colewarts and Cabbages, and
those that are called Vine-fretters, with some few other. For those that live
and breed in Vines, (called of the Graecians Ipes,) do proceed from dew, or
some dewie and moist humor, which is included in their webbes, and there
grown to putrefaction. For then do they swarm so exceedingly in some
countries, as I dare neither affirm, nor otherwise imagine, but that they must
needs have such a mighty increase from putrefaction. And this for the most
part happens when the Eastern wind blows, and that the warmth of the air
furthereth

All the whole pack of them are great destroyers and deuourers of herbs and
Trees: whereupon Philippis the Parasite, as Athenaus says in Pythagorista,
braggeth of himself in this wise, Apola^sathumon lachanonte kampe. Vescens
thyme ^lereque eruca sum. I am (says he) a Catterpiller that eats both Tymbe
and pot herbs. And to this sense speaks Martial, Erucam male pascit hortus
vnam. A Garden hardly and slenderly can suffice to feed one Catterpiller. I
think he means, when the time of their wasting and devouring is gone and
past, for they commonly leave but little behind. For that being past, they go
wandering hither and thither, up and down uncertainly, wasted and
hunger-starued, and so at length pyning away by little and little through
famine, some seek them fit places Aurelia covered with a membrane.

If this happen in the midst of Summer, the hardrind or shell wherein they are
enclosed being broken, about the time of 24. days, there flies out a
Butterflye: but if it come to pass in the midst, or toward the end of Au^umne,
the Aurelia continues a whole vvinter, neither is there any exclusion before
the vernall heat. And yet notwithstanding, all Catterpillers are not converted
into Aureliaes, but some of the^ being gathered and drawn together on a heap
(as the Vine-fretters) do grow at length to putrefaction, from which sometimes
there falls as it were three blackish eggs, the true and proper mothers and

All Catterpillers have a burning quality, and such as will readily fetch of
the skin, and flea it quickly, and raise blisters. If any one drink the
Catterpiller that lives in the Their qualities.
Pytch-trees, there will forthwith follow a great pain about his mouth and
jaws, vehement inflammation of the tongue, strong griping and wringing of the
stomach, belly and intestines, with a sensible itching about the inward parts,
the whole body is as it were burned and scalded with heat and hot vapors, and
the stomach abhors all meat: all which are to be remedied with the same
means, as those that have taken Cantharides. Yet properly, (as here-to-fore I
have touched) oil of Quinces given to cause vomiting, is the best and safest.
And if we may credit Pliny, new Wine boiled to the third part, and Covves milk
being drunk, are very effectual. There is not any one sort of Catterpillers,
but they are malign, naught, and venomous, but yet they are least hurtful who
are smooth and without hayres; and the most dangerous of all the rest, is that
which heretofore I termed

The daughter of Caelius Secundus living at Basil in Germany, (as Gesner
says) when she had unwarily and greedily eaten some Colewort-leaues, or
Cabbage in a Garden, and with them some Catterpillers, after a strong vomit
that was given, her belly began to swell, which swelling, having continued
these many years, could never as yet receive any cure. If you will have your
Gardens and Trees untouched and preserved from their misch^euous quality, you
must first take clean away in the wintertime their webbes, or any part
thereof (though never so little) that you can find cleaving to the bare
boughs: for if you let them alone till the Spring, you shall sooner see them,
then find them removed, for in a short space of time, they devour up all that
is green both leaves and flowers. Some use to annoint their Trees with the
gall of a green Lizard, and some with a Bulls gall, which as some constantly
report, they can by no means away withal.

The Country People choke them with the vapor of a little Brimstone, with
straw being fired under the Tree, and so to smother them. Some there be, that
make a fumigation with Galbanum, Harts-horne, the shauings of Iuory, and
Goates-hoofes, and Oxe-dung. Didymus in Georgicis says, that if you bare the
roots of your trees, and be-smeare or soil them with Doues-dung, they shall
never be hurt by any worms.

I should willingly have omitted, and not renewed with any fresh discovery
Columellaes remedy against Catterpillers, (or rather the immodest dece^t, and
deluding trick of Democritus,) unless experience, which is, Iterata eiusdem
eventus obseruatio, a repeated observation of the same event, had approved the
verity thereof, especially in the Country of Stiria. And Palladius in his first
book, chap. 35. and Constantinus near the end of his xj. and xij. Books,
whose words be these.

At sinulla valet medicina repellere pestem,
Dardaniae veniunt arts, nudata que plantas
Faemina, quae just is tum demum operata juventae
Legibus, obscaeno manat pudibunda cruore,
Sed resoluto sinus, resoluto maest a capillo
Ter circum areolus, et sepem ducitur horti:
Quae tum lustravit gradiens (mirabile visu)
Non aliter decussapluit quam ex arbore nimbus,
Vel Teretis mali, vel tectae cortice glandis,
Voluitur ad terram distorto corpore camp.
Which may be englished thus;

But when no medicine can that plague expel
Then use they Arts, which once the Troyans found
A woman which had virgin-lawes observed well,
Her, bare and naked bring they to the ground,
Flowing with Natures shameful filthy blood:
Her bosom open, and her hair untrimmed falling
Like one ore'prest with grief, forgetting good,
Three times about the plots and hedges walking.
Which done, a wonder it is for to be told,
As rain drops from the trees, type apples fall,
Wallnuts out of husks: so cast you may behold
These worms from trees, all torn, and cannot crall.
Theophrastus says, that Catterpillers will touch no plants which are
moistened or besprinckled with Wine. They will die if they take the fume, or be
any way smoaked with the herb Psora. Aetius. Whereby it is apparent (says
Siluius) that the herb commonly termed Scabiose, is not the true Psora.
Catterpillers that live and feed on Coleworts, if they be but touched with
that kind of worm which is found in the Fullers Teasell, they die. Pliny. All
to besprinkle a Colewort whilst it has but only three leaves, with Niter, or
with saltish and brinish earth, and by means of the saltness, the
Catterpillers will be quite driven away. Geopon. Palladius in this case
prefers the ashes of Figge-leaues. The Squilla, being sown or hanged up in
Gardens, hinders the breeding of Catterpillers. Othersome in the most places
of their Gardens, and round about them, sow and set Mints, the pulse called
Orobos, which is somewhat like Vetches, and some worme-wood, or at leastwise
hang them in bunches in diverse places of the same, to expel this kind of
noisome creature.

Some very advisedly take dry leaves and stalks of Garlic, and with the same
do smoke and perfume their whole Garden, so that by this way the smoke being
conuayed into all places thereof, the Catterpillers will fall down dead, as
Palladius has written, in whose writings, any man may read of plenty of such
antydots and alexipharmicall medicines, as may serve to destroy Catterpillers.

Now will I speak of their use in Physic, and in the Commonwealth. The
web of Catterpillers being taken inwardly, stays women's fluxes, as
Matthiolus says. Being likewise burnt and put into the nostrells, it
stancheth bleeding at the nose. The Catterpillers Their use in Ph^acke.
that are found amongst the herbs called Spurges of all sorts, (by the
judgment of Hippocrates) are notable for putulent and mattrie wombes,
especially if they be first dried Hippocrates in his book De superfoetat.

Di^scorides in his first book and 90. chapter, gives in drink those common
Catter-pillers that live in companies together, against the disease called the
Squinsie. But unless by some hid and secret property, they do good in this
grief being received inwardly, it were needful (in regard of their manifest
venomous nature) that they were utterly rejected and contemned. Nicander uses
them to provoke sleep, for thus he writes, Ei de suge tripsas oligo en
bammati kampen
Kepeien drosoeastan epi chloreida noto. etc.


Which Hieremias Martius has thus translated.

Quod si rodentes olus et frendentia vermes
(Lueva quibus virides depingunt terga colores)
In medio sacra de Palladis arbore succo
Triveris, hincque tuum colleveris vndique corpus,
Tuta dabis dulci securus membra quieti.
Which may be englished thus;

With herbe-eating, or greene-leafe-gnawing worms,
Whose backs imprinted are with colors lively green,
All bruised, mixed with juice from Pallas tree that rumes,
Anointed body brought to sound sleep is often seen.
There are to be seen in diverse thornie, pricklie, sharp and rough herbs,
(as for example in Nettle) sundry hairie or lanuginous Catterpillers, which
being tied or hanged about some part of the body, do by and by (as the report
goes) heal those infants which have any stopping of the meats passage when
they cannot swallow.

A Catterpiller bree-ding in pot-herbes, being first bruised and then
anointed upon any venomous bytings of Serpents, is of great efficacy: and if
you rub a naughty or a rotten tooth with the Colewort-catterpillers, and
that often, within a few days following, the tooth will fall out of his own
accord. Auicenna. Catterpillers mixed with oil, do drive away Serpents.
Dioscorides. If a man annoint his hands, or any other part with oil, it will
cause that he shall receive no hurt by the stinging of Bees, VVaspes, or
Hornets, as Aetius says. Pliny cyteth many fond and superstitious fained
matters, and lying tales, devised by those who in his time were called Magi,
Soothsayers or Diuiners, concerning the admirable virtues of Catterpillers. All
which, because I see them hissed out of the School of Divinity, and that in
heart secretly I have condemned them, I will at this

They are also a very good meat to diverse birds and fowls, which are so
needful for the use, benefit, and food of mankind, as to Starlings,
Peacocks, Hens, Thrushes, Dawes or Choughes: and to sundry fishes likewise,
as to the Tench, Pike or Pikerell, and to a certain Seafish called a
Scorpion: also to the Troute, and some others, who are easily deceived with a
Catterpillerd hook. Which kind of fishing fraud, if you would better be
instructed in, I must refer you to Tarentinus in his Geoponicks, and to a
little book dedicated to Robert Dudley, late Earl of Leicester, written by
Ma: Samuel Vicar, of Godmanchester in Huntingtonshiere.

It is not to be passed over in silence, how that not many years since, there
came infinite swarms of Catterpillers out of Thrucia into Polonia, Hungaria,
and beyond the lymits of Germany, which did not only devout the fruits of
trees, but whatsoever was green either in the meadows and tilled fields,
besides the Vines: which was taken for an evident prognosticke and sign (as
many diuined) of some great Turkish Army to come swarming into those parts:
neither herein did this their gessing and mistrust deceive them, for Vienna in
Austria, the wasting, spoiling and ouer-running of Hungaria, and the deadly
English-Sweating could not contain it self in an Island, but must spread it
self among them of the Continent, whereupon ensued the destruction of many
thousands of people, before any remedy could be found out. In the year of
grace 1573. there rushed infinite swarms of Catterpillers into Italy, where
they spoiled and made hauock of all green buds and grass growing upon the
face of the earth, so that with their unquenchable and insatiate voracity, they
left nothing but the bare roots of trees and plants: and this happened chiefly
about Mantua and Brixia. And upon the neck of this, followed a terrible and
fearful pestilence, of which there dyed above 50. thousand persons.

Also in the year of our Lord GOD 1570. there were two great and sudden
swarms of Catterpillers that came rushing into Italy in the space of one
Summer, which put the Romans into an exceeding great fear, for there was
nothing left green in all their fields that could be preserved from their
rauine, and from their gluttonous and pilling maw. And although the fertility
of the year immediately following, did almost blot and race out the memory of
this their heavy punishment, and that many seemed as it were to repent them of
their repentance, yet are we not to doubt, but that many were truly penitent,
and seriously were drawn to amendment of life by a due consideration hereof.
God grant that we may be warned by other men's punishments, least that poor
creature, which we imagine to be the silliest and least able to do us harm, we
find the most heavy.

OF THE BOAS.
IT was well known among all the Romans, that when Regulus was Governor or
General in the Punick wars, there was a Serpent (near the River Bagrade)
killed with slings and stones, even as a Town or little City is overcome,
which Serpent was an hundred and twenty foot in length: whose skin and
cheek bones, were reserved in a Temple at Rome, until the Numantine war.

And this History is more easy to be believed, because of the Boas Serpent
bred in Italy at this day: for we read in Solinus, that when Claudius was
Emperor, there was one of them slain in the Vatican at Rome, in whose belly
was found an Infant swallowed whole, and not a bone thereof broken. The
Germans call this Serpent Vncke, and besides the^ I do not read of any
other Name. Some have ignorantly confounded it with Chersydrus, an Adder of the
earth, but upon what reason I do not know, only Solinus discoursing of
Calabria, might give some color to this opinion, when he says, Calabria
Chersydris est frequentissima, and boam gignit quem Anguem ad immensam mole^
ferunt coalescere: that is to say, Calabria is full of Earth-Adders, and it
breeds the Boas, which Snake some affirm will grow into a monstrous
stature. Out of which words, there is no

The Latins call it Boa and Boua of Bos, because by sucking Cowes milk it so
increases, that in the end it destroys all manner of hedres, Cattle and
Regions. And our domestical Snakes and Adders, will also suck milk from
Kine, as in all the Nations of the world is most manifest to them that will
observe the same.

The Italians do usually call them, Serpeda de Aqua, a Serpent of the water,
and therefore all the Learned expound the Geeeke word Hydra for a Boas. Cardan
says, that there are of this kind in the kingdom of Senega, both without feet
and wings, but most properly they are now found in Italy, according to these
verses.

Boa quidem serpens quem tellus Itala nutrit
Hunc bubulum plures lac enutrire docent.
Which may be englished thus,

The Boas Serpent which Italy does breed,
Men say, upon the milk of Cowes does feed.
Their fashion is in seeking for their prey among the heardes, to destroy
nothing that gives suck so long as it will live, but they reserve it alive
until the milk be dried up, then afterward they kill and eat it, and so they
deal with whole flocks and herds. The poison of it, says Festus, makes
tumor and swelling in the body, whereunto all others agree, except Albertus,
who in this point agrees not with himself, for in one place he says that
they are venomous, and their teeth also like other Dragons, in another place he
says, their poison is very weak, and not to be regarded, because they be
Dragons of the third order or division. They go all upon their belly, and so I
will conclude their story with Mantuan.

Turpi Boa flexilis aluo.
that is to say,

The filthy Boas on his belly mooues.
OF THE CHAMAELEON.
IT is very doubtful whether a Chamaeleon were ever known to the ancient
Hebrews, because there is no certainty among the^ for the appellation
thereof, some affirming one thing, and some another. We read Leuit. 11. among
other beasts there forbidden to be eaten of, Koah, or Koach, which Rabbi Kimhi
interprets a (Hazah,) Rabbi Jonas in the Arabian, Hardun, and so also does
Auicen. The Chalde Koaha, the Persians An sanga, the Septuagints and S. Ierom,
a Chamaeleon. The self same word is found Leuit. 14. which the Jews do
vulgarly at this day take for Senicus, a Crocodile of the earth. The word Oah
or Oach, seems to come near to this, which is sometimes interpreted a
Torteyse, a Dragon, or a Monkey. And Oas by Syluaticus, is translated a
Salamander. Kaath by the Jews, is translated a Cuckoe, a Iay, a Pelican, and
an Onocratua: and in the second of Sophoni for a Chamaeleon. Some have framed
an Hebrew word Gamalion, which is absurd, for Gameleon. Zamelon, Aamelon,
Hamaleon, and Meleon, are but corrupted terms of Chamaeleon, as Isidorus well
observes, or else signifies some Albertus, and other learned Writers.
Therefore I will not blot more paper about the Arabian beasts Harbe and
Alharbe, Alarbian or Hardon, Hardun or Alharba, but leave them to the judgment
of those, who delight in the inuestigation of such secrets.

Chamaeleon is a Greek word, from whence the Latins, and almost all Nations
have borrowed the name of this serpentine or creeping beast, except the
Germans, and they only have fained names, as Lindtwarm in Albertus, that is,
a Worm of the wood, and Rattader by Gesner, that is a Ratmouse, because in
quantity and composition, it resembles both those creatures. Some Latins, by
reason of the similitude it holds with a Lizard, call it Muri Laccritus, a
Mouse-Lyzard. The Greek word Chamaeleon, signifies a low and Chamaecerasus,
Chamaeciparissus, Chamaedris, and Chamaepitis, shrubs of plumtree, heath,
Cipres, Germander, and ground Iuy, from the Cherry, the Cypres, the Cedar, and
the Pine tree. And thus much for the name of the Chamaeleon.

The countries breeding Chamaeleons, are Africa, Asia, and India, and for the
quantity thereof I do find diverse descriptions, some particular, as in
Bellonius and Scaliger, and some general in other Writers, all which I purpose
briefly and successively to express in this place. It is said (says
Bellonius,) that the versi-color Chamaeleon, that is, a Turne-coate-coloured
Chamaeleon. But both these kinds of Chamaeleons, have a copped head, like to a
Camel, and two bones at the run from their presence, neither is it easily
provoked to harm or bite a man: it climbeth little trees for fear of Vipers
and horned Serpents.

Some have thought that it never eats meat, but is nourished with the wind,
because it draws in very eagerly many times the wind into the belly, whereby
it swells: for it has great lights stretched all along the sides of the
belly: but this opinion is false, as shall be showed hereafter, although it
cannot be denied that it is Ouiparum patrentissimum famis: that is, The most
enduring famine among all other Egge-breeding-beastes, for it fasteth many
times eight months: yea, a whole year together. In stead of Nostrils and
ears it has certain passages in those places, whereby it smells and
hears.

The opening of the mouth is very large, and it has teeth on the nether and
upper Bellonius.

In the next place for the better manifestation of the nature of this beast, I
will also add the description that Scaliger makes thereof. For he says, when
Johannes Landius was in the farthest parts of Syria, he saw five Chamaelions,
whereof he bought one, which with his tongue did very soddenly take off a Fly
from his breast: Wherefore in the dissection

It is not true that the Chamaelion changes her self into all colors, upon
green Leg before, then are there three on the outside behind, and two on the
inside: And thus much I received from Langius. So far Scaliger.

Now we will proceed to the particular description of their parts, as we find
them recorded in other Writers, leaving those brief and pregnable Narrations
of Bellonius and Scaliger. And first of all for the figure and outward shape of
their bodies, then for their color, and the reasons of their mutability and
variation of color. For the figure and shape of their bodies, Pliny is of
opinion, that a Chamaelion is like to a Crocodile of the Earth, except in the
sharp bending of the backe-bone, or the length or greatness of the tail.
Some say that the whole parts of the body does represent a Lizard, excepting
that the sides are joined to the belly, and the baeke-bone stands up as in
Fishes. Arnoldus Aristotle
says it resembles a Stellion if the Legs were not straighter and higher: but
the truth is, it is a Foure-footed-beast, much like to a Lizard, yet it goes
higher from the Earth, Solmus.
and always gapeth, having a rough skin all over the body like a Crocodile,
and is also full of scabs.

The length of it from the tip of the Nose to the rumpe of the tail, is 7. or
8. fingers, the height of them five fingers, and the Legs lone, three fingers
and a half. The length of the tail eight or nine fingers, the backe-bone
eminent and standing up, cersted or indented all throughout to the tip of the
tail, but near the rump, the crestes are more low and less visible. On
either side at the root of the ribs stand bony eminent bunches, from which
discendeth a line, and is extended throughout the length of the tailo on both
Lambda, except that the angle thereof be more wide and potent, which looks
backward toward the tail, and within these ribs is the whole haunch of the
body and belly, contained in a round compass on either side. Being black, it
is not unlike the Crocodile, and being pale, it is like to the Lizard, set over
with black spots like a Leopard. It changes color both in the eyes, tail,
and whole body, always into the color of that which is next it, except red
and white, which colors it cannot easily Ovid;

Id quoque quod ventis animal natritur and aura,
Protinus assimilat, tetigit quoscunque colores.
In English thus;

The beast that lives by wind and weather,
Of each thing touched takes color.
The reasons of this change of color are the same which are given of the Buffe
and Polypus Fish; namely, extremity of fear, the thinness, smoothness, and
baldness of the skin. Whereupon Tertullian writes thus: Hoc soli
Chamaelienti datum quod vulgo dictum est de suo corio ludere: That is to say,
This is the only gift of nature to a Chamaelion, that according to the common
Proverb it deceives with his skin: meaning that a chamaelion at his own
pleasure can change the color of his skin. Whereupon Erasmus applies the
proverb, de alieno corio ludere, to such as secure themselves with other men's
peril. From hence also comes another proverb, Chamaileontos
rumetaboloontaros, more mutable then a Chamaelion, for a crafty, cunning,
inconstant fellow, changing himself into every man's disposition; such a one
was Alcibiades, who was said to be in Athens, Alciatus make this emblem against
flatterers:

Semper hiat, semper tenuem qua vescitur auram,
Reciprocat Chamaelion,
Et mutat faciem, varios sumitque colores,
Praeter rubrum vel candidum.
Sic and adulator populare vescitur aura,
Hiansque cuncta deuorat.
Et solum mores imitatur principis atros.
Albi and pudici nescius.
That is to say;

It always gapes, turning in and out that breath
Whereon it feeds: and often changes hew:
Now black and green, and pale, and other colors has,
But red and white Chamaelions do eschew:
So Clawbackes feed on vulgar breath as bread,
With open mouth devouring fame and right,
Princes, blacke-vices praise, but virtues dread,
Designed in nature by colors red and white.
A Chamaelion of all Egge-breeding-beastes is the thinnest, because it lacks
blood, and the reason hereof is by Aristotle referred to the disposition of the
soul: For he says, through over much fear, it takes upon it many colors,
and fear through the want of blood and heat, is a refrigeration of this
beast.

Plutarke also calls this beast a meticulous and fearful beast, and in this
cause concludes the change of his color, not as some say, to avoid and
deceive the beholders and to work out his own happiness, but for mere dread
and terror. Johannes Vrsinus assigns the cause of the change of Chamaelions
color, not to fear, but to the meat and to the air, as appears by these
verses;

Non timor, imo cibus, nimirum limpidus aer,
Ambo simul vario membra color nouant.
Which may be thus englished;

Not fear, but meat which is the air thin,
New colors on his body does begin.
But I for my part do assign the true cause to be in the thinness of their
skin, and therefore may easily take impression of any color, like to a thin
fleake of a horn, which being laid over black, seems black, and so over
other colors: and besides, there being no hinderaunce of blood in this beast,
nor Intrals, except the Lights, the other humors may have the more predominant
mutation; and so I will conclude the discourse of the parts and color of a
Chamaelion, with the opinion of Kiranides, not that I approve it, but to let
the Reader know all that is written of this Subject, his words are these:
Chamaelem singulis horis diei mutat colorem: A Chamaelion changes his color
every

This beast has the face like a Lion, the feet and tail of a Crocodile,
having a variable color, as you have heard, and one strange continued Nerve
from the head to the tail, being altogether without flesh, except in the
head, cheeks, and uppermost part of the tail, which is joined to the body;
neither has it any blood but in the heart, eyes, and in a place above the heart,
and in certain veins derived from that place, and in them also but a very
little blood.

There be many membranes all over their bodies, and those stronger then in any
other Beasts. From the middle of the head backward, there arises a three
square bone, and Aristotle. Pliny.
the fore part is hollow and round like a Pipe, certain bony brimmes, sharp
and indented, Niphus calls Palla, which signifies that part of a Ring,
wherein is set a precious stone.

The eyes in the hollow within, are very great, and much greater then the
proportion of the body, round, and covered over with such a skin as the whole
body is, except the apple, which is bare, and that part is never covered. This
apple stands immovable, not turned, but when the whole eye is turned at the
pleasure of the beast. The snoute is like to the snoute of a Hog-ape, always
gaping, and never shutting his mouth, and serving him Solinus.
for no other use but to bear his tongue and his teeth: his gumbes are adorned
with teeth as we have said before, the upper lip being shorter and more
turned in then the other. Their throat and artery are placed as in a Lizard:
their Lights are exceeding great, and they have nothing else within their body.
Whereupon Theophrastus as Plutarch witnesses, conceiueth, that they fill the
whole body within, and for this cause it is more apt to live on the air, and
also to change the color.

It has no Spleen or Melt, the tail is very long, at the end and turning up
like a Vipers tail, winded together in many circles. The feet are double
cloven, and for proportion Aristotle
resemble the thumb and hand of a man, yet so, as if one of the fingers were
set near the side of the thumb, having three without and two within behind,
and three within, and two without before; the palm betwixt the fingers is
somewhat great: from within the hinder legs, there seem to grow certain
spurs. Their legs are straight, and longer then a Lizards, yet is their
bending alike, and their nails are crooked and very sharp. One of these
being dissected and cut asunder, yet breaths a long time after, they go
into the caves and holes of the earth like Lizards, wherein they lie all the
winter time, and come forth again in the Spring, their pace is very slow, and
themselves very

They have for their enemies the Serpent, the Crow and the Hawke. When the
hungry ^erpent does assault them, they defend themselves in this manner, as
Alexander Mindius writes: they take in their mouths a broad and strong stalk,
under protection whereof as under a buckler, they defend themselves against
their enemy the Serpent, by reason that the stalk is broader then the Serpent
can gripe in his mouth, and the other parts of the Chamaeleon so firm and
hard, as the Serpent cannot hurt them: he labors but in vain to get a prey,
so long as the stalk is in the Chamaeleons mouth. But if the Chamaeleon at any
time see a Serpent taking the air, and sunning himself under some green
tree, he climbeth up into that tree, and setleth himself directly over the
Serpent, then out Scaliger reports a greater vvonder then this in the
description of the Chamaeleon, for he says, if the boughs of the Tree so grow
as the perpendiculer line cannot fall directly upon the Serpent, then he so
corrects and guides it with his fore-feete, that it falls upon the Serpent
within the mark of a hayres breadth.

The Raven and the Crow are also at variance with the Chamaeleon, and so great
is the adverse nature betwixt these twain, that if the crow eat of the
chamaeleon being slain by him, he dies for it, except he recover his life by
a Bay-leafe, even as the Elephant after Pliny reports to be betwixt the
Chamaeleon and the Hawke. For he writes, that when a Hawke flies over a
Chamaeleon, she has no power to resist the Chameleon, but falls down before
it, yielding both her life and limbs to be devoured by it; and thus that
deuourer that lives upon the prey and blood of others, has no power to save
her own life from this little beast.

A Chamaeleon is a fraudulent, ravening and gluttonous beast, impure, and
unclean by the law of GOD, and forbidden to be eaten: in his own nature
wild, yet countersetting meekenes, when he is in the custody of man. And this
shall suffice to have spoken for the description of this beast, a word or two
of the Medicines arising out of it, and so a

I find that the Ancients have observed two kinds of Medicines in this beast,
one magical, and the other natural, and for my own part, although not able
to judge of either, yet I have thought good to anex a relation of both to this
History. And first of the natural medicines, Democritus is of opinion that
they deserve a peculier Volume, and yet he himself tells nothing of the^
worthy of one page, except the lying vanities of the Gentiles, and
superstitions of the Graecians. With the gall, if the suffusions and Leprous
parts of the body be anointed three days together, and the whiteness of the
eyes, it is believed to give a present remedy: and Archigenes prescribes the
same for a medicine for the Marcellus.
taking away of the unprofitable and and pricking hayres of the eyebrows. It
is thought if it be mixed with some sweet composition, that it has power to
cure a quotidian Ague. If the tongue of Chamaelion be hung over an obliuious and
forgetful person, it is thought to have power to restore his memory.

The Chamaelion from the head to the tail, has but one Nerve, which being
taken Rhazes.
out and hung about the neck of him that holds his head awry or backward,
it cures Kiranides.
comes, then if you see a man in the fit of the falling sickness, turn him
upon his belly, and annoint his back from the Os sacrum to the ridge bone,
and it will presently deliver him from the fit: but after seven times using, it
will perfectly cure him. The Oil thus made must be kept in a Box. This
medicine following is a present remedy against Trallianus.
the gowt. Take the head and feet of a Chamaeleon, cut offalso the outward
parts of the knees and feet, and then keep by themselves those parts: that
is to say, the parts of the right leg by themselves, and the parts of the
left Leg by themselves, then touch the

The like superstitious and magical devises are these that follow, as they are
recorded by Pliny and Democritus. The head and thraot being set on fire with
wood of Oak, they believe to be good against Thunder and rain, and so also
the Liver burned on a Tyle.

With the right foot are all paulsies resolved, and with the left foot all
Lethargies: the Wine wherein one side of a Chamaeleon has been steeped,
sprinkled upon the head, cures the ach thereof. If Swines Grease be mingled
with the powder of the left foot or Thigh, and a man's foot be anointed
therewith, it brings the gout, by putting the Gall into fire, they drive away
Serpents; and into Water, they draw together Weasels, it pulls off hair
from the body, so also does the Liver, with the Lights of of a Toade; likewise
the Liver dissolueth amorous enchantments. Melancholy men are

With the tail they bring Serpents asleep, and stay the flowing of the
floods and Waters: the same mingled with Ceder and Myrrh, bound to two rods of
Palm, and struck upon water, causes all things that are contained in the
same water to appear; but I would to GOD that such Magitians were well beaten
with Rods of stronger wood, until they forsook these magical fooleries:
And thus much for the story of the Chamaeleon.

OF THE COCKATRICE.


THis Beast is called by the Graecians Baziliscos, and by the Latin Regulus,
because he seems to be the King of serpents, not for his magnitude or
greatness. For there are Pliny. Solinus,
many Serpents bigger then he, as there be many Foure-footed-beastes bigger
then the Lion, but because of his stately pace, and magnanimious mind: for he
creeps not on the earth like other Serpents, but goes half upright, for
which occasion all other Serpents avoid his sight. And it seems nature has
ordained him for that purpose: for beside the strength of his poison which is
Sibilus, as we read in Isidorus, Sibilus enim occidit antequam mordeat vel
exurat: The Cockatrice kills before it burns. The Hebrews call it Pethen,
and Curman, also Zaphna, and Zaphnaini. The Chalde Armene, Harmene, and also
Carmene: The Egyptians Vreus, the Germans Ein Ertz Schlengle, the French Un
Basilic: The Spaniards and Italians Basilisco.

There is some question amongst Writers, about the generation of this Serpent:
for some, (and those very many and learned) affirm, him to be brought forth of
a Cocks egg. For they say that when a Cock grows old, he lays a certain
egg without any shell, in stead whereof it is covered with a very thick
skin, which is able to withstand and afterward set upon by a Snake or a Toad,
brings forth the Cockatrice, being half a foot in length, the hinder part
like a Snake, the former partlike a Cook, because of a treble comb on his
forehead.

But the vulger opinion of Europe is, that the Egg is nourished by a Toad, and
not by a Snake; howbeit in better experience it is found that the Cock does
sit on that egg himself: whereof Leuinus Lemnius in his twelth book of the
hidden miracles of nature has this discourse, in the fourth chapter thereof.
There happened (says he) within our memory in the City Pirizaea, that there
were two old Cocks which had laid Eggs, and the common people (because of
opinion that those Eggs would engender Cockatrices) labored by all means
possible to keep the said cocks from sitting on those eggs, but Affrican
cockatrice or Basiliske, and yet it is not the same whereof we purpose here to
entreat, but will acknowledge that to be one kind of cockatrice, but this kind
is generated like other Serpents of the earth, for as the ancient Hermes
writes, it is both false and impossible, that a cockatrice should be hatched
of a cocks Egg. The same writer makes mention of a Bazeliske ingendered in
dung, whereby he means the Elixir of life, wherewithal the Alchimistes
convert metals.

The Egyptians hold opinion, that these cockatrices are engendered of the
Eggs of the Bird called Ibis, and therefore they break those Eggs
wheresoever they find them: Ibis, and a cockatrice.

The countries breeding or bringing forth these cockatrices, are said to be
these: First Pliny. Textor. Auicenna. Aelianus Solinus.
Affricke, and therein the Ancient seat or land of the Turks, Nubia, and all
the wilderness of Africa, and the countries Cyrenes. Gallen among the
Physicians only, doubts whither there be a cockatrice or no, whose authority
in this case must not be followed, seeing it was never given to mortal man to
see and know every thing, for besides the holy scriptures unavoidable
authority, which both in the prophecy of Esaias and Jeremy, makes mention of
the cockatrice and her Eggs: there be many grave human Writers, whose
authority Mercuriall affirming, that when he was with Maximilion the Emperor,
he saw the carkase of a cocatrice, reserved in his treasury among his
undoubted monuments. Of this Serpent the Poet Georgius Pictorius writes on
this manner;

Rex est serpentum basiliscus, quem modo vincunt
Mustelae insultus, saeuaque bella ferae.
Lernaeum vermem basiliscum foeda Cirene
Producit cunctis maxim perniciem.
Et nasci ex ouo galli, si credere fas est,
Decrepiti, in fimo, sole nitente, docent.
Sed quoniam olfactu loedit, visuque ferarum
Omne genus credas, nulla tenere bona.
That is to say;

The Bazeliske the Serpents King I find,
Yet Weasels him do' overcome in war,
The Cyren land him breeds of Lernaes kind,
They to all other a destruction are:
And if we may believe, that through the heat of Sun,
In old Cocks Eggs this beast is raised first,
Or beasts by fight or smell thereof are all undone,
Then is it not good, but of his kind the worst.
We do read that in Rome, in the days of Pope Leo the fourth, there was a
Cockatrice found in a Vault of Church or Chapel, dedicated to Saint Lucea,
whose pestiferous breath had infected the Air round about, whereby great
mortality followed in Rome: but how the said Cockatrice came thither it was
never known. It is most probable that it was created and sent of GOD for the
punnishment of the City, which I do the more easily believe, because Segonius
and Julius Scaliger do affirm, that the said pestiferous beast was killed by
the prayers of the said Leo the fourth.

I think they mean that by the authority of the said Bishop, all the people
were Moses, he brought Grasse-hoppers and Lice, so by the same hand he drove
them away again.

There is some small difference amongst the Writers, about the quantity and
parts of this Serpent: which I will breefely reconcile. First Aelianus says,
that a Cockatrice is not past a spanne in compass, that is as much as a man
can gripe in his hand. Pliny says, that it is as big as twelve fingers.
Solinus and Isidorus affirm, that it is but half a foot long.

Auicen says, that the Arabian Harmena, that is, the Cockatrice, is two cubits
and a half long. Nicander says, Et tribus extenso porrectus corpore palmis,
that is, it is in length but three palms. Aetius says, that it is as big as
three handfuls: Now for the reconciliation of all these. It is to be
understood, that Pliny and Aelianus speaks of the Worm that comes out of
the Cocks Egg, in regard of the length, but not of the quantity, and so
confound together that Worm and the Cockatrice. For it is very reasonable,
that seeing the magnitude and greatness of the Serpent is concluded to be at
the least a span in compass, that therefore the length of it must needs be
three or four foot at the shortest; else how could it be such a terror to
other Serpents, or how could the fore part of it arise so eminently above the
earth, if the head were not lifted at the least

It is likewise questionable whether the Cockatrice have Wings or no: for by
reason of his conceived generation from a Cock, many have described him in the
forepart to have Wings, and in the hinder part to have a tail like a
Serpent: And the conceit of wings seems to be derived from Holy Scripture,
because it is written Esaias 14: verse twenty nine, De radice cobibij egredietur
regulus and semen eius absorbens volucrem: That is to say, Out of the Serpents
roots shall come a Cockatrice, and the fruit thereof shall be a fiery flying
Serpent, as we translate it in English: but Tremellius the best Interpreter,
does render the Hebrew in this manner: De radice Serpentis prodit haemorrhus and
fructus illius prester volans: That is to say; Word for word, Out of the root
of the Serpent shall come the Haemorrhe, and the fruit thereof a flying
Prester. Now we know, that the Haemorrhe and the Prester are two other
different kinds of Serpents from the Cockatrice, and therefore these
Interpreters being the more faithful and learned, we will rather follow the
Holy Scripture in their translation, then the vulgar Latin, which is corrupted
in very many places, as it is also Esaias. the 30. verse six. For Praester,
there is again in the vulgar translation the Cockatrice: and for this cause
we have not described the Cockatrice with wings, as not finding sufficient
authority to warrant the same.

The eyes of the Cockatrice are read, or somewhat inclyning to blackenesse,
the skin and carkase of this beast have been accounted precious, for we do
read that the Pergameni did buy but certain pieces of a Cockatrice, and gave
for it two pound and a half of Silver: and because there is an opinion that no
Byrd, Spyder, or venomous Beast, will endure the sight of this Serpent, they
did hang up the skin thereof stuffed, in the Temples of Apollo and Dinna,
in a certain thin Net made of Gold: and therefore Solinus. Scaliger.
any House. And moreover, if Silver be rubbed over with the powder of the
Cockatrices flesh, it is likewise said, that it gives it a tincture like unto
Gold: and besides these qualities, I remember not any other in the flesh or
skin of this serpent.

The hissing of the Cockatrice which is his natural voice, is terrible to
other serpents, and therefore as soon as they hear the same, they prepare
themselves to fly away, according to these verses of Nicander;

Illius auditos expectant nulla susurr^s,
Quantumuis magnas sinuent animalia spiras
Quando vel in pastum, vel opacae deuiae siluae,
Irriguosue locos, mediae sub luce diei
Excandescenti succensa furore feruntur,
Sed turpi co^uersa fugae dant terga retrorsum.
Which may be englished thus,

When as the greatest winding Serpents hear,
(Feeding in woods or pasture all abroad,
Although enclosed in many spiers, yet fear:
Or in midday the shadows near brooks road,)
The fearful hissing of this angry beast,
They run away: as fast as feet can lead them,
Flying his rage unto some other rest,
Turning their backs whereby they do escape him.
We read also that many times in Africa, the Mules fall down dead for thirst,
or elsely dead on the ground for some other causes, unto whose Carkase
innumerable troops of Serpents gather themselves to feed thereuppon: but
when the Bazeliske windeth the said dead body, he gives forth his voice: at
the first hearing whereof, all the Serpents Aelianus.
near the place wherein the Cockatrice is lodged, so soon as it perceives
the presence thereof, although it be not heard nor seen, yet it deaparteth
back again, without drinking, neglecting his own nutriment, to save itself
from further danger: whereupon Lucanus says;

-- Late sibi submouet omne
Vulgus, and in vacua regnat Basiliscus arena.
Which may be thus englished;

He makes the vulgar far from him to stand,
While Cockatrice alone reigns on the sand.
So then it being evident that the hissing of a Cockatrice is terrible to all
Serpents, and his breath and poison mortal to all manner of Beasts: yet has
GOD in nature not left this vilde Serpent without an enemy; for the Weasell
and the Cock are his tryumphant Victors; and therefore Pliny says well: Huic
tali monstre quod saepe enectum concupiuere reges videre, mustelarum virus
exitio est, adeo naturae nihil placuit esse sinae pari: That is to say, This
monster which even Kings have desired to see when it was dead, yet is
destroyed by the poison of Weasels, for so it has pleased nature that no beast
should be without his match.

The people therefore when they take Weasells, after they have found the Caves
and lodging places of the Cockatrices, which are easily discerned by the upper
face of Rue, or else she would be poisoned with the contagious air about the
Cockatrice: and besides this Weasell, there is no other beast in the World,
which is able to stand in contention against the Cockatrice, says Lemnius.

Again, even as a Lion is afraid of a cock, so is the Bazeliske, for he is not
only afraid at his sight, but almost dead when he hears him crow, which
thing is notoriously known throughout all Africa. And therefore all
Travelers which go through the

There are certain learned Writers in Saxony, which affirm, that there are
many kinds of Serpents in their Woods; whereof one is not unlike to a
Cockatrice: for they say it has a very sharp head, a yellow color, in length
not exceeding three Palms, of a great thickenesse, his belly spotted and
adorned with many white pricks: the back blew, and the tail crooked and
turned up, but the opening of his mouth is far wyder then the proportion of
his body may seem to bear. These Serpents may well be referred to
Cockatrices: for howsoever their poison is not so great as Africa, (even as
all other Serpents of the hot Countries, are far more pestiferous then
those which are bred in the cold Countries:) the very same reason persuades
me, that there is a difference among the Cockatrices, and that those of
Saxonia may differ in poison from those in Africa, and yet be true
Cockatrices: Besides this, there is another reason in Lemnius, which persuades
the Reader they are no Cockatrices; because when the Countrymen set upon them
to kill them, with Clubs, Bills, or Forkes, they receive no hurt at all by
them, neither is there any apparent contagion of the Air: but this is
answered already, that the Poison in the cold Country is nothing to great as
in the hot, and therefore in Saxony they need fear the biting, and not the
airs infection.

Gardan relates another story of a certain Serpent, which was found in the
walls of an old decayed House in Millan, the head of it (says he) was as
big as an Egg, too big for the body, which in quantity and shape resembled
a Stellion. There were teeth on either chappe, such as are in Vipers. It had
two Legs, and those very short, but great, and their feet had clavves like a
Cats: so that when it stood, it was like a Cock, for it had a bunch on the
top of the head, and yet it vvanted both Feathers and Wings: The tail was as
long as the body, in the top whereof there was a round bunch as big as the head
of an Italian Stellian. It is very likely that this beast is of the kind of
Cockatrices.

Now we are to entreat of the poison of this serpent, for it is a hot and
venomous poison, a man touches the body it self, but also by touching a
Weapon wherewith the body was slain, or any other dead beast slain by it, and
there is a common fame, that a Horseman taking a Spear in his hand, which had
been thrust through a Cockatrice, did not only draw the poison of it into his
own body and so dyed, but also killed his Horse thereby. Lucan writes;

Quid prodest miseri Basiliscus cuspide Mauri
Transactus? velox currit per tela venenum,
Inuadit manumque equumque.
In English thus;

What had the Moore to kill
The Cockatrice with spear,
Since the swift poison him did spill,
And horse that did him bear.
The question is in what part of this Serpent the poison does lie; Some say in
the head alone, and that therefore the Bazeliske is deaf, because the Air
which serves the Organe of hearing, is resolved by the intensiue calidity: but
this seems not to P^
be true, that the poison should be in the head only, because it kills by
the

But to omit inquiry in what part of his body the poison lies, seeing it is
most manifest that it is universal, we will leave the seat thereof, and
dispute of the instruments and effects.

First of all therefore it kills his own kind, by sight, hearing, and
touching. By his own kind, I mean other Serpents, and not other
Cockatrices, for they can live one beside another, for if it were true (which I
do not believe) that the Arabian Harmene were any other Serpent then a
Cockatrice, the very same reason that Ardoynus gives of the fellowshippe of
these two Serpents together, (because of the similitudes of their natures) may
very well prove that no diverse kinds can live so well together, in safety
without harming one or other, as do one and the same kind together. And
therefore Harmene, and it is more likely that a Cockatrice does not kill a
Cockatrice, then that a Cockatrice does not kill an Harmene: And again,
Cockatrices are ingendered by Eggs, according to the Holy Scripture; and
therefore one of them kills not another by touching, hissing, or seeing,
because one of them hatcheth another. But it is a question whether the
Cockatrice dye by the sight of himself: some have affirmed so much, but I dare
not subscribe thereunto, because in reason it is impossible, that any thing
should hurt it self, that hurts not another of his own kind, yet if in the
secret of nature GOD have ordained such a thing, I will not strive against them
that can show it.

And therefore I cannot without laughing remember the old Wives tales of the
Vulgar Cockatrices that have bin in England; for I have oftentimes heard it
related confidently, that once our Nation was full of Cockatrices, and that a
certain man did destroy them by going up and down in Glass, whereby their
own shapes were reflected upon their own faces, and so they dyed. But this
fable is not worth refuting, for it is more likely that the man should first
have dyed by the corruption of the air from the Cockatrice, then the
Cockatrice to die by the reflection of his own similitude from the glass,
except it can be showed that the poisoned air could not enter into the glass
wherein the man did breathe.

Among all living creatures, there is none that perrisheth sooner then does a
man by the poison of a Cockatrice, for with his sight he kills him, because
the beams of the Cockatrices eyes, do corrupt the visible spirit of a man,
which visible spirit corrupted, all the other spirits coming from the brain
and life of the heart, are thereby corrupted, and so the man dies: even as
women in their monthly courses do vitiat their looking-glasses,

To conclude, this poison infecteth the air, and the air so infected kills
all living things, and likewise all green things, fruits, and plants of the
earth: it burns up the grass where-vppon it goes or creeps, and the
fowls of the air fall down dead when they come near his den or lodging.
Sometimes he byteth a man or a beast, and by that wound the blood turns
into choler, and so the whole body becomes yellow as gold, presently killing
all that touch it, or come near it. The symptoms are thus described by
Nicander, with whose words I will conclude this History of the Cockatrice,
writing as follows:

Quod ferit hic, multo corpus succenditur igne,
A membris resoluta suis caro defluit, and fit
Lurida and obscuro nigrescit opaca color.
Nullae etiam volucres quae faeda cadauera pascunt,
Sic occisum hominem tangunt, vt vultur, and omnes;
Huic similes alia, pluuiae quoque nuncius aura
Coruus, nec quaecunque fera per deuia lustra
Degunt etali capiunt sibi tabula carne.
Tum teter vacuas odor hinc exhalat in auras,
Atque propinquantes penetrant non segniter artus;
Sin cogente fame ventens aproximet ales
Tristia fata refert, certamque ex aere mortem,
Which may be englished thus;

When he does strike, the body hurt is set on fire,
And from the members falls off the flesh, withal,
It rotten is, and in the color black as any mire.
Refused of carrion-feeding-birds both great and small
Are all men so destroyed. No Vulture or Bitter fierce,
Or weather-telling-Crow, or deserts wildest beast,
Which live in dens sustaining greatest famines force,
But at their tables do this flesh detest.
Then is the air repleate with his loathsome smell,
Piercing vital parts of them approaching near,
And if a bird it taste to fill his hunger fell,
It dies assured death, none need it fear.
OF THE CORDYLL.
ALthough I find some difference about the nature of this living creature, and
namely whether it be a Serpent or a Fish, yet because the greater and better
part make it a Serpent, I will also bring it in his due order in this place for
a venomous beast. Gesner is of opinion, that it is no other but a Lizard of the
Water, but this cannont agree with the description of Aristotle and Bellonius,
who affirm the Cordill to have Gilles like a Fish, and these are not found in
any Lizard. The Kordule, and Kordulos, whereof the Latins derive or rather
borrow their Cordulus, and Cordyla. Numenius makes this a kind of Salamander
which the Apothecaryes do in many Countries falsely sell for the Scincus or
Corcodile of the Earth, and yet it exceeds the quantity of a Salamander,
being much less then the crocodile of the earth, having gils, and wanting fins
on the sides, also a long tail, and according to the proportion of the body,
like a Squirrels, although nothing so big, without scabs: the back being bald
and some what black, and horrible rough, through some bunches growing thereupon,
which being pressed do yeald a certain humor like milk, which being said to the
Nosthrils does smell like poison, even as it is in a Salamander. The beak or
snout is very blunt or dull, yet armed with very sharp teeth. The claws of his
forelegges Lamprey.

The inward parts of this Serpent are also thus described. The tongue is soft
and spungy, like as is the tongue of a Water-Frogge, wherewith as it were with
Glue, he draws to his mouth, both Leches and Worms of the earth, whereupon
it feeds. At the root of his tongue there is a certain bunch of flesh,
which as I think supplieth the place of the lights, for when it breaths,
that part is especially moved, and it pants too and fro, so that thereby I
gather, either it has the Lights in that place, or else in some other
Pericadium.

The liver is very black, and somewhat cloven at the bending or sloape side:
the melt somewhat red, cleaving to the very bottom of the ventricle. The
reins are also very spungy, joined almost to the Legs, in which parts it is
most fleshy, but in other places especially in the belly and breast, it is all
skin and bone. It also bears Eggs in her place of conception, which is
forked or double, which are there disposed in order, as in other living gristly
creatures. Those Eggs are nourished with a kind of red fat, out of
Bellonius, besides whom I find nothing more said, that is worthy to be related
of this Serpent, and therefore I will here conclude the History thereof.

OF THE CROCODILE.
BEcause there be many kinds of Crocodiles, it is no marvel although some
have taken the word Crocodilus for the Genus, and the several Species, they
distinguish into the Crocodile of the Bresilia, and the Scincus: the Crocodiles
of the water into this here described, which is the vulgar one, and that of
Nilus, of all which we shall entreat in order, one successively following
another. But I will not contend about the Genus or Species of this word, for my
purpose is to open their several natures, so far as I have learned, wherein
the works of almighty God may be known, and will leave the strife of words to
them that spend their wits about terms and sillables only. Thus much I
find, that the ancients had three general terms for Rana, Testudo, Lacerta:
And therefore I may forbear to entreat of Crocodilus as a Genus and handle it
as a species, or particular kind. The Hebreus have many words which they use
for a Crocodile. Koah Leuit. 11. which the Arabians render Hardun, and the
Persi^ds Sanga, which word comes near the Latin word Scincus for a
Crocodile of the earth, and yet that word Koah by Saint Ierom and the
Septuagints is translated a Chamaeleon.



In the same place of Leuiticus the word Zab is interpreted a kind of
Crocodile: where-withall David Kimhi confounds Gereschint, and Rabbi Solomon,
Faget. The Chaldes translate in Zaba. The Persians An Rasu. The Septuagints a
Crocodile of the earth, but it is better to follow Saint Hierom in the same,
because the Text adds according to his kind, wherefore it is superfluous to

In Exodus 8. there is a Fish called Zephardea, which comes out of the waters
and eats men, this cannot agree to any Fish in Nilus, save only the
Crocodile; and therefore this word is by the Arabians rendered Al Timasch. Some
do hereby understand Pagulera, Grenelera, and Batrichoi, that is Aluka by most
of the Jews understand a Horsleach, Pro. 30. but David Kimhi takes and uses
it for a Crocodile. For he says, it is a great Worm, abiding near the Rivers
sides, and upon a sudden sets upon men or cattle as they pass besides him.
Tisma and Alinsa are by Auicen expounded for a crocodile: and Tenchea for that
Crocodile that never moves his nether or under chap. ^ shipped by the
inhabitants, and kept tame by the Priests in a certain Lake, this sacred
Crocodile is called Suchus, and this word comes near to Scincus, which as
we have said, signifies any Crocodile of the earth, from which the Arabian
Tinsa seems also to be derived, as the Egyptian Thampsai does come near to
the Arabian Trenisa. Herodotus calls them Champsai, and this was the old
Ionian word for a Vulgar Crocodile in hedges. Upon occasion whereof Scaliger
says, he asked a Turk by what name they call a Crocodile at this day in
Turkey, and he answered Kimpsai, which is most evidently corrupted from
Champsai.

The Egyptians vulgarly call the Crocodile of Nilus, Cocatrix, the Graecians
Neilokrokadeilos, Krocodeilos, and sometimes Dendrites. The Latins Crocodilus,
and Albertus, Crocodillus, and the same word is retained in all languages of
Europe. About the Etymology of this word, I find two opinions not unprofitable
to be rehearsed: the first, that Crocodilus comes of Crocus, Saffron, because
this beast, especially the Crocodile of the earth, is afraid of Saffron, and
therefore the country people, to defend their Hiues of Bees and honey from them,
strew upon the places Saffron. But this is too far fetched, to name a beast
from that which it fears, and being a secret in nature, it is not likely
that it was discovered at the first, and therefore the name must have some
other inuestigation.

Isidorus says, that the name Crocodilus comes of Croceus color, the color
of Saffron, Varinus and Eustathius was the original, for they say that the
shores of sands on the Rivers, were called Croc^ and Croculae: and because the
Crocodiles haunt and live in those shores, it might give the name to the
beasts, because the water Crocodiles live and delight in those sands, but the
Land or earth Crocodiles abhor and fear them.

It is reported that the famous Grammarian Artemidorus seeing a Crocodile lying
upon the sands, he was so much touched and moved therewith, that he fell into
an opinion Aurelianus


In the next place we are to consider the Countries wherein Crocodiles are
bred, and keep their habitation, and those are especially Egypt, for that
only has Crocodiles of Aristotle Mela. Diod. Sicul.
both kinds, that is, of the water and of the Land, for the Crocodiles of
Nilus are Amphibij, and live in both elements: they are not only in the river
Nilus, but also in all the pooles near adjoining. The River Bambotus near to
Atlas in Africa, does also bring forth Crocodiles: and Pliny says, that in
Darat a River of Mauritania, there are Crocodiles ingendered. Likewise
Apollonius reports, that when he passed by the River Indus, he met Nilus, and
besides these countries I do not remember any other, wherein are ingendered
crocodiles of the water, which are the greatest and most famous Crocodiles of
all other.

The Crocodiles of the earth, which are of lesser note and quantity, are more
plentiful, for they are found in Libia, and in Bithinia, where they are called
Azaritia, and in the Mountain Syagrus in Arabia, and in the vvoods of India,
as is well observed by Arianus, Dioscorides, and Hermolaus, and therefore I
will not prosecute this matter any further.

The kinds being already declared, it follows that we should proceed to
their quantity and several parts. And it appears that the water Crocodile
is much greater, and Marcellinus Herodotus. Isidore.
more noble, then the Crocodiles of the earth; for they are not above two
cubits long, or Bellunensis) the^ their young ones are much greater, but if on
the Land, then are they lesser, and like the Crocodiles of the earth. In the
River Ganges there are two kinds of Crocodiles, one of them is harmless, and
does no hurt to any creature, but the other is a deuouting insatiable beast,
killing ^ snoute there grows a bunch like a horn.

Now a Crocodile is like a Lyzard in all points (excepting the tail, and the
quantity of a Lyzard,) yet it lays an egg no greater then a Gooses egg, and
from so small a beginning arises this monstrous Serpent, growing all his life
long, unto the length of fifteen or twenty cubits. And as Phalareus
witnesses, in the days of Psammitichus King of Egypt, there was one found of
five and twenty cubits long: and before that, in the days of Amasis, one that
was above six and twenty cubits long, the reason whereof was their long life,
and continual growth.

We have showed already, that the color of a Crocodile is like to Saffron,
that is, Peter Martyr says, that their belly is somewhat whiter then the other
parts. Their body is rough all over, being covered with a certain bark or
rind, so thick, firm and strong, as it will not yield (and especially about
the back) unto a cart-wheele when the cart is loaded, and in all the upper
parts, and the tail, it is impenitrable with any dart or spear, yea scarcely
to a pistol or small gunne, but the belly is softer, whereon he receives
wounds with more facility: for as we shall show afterward, there is a kind
of Dolphine which comes into Nilus, and fights with them, wounding them on
the belly parts.

The covering of their back is distinguished into diverse divided shells,
standing up Caelius Rho^
of the cheek, which by reason of their eyes never twinckleth. And the
Egyptians say, that only the Crocodile among all the living creatures in the
water, draws a certain thin bright skin from his forehead over his eyes,
where-withall he covers his sight: and this I take to be the only cause of
his dim sight in the waters.

The head of this beast is very broad, and his snoute like a Swynes. When he
eats Aristotle gives this reason, that seeing Nature has given him so short
feet, as that they are not able to hold Herodotus Pliny. Solinus. Marcelinus.
or to take the prey, therefore the mouth is framed instead of feet, so as it
may more vehemently strike and wound, and also more speedily move and turn
after the prey, and this is better done by the upper the^ the nether chap. But
it is likely that he was not deceived, although he speaks of Crocodilus
Marinus, a crocodile of the sea: vvheras there is no Crocodile of the Sea, but
rather some other monster like a Crocodile in the sea, and such peradventure
Albertus saw, and there-vpon inconsideratly affirmed, that all Crocodiles move
their vnder-chapps, except the Tenchea. But the learned Vessalius proves it
to be otherwise, because that the nether chappe is so conjoined and fastened to
the bones of the

The second wonder unto this, is that the Crocodile has no tongue, nor so much
as any Albertus. Herodotus.
appearance of a tongue. But then the question is, how it comes to
distinguish the sapours and taste of his meat. Whereunto Aristotle answers,
that this Crocodile is such a ravening beast, that his meat tarrieth not in
his mouth, but is carried into his stomach, like as other water-beasts, and
therefore they discern sapours, and relish their meat more speedily the^
other; for the water or humor falls so fast into their mouths, that they
cannot stand long upon the taste or distaste of their meat. But yet some make
and yet not visible as in other, and therefore is very hardly discerned. For
all this, I rather conclude with the former Authors, that seeing it lives
both in the waters and on the land, and therefore it resembles a fish and a
beast, as it resembles a beast, locum obtinet lingua, it has a place for a
tongue, but as it resembles a fish, Elinguis est, it is without a tongue. It
has great teeth standing out, all of them stand out before visibly when the
mouth is shut, and fewer behind. And whereas Aristotle writes, that there is
no living creature which has both dentes prominentes, and serratos, that is,
standing out, and divided like a saw, yet the Crocodile has both. These teeth
are white, long, sharp, and a little crooked and hollow, their quantity well
resembling the residue of the proportion of the body: and some say, that a
crocodile has three rows of teeth, like the Lion of Chius, and T. Martyr
like the Whale, but this is not an approved opinion, because they have no
more then 60. teeth. They have also 60. joints or bones in the back, which are
also tied together with so many nerves. The opening of his mouth reaches to
the place of his ears, and there be some Crocodiles in Ganges which have a
kind of little horn upon their noses or snout. The Aelianus
melt is very small, and this somesay is only in them that bring forth eggs,
their stones are inward and cleave to their loins. The tail is of the same
length that the whole body has, and the same is also rough and armed with hard
skin upon the upper part and the sides, but beneath it is smooth and tender. It
has finnes upon the tail, by the benefit whereof it swimmeth, as also by the
help of the feet. The feet are like a Bears, except that they are covered
with scales in stead of hair; their nails are very sharp and strong, for if
it had a thumb

The knowledge also of the natural actions and inclinations of Crocodiles is
requisite to be handled in the next place, because that actions follow the
members as sounds do instruments. First therefore, although Aristotle for the
most part speaking of a Crocodile, calls it aquatilis and fluuiatilis, yet it
is not to confine it to the waters and rivers, as though it never came out of
the^ like fishes, but only to note that particular kind which differs from
them of the earth, for it is certain that it lives in both elements, namely
earth and water: and for the time that it abides in the water, it also takes
air, and not the humor or moistnes of Herodotus P^^y.
earth is hoter then the water, and in the night, the water warmer then the
earth: and while it lives on the land, it is so delighted with the sunshine,
and lies therein so immovable, that a man would take it to be stark dead. The
eyes of a Crocodile (as we have said) are dull and blind in the water, yet they
appear bright to others, for this cause, when the Egyptians will signify the
sunrising, they picture a Crocodile in the water looking upward to the earth,
and when they will signify the west, they picture a Crocodile diuing into the
water, and so for the most part the crocodile lies upon the banks, that he may
either diue into the water with speed or ascend to the earth to take his prey.

By reason of the shortness of his feet, his pace is very slow, and therefore it
is not only easy to escape from him by flight, but also if a man do but turn
aside and wind out of the direct way, his body is so unable to bend it self,
that he can neither wind nor turn after it. When they go under the earth into
their caves, like to all other foure-footed and egge-breeding serpents, as
namely Lizards, Stellions, and Torteises, they have all their legs joined to
their sides, which are so retorted as they may bend to either side, for the
necessity of covering their eggs, but when they are abroad, and go bearing up
all their bodies, then they bend only outward, making their thighs more
visible. It is som-what questionable, whether they lie hid within their caves
4. months or 60. days, for some Authors affirm one thing, and some another,
but the reason of the difference is taken from the condition of the

The tail of a Crocodile is his strongest part, and they never kill any beast
or man, but first of all they strike him down and astonish him with their
tails, and for this cause, the Egyptians by a Crocodiles tail do signify
death and darkness. They devour both men and beasts if they find them in their
way, or near the banks of Nilus, wherein they abide, Orus.
taking sometimes a calfe from the cow his damme, and carrying it whole into
the waters. And it appears by the portraiture of Nealces, that a Crocodile
drew in an Ass into Nilus as he was drinking, and therefore the dogs of
Egypt by a kind of natural instinct, do not drink but as they run, for
fear of the Crocodiles: whereupon came the proverb, Vt canis e Nilo bibit and
fugit, as a dog at one time drinks and runs by Nilus.

When they desire fishes, they put their heads out of the water as it were to
sleep, and then suddenly when they espy a booty, they leap into the waters
upon them and take them. After that they have eaten and are satisfied, then
they turn to the land again; and as they lie gaping upon the earth, the
little bird Trochilus makes clean their teeth, and is satisfied by the
remainders of the flesh sticking upon them. It is also affirmed by Arnoldus,
that it is fed with mud, but the holy Crocodile in the Province of Arsinoe,
is fed Sira^o.
with bread, flesh, wine, sweet and hard, sodde flesh and cakes, and such like
things as the poor people bring unto it when they come to see it. When the
Egyptians will write a Orus.
man eating or at dinner, they paynt a Crocodile gaping.

They are exceeding fruitful and prolificall, and therefore also in
Hieroglyphics they Aelianus. Solinus.
and temperate time, otherwise they perrish and come to nothing, for extremity
of heat spoyleth the egg, as the buds of some trees are burned and scorched
off by the like occasion. The egg is not much greater then the egg of a
Goose, and the young one out of the shell is of the same proportion. And so
from such a small beginning does this huge and monstrous Serpent grow to his
great stature, the reason whereof (says Aristotle) is, because it grows all
his life long, even to the length of ten or more cubits. When it has Plutarch.
a fatidicall or prophetical geographicall delineation, for so she places
her eggs in the brimme or bank of the flood (before the flood comes) that
the water may cover the nest, but not herself that sits upon the eggs. And
the like to this is the building of the Beauer, as we have showed in due place
before in the History of Foure-footed beasts.

So soon as the young ones are hatched, they instantly fall into the depth of
the water, but if they meet with frogge, snayle, or any other such thing fit
for their meat, they Philes, that after the egg is laid by the Crocodile,
many times there is a cruel stinging Scorpion which comes out thereof, and
wounds Sclinus.
the Crocodile that laid it. To conclude, they never prosper but near the
waters, and they live threescore years, or the age of a man's life.

The nature of this beast is to be fearful, ravening, malicious, and
treacherous in getting of his prey, the subtlety of whose spirit, is by some
attributed to the thinness of his blood, and by other to the hardness of his
skin and hide. How it deals with her young ones, we have showed already, as
it were trying their nature whether they will degenerate or no, and the like
things are reported of the Aspes, Cancers, and Torteyses of Egypt.

From hence came the conceit of Pietas Crocodili, the piety of the Crocodile.
But as we have said, it is a fearful Serpent, abhorring all manner of noise,
especially from the strained voice of a man, and where he finds himself
valiantly assaulted, there also he is discouraged, and therefore Marcellinus
says of him, Audax Monstrum fugacibus, at vbi audacem senserit timidissimum:
An audacious Monster to them that run away, but most fearful where he
finds resistance.

Some have written, that the Crocodile runs away from a man if he wink with
his left eye, and look steadfastly upon him with his right eye, but if this
be true, it is not to be attributed to the virtue of the right eye, but only
to the rareness of sight, which is conspicuous to the Serpent from one eye.
The greatest terror unto Crocodiles, as both Pe^: Mar:
Seneca and Pliny affirm, are the inhabitants of the I Will Tentyrus within
Nilus, for those people make them run away with their voices, and many times
pursue and take them in snares. Of these people speaks Solinus in this
manner. There is a generation of men in the I Will Tentyrus within the waters of
Nilus, which are of a most adverse nature to the Crocodile, dwelling also in
the same place. And although their persons or presence be of small stature, yet
herein is their courage admired, because at the sudden sight of a Crocodile
they are no whit daunted: for one of these dare meet and provoke him to run
away. They will also leap into the Rivers and swim after the Crocodile, and
meeting with it, without fear cast themselves upon the Beasts back, ryding
on him as upon a horse. And if the Beast lift up his head to byte him, when
he gapeth they put into his

The like thing we have before in our general discourse of Serpents, showed
to be in the Indian Psylli against the greatest Serpents. And Strabo also has
recorded, that at what time crocodiles were brought to Rome, these Tentyrites
followed and drove the^. For whom there was a certain great poole or fish pond
assigned and walled about; except one passage for the Beast to come out of the
water into the sunshine: and when the people came Tentyrites with nets would
draw them to the Land, and put them back again into the water at their own
pleasure. For they so hook them by their eyes, and bottom of their bellyes,
which are their tenderest parts, that like as horses broken by their Riders,
they yield unto them, and forget their strength in the presence of these their
Conquerours.

Peter Martyr in his third book of his Babylonian Lagation, says, that from
the City Cair to the Sea, the Crocodiles are not so hurtful and violent as
they are up the River Nilus into the Land, and against the stream. For as you
go further up the River, near the mountanie and hilly places, so shall you
find them more fierce, bloody, and irresistable, whereof the inhabitants gave
him many reasons. First, because that part of the River Cair and the Sea, is
very full of all sorts of fishes, whereby the beasts are so filled with
devouring of them, that they list not come out of the water on the Land to hunt
after men or cattle, and therefore they are the less hurtful, for even the
Lion and Wolf do cease to kill and devour when their bellyes are full. But
sometimes the Crocodiles beneath the River, follow the gales or troops of fish
up the River, like so many Fishermen, and then the Country Fishermen enclose
them in Nets, and so destroy them. For there is a very great reward proposed
by the Law of the Country, to him that kills a Crocodile of any great
quantity; and therefore they grow not great, and by reason of their smalnes
are less aduenturous. For so soon as a great Crocodile is discovered, there
is such watch and care taken to interrupt and kill him for hope of the reward,

Thirdly, the Crocodiles up the River, toward the Mountains, are more
hurtful, because they are pressed with more hunger and famine, and more
sildome come within the terror of men, wherefore they forsake the waters, and
run up and down to seek preyes to satisfy their hunger, which when they meet
withal, they devour with an irresistable desire, forced and pressed forward
by hunger, which breaks stone walls. But most commonly when the River Nilus
is lowest, and sunck down into the channel, then the Crocodiles in the waters
do grow most hungry, because the fish are gone away with the floods; and then
the subtle beast will heal and cover himself over with sand or mudde, and so
lie in the bank of the River, where he knows the women come to fetch water,
or the cattle to drink, and when he espieth his advantage, he suddenly
takes the woman by the hand that she takes up water withal, and draws her
into the River, where he teareth her in pieces and eats her. In like sort
deals he with Oxen, Cowes, Asses, and other cattle. If hunger force him to
the Land, and he meet with a Cammell, horse, Ass, or such like beast, then
with the force and blows of his tail he breaks his legs,

There is also another perrill by Crocodiles, for it is said that when Nilus
falls, and the water waxes low, the Barks thorough want of wind, are feign
by the Mariners to to be tugged up the stream with long lines and cords: the
subtle Crocodile seeing the same, does suddenly with his tail smite the
same line with such force, that either he breaks it, or by his forcible
violence tumbleth the Mariner down into the water, whom he is ready to
receive with open mouth before he can recover. Yea many times by means thereof
the Bark it self so tottereth and reeleth, that the violent beast takes a

Aelianus says, that among the Ombitae which are in Arsinoe, the Crocodiles
are harmless, and having several names when they are called, do put their
heads out of the water and take meat gently, which meat is the head and
garbage of such sacrifices as are brought thither. But in another place he
writes, that among the Ombitae or Coptitae, it is not safe for a man to fetch
water from the River, or to wash their feet, or walk on the Rivers side, but
with great caution and warines. For even those beasts which are most kindly
used by men, do rage against their Benefactours, as namely the Crocodile, the
Ichneumon, the Wild-cats, and such like. And yet Plutarch in his book Vtra
animalium, says, that the Priests, by the custom of meate-giuing, have made
some of them so tame, Marcelinus.
that during the seven Ceremonial days of the nativity of Apis, there is
none of the^ that shows any wild trick or cruel part, but as it were by
compact betwixt them and the Priests, they lay aside all cruelty and rage
during that time.

And therefore Cicero writes most excellently, saying; Egyptiorum morem quis
ignoret? quorum imbutae mentes prauitatum erroribus, quamvis carnificinam
potius subierint, quam ibim, aut aspidem, aut crocodilum violent. That is to
say, Who is ignorant of the custom of the Egyptians? whose minds are so
seasoned and endued with erroneous wickedness, that they had rather undergo
any torment, then offer violence to an Ibis, an Aspe, or a holy Crocodile. For
in diverse places, all these, and Cats also, were worshipped Iuuenall.

Crocodilon aderat parshaec Egypti,
Illa pauit saturam serpentibus Ibim.
Which may be englished thus;

This part of Egypt Crocodiles adore,
That, the Ibis, fed with Serpents store.
But the reasons of divine worship or honor given to the Crocodiles are
worth noting, that the diligent Reader may the better have some taste of that
ancient blindness

First therefore the Idolatrous Priests, thought there was some divine power
in the Crocodile, because it wanted a tongue, for the Deity or Divine speech,
has no need of a voice to express his meaning, according to the saying of
the Graecians, Kai di apsophoa bainoon keleuthon kai dikes, ta thueta agrikata
diken: For by a mute and silent way it ascends, and brings all things
mortal to a vocal justice, which speaks in action though not in voice, even
as all that is in the Crocodile, is action and not voice.

Secondly, by reason of a certain thin smooth skin coming from the midst
of his forehead, where-withall it covers his eyes, so that when it is
thought to be blind, Caelius
yet it sees: even so is it with the Divine power, for even then when it is
not seen, yet does it see perfectly all mortal things.

Again, by their eggs and nests they usually fore-shew the ouer-flowing of
Nilus, to the infinite benefit of their country wherein they live, for thereby
the husbandmen know when to till their Land, and when not, when to sow and
plant, and lead forth their

Again, it lays threescore eggs, and lays threescore years, which number
of threescore, was in ancient time the first dimension of heaven and heavenly
things.

Cicero also speaking against this Egyptian vanity, says, that they never
consecrated a beast for a God, but for some apparent utility, as the Ibis for
devouring of Serpents, and the Crocodile for being a terror to thieves: and
therefore the Arabian and Lybian thieves durst not come over the River Nilus to
rob the Egyptians for fear of the Crocodiles.

There is a tale in Diodorus Siculus of the original of a Crocodiles divine
worship, Minas, or as Herodotus calls him Menes, who following his hounds
in hunting into a certain marish of Moeris, fell in with his horse, and there
stuck fast, none of his followers daring to come after him to release him, so
that he had there perrished, had not a crocodile come and taken him up upon
his back, and set him safe upon the dry Land. For which miracle, the said
King there built a City, and caused a Crocodile to be worshipped, which was
called Sychus by all the inhabitants of that City, and also gave all the said
Marish of Moeris for the sustenance of the same. It was nourished with bread,
flesh, and wine, cakes, sodde flesh, and sweet new wine: so that when any man
came to the Lake

This Crocodile of Moeris, is the same that is called Arsinoe, and like to that
at Thebes, about which they did hang jewels of gold, silver, and iemmes of
earings, bracelets, and such other things of price. When it dyed, they did
season the body thereof with salt, and buried it in the holy Tombs or burying
Pots. The same also are called Ombitae, I mean the people of that Egypt which
dwell in Arsinoe, and for the love of the Crocodiles, they abandon all manner
of Hawks their enemies, insomuch that many times they take them and hang them
up in public upon gallows for that purpose erected. And further, they
Herodotus
keep certain days of tryumphes like the Olympiades, and games of honor:
and so far they were blinded with that superstition, that they thought
themselves exceedingly blessed if they lost their children by them, and thought
themselves much honored, if they saw them with their eyes fetched out of the
streets and playing places by Crocodiles.

Again, all the Egyptians hold opinion, that the Crocodile is a Diuinatour,
which they prove by the testimony of Ptolomeus, who calling one of these
sacred Crocodiles, which was the oldest and best of all, he would not answer
him, and afterward offering him meat, he also refused it, whereat many
wondered: and some of the Priests said, it was some prognosticall sign either
of the Kings death or his own, and so it fell out shortly after, for the same
Crocodile dyed. As though a Swine might not as well be accounted

There is a city in Egypt called Apollinopolis, the city of Apollo, where the
inhabitants abhor and condemn the worship of crocodiles, for when they take
any of them they hang the^ up and beat them to death, notwithstanding their
tears and cryings, and afterward they eat them: but the reason of their
hatred is, because Typhon their ancient enemy, was clothed with a Crocodiles
shape. Others also say, the reason of their hatred is, because a Crocodile
took away and devoured the daughter of Psamnites, and therefore they enjoined
all their posterity to hate Crocodiles.

To conclude this discourse of Crocodiles inclination, even the Egyptians
themselves account a Crocodile a savage, and cruel murdering beast, as may
appear by their Hieroglyphics, for when they will decypher a mad man, they
picture a crocodile, who being Orus.
put from his desired prey by forcible resistance, he presently rages against
himself. And they are often taught by lamentable experience, what fraud and
malice to mankind lives in these beasts, for they cover themselves under
willowes and green hollow banks, Aelianus
Crocodili lachrimae, the crocodiles tears, justifies the treacherous nature
of this beast, for there are not many brute beasts that can weep, but such is
the nature of the Crocodile, that to get a man within his danger, he will sob,
sigh and weep, as though he were in extremity, but suddenly he destroys
him. Others say, that the crocodile weepeth after he has devoured a man.
How-soeuer it be, it Judas was for the betraying of Christ, before he went and
hanged himself.

The males of this kind do love their females above all measure, yea even to
jealousy, as may appear by this one history of P. Martyr. About the time that
he was in those countries, there were certain Mariners which saw two
Crocodiles together in carnal copulation upon the sands near the River, from
which the water was lately fallen into a certain Island of Nilus, the greedy
Mariners forsook their ship, and betook themselves to a long boat, and with
great shouting, hollowing and crying, made toward them in very courageous
manner: the male at the first assault fell amazed, and greatly terrified ran
away Nilus again, and in his rage swam stoutly against the stream until he
ouertooke the ship wherein his dead femall was, which he presently set upon,
lifting up himself and catching hold on the sides, would certainly have
entered the same, had not the Mariners with all their force battered his head
and hands with clubs and staves; until he was wearied and forced to give over
his enterprise, and so with great sighing and sobbing

And it is no wonder if they make much of one another, for besides themselves
they have few friends in the world, except the bird Trochilus and Swine, of
whom I can say little, except this that follows. As for the little bird
Trochilus, it affects and follows them for the benefit of his own belly:
for while the Crocodile greedily eats, there sticks fast in his teeth some
part of his prey, which troubles him very much, and many times ingendereth
worms, then the beast to help himself takes land, and lies gaping against
the sunne-beames westward, the bird perceiving it, flies to the jaws of the
beast, and there upon the Bird, and to devour his friend, like a cursed
wretch which makes no reckoning of friendship, but the turn served, requiteth
good with evil. But Nature has armed this little bird with sharp thorns
upon her head, so that while the Crocodile endeavors to shut his chaps and
close his mouth upon it, those sharp thorns prick him into Aristotle
Marcelinus. Aelianus. Leo Afric:
his palate, so that full sore against his unkind nature, he lets her fly
safe away. But where as there be many kinds of Trochili, which are greedy of
these worms or clensings of the Crocodiles, some of them which have not
thorns on their heads pay for it, for there being not offense to let the
closing of the Crocodiles mouth, they must needs be devoured: and therefore
this enforced amity betwixt him and the Crocodile, is only to be understood
of the Claedororynchus, as it is called by Hermolaus.

There be some that affirm that he destroys all without exception that thus
come into his mouth, and other-some say he destroys none, but when he feels
his mouth sufficiently cleansed, he waggeth his upper chappe, as it were to give
warning of auoydance, Plutarch.
and in favor of the good turn, to let the bird fly away at his own
pleasure. Howbeit, the other and former narration is more likely to be true,
and more constantly affirmed by all good Authors except Plutarch. And Leo
Afric: says, that it was the constant and confident report of all Africa,
that the Crocodile deuoureth all for their love and kindness, except the
Claedororynchi, which they cannot, by reason of the thorns upon their head.

That there is an amity and natural concord betwixt Swine and Crocodiles is
also gathered, because they only among all other living foure-footed beasts,
do without danger, Calcagninus.
Nilus, even in the midst of the Crocodiles; and therefore it is probable that
they are friends in nature. But oh how small a sum of friends has this beast,
and how unworthy of love among all creatures, that never in nature has but
two, in heaven or earth, air or water, that will adventure to come near it,
and one of these also, which is the best deserving, it deuoureth and
destroys, it it get it within his danger.

Seeing the friends of it are so few, the enemies of it must needs be many,
and therefore require a more large catalogue or story. In the first rank
whereof comes, (as worthy the first place, the Ichneumon, or Pharaohs-mouse,
who rages against their eggs and Diod: Sicul.
their persons, for it is certain that it hunteth with all sagacity of sense
to find out their Strabo.
throats before they be aware, and then putting the Crocodile to exquisite and
intolerable torment, by eating their guts asunder, and so their soft
bellies, while the Crocodile tumbleth to and fro sighing and weeping, now in
the depth of water, now on the Land, never resting till strength of nature
fails. For the incessant gnawing of the Ichneumon so provoke her to seek
her rest in the unrest of every part, herb, element, throws, throbs,
rowlings, tossings, mournings, but all in vain, for the enemy within her
breaths thorough her breath, and sporteth her self in the consumption of
those vital parts, which Ichneumon. But whether it be true or no, that the
Trochilus does awake the sleeping Crocodile, when he sees the Ichneumon lie in
wait to enter into her, I leave it to the credit of Strabo the reporter, and
to the discretion of the indifferent Reader.

Monkeyes are also the haters of Crocodiles, as is showed in their story, and
lie in wait to discover, and if it were in their power to destroy them. The
Scorpion also and the crocodile are enemies one to the other, and therefore
when the Egyptians will describe the Philes, that out of the eggs of
crocodiles, many times come Scorpions, which devour and destroy them that lay
them.

Fishes also in their kind are enemies to Crocodiles, the first place whereof
belongs to the most noble Dolphin. Of these Dolphins it is thought there be
two kinds, one bred in Nilus, the other foreign and coming out of the Sea,
both of them professed enemies to the Crocodile: for the first, it has upon
the back of it sharp thorny prickles or finnes, as sharp as any spears point,
which are well known to the fish that bears them, as her armor and weapons
against all adversaries. In the trust and confidence of these prickles, the
Dolphin will allure and draw out the Crocodile from his den or lodging place,
into the depth of the River, and there fight with him hand to hand. For the
Dolphin, as it knows his own armor and defense, like other beasts and
fishes, so does it know the weakest parts of his adversary, and where his
advantage of wounding lies. Now, as we Strabo. Solinus.
the deep waters, like one afraid of the fight, underneath him he goes, and
with his sharp finnes or prickles on his back, gives his weak and tender
belly mortal wounds, whereby his vital spirits, with his guts and entralls,
are quickly euacuated. The other Dolphins of the Sea being greater, are
likewise armed with these prickles, and of purpose come out of the Sea into
Nilus to bid battle to the Crocodiles.

When Bibillus (a worthy Roman) was Governor of Egypt, he affirmed that on a
season the Dolphins and the Crocodiles met in the mouth of Nilus, and bade
battle the one to the other, as it were for the sovereignty of the waters,
and after that sharp combat, Senecae.


There is likewise a certain Wild-oxe or Bugill among the Parthians, which is
an enemy Albertus writes, if he find or meet with a Crocodile out of the
water, he is not only not afraid of him, but takes heart and sets upon
him, and with the weight and violent agitation of his body, treads him all to
pectes: and no marvel, for all beasts are enemies to the Crocodiles on the
Land, even as the Crocodile lies in wait to destroy all them in the water.
Hawks are also enemies to Crocodiles, and Orus. Aelianus.
especially the Ibis-bird, so that if but a feather of the Ibis come upon the
crocodile by chance, or by direction of a man's hand, it makes it immovable
and cannot stir. For which cause, when the Egyptians will write or decypher
a rau^ning, greedy, idle-fellowe, they paynt a Crocodile, having an Ibis
feather sticking in his head. And thus much for the enmity betwixt the
Crocodiles and other living creatures.

It has been sildome seen that Crocodiles were taken, yet it is said that
men hunt them in the waters, for Pliny says, that there is an assured
persuasion, that with the gall and fat of a Water-Adder, men are wonderfully
helped, and as it were armed against Crocodiles, and by it enabled to take and
destroy them, especially when they carry also about them the herb Potamegeton.
There is also a kind of thorny Wilde-beane growing in Egypt, which has many
sharp prickles upon the stalks, this is a great terror to the Crocodile, for
he is in great dread of his eyes, which are very tender and easy to be
wounded. Therefore he auoydeth their sight, being more unwilling to adventure
upon a man that Crescensun:
bears them, or one of them, then he is to adventure upon a man in complete
Armor, and therefore all the people plant great store of these, and also bear
them in their hands

There be many who in the hunting and prosecuting of these Crocodiles, do
neither give themselves to run away from them, nor once to turn aside out of
their common path or road, but in a foolish hardiness, give themselves to
combat with the beast, when they might very well avoid the danger, but many
times it happens that they pay decrely for their rashness, and repent too late
the too much reputation of their own man-hoode: for whiles with their spears
and sharp weapons they think to pierce his sides, they are deceived, for
there is no part of him penetrable except his belly, and that he keeps safe
enough from his enemies, blunting upon his scales (no less hard then plates
ofyron) all the violence of their blows and sharpness of weapons, but
clubbes, beetles, and such like weapons, are more irksome to him, when they be
set on with strength, battering the scales to his body, and giving him such
knocks as does dismay and astonish him. Indeed Diodorus.
there is no great use of the taking of this Serpent, nor profit of merchandise
comes thereby, his skin and flesh yielding no great respect in the world.

In ancient time they took them with hooks bayted with flesh, or else
enclosed them Herodotus.
it up, and makes after the noise: at last, coming to the Land, the Hunter
with valiant courage and diligence, casts mudde and dirt into his eyes, and
so blinds him that he may oppress and kill him with ease.

Leo Afric: relates also this means or way to take Crocodiles: There be many
Trees planted upon the banks of Nilus, unto one of these there is a long and
strong rope tied, and at the end of the same there is fastened a hook of a
cubite long, and a finger in quantity: unto this hook for a bayte, is tied a
Ram or a Goat, which being set close to the River, and tormented with the
hook upon which it is fastened, cries out amain, by hearing of whose voice,
the hunger-greedy Crocodile is raised out of his den, and invited as he
thinks to a rich prey, so he comes (although it self of a treacherous
nature, yet suspecteth not any other) and swalloweth the bayte, in which he
finds a hook not to be disgested. Then away he strives to go, but the
strength of the rope stays his journey, for as fast as the bayte was to the
rope and hook, so fast is he also ensnared and

Peter Martyr has also other means of taking Crocodiles. Their nature is,
that when they go to the Land to forage and seek after a prey, they cannot
return back again Caire, where for their reward they receive ten pieces of
gold, which amounts to the value of ten nobles of our English coin.

There have been some brought into that City alive, as P. Martyr affirms,
whereof one was as much as two Oxen and two Cammels could bear and draw, and
at the same time there was one taken by this devise before expressed, which had
entered into a village in Saetum near Nilus, and swallowed up alive three
young Infantes sleeping in one cradle, the said Infants scarcely dead were
taken again out of his belly, and soon after when no more tokens of life
appeared, they were all three buried in a better and more proper grave of the
earth. Then also there was another slain, and out of his belly was taken a
whole Ram not disgested, nor any part of him consumed, and the hand of a
woman which was bitten or torn off from her body above the wrist, for there
was upon the same a Bracelet of Brass.

We do read that Crocodiles have been taken and brought alive to Rome. The
first that ever brought them thither, was Marcus Scaurus, who in the games of
his aedility, brought five forth and showed the^ to the people in a great pond
of water, (which he had Pliny. Capitolinus. Lampridi^^.
Heliogabalus and Antoninus Pius. The Indians have a kind of Crocodile in
Ganges, which has a horn growing out of his nose like a Rhinocerot: unto this
beast they cast condemned men to be devoured, for in all their executions, they
want not the help of men, seeing they are provided of beasts to do the
office of Hang-men.

Aurelius Festiuus writes, that Firmus a Tyrant of Egypt being condemned to
Nilus to be devoured by Crocodiles, before hand bought a great quantity of the
fat of Crocodiles, and so stripping himself stark naked, laid the same all
over his body, so he went among the Crocodiles and escaped death: for this
savage beast being deceived with the savor of it own nature, spared the man
that had but so cunningly carried it. Uadian^.
of this beast, that he beguileth the cruel nature of the living, by the taste
and savor of the dead: how beit some think that the Water-Crocodile is
daunted with the savor of the fat from the Land Crocodile, and the
Land-Crocodile by the water again.

And some again say, that all venomous beasts run away from the savor of
the fat hereof; and therefore no marvel if it also be afraid, being
venomous, as well as any Aetius.
other. Wherefore the saying of Firmus was not to be attributed to any
indulgence of the Crocodile toward their own kind, but rather to a deadly
antipathy reflecting themselves upon themselves, though not in shape and
figure as the Cockatrice, yet in sense, savor, and rankness of their
pestiferous humor.

The use of crocodiles taken, is for their skin, flesh, caul, and medicine
arysing out of it. Their skin as it is exceeding hard upon their backs
while they are alive, so is it P: Martyr.
also when they are dead, for with that the common people make them better
armor then coats of Mayle, against Darts, Spear, or Shield, as is well
known in all Egypt at this day. For the flesh of crocodiles, it is also eaten
among those people that do not worship it: as namely, the people about
Elephantina Apollinopolis. Notwithstanding by the Herodoius.
Law of God Leuit. 11. it is accounted an unclean beast, yet the taste thereof
being found pleasant, and the relish good, without respect of GOD or health,
the common people make use thereof.

The medicines arising out of it are also many. The first place belongs to
the caul, Dioscorid.
is held profitable for many things, and among other it is thought to cure the
bitings of any Serpent. Also by annoynting the eyes, it cures both the dregs
or spots of blood in them, and also restores soundness and clearenesse to the
sight, taking away all dullness or deadness from the eyes. And it is said,
that if a man take the liquor which comes Pliny.
from a piece of a crocodile fried, and annoynte therewithal his wound or
harmed part, that then he shall be presently rid of all pain and torment. The
skin both of the Land and water crocodile dried into powder, and the same
powder with Vinegar Arnoldus.
or Oil, laid upon a part or member of the body, to be feared, cut off, or
lanced, takes away all sense and feeling of pain from the instrument in the
action.

All the Egyptians do with the fat or sewet of a crocodile annoint all them
that be sick of Feauers, for it has the same operation which the fat of a
Sea-dogge or Dog-fish has, and if those parts of men and beasts which are hurt
or wounded with crocodiles teeth, be Aetius.
anointed with this fat, it also cures them. Being concocted with water and
Vinegar, and so rolled up and down in the mouth, it cures the toothache:
and also it is outwardly Rhazes.
applied against the biting of Flies, Spyders, Worms, and such like, for this
cause, as also because it is thought to cure Wennes, bunches in the flesh, and
old wounds. It is sold dear, and held precious in Alcair. Scaliger writes,
that it cures the Gangren. The canyne teeth which are hollow, filled with
Frankincense, and tied to a man or woman which has the toothache, cures them,
if the party know not of the carrying them about: And so they write, that if
the little stones which are in their belly be taken forth and so used, they
work the same effect against Feauers. The dung is profitable against the
falling off of the hair, and many such other things.

The biting of a Crocodile is very sharp, deep, and deadly, so that
wheresoever he lays his teeth, seldom or never follows any cure. But yet
the counsel of Physicians is, Aetius.
that so soon as the patyent is wounded, he must be brought into a close
Chamber where are no windows, and there be kept without change of air, or
admission of light, for the poison of the Crocodile works by cold Air and
light; and therefore by the want Arnoldus.
of both is to be cured. But for remedy (if any be) they prescribe the same
which is given for the cure of the biting of a mad Dog, or (as Auicen) the
biting of a Dog not mad. But most proper is the dung of a man, the Fish
Garum and Mysy pounded together, and so applied, or else the broth of
salt-sod-flesh, and such other things as are vulgarly known to every
Physician: and therefore seeing we live in a country far from the annoyance of
this Serpent, I shall not need to blot any Paper to express the cure of this
poison.

The Crocodile of Nilus only lives on Land and water, all other are contented
with Bellonius
one element: the picture of the Crocodile was wont to be stamped upon coin,
and the skin hanged up in many famous Cities of the world, for the
admiration of the people, and there is one at this day at Paris in France.

OF THE ARABIAN OR EGYPTIAN Land-Crocodile.


THe figure of this Crocodile shows evidently the difference betwixt him and
the other of Nilus; and beside it is neither so tall or long as is the other,
the which proportioned beast is only particular to Egypt and Arabia, and some
because of his scaly head, legs, articles, and claws, have observed another
difference in it from the former: yet beats and strikes the beast most
cruelly, to make him go with his Rider to the place of his most fit execution,
free from all rescue of his Heard-man or Pastor, or annoyance of Passengers,
where in most cruel and savage manner he teareth the Limbs and parts one from
another till he be devoured. The Apothecaries of Italy have this beast in their
shops to be seen, and they call it Caudiuerbera, that is, a Tayle-bearer, for
the reason aforesaid. And thus there being nothing in this beasts nature
different from the former, besides his figure, and that which I have already
expressed, I will not trouble the Reader with any more Narration about it.

OF THE LAND CROCODIE of Bresilia.


THe figure and proportion of this serpent was altogether unknown in this part
of the world, till of late our discouerers and nauigatours brought one of them
out of Bresilia. The length of it is about a fathom, and the breadth as much as
ten fingers broad: the forelegges have ten claws, five upon a foot, the
hinder legs eight, and both before and behind

OF THE CROCODILE OF THE earth, called Scincus: a Scinke.
THere have been some that have reckoned Scinkes and Lizards among Worms, but
as the Greek words Erpetx, and Scolex, differ in most apparent dialect, and
signification, and therefore it is an opinion not worth the confuting, for
there are no worms of this quantity. But for the better explycation of the
nature of this beast, because some have taken it for one kind, and some for in
his color and thickness of his skin: the third kind of Crocodile is
unknown to Pliny and others make mention of it, and describe it to be a beast
having his scales like a Gorgon, growing or turning to his head from the tail,
and not as others do, from the head to the tail.

The Graecians call this beast Skigkos, and some unlearned Apothecaries
Stincus, and Myrepsus Sigk. It is also called Kikeros, and the Haebrew Koach,
does more properly signify this beast, then any other Crocodile or Chamaeleon,
or Lizard. Some of the Haebrewes do expound Zab for a Scinke, and from thence
the Chaldaes and the Arabians Dad and Aldab, turning Z into D: So we read
Guaril and Adhaya, for a Scinke or Crocodile of the earth: Alarbian is also for
the same serpent among the Arabians, Balecola, and Ballecara Schanchur, and
Aschanchur, and Askincor, and Scerantum, and Nudalep, and Nudalepi, are all of
the^ Synonymaes, or rather corrupted words for this crocodile of the earth. But
there are at this day certain Pseudoscinkes set out to be seen and sold by
Apothecaries, that are nothing else but a kind of Water-Lizzard: but the true
difference is betwixt them, that these water-Lizards are venomous, but this is
not, and neither living in the Northern parts of the world, nor yet in the
water: and so much shall suffice for the name and first entrance into this
Serpents History.

They are brought out of the Eastern Countries, or out of Egypt: yet the
Monks Mesuen affirm, that they had seen Scinkes or Crocodiles of the earth
about Rome. Syluaticus and Platearius in Apulia. But howsoever their affections
may lead them to conjecture of this serpent, I rather believe that it is an
Affrican beast, and seldom found in Asia or Europe. They love the banks of
Nilus, although they dare not enter the water, and for this cause some have
thought (but untruly) that when the Crocodile lays her eggs in the water,
the young is there also engendered and hatched, and is a Crocodile of the
water, but if they lay their eggs on the dry Land, from thence comes the
Scinke or Crocodile of the earth. This folly is evidently refuted, because that
they never lay eggs in the water, but all upon the dry Land. They are found
(as I have said before) in Egypt, and also in Affricke, and among the Lydians
of Mauritania, otherwise called Lodya, or rather Lybia, among the Pastoral or
Plow-men- Affricans; among the Arabians, and near the red Sea, for all those
at this day sold at Venice, are brought from those parts. The greatest in the
world are in India, (as Cardan teaches) who are in all things like Lizards,
saving in their excrements, which smell or savor more strongly, and generally
the difference of their quantity arises from the Country which they inhabit,
for in the hotter and moyster country they are greater, in the hotter dryer
Region they are smaller, and generally they exceed not two or three cubits in
length, with an answerable proportionable body, which is thus described.

There be certain cross lines which come along the back one by one,
somewhat white, and of a dusky color, and those that be dusky have also in
them some white spots. length from the head to the tippe of the tail, (which
is first thick, and then very small at the end) is about eight fingers. When
they have taken them they bowell them, and fill their bodies with Sugar, and
Silk of Wool, and so they sell them for a reasonable price. That which I have
written of their length of eight fingers, is not so to be understood, as
though they never exceeded or came short of that proportion: for sometimes
they are brought into these parts of the World twenty or four and twenty
fingers long, sometimes again not above five or six fingers long.

When they lay their Eggs, they commit them to the earth, even as the
Crocodiles Aristotle.
of the water do. They live upon the most odoriferous flowers, and therefore
is his flesh so sweet, and his dung or excrements odoriferous. They are
enemies to Bees, and live Indians have a little beast about the quantity of a
little Dog, which they call Phattage, Aelianus.
very like to a Scinke or Crocodile of the Earth, having sharp scales, as
cutting as a saw.

There is some hurt by this beast unto men, for which cause I may justly reckon
it among the venomous, for if it chance to bite any man, if the wounded man
fall into a sever Rhazes.
before he make water, he dies for it, but if he first make water, the beast
dies and the man escapes.

It is thought that it contains a kind of natural magic, witchcraft, or
sorcery; and therefore they say it has a stupifying power, changing the mind
from louc to hatred, and from hatred to love again. The powder of this Serpent
drunk in Wine, if it stir venerous lust, it hurts the Nerves and sinnewes.
There be certain magical devises raised out of this Serpent which are not
worth the writing, as not having in them any dram of wit, learning, or truth;
and therefore I will not trouble the Reader with them,

The body of this Serpent to be dried, after it has line long in salt, and to
be preserved in Noosewort, as Ruellius and Marcellus write: (but truth is,
there is no need of Salt where Nosewort is applied, because the Arcrimony of
this Herb does easily dry up the moisture of the beast, keeping Worms from
breeding in it.) With the powder thus prepared, venerious men stir up their
lusts. Mithridate is called Diasincu, because it is Gallen had an Antidote
against Scorptions, which among other things contains in it the flesh of a
Crocodile of the Earth, wherewithal he cured all them that had been stung
with Scorpions in Lybia. It is also good against the biting of mad beasts, and
pleurises; against poisoned Honey, or the crudity and loathing that comes in
the stomach by eating of sound Honny: It is profitable against empoysoned
Arrows or Darts, being taken immediately before or after the wound, as
Apelles has observed.

Serapio did make a medicine compounded of the dung of this Crocodile, and
applied the same against the falling sickness. Of the body of this Scinke,
except the head and Galen did for Amarantus the Grammartan. They are also good
in medicine against the coldness of the sinnewes. This beast is very hot, and
therefore increases the seed of man, and provoke lust; and for this purpose
the greatest and fattest, and such a one as is taken in the spring time, when
they burn in lust for copulation is preferred. But this is not to be meant of
the fleshy parts, but only of those parts that are about the reins, if a
man drink thereof the weight of a groat in Wine afterward, for the alaying
of the heat thereof, the Physicians do prescribe a decoction of Lentiles with
Honey, and the seed of Lettice drunk in Water. The snout of this Crocodile
with the feet drunk in white wine, has the same operation: but we have
showed already, that these parts are to be cut offand thrown away, because if
there be any venom in the beast it lies in them.

A perfume being made of the body and intrals of this Crocodile under the womb
of

The dust of the skin of this Crocodile being anointed with Vinegar or Oil
upon any part or member which is to be cut off, takes away the sense of pain
in the time of execution. The blood is good for the eyes, and takes away the
filthy skin of the body, with the spots and burles in the face, restoring the
first, true, native, and lively color. The fat takes away the pain in the
reins, and causes a distillation of the seed of man, yet this fat touching
the hair of a man, makes it to fall off, and a man anointed Rasis says,
that it being hung over the head of a woman being in travail, keeps her
from delivery. In the gall of this Serpent there is a power against the falling
off of the hair, especially if the medicine be made of the roots of Beetes
to neese withal; and besides, the eyes being anointed therewith, and with
Honey, there is nothing more profitable against suffusions. The stones and
reins have power to provoke generation, and Aetius prescribes an Antidote to
be made of the tail of this beast, against the gout.

Great is the virtue of the dung or excrement of this Serpent, if the same
could be casily found, but while it is sought for, it loses the virtue. It is
called Crocodillia, and is profitable to give a good color to women's faces,
that is the best which is whitest, short, and not heavy, feeling like Leaven
betwixt the fingers, that is, smelling somewhat sharp like Leaven.

It is adulterated with Meal, Chalk, white-earth, or painting, but it is
descerned by the heaviness. The reason of the virtue of this is, because it
feeds upon the sweetest and best smelling Herbs, whereby it comes to pass,
that it does not only smell fragrantly, but also contain in it many excellent
virtues. First therefore it is good for the comeliness of the face, to give
color to it, according to the saying of Horace: Colorque stercore fucatus
Crocodili: A color in-grained with the dung of a Crocodile, and for this cause
also is the verse of Ovid: Nigrior ad pharij confugit picis opem: That is, The
black Woman goes to crave help of the Fish Pharius, to become more
beautiful; for by the fish Pharius, is understood a Crocodile. As some think
eight, graynes of this dung, or rather the weight of eight groates, with half
so much Mustard-seede and Vinegar, cures the falling off of the hair.
Arnoldus does prescribe a composition of the dung and Cantharides, for the
regenerating and bringing again of hair that is decayed. If a perfume hereof
be made and infused by a Tunelli into the holes of Serpents, it will drive them
away, by reason of the sharp and leauenish savor thereof.

Tralianus makes a medicine thereof for an Eye-salue against the whiteness
and bloud-shot-eyes. It is good also against dimnesse and suffutions, being
anointed with the juice of Leekes: and to conclude, it is drunk in sweetwine
and Vinegar, against the falling sickness, and also being applied unto women,
stirs up their monthly courses. And thus much shall suffice for the story of
the Crocodile.

OF THE DART.


AMong the diverse kinds of Serpents, there is one of special note which the
Graecians call Acontia. The Latins Iaculares, or Iaculi, or Sagitta, a Dart or
Arrow. The Graecians at this day Saetta. The Turks Orchilanne: In Calabria and
Sicilia, Saettone, and of the Germans Ein schossz oder angelsch lang. The
reason of this name is taken from his swift leaping upon a man to wound and
kill him; and therefore the Poets say Iaculique volucres, speaking of these
kinds of Serpents. Albertus and Auicen also calls them Cafezati, and
Cafezaci, Altararat, Acoran, and Altinanti.

The manner of this Serpent is to get up into trees or hedges, and from thence
to fly like an Arrow upon the upper parts of men, and so to sting, bite, and
kill them: and of this kind it is thought that was, which came upon the hand of
the Apostle Paul, whereof the Poet writes;

Ecce procul sauus sterilis robore tunci
Torsit, and immisit (Iaculum vocat Africa) serpens:
Perque caput Pauli transactaque tempora fugit.
Nil ibi virus agit: rapuit cum vulnere fatum,
Deprensum est, quaefunda rotat, quam lenta volorent,
Quam segnis Scythicae strideret arundinis aer.
In English thus;

Lo from a far, a cruel Serpent from an Oak
Came flying like a Dart, in Africa the same
A Dart is called, the head and Temples stroke
Of Paul, by winding spires to work his bane:
But nothing could the poison there avail,
For with the wound he put away his death
Faster then swiftest fly, or turning ball,
Or Seythian reed removed with windy breath.
This kind of Serpent is for the most part in Lybia, in Rhodes, in Lemnus, in
Italy, Calabria, Marcelinus. Bellonius Olaus. Mag.
and Sicilia, and in many of the Northern Countries, and also in Germany,
whereof Gesner tells this story following. There is here the Coasts of
Zuricke a River called Glat, and a village or town upon that River Glatfelden.
Near this River, as a poor man was gathering wood, there was a serpent of
some three or four foot long, which from a tree endeavored to leap upon the
poor man, by gathering his body together, (as it were into four spires or
risings like half hoopes,) the man seeing it, left his sa^ke and ran away:
nevertheless, the Serpent leaped after him at the least sixteen or seventeen
foot, but yet for that time he last turned about him, and not seeing the
Serpent to follow him, gathered courage and comfort, and would come back again
for his sack that he had left behind him. The crafty Serpent expecting so
much, had set himself again into another tree, and privily lay till the man
came for his sack, and then ere he was aware came flying at him as he did
before, and presently winded about his left arm; All his body except his tail
hung down, and his neck, which he held up hi^^ing in the man's face: the man
having no sleeue on his arm except his shirt, yet did the serpent so press
the skin and flesh, that the circles of his winding spires and prints of his
body appeared therein after he was taken off, yet did he not bite the man, for
the poor countryfellow did presently with his other hand take him by the head
and cast him away, notwithstanding, he had so foulded himself about his arm:
shortly after that arm beca^^^ to grow mattery, and all the flesh to the bone
consumed, yet was all the rotten putty^

In the Northern parts they leap ten foot at a time, first gathering
t^elues Olaus Mag:
into the similitudes of Bows or half Hoopes, and then fight with those (...)
they would devour, making many times a noise among the Herbs or Flowe^ich are
parched or withered by the Sun; and therefore by the bounty of GOD (...)
nature, their own noise bewrays them to their supitious adversaries, and so
(...) times are avoided in safety. Like unto these are certain in Hungary (as
Johannes V^ ^ported unto Gesner,) whose bodies are of an equal crassitude or
thickness, so as (...) appear without tails, being for that purpose called
Decurtati, Curtailes, these in t^^ ^ame manner do leap upon men as these
Darters do, but they are very short, sildome ^ding the length of two hands
breadth.

There is some difference among Authors about the nature of this Serpent: for
Aelianus confounds it with the Snake of the Earth, called Chersydrus, and
says it lives sometime in the Water and sometime on the Land, lying in weight
to destroy all living Creatures. And (he says) it uses this fraud, it ever
lies hid in secret near the highways, and many times climbeth up into
trees where it roundeth it self round into a circle, and hides his head
within the foldes of his own body, so soon as

But herein Aelianus seems to be deceived, because he makes but one Serpent
of twain: namely, this Dart and the Land-Snake, which are most apparently
different in nature, kind, and quality.

Aetius also confounds this serpent with the Millet-serpent, called
Cenchrites, and says it is of the quantity of two cubits, great on the head,
and the fore part smaller at the tail, being of a greenish color. And he
says further, that at such time as the Millet-seede Aelianus, but herein he
is also deceived, writing by here say as himself confesses, and therefore it
is more safe for us to have recourse to some eiewitnesse for the description of
this serpent, then to stand upon the opinions of them which writ by the
relation of others.

Bellonius says; that he saw one of these in Rhodes, being full of small round
black spots, not greater then the seeds of Lentiles, every one having a round
circle about him like an eye, after such fashion as is to be seen in the
little Eish called the Torpedo. In length it exceeds not three palms, and in
bigness no greater then the little finger. It was of an Ashe-colour, coming
near to the whiteness of Milk, but under the belly it was altogether white:
upon the back it had scales, but upon the belly a thin skin, as in all other
Serpents.

The upper part of the back was somewhat black, having two black lines in
the middle, which begin at the head, and so are drawn along the whole body
to the tail. As for the Cafezati, and Alterarati or Altinatyri, those are
read Serpents, (as Autcen says) which are but small in quantity, yet as deep
and deadly in poison as in any other, for they hurt in the same manner that
these Darters do. Some of the^ do so wound with their poison, as the afflicted
person dies incontinent without sense or pain: Some again dye by languishing
pain after many hopes of recovery, loosing life. Among all the people of the
World, the Sabians are most annoyed with this kind of read Serpents; for
they have many odoriferous and sweet smelling Woods, in the which these
Serpents do abound, but such is their rage and hatred against men, that they
leap upon them and wound them deadly, whenever they come within their
compass. And surely if it be lawful to conjecture what kind of Serpents
those were, which in the Scripture are called fiery Serpents, and did sting
the Israelites to death in Cafezati or Red-Dart-Serpents.

For first the wilderness which was the place wherein they annoyed the people,
does very well agree to their habitation. Secondly, those fiery Serpents are
so called by figure, not that they were firey, but as all Writers do agree,
either because they were red like fire, or else because the pain which they
inflicted, did burn like fire, or rather for both these causes together which
are jointly and severally found in these red Serpents; and therefore I will
conclude for my opinion, that these Serpents (as the highest poison in nature)
were sent by GOD to afflict the sinning Israelites, whose poison

Matthiolus also tells a story of a Shepherd which was slain in Italy by
one of these, as he was sleeping in the heat of the day under the shadow of
a tree, his fellow Shepheardes being not far off looking to their flocks,
soddainely there came one of these Dart-Serpentes out of the tree, and wounded
him upon his left pappe, at the biting whereof the man awaked and cried out,
aad so dyed incontinently: his fellow Shepherds hearing this noise, came unto
him to see what he ayled, and found him dead, with a Serpent upon his breast;
now knowing what kind of Serpent this was, they forsook their flocks and ran
away for fear.

The cure of this Serpents biting, if there be any at all, is the same which
cures the Viper, as Aetius and Auicen writes, and therefore I will not relate
it in this place. Sythian Stone, yealdeth a very good Eye-salue. The which Gall
lies betwixt the back and the Liver: And thus much shall suffice for this
Serpent.

OF THE DIPSAS.
THis Dipsas has many names for many occasions: First Dipsas in Greek
signyfieth thirst, as Sitis does in Latin, and thereof also it is called
Situla, because whosoever is vvounded by Prester: and by some Causon, because
it sets the whole body on fire: but we shall show afterward, that the
Prester is a different Serpent from this. It is called likewise Milanurus,
because of his black tail, and Ammo^tis, because it lies in the sand, and
there hurts a man. It is not therefore unfitly defined by Auicen, to be
Vipera sitem faciens, That is, A Viper causing thirst, and therefore Ovid
sporting at an old drunken woman named Lena, calls her Dipsas in these verses;

Est quaedam nomine Dipsas anus,
Ex re nomen habit, nigri non illa parentem,
Memnonis in roseis sobria vidit equis.
In English thus;

There is a woman old, which Dipsas may be hight,
And not without some cause, thirsty she ever is,
For never Memnous sire, all black and sildome bright,
Did she in water sweet behold in soberness.
They live for the most part near the Waters, and in salt Marishy places:
whereupon Lucan said:

Stant in margin siccae Aspides,
Et medijs sitiebant Dipsades vndis.
That is to say;

Upon pits brinke dry Aspes there stood,
And Dipsads thirst in midst of water flood.
It is called Torrida Dipsas, and Arida Dipsas, because of the perpetual
thirst, and therefore the Egyptians when they will signify thirst, do
picture a Dipsas: whereupon Lucianus relates this story, there is (says he)
a statue or monument upon a Grave, right over against the great Syrtes betwixt
Sillya and Egypt, with this Epigram:

Talia passus erat quoque Tantalus Aethiope cretus,
Qui nullo potuit font leuare sitim.
Tale nec e Danao not as implere puellas
Assiduis vndis vas potuisse reor.
That is to say;

Such Tantalus endured in Aethiope bred,
Which never could by Water quench his thirst,
Nor could the Grecian maids with water sped,
That with daily pourings till the vessel cursed.
The statue was the picture of a man like unto Tantalus, standing in the
midst of a Estriches lay pictured beside them, such as the Garamants in Lybia
seek after. For it is reported by Lucianus, that the people of that Country
do earnestly seek after the Fstryges Eggs upon the sands, not only to
eat the meat that is in them, but also to make sundry vessels or instruments
of the shell, and among other things they make Cappes of them. Near unto these
Eggs do these treacherous Serpents lie in weight, and so while the poor
Countryman comes to seek for meat, suddenly he leapeth upon him, and
gives him a mortal wound.

Aelianus has an Emblem, which he seems to have translated out of Greek
from Antipiter Sidonius, of a Falconer, which while he was looking up after
Birds for meat for his Hawke, suddenly a Dipsas came behind him and stung
him to death. The title of his Emblem is, Qui alta contemplatur cadere, he
that looks hie may fall, and the Emblem it self is this that solloweth:

Dum turdos visco, pedica dum fallit alaudas,
Et iacta altiuolam figit arundo gruem,
Dipsada non prudens auceps pede perculit, vltrix
Illa mali, emissum virus ab ore tacit.
Sic obit, extento qui sidera respicit arcu,
Securus fati quod ia cit ante pedes.
Which may be thus Englished;

Whiles Thrush with line, and Lark deceived with net,
And Crane high flying pierced with force of reed,
By Falconer was: behold a Dipsas on the foot did set,
As if it would revenge his bloody foul misdeed,
For poison out of mouth it cast, and bit his foot,
Whereof he dyed, like Birds by him deceived,
Whiles bending bow aloft unto the stars did look,
Saw not his fate below, which him of life bereaved.
This Dipsas is inferior in quantity unto a Viper, but yet kills by poison,
much more speedily, according to these verses;

Exiguae similis spectatur Dipsas echidnae,
Sed festina magis morsictus occupat aegros.
Parua and lurida cui circa vltima cauda nigrescit.
That is to say;

This Dipsas like unto the Viper small,
But kills by stroke with greater pain and speed,
whose tail at end is soft and black withal,
That as your death avoid, with careful heed.
It is but a short Serpent, and so small (as Arnoldus writes,) it kills
before it be espied, Galen writes, that the ancient Marsi which were appointed
for hunting Serpents and Vipers about Rome, did tell him that there was no
means outwardly to distinguish betwixt the Viper and the Dipsas, except in the
place of their abode, for the Dipsas (he says) keeps in the salt places; and
therefore the nature thereof is more fiery, but the Vipers keep in the dryer
Crountries, wherefore there are not many of the Dipsades in Italy, because of
the moystnes of that Country, but in Lybia where there are great store of salt
Marshes. As we have said already, a man or beast wounded with this serpent,
Lucan in these verses following;

Signiferum iuuenem Tyrrheni sanguinis Aulum
Torta caput retro Dipsas calcata momordit*
Vix dolor aut sensus dentis fuit: ipsaque leti
Frons caret inuidia: nec quicquam plaga minatur.
Ecce subit virus tacitum, carpitque medullas
Ignis edax, calidaque incendit visceratabe.
Ebibit humorem circum vitalia fusum
Pestis, and in sicco linguam torrere palato
Coepit, defessos iret qui sudor in artus
Non fuit, atque occulos lachrymarum venarefugit.
Non decus imperij, non moesti iura Catonis
Ardentem tenuere virum, quin spargere signa
Auderet, totisque furens exquireret agris.
Quas poscebat aquas, sitiens in cord venenum.
Ille vel in Tanaim missus, Rhodanumque Padumque
Arderet, Nilumque bibens per rura vagantem:
Accessit morti Libyae: fatique minorem
Famam Dipsas habet terris adiuta perustis.
Scrutatur venas penitus squallentis arenae:
Nunc redit ad Syrtes and fluct us accipit ore:
Aequoreusque placet, sed non and sufficit humor.
Nec sentit fatique genus, mortemque veneni:
Sed putat esse sitim: ferroque apertre tumentes
Sustinuit venas, atque osimplere cruore. Lucanus lib. 9.
In English thus;

Tyrrhenian Aulus, the auncient-bearer young,
Was bit by Dipsas, turning head to heel,
No pain or sense of's teeth appeared, though poison strong,
Death does not frown, the man no harm did feel,
But lo, slye poison takes the marrow, and eating fire
Burning the bowels warm till all consumed,
Drinking up the humor about the vital spire,
And in dry palate was the tongue up burned.
There was no sweat the sinnewes to refresh,
And tears fled from the vein that feeds the eyes,
Then Catoes laws, nor Empiers honor fresh,
This fiery youth could hold: but down the streamer flies,
And like a mad man about the fields he runs,
Poisons force in heart did waters crave:
Though unto Tanas, Rhodanus, Padus, he comes,
Or Nilus: yet all to little for his heat to have.
But dry was death, as though the Dipsas force
Were not enough, but help by heat of earth,
Then does he search the sands: but no remorse
To Syrtes flood he hies, his mouth of them he fills,
Salt water pleases, but it cannot suffice,
Nor knew he fate, or this kind venoms death,
But thought it thirst, and seeing his veins arise
Them cut, which blood stopped mouth and breath.
The signs of death following the biting of this Serpent, are extreme drought
and inflammation both of the inward and outward parts, so that outwardly the
parts are as death. First therefore they use scarification, and make vstion in
the body, cutting of the member wounded. If it be in the extremity, they lay
also playsters unto it, as Treacle, liquid pitch with oil, Hens cut asunder
alive, and so laid to hot, or else the leaves of Purslaine beaten in Vinegar,
Barley-meale, Bramble-leaues pounded with Honey, also Plantine, Isope,
White-garlicke, Leekes, Rue and Nettles. Then must the government of their
bodies be no less looked unto; first, that they be kept from all sharp and
salt meats, then, that they be made continually to drink oil, to procure
vomit, and with their vomits which they cast out of their stomach, to give
them glysters, that so the waters may be drawn to the lower parts. Besides,
some take medicines out of Fishes, especially such as are salt, and the leaves,
bark, or sprigges of Laurill: and to conclude, there

OF THE DOVBLE-HEAD.
BEcause the Graecians call this Serpent Amphisbaina, and the Latins from
thence Amphisbenae, because it goes both ways as if it had two heads and no
tail: and for this purpose it is never seen to turn his body, as it were to
turn about his head. When it has a purpose to avoid that thing which it
fears, or where-withall Lyntius, whom the Poets feign to be very
quick-sighted, or as those Monsters which are said to have eyes in their backs,
or rather like to Ianus, which is said to have two faces, one forward, and
another backward, and therefore I have called it Double-head, I trust fitly
enough to express the Greek word, although compounded of two words together,
for so is the Greek word also, which the French do express by a like
compounded word, Double-marcheur, that is, going two ways. It is likewise
called Ankesime, Alchismus, and Amphisilenem. And thus much may suffice for the
name.

It is said that this Serpent is found in the Island Lemnus, but among the
Germans it is Galen affirms, that it is like a ship having two fore-parts,
that is, one behind, and another before. Pliny also subscribeth hereunto, and
makes it a very pestilent Serpent, Geminum habet caput Amphisbena, tanquam
parum esset, vno ore fundi venenum, says he; It has a double-head, as though
one mouth were not enough to utter his poison, according to the saying of the
Poet:

Est grauis in geminum surgitis caput Amphis-benae
Serpens qui visu necat et sibilo.
Which may be englished thus;

This Serpent Double-head, is grievous to be seen,
Whose clouen-head does kill with sight and hissing keen.
Unto this also Elianus subscribeth, that it is a true Serpent, and has two
heads, so that whenever it is to go forward, one of them stands in the
place of the tail, but when it is to go backward, then the head becomes the
tail, and the tail the head. So also Mantuan says it is a double-headed
Serpent, and a fearful stinging Aspe. And so generally all the Ancients,
until Mathiolus and Greuinus time, who first of all began to contrary this
opinion, affirming it to be impossible in nature, for one Serpent to have two
heads, except it be monstrous; and exceed the common course of nature. Such a
one was Aristotle speaks of, which does easily happen to all those creatures
which at one birth bring forth many young ones; for so their bodies may be
conjoined into one, whiles their heads stand asunder like twain. And they say
that this Serpent does resemble a Worm of the earth, whose head and tail is
hard to be be distinguished asunder except you see it going. And they say
further, that this Serpent is like to the Scytall, of which we shall speak
afterward, differing from it in nothing except in going backward and forward,
and this is all that they can bring against the opinion of the Ancients, whom
I will not stand to confute, but leave the Reader to believe one or other: for
it shall not bring to me any great disadvantage, except the loss of his new
English name, for I have dealt faithfully with the Reader in setting down the
opinion of both sides, and if I do fail in a fit name, yet will I not swerve
from the best description of his nature.

The whole proportion of his body is of equal magnitude or greatness, and the
two extremities do answer the middle. His eyes are for the most part shut, the
color like earth, not black, but tending to blacknes, the skin rough and
hard, and set over with diverse Nicander.

Cuius perpetua est taecum caligine lumen,
Quod latas vtrinque genas porrectaque menta,
Terreus est illi color et densissima pellis
Plurima quam varij distinctam signafigurant,
Plus alijs alto serpentibus aggere tendat:
In English thus;

Whose eye is ever void of light, because
Two cheeks both broad and standing up it hides,
The color earth, thick skin, with spots in rows,
Then other Serpents with greater bulk it glides.
Solinus Polihistor affirms, that they engender and bring eggs forth of the
mouth, that is, out of that mouth which is toward the tail, if there be any
such. There is no serpent that does more boldly adventure to endure the cold
then this does, for it comes out of his den not only before other
Serpents, but also before the Cuckoe sing, or the Grasshopper comes forth.
They are exceeding careful of their eggs, and therefore sildome depart from
them until they be hatched, whereby also may be collected their great love to
their young ones. And further, by their forward and timely coming out of their
holes, Greuinus makes a good observation, that their temperament or
constitution, is more hot then any other Serpent.

The Graecians have all observed, that this kind of Serpent is hard to be
killed, except with a Vine-branch, which they say was demonstrated by
Dionisius, who being turned by Juno into madness, one day falling fast asleep,
this Serpent leaped upon him and awaked him, whereat he being angry,
presently killed it with a Vine-branch. Some have affirmed, that a small rod
or batte covered with the skin of this Serpent, and so la^d beside a man,
drives away all manner of venomous beasts. A Wild-oliue-branch or sprigge
wrapped in this skin, does cure the senseless and benumbed estate of the
sinews, and also is good for many things, as Nicander expresses in these
verses.

Haec vbi iam creuit, cedentes ligna coloni
Sectam deglabrant oleastri exarborc virgam,
Quale pedum, strictisque, prehensi pellibus Anguis
Insectam obuoluunt, quas certis deinde diebus
Exarere sinunt, cantantes ante cicadas
Vtilis hic bacalus frigentibus artubus esse
Fertur, vbi exanimis digitos corpedo fatigat,
Tunc quia constrictos, and eorum vincula, neruos
Calfacit immisso fouet extenditque calore.
Which may be englished thus;

When this is grown, the Peasants cutting wood,
Do peele a branch taken from Oliue-wilde,
A (...) in length, of strained Snakes-skinne good,
Rolling it up herein, till days fulfild,
And let it dry before Grasshoppers green:
Thus made, is good for sinews cold,
Or nummed fingers, whose force has been
By heat extending what cold band did hold.
The wounds that come by the biting or stinging of this Serpent, are not great,
but very small, and scarcely to be discerned outwardly, yet the accidents that
follow, are like to those which ensue the bytings of Vipers, namely,
inflammation, and a lingering death. The cure therefore must be the same which
is applied unto the sting of Vipers. And peculiarly I find not any medicine
serving for the cure of this poison alone, except that which Pliny speaks of,
namely Coriander drunk by the patient, or laid to the sore.

It is reported by Gallen and Greuinus, that if a woman with child do chance
to go over one of these Double-headed-serpents dead, she shall suffer
abortment, and yet that they may keep them in their pockets alive without
danger in boxes. The reason of this is given by Greuinus, because of the
vapoure assending from the dead serpent, by a secret antypathy against humane
nature, which suffocateth the child in the mothers womb. And thus much for
this Serpent.

OF THE DRAGON.


AMong all the kinds of Serpents, there is none comparable to the Dragon, or
that affords and yields so much plentiful matter in history for the ample
discovery of the nature thereof: and therefore herein I must borrow more time
from the residue, then peradventure the Reader would be willing to spare from
reading the particular stories of many other. But such is the necessity
hereof, that I can omit nothing making to the purpose, either for the nature
or morality of this Serpent, therefore I will strive to make the description
pleasant,

The Hebrews call it Thanin, and Wolphius translateth Oach a Dragon, in his
Commentaries upon Nehemiah. The Chaldees call it Darkon, and it seems that
the Greek word Dracon is derived of the Chaldee. We read of Albedisimon or
Ahedysimon for a kind of Dragon, and also Alhatraf, and Hauden, Haren carnem,
and such other terms, that may be referred to this place. The Graecians at
this day call it Drakos, the Germans, Trach Lindtwarm, the French, Un Dragon,
the Italians, Drago and Dragone. The deriuation of the Greek word, beside the
conjecture before expressed, some think to be derived from Derkein, because of
their vigilant eyesight, and therefore it is feigned that they had the custody
not only of the Golden-fleece, but also of many other treasures. And among
other things, Alciatus has an Emblem of their vigilance standing by an
unmarried virgin.

Vera haec effigies innuptae est Paladis: eius
Hic Draco, qui domina constitie ante pedes.
Cur Diuae comes hoc animal? custodia rerum
Huic data, sic lucos sacraque templa colit.
Innuptas opus est cura asseruare puellas
Pervigili: laqueos vndique tendit amor.
Which may be englished thus;

This Dragon great which Lady Pallas stands before,
Is the true picture of unmarried maids:
But why a consort to the Goddess is this? and more
Then other beasts more meek, who never fades?
Because the safeguard of all things belongs to this,
Wherefore his house in Groves and sacred Temples set,
Unmarried maids of guardes must never miss,
Which watchful are to void loves snares and net.
For this cause the Egyptians did picture Serapis their God with three heads,
that is to (...) of a Lion in the middle, on the right hand a meek fauning
dog, and on the left hand a ravening Wolf, all which forms are joined
together by the winding body of a Dragon, turning his head to the right hand
of his God; which three heads are interpreted Draco, a dragon, all of them
ending their course with the Sun and Moon, and they are in this Sphere
called by Astronomers the Intersections of the Circles, the superior of these
ascending, is called the head of the Dragon, and the inferior descending, is
called the tail of the Dragon. And some think that GOD in the 38. of Io^* by
the word Gnaish, means this sign or Constellation.

To conclude, the ancient Romans (as Vegetius writes) carried in all their
bands the Escutchion of a Dragon, to signify their fortitude and vigilancie,
which were borne up Draconarij. And therefore when Constantius the Emperor
entered into the City of Rome, his Soldiers are said to bear up upon the
tops of their spears, dragons gaping with wide mouths, and made fast with
golden chains and pearl, the wind whistling in their throats, as if they had
been alive, threatening destruction, and their tails hanging loose in the
air, were likewise by the vvinde tossed to and fro, as though they strove to
come off from the spears, but when the wind was laid, all their motion was
ended, whereupon the Poet says:

Mansuescunt varij vento cessante Dracones.
In English thus;

When whistling wind in air ceast,
The Dragons tamed, then did rest.
The tale also of the Golden-fleece, if it be worth any place in this story,
deserves to be inserted here, as it is reported by Diodorus Siculns. When
Acts reigned in Pontus, he received an answer from the Oracle, that he
should then dye when strangers should come thither with ships and fetch away
the Gol-den-fleece. Upon which occasion he showed himself to be of a cruel
nature, for he did not only make Proclamation that he would sacrifice all
strangers which came within his dominions, but did also perform the same, that
by the fame and report of such cruelty, he might terrify all other Nations
from having access unto that Temple. Not contented heere-with, he raised a
great strong wall round about the Temple wherein the Fleece was kept, and
caused a sure watch or guarde to attend the same day and night, of whom the
Graetians tell many strange fables. For they say there were Bulls breathing out
fire, and a Dragon warding the Temple and defending the Fleece, but the truth
is that these watchmen because of their strength were

Some affirm again, that in the Gardens of Hesperides in Libia, there were
golden Apples, which were kept by a terrible Dragon, which dragon was afterward
slain by Hercules, and the Apples taken away by him, and so brought to
Euryshteus. Others affirm that Hesperides had certain flocks of sheep, the
color of whose woll was like gold, and they were kept by a valiant Shepherd
called Draco: but I rather agree with Solinus, who gives a more true reason of
this fable, Nefamae licentia vulneretur fides, least (as he says) faith and
truth should receive a disgrace or wound by the lavish report of fame. There
was among the Hesperides a certain winding River coming from the sea, and
including Hesperides, at one place whereof, the falling of the water broken by
a Rock, seems to be like the falling down of Snakes, to them that stand a
far off, and from hence arises all the occasion of the fable aforesaid.

Indeed there was a statue of Hercules, in the left hand whereof were three
Apples, which he was said to have obtained by the conquest of a dragon, but
that conquest of the dragon did morrally signify his own concupiscence,
whereby he reigned over three passions, that is to say, over his wrath by
patience, over his cupiditie by temperance, and over his pleasures by labor
and travail: which were three virtues far more precious then three golden
Apples. But I will stay my course from prosecuting these morrall discourses of
the

There are diverse sorts of Dragons, distinguished partly by their Countries,
partly by their quantity and magnitude, and partly by the different form of
their external parts. There be Serpents in Arabia called Sirenae, which have
wings, being as swift as horses, running or flying at their own pleasure,
and when they wound a man, he dies before he feels pain. Of these it is
thought the Prophet Esaias speaks, chap. 13. ver. 22. Serpens clamabit in
Templis voluptarijs: and for Serpents, the old Translators read Syrenae, and so
the English should be, the Syrene dragons should cry in their Temples of
pleasure: and the ancient distinction was, Anguis aquarum, Serpents terraru^,
Dracones Temploru^: that Reave: 12. ver: 3. And there appeared another wonder in
Heaven, for behold a great Redde-dragon, having 7. heads, and ten horns, and
seven crowns upon his head. verse 4. And his tail drew the third part of
the stars of heaven, and cast them to the earth: and the dragon stood before
the Woman which was ready to be delivered, to devour her child when she had
brought it forth. Verse 5. So she brought forth a man-child, which should rule
all Nations Verse 6. And the Woman fled into the Wilderness, where she has a
place prepared of God, that they should feed her there 1260. days. Verse 7.
And there was a battle in heaven, Michaell and his Angels fought against the
Dragon, and the Dragon fought and his Angels. Verse 8. But they prevailed not,
neither was their place found any more in heaven. Verse 9. And the great Dragon
that old Serpent called the devil and Satan, was cast out, which deceives all
the world, he was even cast unto the earth, and his Angels were cast out with
him. Verse 13. And when the dragon saw that he was cast unto the earth, he
persecuted the Woman which had brought forth a man-child: and so forth, as it
follows in the Text. Where-vppon S. Augustine writes, Diabolus draco dicitur
propter insidias, quia occulte insidiatur: that is, the devil is called a
dragon because of his treachery, for he does treacherously set upon men to
destroy them.

It was wont to be said, because dragons are the greatest Serpents, that except
a Serpent eat a serpent, he shall never be a dragon: for their opinion was,
that they grew so Aelianus.
great by devouring others of their kind; and indeed in Ethiopia they grow to
be thirty

Onesicritus writes, that one Aposisares an Indian, did nourish two Serpents
dragons, whereof one was six and forty cubits long, and the other fourscore;
and for the more famous verification of the fact, he was a very earnest suter
to Alexander the great, when he was in India to come and see them, but the King
being afraid, refused.

The Chroniclers of the affairs of Chius do write, that in a certain valley
near to the foot of the mountain Pellenaus, was a valley full of strait
tall Trees, wherein was bred a dragon of wonderful magnitude or greatness,
whose only voice or hissing, did terrify all the Inhabitants of Chius, and
therefore there was no man that durst come nigh unto

It is also reported, that Alexander among many other beasts which he saw in
India, did there find in a certain den a dragon of seauentie cubits long,
which the Indians accounted a sacred beast, and therefore entreated Alexander
to do it no harm. When it uttered the voice with full breath, it terrified
his whole Army: they could never see the proportion of his body, but only the
head, and by that they gessed the quantity of the whole body, for one of his
eyes in their appearance seemed as great as a Macedonian buckler. Maximus
Tyrius writes, that in the days of Alexander, there was likewise seen a
dragon in India, as long as five roodes of land are broad, which is
incredible. For he

Whereas dragons are bredde in India and Africa, the greatest of all are in
India, for in Ethiopia, Nubia, and Hesperia, the dragons are confined within
the length of five cubits, and twenty cubits: for in the time of Euergetes,
there were three brought into Egypt, one was nine cubits long, which with great
care was nourished in the Temple of Esculapius, the other two were seven
cubits long. About the place where once the Tower of Babell was builded, are
dragons of great quantity, and under the Equinoctial, as Nicephorus Callistus
writes, there are Serpents as thick as beams, in testimony whereof their
Austine writing upon the 148. Psalm, does say, Draconis magna quedam sunt
animantia maiora non sunt super terram: dragons are certain great beasts, and
there are none greater upon the earth. Neither is it to be thought incredible
that the soldiers of Attilius Regulus did kill a dragon which was a hundred
and twenty foot long, or that the dragons in the dens of the Mountain
Atlas, should grow so great that they can scarce move the fore-parts of their
body. I am yet therefore to speak of the dragons in the Montaines Emodij, or
of Arigia, or of Dachinabades, or the Regions of the East, or of that which
Augustus showed publicly to the people of Rome, being fifty cubits long; or
of those which be Stumpsius.
in the Alps, which are found in certain Caves of the South-sides of the
hills, so that this which has been said, shall suffice for the quantity and
Countries of dragons. Besides, there are other kinds of dragons which I must
speak of in order: and first of all of the Epidaurian dragons, which is bred
no where but in that Country, being tame, and of yellow golden-colour,
wherefore they were dedicated to Aesculapius, of whom Nicander writes in this
manner;

Nunc veridem et nigrem post dicta venena Drachonem
Aspice, quem patulafago Phoebia proles
Ingelido peli nutriuit, culmine iuxta
Letae pelethuniae quondam decliuia vallis,
In English thus;

After these venoms now behold the dragon black and green,
Nourished by Apollos son under a Beech full broad,
On top of the cold Pelus, as often has been seen,
By fertile vale of Pelethun his slyding road.
There are likewise other kinds of Tame-dragons in Macedonia, where they are
so meek, that women feed them, and suffer them to suck their breasts like
little children, their Infants also play with them, riding upon them and
pinching them, as they would do with dogs, without any harm, and sleeping
with them in their beds. But among all dragons, there was none more famous then
the dragon Python, or Pithias, as the Poets feign, which was bred of the slyme
of the earth, after the flood of Ducalion, and slain afterward by Apollo,
whereof there lies this tale; That when Latona was with child by Jupiter of
Apollo and Diana, Juno resisted their birth, but when they were borne and laid
in the cradle, she sent the dragon Python to devour them, Apollo being but a
young Infant, Python by the commandment of Juno, did persecute Latona
throughout all the world, seeking to devour her, so as she had no rest until
she came unto her sister Asteria, who received her into Delos, where she was
safely delivered of Apollo and Diana. Afterward, when the child was grown up,
he slew the dragon in remembrance and revenge of the wrong done to his mother.
But the true cause of this history is delivered by Pausanias and Macrobius, to
be thus; That Apollo killed one Python a very wicked man in Delphos, and that
the Poets in excuse of the fact, did feign him to be a dragon, as aforesaid.
And so I shall not need to say any more of Python, except these verses
following out of Ovid about his generation.

-- Sed te quoque maxim Python,
Tum genuit populisque nouis incognite serpens
Terror eras: tantum spatij de monte tenebras.
Hunc Deus arcitenens and nunquam talibus armis
Ante, nici in damis, caprisque fugacibus vsus;
Mill grauem telis exhausta penepharetra
Perdidit effuso per vulnera nigra veneno,
Neue operis famam posset delere vetustas,
Inflituit sacros celebri certamine ludos
Pithia per domitae serpentis nominem dictor.
Caeruleus tali prostratus Apolline Python.
Which may be englished thus;

But yet thou ugly Python were engendered by her, tho
A terror to the new-made-folke, which never erst had known
So foul a Dragon in their life, so monstrously fore-growne,
So great a ground thy poysond paunch did underneath thee hyde,
The God of shooting, who no where before that present tide
Those kind of weapons put in ure but at the speckled Dear,
Or at the Roes so light of foot, a thousand shafts well near
Did on that hydeous Serpent spend, of which there was not one
But forced forth the venomd-blood, along his sides to gone:
So that his quiver almost void, he nayld him to the ground,
And did him nobly at the last by force of shot confound.
And least that time should of this work deface the worthy fame,
He did ordain in mind thereof a great and solemn game,
Which of the Serpent that he slew, of Pythions bare the name.
Of the Indian Dragons there are also said to be two kinds, one of them fenny,
and living in the Marshes, which are slow of pace and without combs on their
heads like females: the other in the Mountains, which are more sharp and
great, and have combs upon their head, their backs being somewhat brown,
and all their bodies less scaly then the other. When they come down from the
mountains into the plain to hunt, they are neither afraid of Marshes nor
violent waters, but thrust themselves greedily into

Their members are very great, like unto the members of the greatest Swine, but
their

OF THE WINGED DRAGON.
THere be some Dragons which have wings and no feet, some again have both
feet and wings, and some neither feet nor wings, but are only distinguished
from the common sort of Serpents by the comb growing upon their heads, and
the beard under their cheeks.

Saint Augustine says, that dragons do abide in deep Caves and hollow places
of the earth, and that sometimes when they perceive moistnes in the air, they
come out of their holes, and beating the air with their wings, as it Lucan
the Poet in his verses to write in this manner following:

Vos quoque qui cunctis innoxia numina terris
Serpitis, aurato nitidifulgore Dracones,
Pestiferos ardens facit Africa: ducitis altum
Era cum pennis. etc.
In English thus;

You shining Dragons creeping on the earth,
Which fiery Afric holds with skins like gold,
Yet pestilent by hot infecting breath:
Mounted with wings in the air we do behold.


The inhabitants of the kingdom of Georgia, once called Media, do say that in
their Valleys there are diverse Dragons which have both wings and feet, and
that their feet are like unto the feet of Geese. Besides, there are dragons
of sundry colors, for some of them are black, some read, some of an
Ashe-colour, some yellow, and their shape and outward appearance very
beautiful, according to the verses of Nicander.

Formosa apparet species pulchro illius orae,
Triplici conspicui se produnt ordine dentes,
Magna sub egregia scintillant lumina front,
Tinctaque fell tegunt imum paleariamentum.
Which may be englished thus;

Their form of presence outwardly appears
All beautiful, and in their goodly mouth
Their teeth stand double, all one within another:
Conspicuous order so does bewray the truth.
Under their brows, which are both great and wide,
Stand twinkling eyes, as bright as any star,
With redde-galls tincture are their dewlaps dyed,
Their chinne or vnder-chappe to cover far.
Gyllius, Pierius, and Greuinus, following the authority of this Poet, do
affirm that a Dragon is of a black color, the belly somewhat green, and
very beautiful to behold, having a treble row of teeth in their mouths upon
every iawe, and with most bright and cleere-seeing eyes, which caused the
Poets to feign in their writings, that these dragons are the watchfull-keepers
of Treasures. They have also two dewlappes growing under their chinne, and
hanging down like a beard, which are of a red color: their

Their mouth, (especially of the most tame-able Dragons) is but little, not
much bigger then a pype, through which they draw in their breath, for they
wound not with their mouth, but with their tails, only beating with the^
when they are angry. But the Indian, Ethiopian, and Phrygian dragons, have very
wide mouths, through which they often swallow in whole fowls and beasts.
Their tongue is cloven as if it were double, and the Investigators of nature
do say, that they have fifteen teeth of a side. The males have combs on
their heads, but the females have none, and they are likewise distinguished by
their beards.

They have most excellent senses both of seeing and hearing, and for this cause
their name Drakon comes of Derkein, and this was one cause why Jupiter the
Heathens great Proserpina, he ravished her in the likeness of a dragon, for he
came unto her and covered her with the spires of his body; and for this cause
the people of Sabazij did observe in their mysteries or sacrifices, the shape
of a dragon rolled up within the compass of his spires: so that as he begot
Ceres with child in the likeness of a Bull, he likewise deluded her daughter
Proserpina in the likeness of a dragon; but of these transmutations we shall
speak more afterward, and I think the vanity of these, took first ground
from the Affricans, who believe that the original of dragons took beginning
from the unnatural conjunction of an Eagle and a shee-Wolfe. And so they say
that the Wolf growing great by this conception, does not bring forth as at
other times, but her belly breaks, and the

The dragons of Phrygia when they are hungry, turn themselves toward the west,
and gaping wide, with the force of their breath do draw the birds that fly
over their heads into their throats, which some have thought is but a voluntary
lapse of the fowls, to be drawn by the breath of the dragon, as by a thing
they love, but it is more probable, that some vaporous and venomous breath is
sent up from the dragon to them, that poysoneth and infecteth the air about
them, whereby their senses are taken from them, and they astonished fall down
into his mouth. But if it fortune the dragons find not food enough

They greatly preserve their health (as Aristotle affirms) by eating of
Wild-lettice, for that they make them to vomit, and cast forth of their
stomach what-soeuer meat Plutarch says) does many times grow weak and
feeble, and therefore they renew and recover the same again by rubbing their
eyes against Fennel, or else by eating of it.

Their age could never yet be certainly known, but it is coniectured that
they live long, and in great health, like to all other Serpents, and therefore
they grow so great. They do not only live on the land, as we have said
already, but also swim in the water, for many times they take the Sea in
Ethyopia, four or five of them together, folding their tails like hurdles,
and holding up their heads, so swim they over to seek better food in Arabia.

We have said already, that when they set upon Elephants, they are taken and
killed of men: now the manner how the Indians kill the Mountaine-dragons is
thus; they take a garment of Scarlet, and picture upon it a charm in golden
letters, this they lay upon the mouth of the Dragons den, for with the red
color and the gold, the eyes of the dragon Gyges. Many times it falls out,
that the dragon draws in the Indian both with his Axe and Instruments into
his den, and there deuoureth him, in the rage whereof, he so beats the
Mountain that it shakes. When the dragon is killed, they make use of the
skin, eyes, teeth, and flesh, as for the flesh, it is of a vitriall or glassie
color, and the Ethiopians do eat it very greedily, for they say it has in
it a refrigeratiue power. And there be some

Now because we have already showed, that some dragons have wings, least it
should seem incredible, as the foolish world is apt to believe no more then
they see, I have therefore thought good to add in this place, a particular
relation of the testimonies of sundry Learned-men, concerning these winged
Serpents or dragons. First of all Megastenes Aelianus. Scaliger.
writes, that in India there be certain flying Serpents, which hurt not in
the day, but in the night time, and these do render or make a kind of urine, by
the touching whereof, all the parts of mortal creatures do rotte away. And
there is a Mountain which deuideth asunder the Kingdom of Narsing a from
Alabaris, wherein be many winged-serpents Ibis, who fights with the^ in the
defense Aelianus. Herodotus.
of that Country where she lives, so that there lie great heaps of them many
times destroyed upon the earth by these Birds, whose bodies may be there
visibly seen to have both wings and legs, and their bones being of great
quantity and stature, remain unconsumed for many years after. These kind of
Serpents or Dragons, covet to keep about the Trees of Frankincense which grow
in Arabia, and when they are driven away from thence with the fume or smoke of
Stirax, then they fly (as is aforesaid) into Egypt, and this is to be
considered, that if it were not for this Stirax, all that Country would be

Neither have we in Europe only heard of Dragons and never seen them, but
also even in our own Country, there have (by the testimony of sundry Writers)
diverse been discovered and killed. And first of all, there was a Dragon or
Winged-serpent brought unto Frauncis the French-King when he lay at Sancton,
by a certain Countryman, Brodaus Scaliger
who had slain the same Serpent himself with a Spade, when it set upon him
in the fields to kill him. And this thing was witnessed by many Learned and
credible men which saw the same: and they thought it was not bredde in that
Country, but rather driven by the wind thither from some foreign Nation. For
France was never known to breed any such Monsters. Among the Pyrenes also,
there is a cruel kind of Serpent, not past

Gesner also says, that in the year of our Lord 1543. there came many
Serpents both with wings and legs into the parts of Germany near Stiria, who
did bite and wound many men incurably. Cardan also describes certain serpents
with wings, which he saw at Parris, whose dead bodies were in the hands of
Gulielmus Musicus, he says that they had two legs and small wings, so that
they could scarce fly, the head was little, and like to the head of a Serpent,
their color bright, and without hair or feathers, the quantity of that which
was greatest, did not exceed the bigness of a Cony, and it is said they were
Crinitus
brought out of India. Besides, a further confirmation of these beasts, there
have been noted in all ages; for it is written in the Roman Chronicles, the
times of their apparision and manifestation.

When the River of Tiber ouer-flowed above the banks, then were many Serpents
discovered, and many Dragons, as in the time of Mauritius the Emperor, at what
time a dragon came along by the City of Rome, upon the waters in the sight of
all men, and Stumpsius.
the year 1499. the twenty six day of May, there came a dragon to the City
of Lucerne, which came out of the Lake through Rusa, down along the River,
many people of all sorts beholding the same.

There have been also Dragons many times seen in Germany, flying in the air
at midday, and signifying great and fearful fires to follow, as it happened
near to the City called Niderburge, near to the shore of the Rhyne, in a
maruailous clear sunshine day, there came a dragon three times successively
together in one day, and did hang in the air over a Town called Sanctogoarin,
and shaking his tail over that Town every time: it appeared visibly in the
sight of many of the inhabitants, and afterward it came to pass, Justinius
Goblerus, in an Epistle to Gesner, affirming that he did not write feigned

When the body of Cleomines was crucified, and hung upon the Cross, it is
reported by them that were the watchmen about it, that there came a dragon and
did wind it self about his body, and with his head covered the face of the
dead King, oftentimes licking the same, and not suffering any bird to come
near and touch the carcass. For which cause there began to be a reverent
opinion of divinity attributed to the King, until such time as wise and
prudent men, studious of the truth, found out the true cause hereof. For they
say that as Bees are generated out of the body of Oxen, and Drones of horses,
and Affricanus, because that under an Olive planted with his own hand, a
dragon was said to preserve his ghost.

But I will not mingle fables and truth together, and therefore I will reserve
the morrall discourse of this beast unto another place; and this which I have
written, may be sufficient to satisfy any reasonable man, that there are
winged Serpents and dragons in the world. And I pray God that we never have
better arguments to satisfy us, by his corporal and lively presence in our
Country, least some great calamity follow there-vppon. Now therefore we will
proceed to the love and hatred of this beast, that is observed with

And first of all, although Dragons be natural enemies to men, like unto all
other Serpents, yet many times (if there be any truth in story) they have been
possessed with extraordinary love, both to men, women and children, as may
appear by these particulers following. There was one Aleua a Thessalian
Neatheard, which did keep oxen in Ossa, hard by the fountain Hemonius, there
was a Dragon fell in love with this man, for his hair was as yellow as any
gold, unto him for his hair did this dragon often come, creeping closely as a
Lover to his Love: and when he came unto him, he would lick his hair and face
so gently, and in so sweet a manner, as the man professed he never felt the
like, Aelianus.
so as without all fear he conuersed with him, and as he came, so would he
go away again, never returning to him empty, but bringing some one gift or
other, such as his nature and kind could lay hold on.

There was a Dragon also which loved Pindus the son of Macedo King of
Emathia: This Pindus having many Brothers most wicked and lewd persons, and he
only being a valiant man of honest disposition, having likewise a comely and
goodly personage, understanding Pindus the Hunter, and so saved himself. Then
he alighted from his horse and tied him to the next Tree, seeking out as
diligently as he could for a way into the Cave, whereinto the Hind-calfe had
leaped: and when he had looked a good while about him, and could find none, he
heard a voice speaking unto him, and forbidding him to touch the Hind-calfe,
which made him look about again, to see if he could perceive the person from
whom the voice proceeded, but espying none, he grew to be afraid, and thought
that the voice proceeded from some other greater cause, and so leaped upon his
horse hastily, and departed again to his fellows.

The day after, he returned to the same place, and when he came thither, being
terrified Pindus, who at the first sight was not a little afraid of him, but
yet did not run away, but rather gathering his wits together, remembered that
he had about him birds, and diverse parts of sacrifices, which instantly he
gave unto the dragon, and so mitigated his fury by these Pindus, was contented
to forsake the old place of his habitation, and to go away with him. Pindus
also being no less glad of the company of the Dragon, did daily give unto
him the greatest part of his hunting, as a deserved price and ransom of his
life, and conquest of such a beast. Neither was he unrequired for it, for
Fortune so favored his game, that whether he hunted fowls of the air, or
beasts of the earth, he still obtained and never missed. So that his fame for
hunting, procured him more love and honor, then ever could the Imperial
crown of his Country.

For all young men desired to follow him, admiring his goodly personage and
strength, he hunted, to accomplish their accursed enterprise, which at last
they obtained: for as he followed the game, they enclosed him in a narrow
straight near to a Rivers side, where he had no means to avoid their hands,
they and their company being many, and he alone, wherefore they drew out
their swords and slew him.

When he saw no remedy but death, he cried out aloude for help, whose voice
soon came to the ears of the watchful Dragon, (for no beast hears or sees
better) out he comes from his den, and finding the murderers standing
about the dead body, he presently surprised them and killed them, so revenging
the quarrel of Pindus, and then fell upon the dead body of his friend, never
forsaking the custody thereof, until the neighbors adjoining to the place,
taking knowledge of the fact, came to bury the bodies. But Pindus-death.

By which story may appear, that these savage Dragons are made loving and tame
to

There was a Dragon the lover of Aetholis (as Plutarch writes) who came unto
her every night, and did her body no harm, but gently slyding over her, played
with her till morning, then also would he depart away as soon as light
appeared, that he might not be espied. The Maidens friends came to the
knowledge hereof, and so removed her far away, to the intent the dragon
might come no more at her: and thus they remained asunder a great while, the
dragon earnestly seeking for the maiden, wandered far and Gillius.
flew upon her, binding her hands down with the spire of his body, hissing
softly in her face, and beating gently with his tail her back-parts, as it
were taking a moderate revenge upon her, for the neglect of his love by her
long absence.

Another like story unto this is reported by Elianus, of a great Dragon which
loved a fair woman, beloved also of a fair man, the woman oftentimes did
sleep with this dragon, but not so willingly as with the man: wherefore she
forsook the habitation of her place for a month, and went away where the
dragon could not find her, thinking that her absence might quench his desire.
But he came often to the place where he was wont to meet with the woman, and
not finding her, returned quietly back again, and came Elianus) happened in
Judea, in the days of Herod the King.

There was a little Dragon-whelpe bredde in Arcadia, and brought up familiarly
with a little boy from his infancy, until the boy became a young man, and the
dragon also became of great stature, so that one of them loved another so well
as man and beast could love together, or rather two play-fellowes from the
Cradle. At last the friends of the boy herbs and poison, according to his
nature, and never more cared for the habitation of men, but rested contented
with a solitary life. In the length of time it came to pass that the boy grew
to be a perfect man, and the dragon also remained in the wood; and although
absent one from the other, yet mutually loving as well as ever. It happened that
this young man traveled through that place where the dragon was lodged, and
fell among thieves, when the young man saw their swords about his ears, he
cried out, and the dragons den being not far off, his cry came to the
dragons cares, who instantly knowing the voice of his play-fellow, answered the
same with another, at whose hyssing the thieves grew afraid, and began to run
away, but their legs could not carry them so fast, as to escape the dragons
teeth and claws; for he came speedily to release his friend, and all the
thieves

They that desire to read more of this subject, shall find store of examples
in Elianus his sixth and thirteen books. To conclude, when Messalina the wife
of Claudius, did send certain men to take away the life of Nero, who was a
rival of Britanicus, it is said, that when they had him in their hands to
strangle him, a dragon appeared out of the earth, or floor of the chamber, and
did so terrify these hangmen, that they ran away and spared Neros life. By
which example, another example of piety in dragons is observed.

Again, Telephus ignorantly lying with his mother, had committed incest with
her, had Suerani^^.
not a dragon by divine providence come and parted them asunder: therefore
Draconi similis est virtus indagatrix, quae diligenter omnia perscrutatur,
rimaturque studiocissime, the virtue of discretion or perfect knowledge, is like
a dragon, which diligently searches all things, and studiously looks into
every chinck: so did this dragon preserve the chastity of the mother and the
son, when they ignorantly and in the dark had defiled each other, but for
his appearance and demonstration. I will add but this one example more of
their love of chastity in men and women.

In Lauinium there was a great holy wood, near unto which stood a Temple of
Juno, in that wood there was a great deep den of a dragon, unto the which
dragon the Virgins

The examples before expressed being all extraordinary and beside nature, do
not conclude but that there is an ordinary hatred betwixt men and dragons, and
therefore in the discourse of their enemies, men must have the first place, as
their most worthy adversary, for both dragons have perrished by men, and men
by dragons, as may appear by these stories following. When the Region of
Heluetta began first to be purged from noisome beasts, there was a horrible
dragon found near a Country town called Wilser, who did destroy all men and
beasts that came within his danger in the time of his hunger, insomuch that
that Town and the fields there-to adjoining, was called Dedwiler, that is, a
Village of the Wilderness, for all the people and inhabitants, had forsaken the
same, and fled to others places.

There was a man of that Town whose name was Winckelriedt, who was banished
for manslaughter, this man promised if he might have his pardon, and be
restored again to Stumpsius
his former inheritance, that he would combat with that Dragon, and by Gods
help destroy him: which thing was granted unto him with great ioyfulnes.
Wherefore he was recalled home, and in the presence of many people went forth
to fight with the dragon, whom he flow and overcame, whereat for joy he lifted
up his sword imbrued in the dragons blood, in token of victory, but the blood
distilled down from the sword upon his body, and caused him instantly to fall
down dead. And thus this noble Conqueror, a man worthy to be remembered in all
ages and Nations, who had strength to kill the dragon being alive, yet had no
power to resist the venom of his blood, he being dead. But had it not been
that his hand had been before imbrewed in the blood of a man, I do not believe
that the blood of a dragon could have fallen so heavy upon him. But this is
the Christ forbade his Disciples that they should rejoice that the devils were
subject unto them; and therefore much less may we poor creatures rejoice for
ouer-comming men or beasts.

And yet one thing more is to be considered in the death of this man, who was
banished for killing a man, and was pardoued for killing a dragon, and yet
killed by the dragon after the dragon was slain. Thus blood was the sin
because it brought death, and death again brought blood to be the revenger of
the first, that the blood of man might be washed away with the blood of man,
the blood of a Serpent coming betwixt. And Sanguine suc creuit, sanguine finis
erit, as it grew, so shall it end in blood.

In the days of Phillip King of Macedon, there was a way into a Mountain of
Armenia, over which the King had prayed, that never man might go but he might
die: wherefore Aristotle
Socrates, to try the effect of the Kings prayer, set his Opticke
Philosophical glass that he might see what was in that way, and presently he
perceived two great dragons, who coming out of their dens, did infect all
the air there-abouts wi^h a pestilent evaporation of their own breath. This
he declared to the King, who for the reuocation of his own prayer, (...) diverse
men to go out against them and kill them: who likewise performed the same, and
so cleared the way from that annoyance. And thus we see

Here (unto may be) added, how Hercules when he was a child and in his cradle,
slew two Dragons, as Pindarus relates. And the Gorcyreans did worship
Diomede's for killing of a dragon^ Donatus a holy Bishop in Germany, finding a
dragon to lie secretly hid beside a bridge killing men, Oxen, Horse, Sheep,
and Goats, he came boldly unto him in the name of Christ, and when the dragon
opened his mouth to devour him, the holy Bishop spetting into his mouth killed
him.

When Orpheus was in hawking, and while he intended his sport, suddenly a
Dragon set upon him, but his hawking spaniels or dogs released him of that
danger, for they tore the dragon in pieces. Many such other stories I could
relate, but I spare them

Petrus Damianus declares of a certain husbandman, who rising early in the
morning and traveling by the way side, saw a great dragon lie still upon the
earth without motion, he being weary, thought him to be a trunck of some tree,
wherefore he satedowne upon him, and the beast endured him a little while, but
at the last he turned his head in anger, and swallowed him up. After that the
Graecians fained as though they would go away from Troy, and Synon the
Traitor was received by the Troyans into the City, there were two dragons
which slew the sons of Laocoon as they landed in the Island Porey, Charibeae
and Chalidnae, which is thus described by Virgill.

At gemini lapsu delubra ad summa Dracones
Effugiunt, saeveque petunt Tritonidos arcem,
Subpedibusque Deaeclypeique suborbe teguntur:
Tum vero tremefact a novus per pectora cunctis
Insinuat pauor et scelus expendisse merentem,
Laocoonta ferunt, sacrum qui cuspide robor
Laeserit. etc.
Which may be englished thus;

Two dragons slide, and to the top of Temple fly,
Making their way unto the fort of Tritons seirce,
Under the Goddess feet and shield, in circle down they lie,
What fear did mortal breast possess then cannot I rehearse:
For then Lacoon did begin to think on's former sin,
When he did harm the sacred thing by thrusting spear within.
About the Temple of Jupiter Nemeus, there is a Grove of Cypress trees, among
which there is a place wherein a dragon did destroy Opheltes, when he was laid
under a green bush by his Nurse. There is a proverb, Bonos viros vel a mure
morderi, malis ne draconem dentes audere admoliri: that is to say, every mouse
will bite a good man, but evil men are not touched with the teeth of dragons.

Alciatus has a pretty Emblem, whose title is, Ex arduis perpetuum nomen, from
difficult things and great labors, arises immortal fame: wherein he
pictureth a dragon following young sparrowes to take and eat them. His verses
in Latin are these:

Crediderat platani ramis sua pignora passer.
Et been, ni saeuo visa, dracone forent
Glutijt hic pullos omnes, miseramque parentem
Saxus and tali dignus obire nece.
Haec, nisi mentitur Calchas, monimenta laboris
Sunt longi, cuius fama perennis eat.
Which may be thus englished;

To Plantine-leaues the Sparrow did her young commit,
And safe enough, had not the Dragon them espied,
He eat the young ones all, the damme with sannes destroyde,
Well worthy such a death, of life to be denied:
This is by Calchas said, a type of labor long,
Whose fame eternal lives in every tongue.
There be certain beasts called Dracontopides, very great and potent Serpents,
whose faces are like to the faces of Virgins, and the residue of their body
like to dragons. It is thought that such a one was the Serpent that deceived
Eve, for Beda says it had a Virgins countenance, and therefore the woman
seeing the likeness of her own face, was the more easily drawn to believe it:
into the which when the devil had entered, they say he taught Moses would have
said so, and therefore for ordinary punishment, God does appoint it to creep
upon the belly, wherefore it is not likely that it had either wings or feet.
Secondly, it was impossible and unlikely, that any part of the body was covered
or conceited from the sight of the woman, seeing she knew it directly to be a
Serpent, as afterward she confessed before GOD and her husband.

There be also certain little dragons called in Arabia, Vesga, and in
Catalonia, dragons of houses, these when they bite, leave their teeth behind
them, so as the wound never ceaserh

The greatest discord is betwixt the Eagle and the Dragon, for the Vultures,
Eagles, Swannes and dragons, are enemies one to another. The Eagles when they
shake their wings, make the dragons afraid with their rattling noise, then the
dragon hides himself within his den, so that he never fights but in the
air, either when the Eagle has taken away his young ones, and he to recover
them flies aloft after her, or else when the Eagle meets him in her nest,
destroying her eggs and young ones: for the Eagle deuoureth the dragons and
little Serpents upon earth, and the dragons again and Serpents do the like
against the Eagles in the air. Yea many times the dragon attempteth to take
away the prey out of the Eagles talants, both on the ground and in the air, so
that there arises betwixt them a very hard and dangerous fight, which is in
this manner described by Ni^ander.

Hunc petit invisum magni Iouis armiger hostem,
Cumque genis parat acre suis ex aethere bellum:
Pascentem in siluis quam primum viderit
Quod totos ferus is nidos cum mitibus ouis,
Et simul ipsa terens, et vastans pignora perdat.
Non timet hoc serpens, imo quodam impete dumis
Prosiliens, ipsamque, aquilam, leporemque tenellum
Ex trahit ex rapidis vifraudeque fortior vncis.
Cauta malum declinat auis, fit ibi aspera pugna,
Vt queat extortam victor sibi tollere praedam.
Sed frustra elapsam, et volitantem hinc inde volucrem
Insequitur, longos sinuum contractus in orbs,
Obliquoque leuans sursum sua lumina visu.
Which may be englished thus;

When as the Eagle, Jove's great bird, did see her enemy,
Sharp war in the air with beak she did prepare
Against Serpent feeding in the wood, after espy
Cause it her eggs and young fiercely in pieces tare.
The Serpent not afraid of this, leapes out of thorns
With force upon the Eagle, holding tender Hare,
Out of her talants by fraud and force more strong,
That takes and snatches despite her enemies fear.
But wary Bird auoydes the force, and so they fight amain,
That Victor one of them might joy the prey alone,
The flying foul by winding Snake is hunted all in vain,
Though up and down his nimble eyes this and that way be gone.
In the next place we are to consider the enmity that is betwixt Dragons and
Elephants, for so great is their hatred one to the other, that in Ethyopia the
greatest dragons have no other name but Elephant-killers. Among the Indians
also the same hatred remains, against

Sometimes again a multitude of dragons do together observe the paths of the
Elephants, and cross those paths they tie together their tails as it were in
knots, so that when the Elephant comes along in them, they ensnare his
legs, and suddenly leap up to his eyes, for that is the part they aim
above all other, which they speedily pull out, and so not being able to do
him any more harm, the poor beast delivers himself from present death by
his own strength, and yet through his blindness received in that combat, he
perrisheth by hunger, because he cannot choose his meat by smelling, but by
his eyesight.

There is no man living that is able to give a sufficient reason of this
contrariety in nature betwixt the Elephant and the Dragon, although many men
have labored their wits, and strayned their inventions to find out the true
causes thereof, but all in vain, except this be one that follows. The
Elephants blood is said to be the coldest of all other Beasts, and for this
cause it is thought by most Writers, that the dragons in the Summer

The Gryffins are likewise said to fight with the dragons and overcome them.
The Panther also is an enemy unto the Dragons, and drives them many times into
their dens. There is a little bird called Captilus, by eating of which the
dragon refreshes himself when he is wearied in hunting of other beasts. And
to conclude, he is an enemy unto all kind of Beasts, both wild and tame, as
may appear by these verses of Lucan,

-- Arment aque tota secuti,
Rumpit is ingentes amplexi verbere Tauros:
Nec tutus spacio est Elephas.
Which may be englished thus;

And following close the Herds in field,
Great Bulls with force of might,
And Elephants are made to yield
By dragons valiant sprite.
In the next place I will pass unto the poison and venom of dragons, omitting
all poetical discourses about the worshipping and transmutation of dragons
from one kind to another, such as are the hairs of Orpheus, or the teeth of
the dragon which Cadmus slew, into Armed-men, and such like fables, which have
no show nor appearance of truth, but are only the inventions of men, to utter
those things in obscure terms, which they were afraid to do in plain
speeches.

It is a question whether dragons have any venom or poison in them, for it is
thought that he hurts more by the wound of his teeth, then by his poison. Yet
in Deuteron. 22. Moses speaks of them as if they had poison, saying: Their
wine is as the poison of dragons, Heliodorus speaks of certain weapons
dipped in the poison of dragons. For which cause we are to consider, that they
wanting poison in themselves, become venomous two manner of ways: First by the
place wherein they live, for in the hoter Countries they are more apt to do
harm then in the colder and more temperate, which caused the Poet in his
verses to write of them in this manner following;

Vos quoque qui cunct is innoxi numina terris
Serpitis aurato nitidifulgore Dracones,
Pestiferos ardens facit Africa: Ducit is altam
Era cum pennis. etc.
Which may be englished in this manner;

You shining Dragons creeping on the earth,
Which fiery Afric yeeldes with skin like gold,
Yet pestilent by hot infecting breath,
Mounted with wings in the air we do behold.
So that which is spoken of the poison of Dragons infecting the air wherein
they live, is to be understood of the Met^or called Draco volans, a Fire-drake,
which does many times destroy the fruits of the earth, seeming to be a
certain burning fire in the air, sometime on the Sea, and sometime on the
Land, whereof I have heard this credible story from men of good worth and
reputation, happening about some twelve years ago, upon the Westerne-Seas,
upon the Coasts of England, which because it is well worthy to be kept in
rememberance of all posterity, and contains in it a notable work of God, I
have thought good to set it down in this place.

There was an old Fisherman which with his two hired servant went forth to
take fish, according to his accustomed manner and occupation, and having laid
their nets,

The young men his servant comforted him, telling him there was no cause of
fear, and that they had already committed themselves into the hands of
Almighty GOD, under whose protection they would tarry until they had taken
some fish: the old man rested

So great is the impression of fear, and the natural presage of evil, in men
that know but little in things to come, that many times they prove true
Prophets of their own destruction, although they have little reason till the
moment of perrill come upon them: and so it fell out accordingly in this
old man, for whilst he feared death by storms and

The devil that had put this wicked motion into their minds, gave them
likewise prespan^nt opportunity to put the same in execution, depriving them
of all grace, pity, and piety, unto guilty consciences, (such as all we
mortal men bear) are many times as forcible as the sentence of a Judge to the
heart of the condemned prisoner, and therefore it were happy that either we
could not fear, except when the causes are certain, or else that we might
never perrish but upon premonition. And therefore I conclude with the example
of this man, that it is not good to hold a superstitious fear, least God see
it, and being angry therewith, bring upon us the evil which we fear. But
this is not the end of the story, for that fire-drake, (as by the sequel
appears) proved as evil to the servant, as he did to the Master.

These two sons of the devil, made thus rich by the death of their Master,
foorth-with they sailed toward the Coasts of France, but first of all they
broke the Chair in

Wherefore, as they were thus rejoicing at the sight of Land, behold they
suddenly

A second cause why poison is supposed to be in Dragons, is for that they often
feed upon many venomous roots, and therefore their poison sticks in their
teeth, where-vppon many times the party bytten by them, seems to be
poisoned; but this falls Homer knew and affirmed in his verses, when he
described a dragon making his den near unto the place where many venomous
roots and herbs grew, and by eating whereof, he greatly annoyeth mankind
when he byteth them.

Os de Drokoon espi Xein oresteros andra menesi
Bebrocos kaka pharmaka.
Which may be thus englished;

And the dragon which by men remains,
Eats evil herbs without deadly pains.
And therefore Elianus says well, that when the dragon means to do most
harm to men, he eats deadly poysonfull herbs, so that if he bite after
them, many not knowing the cause of the poison, and seeing or feeling venom by
it, do attribute that to his nature which does proceed from his meat.
Besides his teeth which bite deep, he also kills with his tail, for be
will so be-girt and pinch in the body, that he does gripe it to death, and
also the strokes of it are so strong, that either they kill thereby
foorth-with, or Uincensius. S^linus.
else wound greatly with the same, so that the strokes of his tail, are more
deadly then the biting of his teeth; which caused Nicander to write thus;

Nec tamen ille graves, vt caetera turba, doloris
Si velit, infixo cum forte momorderit ore,
Suscitat: exiguus non noxia vulner a punctus
(Qui ceu rodentes noctu quaeque obvia muris)
In fligit, modicum tenui dat plaga cruorem.
Which may be thus englished;

Nor yet he when with his angry mouth
Does byte, such pains and torments brings
As other Serpents, if Ancients tell the truth,
When with his teeth and spear he stingeth:
For as the holes which byting-myse do leave,
When in the night they light upon a prey,
So small are Dragons-byts which men receive,
And harmless wound makes blood to run away.
Their mouth is small, and by reason thereof they cannot open it wide to byte
deep, so as their biting makes no great pain; and those kind of dragons
which do principally fight with Eagles, are defended more with their tails
then with their teeth: but yet Aetius. Greuinus Auicen.
there are some other kind of dragons, whose teeth are like the teeth of
Bears, biting deep, and opening their mouth wide, where-withall they break
bones, and make many bruses in the body, and the males of this kind byte
deeper then the famales, yet there follows no great pain upon the wound.

The cure hereof, is like to the cure for the biting of any other beast wherein
there is no

The seed of grass, commonly called Hay-dust, is prescribed against the
biting of dragons. The Barble being rubbed upon the place where a Scorpion of
the earth, a Spyder, a Sea or Land-dragon byteth, does perfectly cure the same.
Also the head of a dog or dragon which has bytten any one, being cut off
and fleyed, and applied to the wound with a little Euphorbium, is said to cure
the wound speedily.

And if Albedisimon be the same that is a dragon, then according to the opinion
of Auicen, the cure of it must be very present, as in the cure of Ulcers. And
if Alhatraf and Haudem be of the kind of dragons, then after their biting there
follows great coldness and Mary, and the oil of Wilde-pellitory, or such
things as are drawn out of those oils, wherein is the virtue of Nettles, or
Sea-Onyons.

But those things which are given unto the patient to drink, must be the
juice of Bay-leaues in Vinegar, or else equal portions of Myrrh, Pepper, and
Rewe in Wine, the powder or dust whereof, must be the full weight of a
golden-groat, or as we say, a French-Crovvne.

In the next place, for the conclusion of the history of the dragon, we will
take our farewell of GOD. The eyes being kept till they be stale, and
afterward beat into an Oil with Honey and made into an ointment, keep any
one that uses it from the terror of night-visions and apparisions.

The fat of a Heart in the skin of a Roe, bound with the nerves of a Heart
unto the shoulder, was thought to have a virtue to fore-shew the judgment of
victories to come. The first spindle by bearing of it, procures an easy
passage for the pacification of higher powers. His teeth bound unto the feet
of a Roe, with the nerves of a Heart, have the same power. But of all other,
there is no folly comparable to the composition which the Magitians draw out of
a dragon to make one invincible, and that is this. They take the head and tail
of a dragon, with the hayres out of the forehead of a Lion, and the marrow of

The fat of dragons is of such virtue that it drives away venomous beasts.
It is also reported, that by the tongue or gall of a dragon sodde in wine, men
are delivered from the spirits of the night, called Incubi and Succubi, or else
Night-mares. But above all other parts, the use of their blood is accounted
most notable. But whether the Cynnabaris be the same which is made of the blood
of the dragons and Elephants, collected from the earth when the dragon and the
Elephant fall down dead together, accordings as Pliny

And if that satisfy him not, let him read Langius in the first book of his
Epistles, and sixtie-fiue Epistle, where that learned man does abundantly
satisfy all men concerning this question, that are studious of the truth, and
not prone to contention. And to conclude, Andreas Baluacensis writes, that the
Boodstone, called the Haematite, is made of the dragons blood: and thus I
will conclude the history of the dragon, with this story following out of
Porphyrius, concerning the good success which has been signified unto

Mammea the Mother of Alexander Seuerus the Emperor, the night before his
birth, dreamed that she brought forth a little dragon, so also did Olympia the
Mother of Alexander the great, and Pomponya, the Mother of Scipio Affricanus.
The like prodigy gave Augustus hope that he should be Emperor. For when his
mother Actia came in the night time unto the Temple of Apollo, and had set
down her bed or couch in the Temple among other Matrons, suddenly she
fell asleep, and in her sleep, she dreamed that a dragon came to her, and
clasped about her body, and so departed without doing her any harm.
Afterward the print of a dragon remained perpetually upon her belly, so as
she never durst any more be seen in any bath.

The Emperor Tyberius Caesar, had a dragon which he daily fed with his own
hands, and nourished like good fortune, at the last it happened that this
dragon was defaced with the biting of Emmets, and the former beauty of his
body much obscured: Wherefore the Emperor grew greatly amazed thereat, and
demanding a reason thereof of the Wisemen, he was by them admonished to
beware the insurrection of the common people. And thus with these stories,
representing good and evil by the dragon, I will take my leave of this good
and evil Serpent.

OF THE DRYINE.


THere be some that confound this Serpent with the water-snake, and say it is
none other then that which of ancient time was called Hidrus, for so long as
they live in the water, they are called Hidri, that is, Snakes of the water,
but when once they come to the land, they are called Chelidri and Chersydri:
but it is certain that the Chelidrus, is different from the Chersydrus, by the
strong smell and savor which it carries with it wheresoever it goes,
according to these verses made of Vmbo the Priest in Virgill.

Viperio generi et grauiter spirantibus Hydris
Spargere qui somnos cantuque manuque solebat.
Which may be englished thus;

Who could by song and hand bring into deadly sleep
All kind of Vipers, with Snakes smelling strong and deep.
Which being compared with that instruction which he gives to Shepherds,
teaching them how to drive away the strong-smelling-serpents from the foldes,
he calls them Chelydri when he writes in this manner.

Disce et odoratam stabulis accendere Cedrum
Galbanioque agitare graves nidore Chelydros.
That is to say in English thus;

Learn how to drive away strong smelling Cheliders
From folds, by Galbanum and sauourie Cedars.
So that it is clear that these Dryines are the same which are called
Chelydri, who do stincke on the face of the earth, whereby they are
oftentimes disclosed although they be not seen: howbeit, some think that this
filthy savor does not proceed from any fume or smoke coming out of their
bodies, but rather from their motion, according to the opinion of Macer in
these following verses.

Seu terga ex pirant spumantia Virus
Seu terra fumat quateter labitur Anguis.
Which may be englished in this manner;

Whether their foming backs that smell
Do send abroad such poison pestilent,
Or whether the earth whereon this Snake full fell
Does slide, yeeldes that unwholesome scent.
It is said that these Dryines do live in the bottom or roots of Oaks,
where they make their nestes, for which cause they be called Querculi, as if
they were derived from an Oak, which caused the Countrey-people to call it
Dendrogailla, which signifies the Male and Female in this kind: being bred
only in one part of Affricke, and in Hel^spont, and there be of them two
kinds, one of the length of two cubits, being very fat and round, and very
sharp scales over the back; and they are called Druinae of Drus, that
signifies an Oak, because they live in bottom of Oaks: and they are also
called Chelydri, because of their sharp skins or scales, for it is the manner
of the Latins and the Graecians, to call the hard and rough skin of the body
of man and beast, by the name of Chellydra: and I take the serpents Cylmdri, to
be the same that the dryines be. Within the scales of this serpent Aetius.
back is blackish, and not white as some have thought, and the savor or smell
coming from them like to the smell of a Horses hide, wet as it comes out of
the pit, to be shaven by the hand of the Tawyer or Glouer. And Bellonius
writes, that he never saw any serpent greater then this Dryine which he
calls Dendrozailla, nor any that hisseth stronger; for he affirms, that one
of these put into a sack, was more then a strong Countryman could carry two
Miles together without setting it down and resting. And likewise he says,
that he saw a skin of one of these stuffed with hair, which did equal in
quantity the leg of a great man. The head of this beast is broad and flat,
and Olaus Magnus Lucan;

Natrix and ambiguae coleret qui syrtidos arua
Chersidros, tractique via fumante Chellidri:
In English thus;

The Snake which haunt the doubtful Syrtes sands,
And Chelyders by slyding fume on lands.
Georgius Fabricius writes, that he saw in the Temple of Bacchus at Rome, a
company Prudentius the Christian Poet calls Chellidri, that is Dryines in
these verses following;

-- Baccho caper omnibus aris
Craeditur, and virides discindunt ore Chellydros,
Qui Bromium placare volunt, quod et ebria iam tu^
Ante occulos regis Satyrorum insania fecit.
In English thus:

A Goat to Bacchus on every alter lies,
While sacrificers tear Dryines in pieces small
By force of teeth, and that before the eyes
Of Satyrs King, mad-drunke they fall.
The nature of this Serpent is very venomous and hot, and therefore it is
worthily placed among the first degree or rank of Serpents, for the smell
thereof does so stupifie a man, as it does near strangle him, for nature
refuses to breath, rather the^ to draw in such a filthy air. And so pestilent
is the nature of this beast, that it makes the skin of the body of a man hurt
by it, loose, stinking, and rotten: the eyes to be blind and full of pain, it
restrains the urine, and if it come upon a man sleeping, it causes often
neezing, and makes to vomit bloody matter. If a man tread upon it at unawares,
although it neither sting nor bite him, yet it causes his Legs to swell, and
his foot to loose the skin thereof: and that which is more strange, it is
reported, that when a Physician cured the hand of one bitten by this Serpent,
the skin of his hand also came off, and whosoever

When it has wounded or bitten, there follows a black or read swelling
about the sore, also a vehement pain over all the body through the speedy
disp^rsing of the poison; also Pustules or little Wheales, madness, dryness of
the body, and intolerable thirst, trembling and mortification of the members
wounded, whereof many dye. The ^nre is like to the cure of Vipers, and besides
it is good to take Hart-wort drunk in Wine, or Triffolly, or the roots of
Daffadill. Acornes of all kind of Oaks, are profitable against this poison,
being beaten to powder and drunk. And thus much shall suffice for this
Serpent.

OF THE SERPENTS CALLED Elephants.
THere be also Serpents called Elephants, because whomsoever they bite, they
infect with a kind of a leprosy, and I know not whether the Serpent Elops,
Elopis, and Laphiati be the same, but because I find no matter worthy in them
to be spoken of, and they are strangers in our Country, the Reader must be
contented with their bare names

OF FROGS.


Frogs are called by the Hebrews Zab, Zephardea, Vrdeana, and Vrdea Akruka,
and Maskar. By the Arabians Hardun, Difdah, Disphoa, Difdapha, Altahaul. By the
Graecians Batrachos: whereof Brackatas, and Garazum. Lalages and Kemberoie,
signifies green Frogs. The Italians and Spaniards call it Rana, by the
Latin word. The French Grenouille. The Germans Frosch, and Frosche, and
Grassfrosch, for a green Frog. The Flemmings Vrosch, and Vruesch, and Piuit.
The Illirians and Polonians Zaba, by a word derived from the Haebrew. It it
some question from whence the word Rana is derived, and because of much
controversy whether it has received name, because it lives on the land and
in the water, or from the croaking voice which it uses: I will not trouble the
English Reader with that discourse, only I am assured, that the word Frog in
English, is derived from the German word Frosch, as many other English words
are derived besides the common name of many Frogs. Homer in his Commedy of the
fight betwixt Frogs and Mise called Batrachomiomachia, has devised many proper
names for Frogs, such as these are; Lyninocharis, Gracediet, Peleus,
Dust-liuer: Hidromedousa, Water-haunter: Phusignathos, Nature-cryer: Hypsiboas,
Loud-cryer: Leuthaios, Lowe-liuer: Poluphonos, great Labourer: Krambophagos,
Brasile-eater: Lymnesios, Kalaminthios, Mint-eater: Hidrocharis, Water-child:
Borborokoites, noisemaker: Prassaphogos, Grasse-eater: Pelauseas, dust-creeper:
Pelobates, dust-leaper: Krawgasides, drought-hater: Prassaios, Grasse-greene:
and such other like, according to the witty invention of the Author, all which
I thought good to name in this place, as belonging to this History.

In the next place we are to consider the diversity and kinds of Frogs, as
they are distinguished by the place of their abode: for the greatest difference
is drawn from thence; some of them therefore are Water-Frogges, and some are
Frogs of the Land: the Water-Frogges live both in the water and on the Land,
in Marshes, standing-pooles, running streams, and banks of Ryuers, but never
in the Sea; and therefore Rana Marina Massarius has learnedly proved against
Marcellus. The frogs of the land are distinguished by their living in gardens,
in Meddows, in hollow Rocks, and among fruits: all which several differences
shall be afterward expressed, with their pictures in their due places: here
only I purpose to talk of the vulgar and common frogge, whose picture with
her young one is formerly expressed. Besides these differ in generation: for
some of them are engendered by carnal copulation, and some of the slime and
rottenness of the earth. Some are of a green color, and those are eaten in
Germany and in Flanders; some again are yellow, and some of an Ashe-colour,
some spotted, and some black, and in outward form and fashion they resemble a
Toad, but yet they are without venom, and the female is always greater then
the male: when

The tongue is proper to this kind, for the forepart thereof cleaves to the
mouth, as in a fish, and the hinder part to the throat, by which he sends
forth his voice: and this is to be understood, that all frogs are mute and
drunk, except the green frogs, and the frogs of the Water, for these have
voices. And many times the voices of frogs proceeds from the nature of the
Countries wherein they live: for once all the frogs in Macedonia and
Cyrenia, were drunk, until there were some brought thither out of some other
Countries, as at this day the frogs of Seriphus are all drunk, whereupon
came Batrachos ec Seriphou, A frogge of Seriphus, because the frogs of that
Country do never croake, although you carry them into any other Country.

This Seriphus is one of the Islands of the Sporades in Greece, wherein is the
Lake called Pierius, which does not run in the Summer, but only in the
winter, and all the frogs which are cast into that lake, are perpetually
silent, and never utter their voice; whereof there are assigned two causes, one
Fabulous, and the other true and natural. The first, the Seriphians say, that
when Perseus returned with the head of Medusa, having gone very far till he was
weary, laid him down beside that lake to sleep, but the croaking frogs made
such a noise, as he could take no rest: Whereat Perseus was much offended; and
therefore prayed Jupiter to forbid the frogs from crying, who instantly heard
his prayer, and enjoined Fabulous reason, being a mere fiction of the Poets.

The second and more true reason is that of Theophrastus, who says, that for
the coldness of the water: the frogs are not able to cry in that place. The
voice of frogs is said by the Latinists to be Corare, and by the Graecians
Ololugon, peculiar words to set forth this crying: now because their tongue
cleaves to the pallet of their mouth, and their voice proceeds but from
their throat to their mouth, and the spirit is hindered by the tongue, so as it
cannot proceed directly; therefore it has two bladders upon either side of
the mouth, one which it fills with wind, and from thence proceeds the
voice. Now when it croaketh, it puts his head out of the water, holding the
nether lip even with the water, and the upper lip above the water: and this is
the voice of the male provoking the female to carnal copulation.

They have but very small lungs, and those without blood, full of froth like to
al other creatures of the water, which do lay eggs, and for this cause they do
never thirst: wherefore also Sea-calues and Frogs are able to live long under
the Water. They have a double Pliny says, that in the VVinter time they are
resolved into slyme, and in Summer they resume again their first bodies, for
they are to be seen many times in the winter; especially in those waters that
are never frozen, as Agrecolaana Mathiolus, has soundly observed, and they
have been seen in certain running streams, holding small fishes in their
mouths, as it were sucking meat

Sometimes they enter into their holes in Autumn, before winter, and in the
spring time come out again. When with their croaking voices the Male provoke
the femall to carnal copulatio^, which he performs not by the mouth (as some
have thought) but by covering her back: the instrument of geneneration meeting
in the hinder parts, and this they perform in the night season, nature
teaching them the modesty or shamefastness of this action: And besides, in
that time they have more security to give themselves to mutual embraces,
because of a general quietness, for men and all other their adversaries are
then at sleep and rest. After their copulation in the waters, there appears
a thick Ielly, out of which the young one is found. But the Land-frogges are
ingendered Gyrini, from the Greek word Gyrrinos, having no visible part of a
living creature upon them, besides their eyes and their tails, and within
short space after their feet are formed, and their tail divided into two
parts, which tail becomes their hinder Legs: wherefore the Egyptians when
they would describe a man that cannot move himself, and afterward recouereth
his motion, they decypher him by a frog, having his hinder legs. The heads of
these young Gyrini, which we call in English Horse-nailes, because they
resemble a Horse-naile in their similitude, whose head is great, and the other

And first of all they are of a black color and round, and hereof came the
Prouetbe, Rana Gyrina sapientior, wiser then a Horse-naile; because through the
roudndnesse and rolubility of his body, it turns it self with wonderful
celerity, which way soever it pleases. These young ones are also called by the
Graecians Moluridae, Brutichoi, and Batrachida, but the Latins have no name
for it, except Ranunculus, or Rana Nascens. And it is to be remembered, that one
frogge lays an innumerable company of Eggs, which cleave together in the
water, in the middle whereof she her self lodges. And thus much may

Aelianus says, that as he travailed out of Italy into Naples, he saw diverse
frogs by the way near Putoli, whose forepart and head did move and creep,
but their hinder part was unformed, and like to the slyme of the earth, which
caused Ovid to write thus;

Semina limus habet virides generantia Ranas,
Et generat truncas pedibus and eodem corpore saepe
Altera pars viuit, rudis est pars altera tellus.
That is to say;

Dirt has his seed ingendring Frogs full green,
Yet so as feetlesse without Legs on earth they lie,
So as a wonder unto Passengers is seen,
One part has life, the other earth full dead is nigh.
And of these Frogs it is that Pliny was to be understood, when he says, that
Frogs in the Winter time are resolved into slyme, and in the Summer they
recover their life and substance again. It is certain also, that sometime it
raineth frogs, as may appear by Philarchus and Lembus, for Lembus writes
thus: Once about Dardania, and Paeonia, it rained frogs in such plentiful
measure, or rather prodigious manner, that all the houses and highways were
filled with them, and the inhabitants did first of all kill them, but
afterward perceiving no benifit thereby, they shut their doors against them,
and stopped up all their lights to exclude the^ out of their houses, leaving no
passage open, so much as a frog might creep into, and yet notwithstanding all
this diligence, their meat seething on Indians and people of Arabia, were
enforced to forsake their countries through the multitude of frogs.

Cardan seems to find a reason in nature for this raining of frogs, the
which for the better satisfaction of the Reader, I will here express as
follows: Fiunt haec omnia ventorum ira, and so forward in his 16. book De
subtilitate, that is to say; these prodigious raines of frogs and Mice, little
Fishes and stones, and such like things is not to be wondered at: for it
comes to pass by the rage of the winds in the tops of the Mountains, or the
uppermost part of the Seas, which many times takes up the dust of the earth,
and congealeth

But we read in holy Scripture among the plagues of Egypt, that frogs were
sent by GOD to annoy them; and therefore whatsoever is the material cause, it
is most certain that the wrath of GOD and his almighty hand, is the making or
efficient cause, and for Exodus verse 5. Also the Lord said unto Moses, say
thou unto Aaron, stretch out thy hand with thy rod upon the streams, upon
the Rivers, and upon the ponds, and cause frogs to come upon the land of Egypt,
ver. 6. Then Aaron stretched out his hand upon the waters of Egypt, and the
frogs came up and covered the land of Egypt, verse. 7. And the Sorcerers did
likewise with their Sorceries, and brought frogs up upon the land of Egypt.
Verse 8. Then Pharao called for Moses and Aaron, and said; pray ye unto the
Lord, that he may take away the frogs from me, and from my people, and I will
let the people go, that they may do sacrifice to the Lord, verse 9. And Moses
said unto Pharao, concerning me, command when I shall pray for Moses and
Aaron went out from Pharao, and Moses cried unto the Lord concerning the frogs
which he had sent unto Pharao. ver. 13. And the Lord did according to the
saying of Moses, so the frogs dyed in the houses, and in the Towns, and in the
fields. ver. 14. And they gathered them together by heaps, and the land
stanke of them, etc.

And this was the second plague of Egypt, wherein the Lord turned all the
fishes into Frogs, (as the book of wisdom says) and the Frogs abounded in
the Kings chamber: and notwithstanding this great judgment of God for the
present, Pharao would not let the people go, and afterward that blind
superstitious Nation became worshippers of Frogs, (as Philastrias writes)
thinking by this devotion, or rather wickodnesse in this obseruant manner, to
pacify the wrath of God, choosing their own ways before

There was one Cypselus the Father of Periander, who by his Mother was hid in
a Chest called Kypsele, to be preserved from the hands of certain murderers,
which were sent to kill him. Wherefore afterward the said Cypselus consecrated
a house at Delphos to Apollo, because he heard his crying when he was hid in
a Chest, and preserved him. In the bottom of that house, was the trunk of a
palm tree and certain Frogs pictured running out of the same: but what was
meant thereby is not certainly known, for Plutarke which vvriteth the story,
nor Chersias which relates it, gives any signification thereof: but in
another place where he inquireth the reason why the Oracle of Pithias gave no
answer, he coniectured because it was that the accursed thing brought out of
the Temple of Apollo from Delphos, into the Corinthian house, had engraven
underneath the brazen Palm, Snakes, and Frogs, or else for the signification
of the Sun rising.

The meat of Frogs thus brought forth are green Herbs, and Humble-Bees,
or shor^e-bugs, which they devour o^ catch when they come to the water to
drink: some-time also they are said to eat earth, but as well Frogs as
Toads do eat the dead mole, for the Mole deuoureth them being alive. In the
month of August, they never open Albertus.
so fast joined or closed together, that you can hardly open them with your
finger, or with a stick. The young ones of this kind are killed by casting
Long-wort, or the leaves of Sea-Lettice, as Elianus and Suidus write: and thus
much for the description of their parts, generation, and sustentation of these
common Frogs.

The wisdom or disposition of the Egyptian frogs is much commended, for they
save themselves from their enemies with singular dexterity. If they fall at any
time upon a water-Snake, which they know is their mortal enemy, they take in
their mouths a round Reed, which with an invincible strength they hold fast,
never letting go, although the Snake have gotten her into her mouth, for by
this means the Snake cannot swallow her,

There is a pretty fable of a great Bull which came to the water to quench his
thirst, and whilst the beast came running greedily into the Water, he trod in
pieces two or three young Frogs; then one of them which escaped with life, went
and told his mother the miserable misfortune and chance of his fellows: she
asked who it was that had so killed her young ones, to whom he answered: It was
a great one, but how great he could not tell: the foolish mother-frog desirous
to have seen some body in the eyes of her Son, began to swell with holding
in of her breath, and then asked the young one if the beast were as big as
she? And he answered much greater, at which words she began to swell more,
And asked him again if the beast were so big? To whom the young one
answered, Rana Gyrina sapientia, wiser then the young Frogge. This is
excellently described by Horace in his third Satyr, as follows;

Absentis ranaepullis vituli pede pressis,
Vnus vbi effugit matri denarrat, vt ingens
Bellua cognatos eliserit, illa rogare,
Quantane? Number tandem, se inflans, sic magnafuisset?
Mayor dimidio: Number tanto? Cum magis atque
Se magis inflaret, non si te ruperis, inquit,
Par eris: haec a te non multum abludit imago.
Which may be englished thus;

In old Frogs absence, the young were pressed to death
By feet of a great Calfe, drinking in the water,
To tell the dam, one ran that escaped with life and breath,
How a great beast his young to death did scatter.
How great said she? so big? and then did swell,
Greater by half, said he: then she swoll more, and said
Thus big? but he: cease swelling dam, for I thee tell,
Though break thy self, like him thou never can be made.
There is another pretty fable in Esop, tasking discontented persons under the
name of Frogs, according to the old verse:

Et veterem in limoranae cecinsere quaerelam,
Nam neque siccaplacet, nec quae stagnata palude
Perpetitur, querulae semper conuitia ranae.
Which may be englished in this manner;

The Frogs amid'st the earthy slime,
Their old complaints do daily sing:
Not pleased with pooles, nor land that drine,
But new displeasures daily bring.
When Ceres went about seeking Proserpina, she came to a certain Fountain in
Lisia Li sians hindered her from drinking, both by troubling the water with
their feet, and also by sending into the water a great company of croaking
Frogs; whereat the Goddess being angry, turned all those Country People into
Frogs. But Ovid does ascribe this transmutation of the Lisians, to the prayer
of Latona, when she came to drink of the fountain to increase the Milk in
her breasts, at such time as she nursed Apollo and Diana, which Metamorphosis
or transmutation, is thus excellently described by Ovid;

Aeternum stagno (dixit) viuatis in isto.
Eueniunt optata deae, iuuat esse sub v^dis,
Et modo tota caua summergere membra palude,
Nunc proferre caput summo, modo gurgite nare,
S^pe super ripam stagni consistere, saepe
In gelidos resilire lacus, sed nunc quoque turpes
Litibus exercent linguas, pulsoque pudore
Quamuis sint sub aqua, sub aqua maledicere tentant.
Vox quoque iam rauca est, inflataque colla tumescunt:
Ipsaque dilatant patulos conuitia rictus.
Terga caput tangunt, colla intercepta videntur.
Spina viret, venture, pars maxima corporis albet,
Limosoque nouae saliunt in gurgite ranae.
In English thus;

-- For ever might you dwell
In this same pond she said: her wish did take effect with speed,
For underneath the water they delight to be indeed:
Now diuethey to the bottom down, now up their heads they pop,
Another while with spraulling legs they swim upon the top.
And oftentimes upon the banks they have a mind to stond,
And oftentimes from thence again to leap into the pond:
And there they now do practice still their filthy tongues to scold,
And shamelesly, though underneath the water they do hold
Their former wont of brauling, still avoid the water cold:
Their voices still are hoarse and harsh, their throats have puffed goawles,
Their chaps with brawling widened are, their hammer-headed ioawles,
Are joined to their shoulders just, the necks of them do seem
Cut off: the ridgebone of their back stick up with color green.
Their panch which is the greatest part of all their trunk is gray,
And so they up and down the pond made newly, Frogs do play.
Whatsoever the wisdom of Frogs is, according to the understanding of the
Poets, this is certain, that they signify impudent and contentious persons,
for this cause there is a pretty fiction in hell betwixt the two Poets, Erupides
and Aesculus: for the ending of which cotrouersie, Bacchus was sent down to
take the worthyest of them out of Hell into Heaven: and as he went over
Charones Ferry, he heard nothing but the croaking of Frogs,

Their common enemies are the Weasels, Poule-cats, and Ferrets, for these do
gather them together, and lay of them great heaps within their dens: whereupon
they feed in Winter. The Hearne also and Bittor, is a common destroyer of
Frogs, and so likewise are some kind of Kites. The Night-Birds, Gimus and
Gimeta, the Water-Snake (at whose presence in token of extreme terror) the
Frogge sets up her voice in lamentable manner. The Moles are also enemies
to Frogs, and it is further said, that if a burning Candle be set by the water
side, during the croaking of Frogs, it will make them hold their peace. Men do
also take Frogs, for they were wont to bait a hook with a little red wool,
or a

And first of all the Green Frogs, and some of the yellow which live in
floods, Rivers, Lakes, and Fish-pooles, are eaten by men; although in ancient
time they were not eaten, but only for Physic, for the broth wherein they
were sod, and the flesh also, was thought to have virtue in it to cure the^
which were stricken by any venomous-creeping-beast, especially mixed with Salt
and Oil: but since that time Aetius discommendeth the eating Fiera, saying;

vltima, sed nostros non accessura lebetes,
Noluimus, succi est pluuij and limosa maligni.
Ni saliat, putris ranae parabatiter.
Irata est and ad huc rauca coaxat aquis.
In English thus:

We will not dress a Frog unless the last of all to eat,
Because the juice thereof is muddy and of rain, unclean,
Except it go on earth, prepared way to leap
For, angry it ever is, and has hoarse voice amid the stream.
They which use to eat frogs, fall to have a color like Lead, and the hotter
the countries are, the more venomous are the Frogs in colder Countries, as in
Germany they are not so harmefull, especially after the spring of the year,
and their time of copulation passed. Besides, with the flesh of frogs, they
were wont in ancient time to bait their hooks, Pliny.
wherewithal they did take Purple Fishes, and they did burn the young Frogs,
putting the powder thereof into a Cat, whose bowels was taken out, then rosting
the Cat, and after

Wherefore Tully says in his first book of Divination, who is it that can
suspect, or once think that the little Frogge should know thus much, but there
is in them an admirable understanding nature, constant and open to it self,
but more secrets obscure to the knowledge of men; and therefore speaking to the
Frogs he cites these verses;

Vos quoque signa videtis aquai dulcis alumnae,
Cum clamore paratis inanes fundere voces,
Absurdoque sono fontes and stagna cietis.
In English thus;

And you O water-birds which dwell in streams so sweet,
Do see the signs whereby the weather is foretold,
Your crying voices wherewith the waters are repleate,
Vain sounds, absurdly moving pooles and fountains cold.
And thus much for the natural use of Frogs. Now follows Magical. It is
said that Albertus. Kiranides. Democritus
of a woman, then must he cut it out of the Frog alive, and turn the Frog
away again, making certain Charactars upon the Frogs tongue, and so lay the
same upon the panting of a woman's heart, and let him ask her what questions he
will, she shall answer unto him all the truth, and reveal all the secret
faults that ever she has committed. Now if this magical foolery were true, we
had more need of Frogs then of Justices of Peace, or Magistrates in the
commonwealth.

But to proceed a little further, and to detect the vanity of these men, they
also say, that the staff wherewith all a Frog is struck our of a Snakes
mouth, laid upon a woman

Some again do write, that if a Woman take a Frogge and spit three times in
her mouth, she shall not conceive with Child that year. Also if Dogs eat
the Pottage wherein a Frogge has been sodde, it makes him dumb and cannot
bark. And if a man cast a sodde Frogge at a Dog, which is ready to assault
him, it will make him run away, (I think as fast an old hungry Horse from a
bottle of Hay.) These and such like vanities have the Ancient Heathens
(ignorant of GOD) firmly believed, till either experience disapprooued their
inventions, or the sincere knowledge of Religion in every venomous creature.
Frogs sod or roasted, are profitable, especially the broth, if it be given to
the sick person without his knowledge, mixed with Oil and Salt, as we have
said already. The flesh of Water-frogs is good against the biting of the
Sea-hare, the Scorpion, and all kind of Serpents: against Leprosy and scabs,
and rubbed upon the body, it does cure the same.

The broth taken into the body with roots of Sea-halme, expels the
Salamander: so also the Eggs, of the frogge, and the eggs of the Tortoyce,
has the same operation, being sod with Calamynth. The little Frogs are an
antidote against the Toades and great Frogs. Albertus also among other
remedies prescribes a Frogge to be given to sick Faulkcons or Hawks: It is
also good for crickes in the neck, or the Cramp. The same

There is an Oil likewise made out of Frogs, which is made in this manner,
they take a pound of Frogs, and put them into a vessel or glass, and upon
them, they pour a pint of Oil, so stopping the mouth of the glass, they
sees it as they do the Oil of serpents, with this they cure the shrinking of
the sinnewes, and the hot gout, they provoke sleep, and heal the inflammations
in Feauers, by anointing the Temples. The effect of Serenus:

Sape ita per vadit vis frigoris, ac tenet artus,
Vt vix quaesito medicamine pulsa recedat.
Si ranam ex oleo decoxeris, abijce carnem,
Membra foue.
That is to say;

Often are the sinnewes held by force inuading cold,
Which scarce can be repelled back by medicines tried might,
Then sees a Frogge in purest oil, as ancients us have told,
So bath the members sick therein, Frogs flesh cast out of sight.
And again in another place he speaking of the cure of a Fever, writes thus;

Sed prius est oleo partus feruescere Ranae,
In triuijs, illoque artus perducere succo,
In English thus;

But first let Oil make hot young Frogs new found
In ways, therewith bring sinnewes weak to weal full sound.
To conclude, it were infinite and needless to express all that the
Physicians have observed Ranis vinum ministras, you give Wine to Frogs, which
have neither need nor nature to drink it, for they delight more in water; And
so I conclude the History of this vulgar Frogge.

OF THE GREEN FROG.
THis frog is called Calamites, and Dryophytes, and Mantis, and Rana virens. In
Arabia Blefaricon, and Cucunoines, and Cucumones, Irici, Ranulae, Brexantes, of
Brex-ein to rain, and thereof comes the fained word of Aristophanes,
Brekekekex Koax, but I think that as our English word Frogge is derived from
the German word Frosch, so the Germans Frosch from this Greek word Brex. It
is called also Zamia, that is Damnum, loss, hurt or damage, because they live
in trees, and many times hatme men and Cattle underneath the trees; and
therefore called Zamiae of the Greek word Zemia. The Italians call it Racula,
Ranocchia, Lo Ranouoto, Ranonchia de rubetto. The French Croissetz, and
sometimes Graisset, Verdier, in Sauoy Renogle. In Germany Loubfrosch In Poland
Zaba Trawna. Some of the Latins for difference sake call it Rana Rubeta,
because it lives in trees and bushes: and for the same cause it also called
Calamites, because it lives among reeds, and Dryopetes, because it falls
sometime out of trees.



It is the least of all other Frogs, and lives in trees, or among fruits, and
trees especially in the woods of Hasels, or Vines, for with his short Legs
it climbeth the highest trees: insomuch that some have thought it hadd wings.
It is green all over the body, except the feet and the fingers, which are of
dusty or reddish color, and the tops of his nails or claws are blunt and
round: In the dissection thereof there was blood found in every part of the
body, and yet but little. The Heart of it is white, the Liver black, mixed
with the Gall. It has also a Melt, and in the end of July it lays Eggs.

It is a venomous beast, for sometimes Cattle as they brouse upon trees, do
swallovv down one of these upon the leaves not discerning it, because it is of
the same color: but presently after they have eaten it their bellyes begin to
swell, which must needs proceed from the poisoned Frogge.

A second reason proves it to be venomous, is for that many Authors do
affirm, that hereof is made the Psilothrum, for the drawing out of teeth by
the roots, and for this cause is concluded to be venomous, because this cannot
be performed without strong poison. But for the cure of the poison of this
Frogge, we shall express it afterward in the History of the Toade, and
therefore the Reader must not expect it in this place. Always before rain
they climb up upon the trees, and there cry after a hoarse manner Serenus to
call it Rauco garrula questu: at other times it is mute, and has no voice:
wherefore it is more truly called Mantis, that is, a Prophet or a Deuiner,
then any other kind of Frogge, because other Frogs which are not altogether
mute, do cry both for fear, and also for desire of carnal copulation, but
this never cries but before rain.

Some have been of opinion, that this is a dumb Frogge; and therefore
Vincentius Belluacensis says, that it is called a mute Frog from the effect:
for there is an opinion, that this put into the mouth of a Dog, makes him
dumb, which if it be true, it is an Argument of the extreme poison therein
contained, ouercomming the nature of the Dog, whose cheifest senses are his
taste and his smelling. And thus much shall suffice for the description

The medicinal virtues observed herein are these that follow. First if a man
which has a cough, do spet into the mouth of this Frogge, it is thought that
it does deliver him from his cough, and being bound in a Cranes skin unto a
man's thigh, procures venerious desires: but these are but magical devices,
and such as have no apparent reason in nature, wherefore I will omit them, and
proceed to them that are more reasonable and natural. First for the Oil of
Frogs, that is the best which is made out of the Greene-Frogs, as it is
observed by Siluius, and if they are held betwixt a man's hands, in the fit of
hot burning Ague, do much refresh nature, and ease the pain. For
Feauer-heptickes they prepare the^ thus: they take such frogs as have white
bellies, then cut off their heads and pull out their bowels, afterward they
sees them in water, until the flesh fall from the bones, the^ they mingle the
said flesh with Barley Meal, made into Paste, wherewithal they cram and feed
Pullen with that paste, upon which the sick man must be fed, and in default of
Frogs they do the like with Eeles, and other like Fishes. But there is no part
of the Frog so medicinable as is the blood, called also the matter or the
juice, and the humor of the Frogge, although Serenus the Poet writes;

Praeterea quascunque voles auertere setas,
Atque in perpetuum rediuiua occludere tela,
Corporibus vulsis saniem perducito ranae,
Sed quae parua situ est, and rauco garula questu.
That is to say,

Besides, from whatsoever bodies hairs thou will
Be clean destroyed, and never grow again
On them, the mattery blood of Frogs, all spread and spill:
I mean the little Frog questing hoarse voice amain,
The same also being made into a Verdigreace, and drunk the weight of a
Crown, stops the continual running of the urine. The humor which comes
out of this Frog, being alive when the skin is scraped off from her back,
clears the eyes by annoyntment:

OF THE PADDCKE OR CROOKED back Frogge.


IT is apparent that there be three kinds of Frogs of the earth, the first is
the little green Frog: the second is this Padocke, having a crook back,
called in Latin Rubeta Gibbosa, and the third is the Toade, commonly called
Rube tax, Bufo. This second kind is mute or dumb, as there be many kind of
mire Frogs, such as is that which the Germans call Feurkrott, and our late
Alchymists Puriphrunon, that is, a Fire-frogge, because it is of the color of
fire: This is found deep in the earth, in the midst of Rocks and stones when
they are cleft asunder, and amongst mettalls, where-into there is no hole or
passage, and therefore the wit of man cannot devise how it should enter
therein, only there they find them when they cleave those stones in sunder
with their wedges and other instruments. Such as these are, are found near
Towers in France, among a red sandy stone, whereof they make Milstones, and
therefore they break that stone all in pieces before they make the Millstone up,
least while the Paddock is included in the middle, and the Millstone going in
the Mill, the heat should make the Paddocke swell, and so the Millstone
breaking, the corn should be poisoned. As soon

This crooke-backed Paddocke is called by the Germans Gartenfrosch, that is, a
Frog of the Garden, and Grasfrosch, that is, a Frogge of the grass. It is not
altogether mute, for in time of perrill, when they are chaced by men, or by
Snakes, they have a crying voice, which I have oftentimes proved by
experience, and all Snakes and Serpents do very much hunt and desire to
destroy these: also I have seen a Snake hold one of them by the leg, for
because it was great she could not easily devour it, and during that time, it
made a pitiful lamentation.

These Paddocks have as it were two little horns or bunches in the middle of
the back,

OF THE TOADE.
TO conclude the story of Frogs, we are now to make description Coah, the
Graecians call it Phrunon, the Arabians Mysoxus, the Germans Krott, the Saxons
Quap, the Flemings Padde, the Illirians Zaba, the French ^rapault, the Italians
Rospo, Botta, Boffa, Chiatto, Zatta, Buffo, Buffa, Buffone, and ramarro, the
Spaniards Sapo escu, erco, the Latins Rubeta, because it lives among bushes,
and Bufu, because it swells when it is angry.

Now I find of these Toades two kinds, the one called Rubeta palustris, a Toade
of the fennes, or of the waters, the other, Rubeta terrestris, a Toade of the
earth: And these in Authors are sometimes confounded, one taken for ang^er. The
greatest difference that I can (...), is their seat or place of habitation,
for they live both of them in the land and in the water. And of them that be in
the water, some of them Ruberulae, that is, little Toades: and I think they be
the same which are called by some Authors Ranae Si^^oides. Near unto Zuricke,
there are Toades not half so big as the vulgar Toades, at a place called
Kiburg, being of a durtie color on the back, and sharp boned, the belly
white and yellowe, or rather betwixt both, the eyes of a gold flaming color,
the buttocks and hinder legs hairy, and besides that place, these kind of
Toades are no where found. They have a very shrill voice, so as they are heard
a great way off, like a small bell or trumpet, and they never utter their voice
but in the Spring, and the forepart of the Summer, for about September they
hide themselves in Trees, neither do they live among the waters, but on the
dry land; when they cry, it is certain that the night following will bring
forth no frost.

Like unto this there is a Toade in France called Bufo cornutus, a horned
Toade, not because it has horns, for that is most apparently false, but for
that the voice thereof is like to the sound of a Cornet, or rather (as I
think) like to a Raven called Cornix, and by Bufo cornutus. The color of this
Toade is like Saffron on the one part, and like filthy dirt on the other:
besides, there are other venomous Toades living in sinckes, priuies, and under
the roots of plants.

There is another kind also, like to the Toade of the water, but in steed of
bones it has only grissels, and it is bigger then the Toade of the Fenne,
living in hot places. There is another also, which although it be a Toade of
the water, yet has it been eaten for meat not many years since: the mouth
of it is very great, but yet without teeth, which he does many times put out of
the water like a Torteyse to take breath, and in taking of his meat, which are
flies, Locustes, Catterpillers, gnattes, and small creeping things, it
imitateth the Camaelion, for it puts out the tongue, and licketh in his
meat by the space of three

Now we will proceed to the common description of both kinds together. This
Toade is in all outward parts like unto a Frogge, the fore-feete being short,
and the hinder feet long, but the body more heavy and swelling, the color of
a blackish color, the skin rough, viscous, and very hard, so as it is not
easy to be broken with the blow of a Apocynon. The whole aspect of this Toade
is ugly and unpleasant. Some Authors affirm that it carries the heart in the
neck, and therefore it cannot easily be killed, except the throat thereof be
cut in the middle. Their liver is very vicious, and causes the whole body to
be of ill temperament: And some say they

There be many late Writers, which do affirm that there is a precious stone
in the head of a Toade, whose opinions (because they attribute (...) the ve^ of
this stone) it is good to examine in this place, that so the Reader may be
satisfied whether to hold it as a fable or as a true matter, exempl^fying the
powerful working of Almighty God in nature, for there be many that we^re
these stones in Ringes, being verily (...) aded that they keep them from all
manner of grypings and pains of the belly and the small guts. But the Art
(as they term it) is in taking of it out, for they say^ must be taken out of
the head alive, before the Toade be dead, with a piece of cloth of the color
of read Skarlet, ^assarius.

Brasauolus says, that he found such a thing in the head of a Toade, but he
rather took it to be a bone then a stone, the color whereof was brown,
inclyning to blacknes. Some say it is double, namely outwardly a hollow bone,
and inwardly a stone contained (...) in, the virtue whereof is said to break,
prevent, or cure the stone in the bladder now how this stone should be there
ingendered, there are diverse opinions also, and they say yt stones are
ingendered in living creatures two manner of ways, either through heat, or
extreme cold, as in the Snaile, Perch, Crabbe, Indian Tortizes and Toades; so
that by extremity of cold this stone should be gotten.

Against this opinion the color of the stone is objected, which is sometimes
white, sometimes brown, or blackish, having a cittrine or blew spot in the
middle, sometimes Borax, sometimes Crapodinae, and sometimes Nisae, or Nusae,
and Chelonites. Others do make two kinds of these stones, one resembling a
great deal of Milk mixed with a little blood, so that the white exceeds the Red, and yet both are apparent and visible: the other all black, wherein
they say is the picture of a Toade, with her legs spredde before and behind.
And it is further affirmed, that if both these stones be held in ones hand in
the presence of poison, it will burn him. The probation of this stone, is by
laying of it to a live Toade, and if she lift up her head against it, it is
good, but if she run away from it, it is a counterfeyte.

Geor: Agricola calls the greater kind of these stones, Brontia, and the
lesser and smoother Cerauniae, although some contrary this opinion, saying that
these stones Brantia and Cerauniae, are bred on the earth by thundering and
lightning. Whereas it is said before, that the generation of this stone in the
Toade proceeds of cold, that is utterly impossible, for it is described to
be so solid and firm, as nothing can be more hard, and therefore I cannot
assent unto that opinion, for unto hard and solid things, is required
abundance of heat: and again, it is unlikely, that whatsoever this
Toade-stone be, that there should be any store of them in the world as are
every where visible, if they were to be taken out of the Toades alive, and
therefore I rather agree with Salueldensis a Spaniard, who thinks that it is
begotten by a certain viscous spume, breathed out upon the head of some
Toade, by her fellows in the Springtime.

This stone is that which in ancient time was called Batrachites, and they
attribute unto it a virtue besides the former, namely, for the breaking of the
stone in the bladder, and against the Falling-sicknes. And they further write
that it is a discouerer of present poison, for in the presence of poison it
will change the color. And this is the substance of that which is written
about this stone. Now for my part I dare not conclude either with it or against
it, for Hermolaus, Massarius, Albertus, Syluaticus, and others, are directly
for this stone ingendered in the brain or head of the Toade: on the other
side, Cardan and Gesner confess such a stone by name and nature, but they make
doubt of the generation of it, as others have delivered; and therefore they
being in sundry opinions, the hearing were of might confound the Reader, I
will refer him for his satisfaction unto a Toade,

Thus leaving the stone of the Toade, we must proceed to the other parts of
the story, and first of all their place of habitation, which for them of the
water, is near the vvaterside, and for them of the earth, in bushes, hedges,
Rocks, and holes of the earth, never coming abroad while the Sun shines,
for they hate the sunshine, and their nature cannot endure it, for which
cause they keep close in their holes in the day time, and in the night they
come abroad. Yet sometimes in rainy-weather, and in solitary places, (...) in
ancient time the wise Painters of Germany, did picture a woman sitting upon a
^oade, to signify covetousness. They also love to eat Sage, and yet the root
of (...) is to them deadly poison; They destroy Bees, without all danger to
themselves, for (...) (...): reepe to the holes of their Hiues, and there blow
in upon the Bees, by which ^y draw them out of the Hiue, and so destroy them
as they come out: for this (...) at the waterside they lie in wait to catch
them. When they come to drink in ^me they see little or nothing, but in the
night time they see perfectly, and there^ey come then abroad.

About their generation there are many worthy observations in nature, sometimes
they are bredde out of the putrefaction and corruption of the earth, it has
also been seen that New world there is a Province called Dariene, the air
whereof is wonderful unwholesome, because all the country stands upon rotten
Marshes. It is there observed, that when the slaves or servants water the
pauements of the doors, from the drops of water which fall on the right hand,
are instantly many Toades ingendered, as in other places such drops of water
are turned into gnats. It has also been seen, that women conceiving with
child, have likewise conceived at the same time a frog, or a toade or a Lizard,
and therefore Platearius says, that those things which are medicines to
provoke the menstruous course of women, do also bring forth the Secondiues.
And some have called Bufone^ fratrem Salernitanorum, et lacertum fratre^
Lombardoru^: that is, a toade Salernitans, and the Lizard the brother of the
Lombards: for it has been seen that a woman of Salernum, has at one time
brought forth a boy and a toade, and therefore he calls the toade his
brother; so likewise a woman of Lombardy, a Lizard, and therefore he calls
the Lizard the Lombards brother. And for this cause, the women of those
countries, at such time as their child begins to quicken in their womb, do
drink the juice of Parsley and Leekes, to kill such conceptions if any be.

There was a woman newly married, and when in the opinion of all she was with
child, in steed of a child she brought forth four little living creatures like
frogs, and yet she remained in good health, but a little while after she felt
some pain about the rymne of her belly, which afterward was eased by applying
a few remedies. Also there was another Anconitum. But what should be the
reason of these so strange and unnatural conceptions, I will not take upon me
to discide in nature, least the omnipotent hand of God should be wronged, and
his most secret and just counsel presumptuously judged and called into
question. This we know that it was prophesied in the Revelation, that Frogs and
Locusts should come out of the whore of Babylon, and the bottomless pit, and
therefore seeing the seat of the Whore of Babylon is in Italy, it may be that
God would have manifested the deprauation of Christian religion, beginning
among the Italians, and there continued in the conjoined birth of men and
serpents: for surely, none but devils incarnate, or men conceived of Serpents
brood, would so stiffly Romish error as the Italians do, and therefore they
seem to be more addicted to the errors of their Fathers, (which they say is
the religion wherein they were borne) then unto the truth of Jesus Christ, which
does unanswerably detect the pride and vanity of the Romish faith.

But to leave speaking of the conception of toades in women, we will proceed
further unto their generation in the stomachs and bellies of men, whereof there
may more easily a reason be given then of the former. Now although that in the
earth toades are generated of putrified earth and waters, yet such a generation
cannot be in the body of man, for although there be much putrefaction in us,
yet not so much as to engender bones and other orgynes, such as are in toades;
as for worms they are all flesh, and may more easily be conceived of venom
that is in it, never goes out of (...) stance, to poison the other parts of
(...) med into a Toade, without doing (...) are bredde in the bodies of men,
(...) the midst of Trees and Rocks, and (...) are bredde in. For the venom is
so (...) ripeness, even as we see it is almost an vsu^ shall not be
perceived, till many days, weeks, (...)

For the casting out of such a Toade bredde in the They take a Serpent and
bowell him, then they cut of^

These Toades do not leap as Frogs do, but because of their (...) short
legs, their pace is a soft creeping-pace, yet sometimes in anger they lift
up (...) selves, endeavoring to do harm, for great is their watch,
obstinacy, and desire to be (...) uenged upon their adversaries, especially
the Redde-Toade, for look how much her color inclines to redness, so much
is her wrath and venom more pestilent. If she take

A Toade is of a most cold tempriament, and badde constitution of nature, and
it uses one certain herb where-withall it preserves the sight, and also
resists the poison of Bedford, and I was requested to set it down for truth,
for it may be justified by many now alive which saw the same.

It fortuned as the said Earl travailed in Bedfordshire, near unto a
Market-towne called Owbourne, some of his company espied a Toade fighting with
a Spider, under a hedge in a bottom, by the high-way-side, whereat they stood
still, until the Earl their Lord and Master came also to behold the same;
and there he saw how the Spyder still kept her standing, and the Toade diverse
times went back from the Spyder, and did eat a piece of an herb, which to
his judgment was like a Plantine. At the last, the Earl having Bedford
himself upon sundry occasions, and therefore I am the bolder to insert it
into this story.

I do the more easily believe it, because of another like history, related by
Erasmus in his book of friendship, happening likewise in England, in manner as
follows. There ^er her to stand still upon his (...) one of them espying a
Spiders (...) ^duise that the Monk should ^ght underneath the Spyders^ and as
soon as the Spyder saw her aduersa^ down upon the Toade, at (...), so that it
swelled, and at the (...) Spyder killed the Toade, and so (...) in his Chamber;
for at the third time (...) swelled to death, but the man was pre^ Albertus
writes, he himself saw a (...) bitterly, for a Mole did hold her fast by the
leg within (...) in again, whilst the other strove to get out of her teeth,
(...) Toades do eat the Moles when they be dead. They are (...) Lizard, and
all kinds of Serpents, and whenever it receives a^ it cures itself by
eating of Plantine. The Cat does also kill Ser^, but eats them not, and
unless she presently drink, she dies for it. and the Hawke are destroyers of
Toades, but the Storke never destroys a

Now to conclude, the premises considered which have been said of the Toade,
the uses that are to follow are not many, except those which are already
related in the Frog. When the Spaniards were in Bragua, an Island of the
Newe-found-World, they were brought to such extremity of famine, that a
sicke-man amongst them was forced to eat two Toades, which he bought for two
pieces of Gold-lace, worth in Spanish money six Ducats. I do marvel why in
ancient time the Kings of France gave in their Arms the three Toades in a
yellow field, the which were afterward changed by Clodoueus into three
Flower-delusees in a field Azure, as Arms sent unto him from Heaven.

When the Troyans dwelt near Moeetis, after the destruction of Troy, they were
very much annoyed by the Goths, wherefore Marcomirus their King, determined to
leave that Country, and to seek some-where else a more quiet habitation. Being
thus minded, he was admonished by an Oracle that he should go and dwell in
that Country where the River Rhene falls into the Sea, and he was also
stirred up to take upon him that journey, by a certain Magitian-woman, called
Alrunna, for this cunning Woman caused in the nightime a deformed appartion
to come unto him, having three heads, one of an Eagle, another of a Toade, and
the third of a Lion, and the Eagles head did speak unto him in this manner,
Genus tuum o Marcomire opprimet me, et conculcabit Leonem et interficiet
bufonem, that is to say, Thy stock or posterity, o Marcomirus, shall oppress
me, it shall

It is an opinion held by some Writers, that the Weasels of the water do
engender in copulation with the Toades of the water, for in their mouths, and
feet of their belly, they do resemble them. Whereupon these verses were
made;

Bufones gigno putrida tellure sepulta,
Humores pluvij forte quod ambo sumus,
Humet is et friget mea sic vis humet et alget,
Cum perit in terra quiprius ignis erat.
Which may be englished thus;

Buried in rotten earth, forth Toades I bring,
Perhaps because we both are made of rain
That Is moist and cold, moist I, and ever freezing,
When in the earth, that force from fire came.
And thus we will descend to discourse of the Toades poison, and of the
special remedies appointed for the same. First therefore, all manner of
Toades, both of the earth and of the water are venomous, although it be held
that the toades of the earth are more poysonfull then the toades of the water,
except those Toades of the water which do receive infection or poison from the
water, for some waters are venomous. But the toades of the Land, which do
descend into the Marshes, and so live in both elements, are most venomous, and
the hotter the Country is, the more full are they of poison.

The Women-witches of ancient time which killed by poisoning, did much use
Toades in their confections, which caused the Poet in his verses to write as
follows.

Occurrit Matrona potens quae molle Calenum:
Porrectura viro, miscet sciente rubetam.
Which may be englished thus;

There came a rich Matron, who mixed Calen wine,
With poison of Toades to kill her spouse, o deadly crime.
And again in another place,

Funus promittere patris nec volo nec possum,
Ranarum in viscera nunquam inspexi.
In English thus;

I can nor will of Fathers death a promise make,
For of Toades poison I never yet a view did take.
When an Aspe has eaten a Toade, their biting is incurable, and the Bears of
Pamphylia and Sylitia being killed by men after that they have eaten
Salamanders or toades, do poison their eaters. We have said already that a
toade has two livers, and although both of them are corrupted, yet the one of
them is said to be full of poison, and the other to resist poison. The biting
of a Toade, although it be sildome, yet it is venomous, and Par^^elsus
prescribes a plaster of earth, mixed with the spettle of a man.

The common people do call that humor which comes out of the buttocks of a
Toade when she swells, the urine of a Toade, and a man moystned with the
same, bepissed with a Toade; but the best remedy for this evil, is the (...)
of a woman (...) as it resembles the poison in color, so does it resist it in
nature. The bodies of toades ^and so drunk in Wine after they be beaten to
powder, are a most strong poison, against

We have promised in the story of the Frogge, to express in this place such
remedies, as the learned Physicians have observed for the cure of the poison of
Frogs. First therefore, the poison of the Frogge causes swelling in the
body, depelleth the color, (...)eth water and oil, or wine and pitch; or let
him drink the blood of a Sea-Torteyse, mixed with Cummine, and the rennet of a
Hare, or else sweat in a Furnace or hote-house a long time: besides many other
such like remedies, which every Physician, both by experience and reading, is
able to minister in cases of necessity, and therefore I will spare my further
pains from expressing them in this place, and pass on to the medicinal
virtues of the Toade, and so conclude this history.

We have showed already that the Toade is a cold creature, and therefore the
same sod in water, and the body anointed therewith, causes hair to fall off
from the members so anointed. There is a medicine much commended against the
Gowte, which is this: Take six pound of the roots of Wilde-cucumber, six
pound of sweet oil of the marrow Opobalsamum, blood of Torteyses, oil of
Sabyne, Swynes-greace, Quicksiluer, and oil of Bays.

For the scabbes of horses, they take a Toade killed in wine and water, and so
sodde in a brazen vessel, and afterward annoint the horse with the liquour
thereof. It is also said that Toades dried in smoke, or any piece of them
carried about one in a lynnen-cloath, do stay the bleeding at the nose. And
this Frederick the Duke of Saxony was wont to practice in this manner; he had
ever a Toade pierced through with a piece of wood, which Toade was dried in the
smoke or shadow, this he roled in a lynnen cloth, and when he came to a man
bleeding at the nose, he caused him to hold it fast in his hand until it waxed
hot, and then would the blood be stayed. Whereof the Physicians could never
give any reason, except horror and fear constrained the blood to run into
his proper place, through fear of a beast so contrary to humane nature. The
powder also of a toade is said

Buff^ vstus sistit naturae dote cruorem.
In English thus;

A Toade that is burned to Ashes and dust,
Stays bleeding by gift of Nature just.
The skin of a Toade, and shell of a Torteyse, either burned or dried to
powder, cures the Fistulaes: Some add hereunto the root of Laurel and
henne-dunge, salt, and oil of Mallows. The eyes of the Toade are received in
ointment against the worms

OF THE GREEN SERPENT.
IN Valois there are certain Greene-serpents, which of their color are called
Grunling, and I take them to be the same which Hesychius called Sauritae, and
Pliny by a kind of excellency, Snakes, of whom we shall speak afterward, for
I have no more to say of the^ at this present, but that they are very venomous.
And it may be that of these came the common proverb, Latet Anguis sub herba,
under the green herb lies the Greene-Snake,

OF THE HAEMORRHE.


THis Serpent has such a name given unto it, as the effect of his biting
works in the bodies of men, for it is called in Latin H^morrhous, to
signify unto us the male, and Haemorrhois to signify the female, both of them
being derived from the Greek word Aima, which signifies blood, and Reo, which
signifies to flow, because whomsoever it byteth, it makes in a continual
bleeding sweat, with extremity of pain until it die. It is also called
Affodius, and Afudius, Sabrine, and Halsordius, or Alsordius, which are
Haemorrhus.

It is doubtful whether this be to be ascribed to the Aspes or to the Vipers,
for Isidorus says it is a kind of Aspe, and Elianus, a kind of Viper. They are
of a sandy color, and in length not past one foot, or three handfulls, whose
tail is very sharp or small, their eyes are of a fiery-flaming-colour, their
head small, but has upon it the appearance of horns. When they go, they go
straight and slowly, as it were halting and wearilie, whose pace is thus
described by Nicander.

-- Et inster
Ipsius oblique suaparvula terga Cerasta
Claudicat: ex medio videas appellere dorso
Parvum nauigium, terit imam lubrica terram
Alvus, et haud alio tacit trahit ilia motu,
Ac per arundineum si transeat illa grabatum.
In English thus;

And like the Horned-serpent, so trayles this elfe on land,
As though on back a little boat it drove,
His slyding belly makes path be seen in sand,
As when by bed of Reeds she goes her life to save.
The scales of this Serpent are rough and sharp, for which cause they make a
noise when they go on the earth; the female rests herself upon her lower
part near her tail, creeping altogether upon her belly, and never holds up
her head, but the male when he goes holds up his head: their bodies are all
set over with black spots, and themselves are thus paraphrastically described
by Nicander.

Vnum longa pedem, totoque gracillima tractu,
Ignea qundoque est, quandoque est candida forma,
Constrictumque satis collum, et tenuissima cauda.
Bina super gelidos oculos frons cornua profert,
Splendentum quadam radiorum albentia luce,
Syluestres vt apes, populatricesque Locuste:
Insuper horribile ac asprum caput horret.
Which may be englished in this manner following;

On foot in length, and slender all along,
Sometime of fiery hue, sometime milke-white it is,
The neck bound in, and tail most thin and strong,
Whose forehead has two horns above cold eyes:
Which in their light resemble shining beams,
Like Bees full wild, or Locusts spoylers bredde,
But yet to look upon all horrible in seames,
For why? the cruel Bore they show in head.
They keep in Rocks, and stony places of the houses and earth, making their
deunes

Rimosas colit illa Petras, sibique aspera recta,
Et modice pendens facit, inflexumque cubile.
In English thus;

The chincks of Rocks and passages in stone
They dwell, wherein their lodgings bare,
A little hanging made for every one,
And bending too, their sleepie harbors are.
It is said that Canobus the Governor of Menelaus, chanced to fall upon this
Serpent, in revenge whereof Helen his charge, the wife of Menelaus broke his
backe-bone, and that ever since that time they creep lamely, and as it were
without loins; which fable is excellently thus described by Nicander:

Quondam animosa Helene cigni Iovis inclyta proles
Euersa rediens Troia (nisi vana vetustas)
Huic indignata est generi Pharias, vt ad oras
Venit, and aduersi declinans flamina venti,
Fluctiuagam statuit iuxta Nili ostia classem.
Namque vbi nauclerus sefessum forte Canobus
Sterneret, et bibulisfusus dormiret arenis:
Laesa venenosos Haemorrhois impulitictus,
Illatamque tulit letali dente quietem:
Protinus ouipera cernens id filia Led^
Oppressae medium serpenti feruida dorsum
Infregit, tritaeque excussit vinculae spinae,
Quae fragili illius sic dempta e corpore fugit,
Et graciles Haemorrhoi, obliquique Cerastae
Ex hoc clauda trahunt iam soli tempore membra.
Which may be englished thus;

Once noble Helen, Jove's child by Swan-like shape,
Returning back from Troy, destroyed by Grecian war,
(If that our Ancients do not with fables us be-clappe)
This race was enuyed by Pharias anger far.
When to his shores for safety they did come,
Declyning rage of blustering windy Seas,
Water-byding-Nauy at Nilus mouth began run,
Where Canobus all tired faynted for some ease:
For there this Pilot, or Master of the Fleet,
Did have from boat to sleep in drery sand,
Where he did feel the teeth of Hemorrhe deep,
Wounding his body with poison, deaths own hand.
But when egge-breeding Ledaes wench espied
This harm, she pressed the Serpents back with stroke,
Whereby the bands thereof were all untied,
Which in just wrath for just revenge she broke.
So euer-since, out of this Serpents frame
And body they are taken, which is the cause
That Cerasts and lean Haemorrhs are ever lame,
Drawing their parts on earth by natures laws.
They which are stunge with there Haemorrhs, do suffer very intolerable
torments, for out of the wound continually flows blood, and the excrements
also that comes out Lucan of one Tellus a young noble man, slain by this
Serpent, described as follows.

Impressit dentes Haemorrhois aspera Tullo
Magnanimo iuveni, miratorique Catonis:
Vtque solet pariter totis se effundere signis
Coricij pressura croci: sic omnia membra
Emisere simul rutilum pro sanguine virus.
Sanguis erant lachrimae: quaecunque for amina novit
Humor, ab ijs largus manat cruor, or a redundant,
Et patulaenares, sudor rubet, omnia plenis
Membra fluunt venis: totum est pro vulnere corpus.
In English thus;

The Haemorrhe fierce, in noble Tullus fastened teeth
That valiant youth, great Catoes scholar dear:
And as when Saffron by Corycians skeeth
Is pressed, and in his color on them all appear:
So all his parts sent forth a poison read
In steed of blood: Nay all in blood went round.
Blood was his tears, all passages of it were spedde,
For out of mouth and ears did blood abound.
Blood was his sweat, each part his vein out-bleedes,
And all the body blood that one wound feeds.
The cure of this Serpent, in the opinion of the Ancients, was thought
impossible, as Dioscorides, and thereof they complain very much, using only
common remedies, as scarification, vstions, sharp meats, and such things as
are already remembered in the cure of the Dipsas. But besides these they use
Vine-leaues, first bruised and then sod with Honey: they take also the head of
this Serpent and burn it to powder, and so drink it, or else Garlic with
oil of Flower-deluce, they give them also to eat Reisins of the Sun. And
besides, they resist the eruption of the blood, with plasters laid to the
place bitten, made of Vine-leaues and honey, or the leaves of Purslaine and
Barley-meale. But before their urine turn bloody, let them eat much Garlic
stamped, and mixed with oil to cause them to vomit, and drink wine delayed
with water, then let the wound be washed with cold water, and the bladder
continually fomented with hot Spunges. Some

OF THE HORNED SERPENT.


THis Serpent because of his horns (although it be a kind of Viper) is called
in Greek Kerastes, and from thence comes the Latin word Cerastes, and the
Arabian, Cerust, and Cerustes. It is called also in Latin Ceristalis,
Cristalis, Sirtalis, and Tristalis. Cerastes, or else from one another, and
therefore I think it not fit to stand upon them. The Hebrews call it
Schephiphon, the Italians Cerastes, the Germans Engehurnte schlang, the French
Un Ceraste, un serpent cornu, that is, a horned Serpent; and therefore I have
so called it in English, imitating herein both the French and Germans.

I will not stand about the difference of Authors, whether this Serpent be to
be referred to the Aspes or to the Vipers, for it is not a point material, and
therefore I will proceed to the description of his nature, that by his whole
history, the Reader may choose whether he will account him a subordinate kind
unto others, or else a principal of himself. Lybian sandie-seas, places not
inhabited by men, for the huge mountains of sands are so often moved by the
winds, that it is not only impossible for men to dwell there, but also very
dangerous and perrillous to travel through them, for that many times whole
troops of men and cattle, are in an instant overwhelmed and buried in those
sands. And this is a wonderful work of God, that those places which are least
habitable for man, are most of all anoyed with the most dangerous biting
Serpents.

It is also said, that once these Horned-serpents departed out of Lybia into
Egppt, where they depopulated all the Country. Their habitation is near the
highways, in the sands, and under Cart-wheeles: and when they go, they make
both a sound with their motion, Nicander.

Ex ijs alter echis velocibus obuia spinis,
Recto terga tibi prolixus tramite ducit,
Sed medio diffusius hic cerastes se corpore voluit:
Curuum errans per iter, resonantibus aspera squamis.
Qualiter aequoreo longissima gurgite nauis,
Quam violentus agit nunc huc, nunc Aphricus illuc,
Pellitur, et laterum gemebunda fragore suorum
Extra sulcandas sinuose fluctuat vndas.
Which may be englished thus;

Of these the Viper with swift bones thee meets,
Trayling her back in path direct and strait,
The Cerast more diffused in way thee greets
With crooked turning, on scales make sounds full great:
Like as a ship tossed by the Western wind,
Sounds a far off, moved now here, now there,
So that by noise of shrilling sides we find
His furrows turned in Seas and water sphere.
The quantity of this horned-serpent is not great, it exceeds not two cubits
in length the color of the body is branded like sand, yet mingled with
another pale white color, as is to be seen in a Hares skin. Upon the head
there are two Horns, and sometimes 4. for which occasion it has received the
name Cerastes, and with these horns they deceive

I have heard this History of three of these Serpents brought out of Turkey, and
given to a Noble man of Venice alive, who preserved them alive in a great
glass, (made of purpose) upon sand, in that glass nere the fire: The
description as it here follows, was taken by John Faltoner, an English
traveler, saying. They were three in number, whereof one was thrice so big
as the other two, and that was a Female, and she was said to be their Mother:
she had laid at that time in the sands four or five eggs, about the bigness
of Pigeons eggs. She was in length three foot, but in breadth or quantity
almost so big as a man's Arm: her head was flat, and broad as two fingers, the
apple of the eye black all the other part being white.

Out of her eyelids grew two horns, but they were short ones, and those were
truly Horns, and not flesh. The neck compared with the body was very long
and small, all the upper part of the skin was covered with scales, of
ash color, and yet mixed with black. The tail is as it were brown when it
was stretched out. And this was the description of the old one: the other two
being like to her in all things, except in their horns, for being small, they
were not yet grown. Generally, all these horned Serpents have hard dry scales
upon their belly, wherewithal they make a noise when they go themselves, and
it is thus described by Nicander;

Nunc potes actutum insidiatoremque Cerasten
Noscere, vipereum veluti genus, huic quia dispar
Non is corpus habet, sed quatuor aut duo profert
Cornua, cum mutila videatur Vipera front.
Squalidus albenti color est.
In English thus:

You well may know the treacher Cerasts noise,
A Viper-kind, whose bodies much agree,
Yet these four horns and brandy color, poyse,
Where Viper none, but forehead plain we see.
There is no Serpent except the Viper that can so long endure thirst, as this
horned-serpent, for they seldom or never drink; and therefore I think they
are of a Vipers kind: for besides this also it is observed, that their young
ones do come in and out of their bellies as Vipers do: The live in hatred with
all kind of Serpents, and especially with Spiders. The Hawes of Egypt also do
destroy Horned-serpents and Scorpions: but about Thebes in Egypt there are
certain sacred Snakes (as they are termed) which have horns on their head,
and these are harmless unto men and beasts, otherwise all these Serpents are
virulent and violent against all creatures, especially men: yet there be
certain men in Libia called Psylli, which are in a league, or rather in a
natural concord with Horned-Serpents. For if they be bitten by them at any
time, they receive no hurt at all: and besides, if they be brought unto any
man that is bitten with one of these Serpents, before the poison be spread all
over his body, they help and cure him, for if they find him but lightly hurt,
they only spet upon the wound, and so mittigate the pain, but if they find
him more deeply hurt, then they take much water within their teeth, and first
wash their own mouth with it, then spet out the water into a pot, and make the
sick man to drink

Audiui Lybivos Psyllos, quos aspera Syrtis
Serpentumque ferax patria alit populos;
Non ictu inflictum diro, morsuue venenum
Laedere: quin lasis far and opem reliquis,
Non viradicum proprio sed corpore iuncto.
That is to say,

The Lybian Psylli, which Serpent-breeding Syrtes dwell
As I have heard, do cure poison stings and bytes,
Nor hurt themselves, but it in other quell:
By no roots force, but joining bodies quites.
When a Horned-Serpent has bitten a man or beast, first about the wound there
grows hardness, and then pustules. Lastly, black, earthy, and pale matter:
the genitall member stands out straight and never falls, he falls mad,
his eyes grow dim, and his Nerves immanuable, and upon the head of the wound
grows a scab like the head of a Nail, and continually pricking like the
pricking of Needles: And because this Serpent Castoreum: and also Calamint, and
every thing that procures vomit. And thus much for the description of the
Horned-Serpent.

OF THE HYAENA.
THere be some that make question whether there be any such Serpent as this or
no, for it is not very like that there is any such, and that this Hyaena is the
self same which is described to be a Foure-footed-Beast, for that which is
said of that, is likewise attributed to this: namely, that it changes sex,
being one year a Male, another year a female, and that the couples which
seem to be married together, do by continual intercourse, bring forth their
young ones, so that the Male this year is the female next year, and the
female this year is the Male next year. And this is all that is said of this
Serpent.

OF THE HYDRA, SVPPOSED TO be killed by Hercules.


THE Poets do feign, that near to the Fountain Amymona, there grew a
Plantaine, under which was bred a Hydra which had seeuen heads: whereof one of
these heads was said to be immortal: with this Hydra Hercules did fight, for
there was in that immortal head such a poison as was incurable; wherewithal
Hercules moystened the head of Hercules struck offone of these heads, there
ever arose two or three more in the room thereof, until the number of fifty,
or as some say fourscore and ten heads were stricken off: and because this was
done in the fenne of Lerna, therefore there grew a Proverb of Lerna malorum, to
signify a multitude of irresistable evils.

And some ignorant men of late days at Venice, did picture this Hydra with
wonderful Art, and set it forth to the people to be seen, as though it had
been a true carkase, with this inscription. In the year of Christ's
incarnation, 550. about the Month of January, this monstrous Serpent was
brought out of Turkey to Venice, and afterward given to the German) the whole
Christian world is so afflicted, that there is no more evil that can happen to
the Christian World, except destruction; and therefore I hope that these
mo^sters do not foreshew any evil to the christians. Therefore seeing the
Turkish empire is grown to that height, in which estate all other former
kingdoms fell, I may divine and Prophecy, that the danger threatened hereby,
belongs to the Turks, and not unto us, in whose government this Monster was
found to be bred: and the hinder part of his head seems to resemble a Turks
Cap. Thus far this inscribing Deuiner. But this fellovv ought first of all to
have enquired about the truth of this Picture, whether it were sincere or
counterfeit, before he had given his judgment upon it, for that there should be
such a serpent with seven heads, I think it impossible, and no more to be
believed and credited then that Castor and Pollux were conceived in an Egg, or
that Pluto is the GOD of Hell; or that Armed men were created out of Dragons
teeth, or that Vulcan made Achilles armor; or that Venus was wounded by
Diomedes; or that Ulysses was carried in Bottles, so true I think is the shape
of this Monster: for the head, ears, tongue, Nose, and Face, of this Monster,
do altogether degenerate from all kinds of Serpents, which is not usual in
Monsters, but the fore-parts do at most times resemble the kind to which it
belongs; and therefore if it had not been an unskillful Painters device, he
might have framed it in a better fashion, and more credible to the world. But
let it be as it is, how does he know that this evil does more belong to the
Turks then to the Christians? For shall we be so blind and flatter our selves
so far, as not to acknowledge our sins, but to lay all the tokens of
Judgment upon our adversaries? But if there appeared in us any repentance or
amendment of those faults, for which God has suffered

To turn again to the story of the Hydra, I have also heard that in Venice in
the Dukes treasury, among the rare Monumentes of that City, there is preserved
a Serpent with seven heads, which if it be true, it is the more probable that
there is a Hydra, and then the Poets were not altogether deceived, that say,
Hercules killed such an one. This Hydra which Hercules slew, they say was
ingendered betwixt Echidna and Typhaon, and nourished by Juno in Lerna, in
hatred of Hercules: and they say further, that when he came to kill it, there
came a Crabbe or Cancer to help the Hydra against Hercules, who instantly
called upon Iolaus for help, and so Iolaus slew the Crabbe, and Hercules the
Hydra.

Phaaephatus makes the story of Hercules by killing the Hydra, to be a mere
allegory, Lernus, who was assisted by a Noble man (called Cancer) against the
assaults of Hercules, and that Hercules by the help of Iolaus, King of the
Thebanes, overcame that King and Castle. Other say, that Lerna and Hidra
signify the two kinds of Envy, distinguished by Inuidia, and Inuidentia, in
himself, which arise out of the Monstrous filthy fenne of humane corruption,
like a monstrous hydeous Dragon, with whom he strove, and as he struck off one
head, or ^entation, so two or three other continually arose in the room
thereof. And thus much for the Hydra, whether it be true or Fabulous.

OF INNOCENT SERPENTS.
IDoe read of two kinds of Innocent Serpents, one call Lybies, because they are
only in Affricke, and never do hurt unto men, and therefore Nicander was
deceived, which makes this kind of serpent to be the same with the Amodit,
whose sting or teeth are very mortal and deadly. There be also other kinds of
harmless Serpents, as that called Molurus, Mustaca, and Mylacris, which is
Molurus is derived from Molis Ouron, that is hardly making water.

There be also Domestical innocent Serpents, Myagrus, Orophia, and Spathiurus,
which whether they be one kind or many, I will not stand upon, for they are
all termed by the Germans, Hussunck, and Husschlang, that is a House-Snake.
They live by hunting of Mice and Weasels, and upon their heads they have two
little ears, like to the ears of a Mouse, and because they be as black as
coals, The Italians call them Serpe-Nero, and Carbon, and garobonazzo, and the
Frenchmen Anguille-de Hay, that is, a Snake of hedges. There be some that
nourish them in Glasses with branne, and when they are at liberty Mathiolus
writes, that the flesh of this Snake when the head, tail, Intrals, fat, and
Gall are cut off and cast away, to be a special remedy against the French-poxe.

There are also other kinds of Innocent Serpents, as that called Parea, and in
Italy Ba^on, and Pagerina, which are brought out of the East, where these are
bred. There be no other harmefull Serpents in that Country. They are of a
yellow color like Gold, and about four spannes long: upon either side they
have two lines or strakes, which begin about a hand breadth from their neck,
and end at their tail. They are without poison, as may appear by the report
of Gesner, for he did see a man hold the head alive in his And thus much
shall suffice to have spoken of Innocent Serpents.

OF THE LIZARD.
ALthough there be many kinds of Lyzards, yet in this place I will first
entreat of the vulgar Lyzard, called in the Haebrew Letaah, Lanigermusha,
Lyserda, Carbo, Pelipah, and Eglose. The Chaldaeans Haltetha, and Humeta. The
Arabians Ataia, Alhathaie, or Alhadaie, Hardun, Arab, Samabras, Saambras.
Sauros, and Saura, and vulgarly at this day Kolisaura. The Italians in some
places Liguro, Leguro, Lucerta, and Lucertula: about Trent Racani, and Ramarri,
and yet Romarro is also used for a Toad. The Spaniards Lagarto, Lacerta,
Lagartisa, and Lagardixa. The French Lisarde. The Germans Adax: and when they
distinguish the Male from the Female, they express the Male Ein Egochs, and
the Female Egles. In Hessia Lydetstch: In Flanders and Illiria Gesscierka, and
Gesstier. The Latins Lacertus, and Lacerta, because it has arms and
shoulders like a man, and for this cause also the Salamander, the Stellion, the
Crocodile, and Scorpions are also called sometimes Lacerti Lyzards. And thus

The vulgar Lizard is described on this sort: the skin is hard and full of
scales, according to this saying of Virgill:

Absint and picti squalentia terga Lacerti.
In English thus;

-- Those put away
And painted Lizards with their scaly backs.
The color of it is pale, and distinguished with certain rusty spots, as Pliny
writes, with long strakes or lines to the tail; but generally they are of
many colors, but the green with the white belly living in bushes hedges, and
is the most beautiful, and most respected; and of this we shall peculiarly
entreat hereafter. There have been some Lizards taken in

These little Lizards do differ from the Stellions in this; that they have
blood in their when they bite, they leave them in the wound. Their lungs are
small and dry, yet apt to Aristotle, that the same being cut off, grows
Cardan, because imperfect creatures are full of moystnesse; and therefore the
parts cut off do easily grow again. And Pliny reports, that in his days he
saw Lizards with double tails: whereunto Americus Vespucius agrees, for he
says, that he saw in a certain Island not far from Lysbon, a Lizard with a
double tail. They have four feet, two behind and two before, and the former
feet bend backward, and the hinder feet forward, like to the knees of a man.

Now concerning the different kinds of Lizards, I must speak as breefely as I
can in this place, wherein I shall comprehend both the Countries wherein they
bre^de, and also their several kinds, with some other accidents necessary to
be known. There is a kind of Lizard called Guarell, or Vrell, and Alguarill,
with the dung whereof the Physicians do ^uicenna.
cure little pimples and spots in the face, and yet Bellunensis makes a
question, whether this be to be referred to the Lizards or not, because Lizards
are not found but in the country, out of Cities, and these are found every
where.

There is also another kind of Lizard called Lacertus Martensis, which being
s^^ted with the head and purple Wool, Oil of Cedar, and the powder of burnt
Paper, so put into a linen cloth, and rubbed upon a bald place, do cause the
hair that is fallen off to come again. There be other Lyzards, called by the
Graecians Arurae, and by the Latins Lacertae Marcellus
Pissininae, which continually abide in green corn; these burned to powder,
and the same mixed with the best wine and honey, do cure blind eyes by an
ointment.

The picture of the Lyzard with the belly upward.


Albertus writes, that a friend of his worthy of credit, did tell him that he
had seen in Prouence a part of France, and also in Spain, Lyzards as big
as a man's leg is thick, Piemont in France, where there be Lyzards as great as
little puppies, and that the people of the Country, do seek after their dunge
or excrements, for the sweetness and other virtues thereof.

In Lybia there are Lyzards two cubits long, and in one of the Fortunate-Ilands
called S^rabe. Solinus.
Capraria, there are also exceeding great Lyzards.

In the Island of Dioscorides, near to Arabia the lesser, there are very great
Lyzards, the flesh whereof the people eat, and the satte they sees, and use
in steed of oil: these are two cubits long, and I know not whether they be
the same which the Affricans call Dubh,

The Lyzards of India, especially about the Mountain Nisa, are 24. foot in
length, Aelianus. Polycletus
their color variable, for their skin seems to be flourished with certain
pictures, soft and tender to be handled. I have heard that there hangs a
Lyzard in the Kings house at Anthonies. And to the intent that this may seem
no strange nor incredible thing, it is reported by Volatteran, that when the
King of Portugal had conquered certain Islands in Ethiopia, in one of them
they slew a Lyzard, which had devoured or swallowed down a whole infant, so
great and wide was the mouth thereof: it was eight cubits long, and for a rare
miracle it was hanged up at the gate Flumentana in Rome, in the roof, and
dedicated to the virgin Mary. Besides these, there are other kind of Lyzards,
Lacerta vermicularis, because it lives upon worms and Spyders, in the narrow
walls of old buildings. Also a siluer-coloured Lyzard, called Liacome, living
in dry and sunne-shining places. Another kind called Senabras, and Adare, and
Sennekie. Scen is a red Lyzard, as Siluaticus writes, but I rather take it
to be the Scincke, or Crocodile of the earth, which abound near the Red Sea.

There is also another kind of Lyzard called Lacertus Solaris, a Lyzard of the
Sun, to whom Epiphanius compares certain Heretics called Sapmsaei,
because they perceive their eyesight to be dim and dull. They turn
themselves fasting in their Caves to the East, or Sunne-rysing, whereby they
recover their eyesight again.

In Sarmatia, a Country of the Rutenes, there is a Province called Samogithia,
wherein the Lyzards are very thick, black, and great, which the foolish
Country people do worship very familiarly, as the Gods of good fortune, for
when any good befalls them, they intertaine them with plentiful banquets
and liberal cheer: but if any harm or mischaunce happen unto them, then they
vvith-dravv that liberality, and entreat them more coursely, and so these
dizzardly people think to make these Lizards by this

In the Province of Caraia, Subject to the Tartars, there are very great
Lizards, (or at least, wise Serpents like Lizard) sbred, containing in length
ten yards, with an answerable and correspondent compass and thickness.

Some of these want their fore-Legges, in place whereof they have claws like
the clavves of a Lion, or talants of a Falcon. Their head is great, and their
eyes like two great Loaves. Their mouth and the opening thereof so wide, as it
may swallow down a whole man armed, with great, long, and sharp teeth, so as
never any man or other creature durst without terror look upon that Serpent.
Wherefore they have invented this art or way to take them.

The Serpent uses in the day time to lie in the Caves of the Earth, or else in
hollovv plaees of Rocks and Mountains. In the night time it comes forth to
feed, ranging up and and down seeking what it may devour, neither sparing
Lion, Bear, nor Bull, or smaller beast, but eats all he meets with until
he be satisfied, and so returns again to his den. Now for as much as that
Country is very soft and myery: the great and heavy bulk of this Serpent
makes as it were a Ditch by his weight in the sand or mire, so as where you
see the traling of his body, you would think there had been rolled some great
vessel full of Wine, because of the round and deep impression it leaves in
the earth.

Now the Hunters which watch to destroy this Beast, do in the day time fasten
sharp Paulus Venetus,

As Americus Vesputius sailed in his journey from the fortunate Islands, he
came unto a Country where he found the people to feed upon sodde flesh,
like the flesh of a Serpent, and afterward they found this beast to be in
all things like a Serpent without wings, for they savv diverse of them alive,
taken and kept by the people to kill at their own pleasure. The mouths
whereof were fast tied with ropes, so as they could not open them to bite
either man or beast, and their bodies were tied by the Legs. The aspect of
these beasts was fearful to his company, and the strangers which did behold
it, for they took them to be Serpents, being in quantity as big as
Roe-Buckes, having long feet and strong claws, a speckeled skin, and a
face like a Serpent: from the

In Calechut there are Serpents also, or rather beasts remaining in the fenny
places of the Country, whose bodies are all pild without hair like Serpents:
also in their mouth, eyes, and tail they resemble them, and in their feet
Lizards, being as great as Boares, and although they want poison, yet are their
teeth very hurtful where they fasten them. Like unto these are certain others
bred in Hispaniola, in an Island called Hyuana, having prickles on their back,
and a comb on their head, but without voice, having four feet, and a tail
like Lizards, with very sharp teeth. They are not much greater then Hares or
Conies, yet they live indifferently in trees, and on the earth, being very
patient, and enduring famme many days. Their skin smooth and speckled like a
Serpents, and they have a crap on the belly from the chin to the breast, like
the crap of a Bird.

Besides these, there are also some called Bardati, about the bigness of
Conyes, and of a White-ash-colour, yet their skin and tail like a Snakes,
and they resemble trapped Horses. They have four feet, and with the foremost
they dig them holes in the earth, our of which they are drawn again like
Conies to be eaten of men, for they have a pleasant taste. To conclude, we do
read that in the year 1543. there came many winged Serpents and Lizards into
Germany, near Syria, and did bite many mortally: And in the year 1551. there
were such bred in the bodies of men and women, as we have showed already in
the general discourse of Serpents, first of all recited in the beginning.

In all the nature of Lizards, there is nothing more admirable then that which
is reported of them by Aelianus of his own knowledge. When a certain man had
taken a Engagataes Stone, with the Picture of a Lizard engraven upon it. And
besides, upon the Ring he made 9. several marks, whereof he put out every day
one, until at the last he came at the ninth, and then he opened the pot
again, and the Lizard did see as perfectly as ever he did before the eyes were
put out, whereof Albertus enquiring the reason, could give none, but having
read in Isidorus, that when the Lizards grow old, and their sight dim or
thick, then they enter into some narrow hole of a Wall, and Albertus gives
good reason, because he says, the occasion of their blindness comes from
frigidity congealing the humor in their eyes, which is afterward attenuated and
dissolved by the help and heat of the Sun. The voice of the Lizard is like
the voice of other Serpents, and if it happen that any man by chance do cut
the body of the Lizard asunder, so as one part falls from another, yet
neither part dies, but goes away upon the two Legs that are left, and live
apart for a little season, and if it happen that they meet again, they are so
firmly and naturally conjoined by the secret operation of nature, as if they
had never been severed, only the scatre remains.

They live in caves of the earth, and in graves, and the green Lizards in the
fields and Gardens, but the yellowish or earthy brown Lizard among hedges and
Thorns. They devour any thing that comes to their mouth, especially Bees,
Emmets, Palmer-wormes, Grassehoppers, Locusts, and such like things, and four
months of the year they lie in the earth and eat nothing.

In the beginning of the year about March, they come out again of their
holes, and give themselves to generation, which they perform by joining their
bellies together, wreathing their tails together, and other parts of their
bodies afterward the female brings forth eggs, which she commits to the
earth, never sitting upon them, but forgets in what place they were laid
(for she has no memory.) The young ones are conceived of Albertus, for seeing
they want memory to find out their own Eggs, it is not likely that they have
so much understanding as to discern their own young ones, nor yet so
unnatural as to destroy the noblest of their brood, but rather they should
imitate the crocodile, which kills the basest and spares the best spirits.

It is affirmed, that they live but half a year or six months, but it is
also false, for they hide themselves the four coldest months; and therefore
it is likely they live more then six, for else what time should they have for
generation. Twice a year they change their skin, that is in the Spring and
Autumn like other Serpents that have a soft skin, and not hard like the
Tortoyces. Their place of conception and emission of their Eggs is like to
Birds: and therefore it is a needless question to inquire whether they bring
eggs forth of their mouth or not, as some have foolishly affirmed, but
without all warrant of

They live by couples together, and when one of them is taken, the other waxes
mad, and rages upon him that took it, whether it be Male or Female: In the
old Testament Lizards, Weasels, and Mice are accounted impure beasts, and
therefore forbidden to be eaten, not only because they live in Graves and
design in constancy of life, but also Thieves and treacherous persons. They are
affraide of every noyce, they are enemies to Bees, for they live upon them; and
therefore in ancient time they mixed Meal and juice of Mallows together, and
laid the same before the Hiues, to drive away Lizards and Crocodiles. They
fight with all kind of Serpents, also they devour Snailes, and contend with
Toades and Scorpions. The Night-Owles and the Spiders do destroy the little
Lizards,,

-- Serpente ciconia pullos
Nutrit and invent a per deuia rura lacerta.
In english thus;

With Lizards young and Serpents breed,
The Storke seeks her young ones to feed.
Notwithstanding, that by the law of GOD, men were forbidden to eat the
Lizard, Troglodytes Ethiopians did eat Serpents and Lizards, and the Amazons
did eat Lizards and Tortoyces, for indeed those Women did use a very thin
and slender diet; and therefore Caelius does probably conjecture, that they
were called Amazons, because Mazis carebant, that is, they wanted all manner of
delicate fare. We have also showed already, that the Inhabitants of
Dioscorides Isle, do eat the flesh of Lizards, and the fat after it is boiled,
they use instead of Oil.

Concerning the venom or poison of Lizards, I have not much to say, because
there is not much thereof written: yet they are to be reproved which deny they
have any poison at all, for it is manifest, that the flesh of Lizards eaten, (I
mean of such Lizards as

The Medicines arising out of the Lizard, are the same which are in the
Crocodile, and the flesh thereof is very hot: wherefore it has virtue to make
fat, for if the fat of a Lizard be mixed with Wheat Meal, Halinitre, and
Cummen, it makes Hens very fat, and they that eat them much fatter: for
Cardan says, that their bellies will break Marcellus


A Lizard dissected, or the head thereof being very well beaten with Salt,
draws out yton points of Nails, and splentes out of the flesh or body of
man, if it be well applied thereunto, and it is also said, that if it be
mingled with Oil, it causes hair to to grow again upon the head of a man,
where an Ulcer made it fall off. Likewise a Lyzard cut asunder hot, and so
applied, cures the stinging of Scorpions, and takes away Wennes.

In Ancient time with a field-Lizard dried and cut asunder, and so bruzed in
pieces, they did draw out teeth without pain, and with one of these sod and
stamped, and applied with Meal or Frankensence to the forehead, did cure the
watering of the eyes.

The same burned to powder, and mixed with Creticke Honey by an ointment, cures
blindness. The Oil of a Lizard put into the ear, helps deafness, and
dryueth out Worms if there be any therein. If Children be anointed with the
blood fasting, it Serenus;

Verrucam poterit sanguis curare Lacertae.
That is to say;

-- The blood of Lizards can,
Cure freckles in a man.
The urine and (if there be any at all) helps the rupture in Infants. The
bones taken Arnoldus does much commend the dung of Lizards mixed with Meal,
the black thereof being cast away, and so dried in a furnace, and softened
again with water of Niter, and froth of the Sea, afterward applied to the
eyes in a cloth, is very profitable against all the former evils. And thus much
shall suffice to have spoken of the first and vulgar kind of Lyzard: for
killing of whom Apollo was in ancient time called Sauroctonos.

OF THE GREEN LIZARD.


THe greater Lizard which is called Lacerta Viridis, the green Lizard, by the
Graecians Chlorosaura, by the Italians Gez, and by the Germans Gruner Heydox;
is the same which is called Ophiomachus, because it fights with Serpents in
the defense of man. They are of color green, from whence they are named, and
yet sometimes in the Summer they are also found pale. They are twice so big
as the former Lizard, and come not near houses, but keep spettle joyfully, and
it has been seen that they have done the like to the urine of children, and
they are also handled of children without danger, gently licking moisture from
their mouths. And if at any time three or four of them be taken, and so set
together to fight, it is a wonder to see how eagerly they wound one another,
and yet never set upon the man that put them together.

If one walk in the fields by hollow ways, bushes, and green places, he
shall hear a noise, and see a motion as if Serpents were about him, but when
he looks earnestly upon them, they are Lyzards wagging their heads, and
beholding his person; and so if he go forward they follow him, if he stand
still they play about him. One day (as Erasmus writes) there was a Lyzard
seen to fight with a Serpent in the mouth of his own

It is reported by the Italians, that many times while men fall asleep in the
fields, serpents come creeping unto them, and finding their mouths open, do
slide down into their stomachs: Wherefore, when the Lizard sees a Serpent
coming toward a man so

The use of these Greene-Lizards, is by their skin and gall to keep apples
from rotting, and also to drive away Catterpillers, by hanging up the skin on
the tops of trees, and by touching the apples with the said gall: also when the
head, feet or intralls are taken Palladius. Pliny.
away, the flesh of the Greene-Lyzard, is given in meat to one that has the
Sciatica, and thus much for the natural uses of the Greene-Lyzard.

The remedies arising out of this Lyzard, are briefly these: first it is used
to be given to Hawks, and to be eaten in small pieces, provided so as it be
not touched with their tallants, for it will hurt their feet, and draw their
claws together; also they sees it in water, Marcellus
And there are many ways to prepare it for the eyes, which I will not stand to
relate in this place, because they are superstitious, and therefore likely to
do more harm then good to the English Reader.

There is an oil made of Lyzards, which is very precious, and therefore I will
describe Brasauolus. Take seven green Lyzards, and strangle them in two pound
of common oil, therein let them soke three days, and then take them out, and
afterward use this oil to annoint your face every day, but one little drop at
once, and it shall wonderfully amend the same. The reason hereof seems to be
taken from the operation of the dunge or excrements, because that has virtue
to make the face white, and to take away the spots.

If the upper part in the pastorne of a horse be broken, put thereinto this
oil with a little vinegar, then rub the hoof about therewith, so shall it
increase and grow again, and all the pain thereof shall pass away. The making
of the medicine is this. Take a new earthen pot, put there-into three pints of
oil, wherein you must drown your Lyzards, and

The bones of a Greene-Lyzard are good against the falling evil, if they be
prepared on this manner following: put your Greene-Lizard alive into a vessel
full of Salt, and there shut it in safe, so in few days it will consume all
the flesh and Intrals from the bones, and so the bones may be taken and used
in this case like the hoof of an Elke, which are very precious for this
sickness, and no less precious are these bones. The blood does cure the
beating, bruizinges, and thick skins in the feet of men and beasts, being
applied in flocks of wool.

The eye is superstitiously given to be bound to ones arm on a Quartane-Ague,
and the eyes pressed out alive, and so included in golden buttons or Bullets,
and carried about, do also help the pain of the eyes, and in default hereof
the blood taken out of the eyes in a piece of purple wool, has the same
operation. The heart of a Lizard is also very good

OF THE MYLLETT OR Cenchrine.


THis Serpent called by the Graecians Cenchros, Cenchrines, Cenchridion, and
Cenchrites: is by the Latins called Cenchria, Cenchrus, and Milliaris: because
it comes abroad at the time that Myllet-seed flowreth, and is ready to ripe,
or else because it has certain little spots upon it like Myllet-seede; and is
also of the same color. It is likewise barbarously called Famusus, Aracis, and
Faliuisus. The Germans of all other have a name for it, for they call
Punter-Schlang, and Berg-schlang. Other Nations not knowing it cannot have any
name for it; and therefore I cannot feign any thereof, except I should lie
grossly in the beginning of the History. This Serpent is only bred in Lemnus
and Samothracia, and it is there Nicander. Gillius.
fights the tail is turned upward like a Lions tail, and as a Lion does.
But it is agreed at al hands, that it is called Milliaris, a Millet, because in
the spots of his skin and color, Lucan.
it resembles a Millet-seede, which caused the Poet to write on this manner;

Pluribus ille notis variatam tingitur aluum,
Quam paruis tinctus maculis Thebanus Ophites.
In english thus;

With many notes and spots, his belly is bodyed
Like Thebane herb, Ophtes sightly tried.
But not only his belly, for his back and whole skin is of the same fashion
and color. The length of this Serpent is about two cubits, and the thick body
is attenuated toward the end, being sharp at the tail. The color is dusky
and dark like the Millet, and it is then most irefull and full of wrath or
courage, when this Herb or seed is at the highest. Lucan: Et semper recto
lapsurus limite Cenchris: That is, And the Millet always standing in a straight
and right line, and for this cause when a man flies away from it, he must not
run directly forward, but wind too and fro, crooking like an indenture, for
by reason thereof this Serpents large body cannot so easily and with the like
speed turn to follow and pursue as it can directly forward.

It is a very dangerous Serpent to meet withal, and therefore not only the
valiantest man, but also the strongest beast is, and ought justly to be afraid
thereof, for his treacherous deceits and strength of body; for when it has
gotten the prey or booty, he beclaspeth Scicilia Serpa serena, which is
sometimes as long as a man, and as great as the arm about the wrist. In the
heat of summer they get themselves to the Mountain, and there seize upon
cattle of all sorts, as often as anger or wrath enforces them.

The nature of it is very hot, and therefore venomous in the second degree:
wherefore when it has bitten any, there follows putrefaction and
rottenness, as flesh where water lies betwixt the skin, like as in the
Dropsy: for besides, the common affections it

The cure is like the cure of the Vipers biting, take the seed of Lettice, and
Flax-seede, Sauory beaten or stamped, and wild Rue, wild Betony, and
Daffadill two drams in three cups of Wine, and drink the same, immediately
after the drinking hereof, drink also two drammes of the root of Centaury,
or Hartwort, Nosewort, or Gentian, or Sesamine. And thus much for a description
of this venomous Serpent, one of the greatest plagues, to man and beast in all
those Countries or places, wherein it is engendered, and

OF THE NEVTE OR WATER Lizard.
THis is a little black Lyzard, called Wassermoll, and Wasseraddex, that is a
Lizard of the Water. In French Tassot, and in Italian Marasandola, which word
is derived from Marasso a Viper, because Enudros Sauros. They live in standing
waters or pooles. as in ditches of Towns and Hedges. The color as we have
said is black, and the length about two fingers, or scarce so long. Under the
belly it is white, or at least has, some white small spots on the sides and
belly: yet sometimes there are of them that are of a dusty earthy color, and
toward the tail yellowish. The skin is strong and hard, so as a knyfe can
scarce cut the same, and being cut, there issues out a kind of white mattery
liquour, like as is in Salamanders.



Being taken, it shuts the mouth so hard as it cannot be easily opened,
neither does it endeavor to byte although it be plucked and provoked. The
tongue is very short and broad, and the teeth so short and small, as they are
scarcely visible within the lips. Upon

This Serpent is bredde in fat waters and soyles, and sometimes in the ruins
of old walls, especially they delight in white muddy waters, hiding themselves
under stones in the same water if there be any, and if not, then under the
banks sides of the earth, for they sildome come to the Land. They swymme
underneath the water, and are rarely seen at

There is nothing in nature that so much offends it as salt, for so soon as
it is laid upon salt, it endeavors with all might and maine to run away,
for it byteth and stingeth the little beast above measure, so that it dies
sooner by lying in salt where it cannot avoid, then it would by suffering many
stripes, for being beaten it lives long, and dies very hardly. It does not
like to be without water, for if you try one of them, and keep it

Being moved to anger, it stands upon the hinder legs, and looks
directly in the face of him that has stirred it, and so continues till all
the body be white, through a kind of white humor or poison, that it swells
outward, to harm (if it were possible) the person that did provoke it. And by
this is their venomous nature observed to be like the Salamander, although
their continual abode in the water, makes their poison the more weak.

Some say that if in France a hog do eat one of these, he dies thereof,
and yet does more safely eat the Salamander. But in England it is otherwise,
for I have seen a hog without all harm carry in his mouth a Newte, and
afterward eat it. There be some

OF THE PELIAS.
AEtius making mention of the Elaps and Pelias, two kinds of Serpents, does
jointly speak of them in this sort, saying that the signs of these (...)
common and vulgarly known, that (...) among the ancient writers. But the
Pehas biting (...) about the wound or bytten place, but yet not very dangerous,
and it brings obfuscation or dimnesse to the eyes, by reason that as the
poison is Aetius.

OF THE PORPHYRE.
THere is among the Indians a Serpent about the bigness of a spanne or more,
which in outward aspect is like to the most beautiful and well colored
purple, the head hereof is exceeding white, and it wants teeth. This Serpent
is sought for in the highest Mountains, for out of him they take the Sardius
stone. And although he cannot byte because he wants teeth, yet in his
Aelianus, Volateran, and Textor, to differ from this relation of Ctesias, for
they say that the first poison is like to the drops of Almond-trees, which are
congealed into a gum, and the other which comes from it when he is dead,
is like to thin Strabo writes does kill with an unrecoverable poison, and it
is also of a Scarlet color, to the loins or hinder parts.

OF THE PRESTER.
ALthough there be many Writers which confound together the Prester and the
Dipsas, and make of them but one kind, or Serpent of diverse names, yet seeing
on the contrary there be as many or more which do distinguish or divide them,
and make them two in nature different, one from another, the

The Graecians call it Praester of Prethein, which signifies to burn or
inflame, and Tremellius and Iunius think, that the Serpents called fiery
Serpents, which did sting the Israelites in the wilderness, were Presters. We
find in Suidas, Praester for the fire of heaven, or for a cloud of fire
carried about with a vehement strong wind, and sometimes lightenings. And it
seems that this is indeed a fiery kind of Serpent, for he himself always
goes about with open mouth, panting and breathing as the Poet writes;

Oraque distendens auidus fumantia Praester
Inficit, vt laesus tumida membra gerat.
Which may be englished thus;

The greedy Presters wide-open foming mouth
Infects, and swells, making the members by heat uncouth.
When this Serpent has struck or wounded, there follows an immeasurable
swelling, distration, conversion of the blood to matter, and corrupt
inflammation, taking away freedom or easines of aspiration, likewise dimming
the sight, or making the hair to fall off from the head; at last suffocation
as it were by fire, which is thus described by Mantuan upon the person of one
Narsidius, saying as follows.

Ecce subit facies leto diuersa fluenti.
Narsidium Marsi cultorem torridus agri
Percussit prester: illi rubor igneus ora
Succendit, tenditque cutem pereunte figura,
Miscens cuncta tumor toto iam corpore mayor.
Humanumque egressa modum super omnia membra
Efflatur Sanies, late tollente veneno.
Ipse late penitus congesto corpore mersus.
Nec lorica tenet distenti corporis auctum.
Spumeus accenso non sic exundat aheno
Vndarum cumulus: nec tanto carbasa Cor^
Curuauere sinus: tumid^s iam non capit artus
Informis globus and confuso pondere truncus.
Intactum volucrum rostris, epulasque daturum
Haud impune feris, non ausi tradere busto,
Nondum stante modo crescens fugere cadauer.
Which may be englished thus;

Lo suddenly a diverse fate the joyful current stayed
Narsidius, which Marsinus mirror did adore,
By burning sting of scorching Prester dead was taye^,
For fiery color his face enflamed, not as before.
The first appearing visage fayld, all was out-stretcht,
Swelling covered all, and bodies grossenes doubled
Surpassing humane bounds and members all ore reached,
Aspyring venom spreads matter blown in carcass troubled.
The man lies drowned within swollen bodies banks,
No girdle can his monstrous growth contain,
Not so are waters swollen with rage of sandy flanks,
Nor sails bend down to blustering Corus wayne.
Now can it not the swelling sinews keep in hold,
Deformed globe it is, and truncke ore-come with weight,
Untouched of flying fowls, no beakes of young or old
Do him dare eat, or beasts full wild upon the body bayte
But that they dye. No man to bury in earth or fire
Durst once come nigh, nor stand to took upon that hapless case,
For never ceased the heat of corpse though dead to swell,
Therefore afraid they ran away with speedy pace.
The cure of the poison of this Serpent, is by the Physicians found out to be
wild Purslaine, also the flowers and stalk of the bush, the Beauers stones
called Castoreum, drunk with Opponax and Rue in wine, and the little
Sprat-fish in diet. And thus much of this fire-burning venomous Serpent.

OF THE RED SERPENT.


THis kind of Serpent being a serpent of the Sea, was first of all found out
by Pelicerius Bishop of Montpelier, as Rondoletus writes, and although some
have taken the same for the Myrus or Berus of which we have spoken already, yet
is it manifest that Myrus, which we have showed already to be the male
Lamprey. This Serpent therefore for the outward proportion thereof, is like to
the Serpents of the Land, but of a red or purplish color, being full of
crooked or oblique lines, descending from the back to the belly, and dividing
or breaking that long line of the back, which begins at the head, and so
stretches forth to the tail.

The opening of his mouth is not very great, his teeth are very sharp and like
a saw, his gills like scaly fishes, and upon the ridge of his back, all
along to the tail, and underneath upon the ryne or brimme of his belly, are
certain hairs growing, or at the least Bellonius says he saw by the Lake
Abydus, which live in the waters, and come not to the Land but for sleep, for
he affirms that they are like Land-serpents, but in their color they are
redde-spotted, with some small and duskie spots. Gellius ^th, that among the
multitude of Sea-serpents, some are like Congers, and I cannot te^ether that of
Vergill be of this kind or not, spoken of by Laocoon the Priest of Neptune.

Solennes taurum ingentum mactabat ad aras.
Ecce autem gemini a Tenedo tranqulla per alta
(Horresco referens) immensis orbibus angues
Incumbunt pelago: pariterque ad littora tendunt.
Pectora quorum inter fluctus arecta, iubaeque
Sanguineae exuperant vndas: pars caetera pontum
Pone legit, sinuatque immensa volumine terga.
Fit sonitus spumante saelo, etc.
Which may be englished thus;

Whilst he a Bull at Altars solemn sacrifice.
Behold (I fear to tell) two monstrous snakes appeared,
Out of Tenedus shore both calm and deep did rise
One part in Sea, the other on Land was reared:
Their breasts and redde-blood manes on waters mounted,
But back and tail on Land from foaming sea thus sounded.
OF THE SALAMANDER.


I Will not contrary their opinion which reckon the Salamander among the kinds
of Lyzards, but leave the assertion as somewhat tolerable: yet they are not to
be followed, or to be believed, which would make it a kind of Worm, for there
is not in that opinion either reason or resemblance. What this beast is called
among the Hebrews I cannot learn, and therefore I judge that the Jews (like
many other Nations) did not acknowledge that

The Graecians call it Salamandra, which word or term is retained almost in
all Languages, especially in the Latin, and therefore Isidore had more
boldness and wit, then reason, to derive the Latin Salamandra, quasi
valincendram, resisting burning, for being a Greek word, it needs not a
Latin notation. The Arabians call it Saambras, and Samabras, which may well be
thought to be derived or rather corrupted, from the former word Salamandra, or
else from the Hebrew word Semamit, which signifies a Stellion. Among the
Italians and Rhaetians it retains the Latin word, and sometimes in Rhaetia
it is called Rosada. In the dukedom of Sauoy, Pluuina. In France, Sourd,
Blande, Albrenne, Arrassade, according to the diverse Provinces in that
Kingdom. In Spain it is called Salamantegna. In Germany it is called by
diverse names, as Maall, and Punter maall, Olm, Moll, and Molch, because of a
kind of liquour in it like milk, as the Greek word Molge, from amelgein to
suck milk. Some in the Country of Heluetia do call it Quattertetesh. And in
Albertus it is likewise called Rimatrix. And thus much may suffice for the name
thereof.

The description of their several parts follows, which as Auicen and other
Authors write, is very like a small and vulgar Lyzard, except in their
quantity, which is greater, their legs taller, and their tail longer. They
are also thicker and fuller then a Lyzard, having a pale white belly, and one
part of their skin exceeding black, the other yellow Animal stellatum, a
creature full of stars, and the skin is rough and balde, especially upon
the back where those spots are, out of which as writes the Scholiast, issues
a certain liquour or humor, which quenches the heat of the fire when it is
in the same.

This Salamander is also foure-footed like a Lyzard, and all the body over it
is set with spots of black and yellow, yet is the sight of it abominable and
fearful to man. The Matthiolus
head of it is great, and sometimes they have yellowish bellyes and tails, and
sometimes earthy. It is some question among the Learned, whether there be any
discretion of sex, Pliny affirms that they never engender, and that there is
not among them either male or female, no more then there are among Eeles. But
this thing is justly crossed, both by Bellonius and Agricola, for they affirm
upon their own knowledge, that the Salamander engendereth her young ones in
her belly like unto the Viper, but first conceiueth eggs, and she brings
forth forty and fifty at a time, which are fully perfected in her womb, and
are able to run or go so soon as ever they be littered: and therefore there
must be among them both male and female.

The Countries wherein are found Salamanders, are the Region about Trent, and
in the Alps, and some-time also in Germany. The most commonly frequent the
coldest and moystest places, as in the shadow of Woods, in hedges near
Fountains and Rivers, and sometimes they are found among Corn and thorns,
and among Rocks. They are sildome seen except it be either in the Springtime,
or against rain, and for this cause it is called Animal vernale, and
Pluuiosum, a Spring or raynie creature. And yet there were many of them found
together in a hole near unto the City Sneberge in Germany,

Some do affirm that it is as cold as Ise, and that it therefore quenches
heat or fire like a piece of Ise, which if it be true, then is the old
phylosophicall Maxim utterly false, namely, that all living creatures are hot
and moist, being compared to creatures without life and sense, for there is
not any dead or senseless body that so quenches fire as the Ise does. But the
truth is, that the Salamander is cold, and colder then any Serpent, yet

It naturally loves milk, and therefore sometimes in the Woods or near
hedges, it sucketh a Cow that is laid, but afterward that Cowes vdder or
stock dries up, and never more yields any milk. It also greatly loves
the Honny-combe, and some Authors have affirmed, that they use to gape after
air or fresh breath, like the Camaelion, Will^
yet they which have kept Salamanders in glasses, never perceived by the^ any
such thing. They are slow of pace, and void ground very sluggishlie, and
therefore it is justly termed a heavy and slothful beast.

But the greatest matter in the Salamander to be inquired after, is whethet it
can live and be nourished by and in the fire, or whether it can pa^se thorough
the fire without any harm, or quench and put out the same. Which opinions in
the very relation and first hearing, do cross one another, for how can that
either be nourished or live in the fire, which quenches the same being put
into it? Aristotle that never saw a Salamander himself, but wrote thereof by
hearsay, has given some color to this opinion, because he writes, nonulla
corpora esse animalium quae igne non absumantur Salamandra document^ est: quae
(vt aiunt) ignem inambulans per eum extinguit. That is to say, the Salamander
is an evidence, that the bodies of some creatures are not wasted or consumed in
the fire, for (as some say) it walks in the fire and extinguisheth the same.

Now whether this beseemed so great a Philosopher to write upon hearsay,
who took upon him to gather all natural learning into his own Graunge or
storehouse, and out of the same to furnish both the present and all future
ages, I leave it to the consideration of every indifferent Reader that shall
peruse this story. I for mine own part, rather judge it to be lightness in him,
to insert a matter of this consequence in the discourse of this beast, without
either Authors, or experience gathered by himself. This one thing I marvel
at, why the Egyptians, when they will express or signify a man burnt, do in
Orus.
their Hierogliphicks paint a Salamander, except either fire can burn a
Salamander, or else contrary to all their custom, they demonstrate one
contrary by another.

Nicander plainly affirms, that the Salamander does without all harm pass
thorough the fire, and the Scholiast adds, that there are certain passages
in the skin, out Andreas, who did dippe a piece of cloth in the blood of a
Salamander, and tried afterward whither it would burn or not, but did not find
that it would burn, wherefore he put it upon his hand, and thrust that into
the fire, and then also he felt no manner of pain. And therefore the said
Nicander calls this creature Ciporrhinon, because of a certain fat humor
which issues out of it, quenching the fire, but I rather think that this fat
humor makes the skin to glister, for if it were properly fat, it would
rather kindle and increase the fire then quench or extinguish the same.

Suidas follows the common received opinion, that the Salamander quenches
the fire, (although it be not bredde of the fire as Krekets are) like Ise, and
when the fire is so quenched, it is in vain to blow or kindle the same again
with any bellows, as they say has been tried in the forges of Smithes. And
this also caused Serenus to write, Seu Salamandra potens, nullisque obnoxia
flammis: the potent Salamander is never hurt by flames. Seneca consents
hereunto, and Zoroastres: and so great has been the dotage about

Pliny affirms, that in his own experience he found that a Salamander was
consumed in the fire, and not the fire by it, for he says he burned one to
powder, and used the same powder in medicines.

Sextius also denies that it quenches the fire, and unto this opinion agrees
Dioseorides. Aetius writes, that when it is first put into the fire, it
deuideth the flame, and passes thorough speedily without harm, but if it
tarry long therein it is burned and consumed, Galen, Theophrastus, and Niphus.
And Matthaeolus affirms that he tried the same, and found that if burning
coals were laid upon it, then it burned like unto any other raw flesh, but
being cast into the fire, it burns not speedily.

Albertus writes, that there were some which brought to him a certain thing
which they called Wool, and said that it would not burn, but he found it not
Laua, wool, but Lamygo, that is, a vapoury adhaerencie of a thing which
flies from the strokes o^ hammers upon hot burning iron, and being collected
upon cloth, or cleaving to any part of the forge, it there becomes in show
like yellowish pale wool.

The said Author affirms, that he took a Spyder, and laid the same upon a
hot

There be some that have found a web out of the hair growing upon
Salamanders, which can by no means be set on fire, but this is very false,
because the Salamander Cordus*
has no hair upon it at all. And this kind of web rather comes of a kind
of flax that Pliny vvriteth of, or rather of the Amiantus-stone, called the
Asbest, which is found in Cyprus, whereof they used to make couerings for the
Theaters. This being cast into Dioscorid.
a fire, seems to be forthwith all in a flame, but being taken out again, it
shyneth the more gloriously.

Some also do affirm, that such a piece of cloth or web, may be wrought out
of the Salamanders skin, but Brasauolus denies both the virtue of the stone,
and of the Salamanders hyde or shell, for he says he tried the stone, and it
would not be wrought into wool or spun into thread, and when he cast the
Salamanders shell or hide into the fire, it burned, and the mattery cold liquor
thereof did almost fly into his face.

But some then will demand, where had Pope Alexander that coat, which could
not be purged but by fire, which made it always as white as snow, or that map or
net at Rome wherein (it is said) the napkin of our Savior Christ is preserved,
which men say is not washed but in the fire, which thing was sent to a Bishop
of Rome for a present from the king of Tartars. Unto whom I answer out of
Paulus Venetus as follows. There is a province in Tartaria called
Chinchnitalas, wherein is a mountain abounding with Mines of Steel and
Copper; now in this Mountain there is a kind of earth dug up, which
yields a thread like the thread of wool. After the digging of it up they dry
it in the sun, and then beat it in a brazen mortar, afterward they spinne it
and weaue it, in the same manner that they spin and weaue other woollen cloth.
After it is made, they have no means to purge

There is also an Alum called Alumen Sciolae, and it is the same which among
the Ancients is called Aster samius, out of which also is made cloth that
cannot burn, by reason of a certain oil that it contains or yields to
resist the fire. So out of the stone Pyritis found in Kisheba, there comes
out a green liquour pressed with dead coals, and after Cardan.
that, no fire can burn that cloth. There are also certain Mantles in
Bohemia, (as witnesses Agricola) which could never be burned. And out of the
Magnesia a scaly stone in Boldecrana, they make tables, which cannot be cleansed
but by fire. It is also recorded, that the forenamed Aster samius and pitch
quenched in the juice of Mallows or Mercuriall, Albertus writes of a stone
which he calls Iscullos, or Iscustos, which I take to be a kind of the
Asbeste or Amiantus. And this stone is found (as the same Author writes) in
the farthest parts of Spain, near the Straights and Hercules-pillers.

And this thing seems the less strange* because they which are anointed
with birdlime, or else with vinegar and the white of an egg, do not so quickly
feel the strength of fire and heat, when they thrust their hands into the
midst of it. It is also found, that the hearts of them that dye of the
hart-burning disease, or else are killed by poison, cannot be Pliny.
burned with fire. And therefore when Germanicus Caesar was dead, it being
suspected that he was poisoned by Piso, they cast his heart into the fire and it
would not burn, which Vitellius the Orator. And one Aesculapius in an
Epistle which he wrote to Octauian Augustus says, that there is a poison so
extreme cold, that it keeps the heart of a man poisoned therewith from
burning, and if it lie long in the fire, it waxes as hard as a stone, which so
concreted is called Profilis, from the force of the fire, and from the matter
whereof it consists it is called an humane stone. He also says, that this
is read in color, mixed with some white, and is accounted precious, because
both it makes a man that wears it to be a Conqueror, and also preserves
him from all manner of poison.

When the Salamander is provoked, it casts forth a white mattery liquour or
humor, and it is an audacious and bold creature, standing to his adversary,
and not flying Si mordu to a vne aressade,
Prens ton linccul et taflassade.


That is, if a Salamander byte you, then betake you to the coffin and winding
sheet. The Rhaetians also do ordinarily affirm, that when a man is bytten by
a Salamander, he has need of as many Physicians as the Salamander has spots.
And Arnoldus says, that this means only is the patient kept alive: yet this
is always to be remembered, that the Salamander does not always bite, although
provoked, for Gesner affirimeth, that he having two of them, could never by
beating make them open their mouths, nor that in all his life did he ever
hear of any man bytten by them. And of this thing he not only gathers the
difference of time, wherein their rage shows it self by biting, and when
not, but also the difference of place and region, for that they byte in some
Countries, and not in other. When they have bitten, there follows a vehement
pain and s^abbe upon the place, for the cure whereof there must be taken a
decoction of Frogs, and the broth must be drunk, and the flesh applied to
the sore; or else other common remedies against the poison prescribed in the
Treatise following.

The poison hereof is great, and not inferior to the poison of any other
Serpent, for sometimes by creeping upon Apple Trees, it infecteth and poysoneth
all the fruit, so that those which eat the same, dye and languish they know
not whereof: and if the heel of a man do but touch any small part or portion
of the spettle of a Salamander, it makes all the hair of the body to fall of.
The poison it self is not cold, as some have thought, but Aelianus.
hot, like to the poison of Cantharides, and therefore to be cured by the same
means, as by vomits, Glysters, Ephemeron, and such like. Only Swyne do eat
Salamanders without harm or damage, for there is in them a kind of resistance
in nature, and yet if man or dog do chance to eat of that Swyne that has
eaten a Salamander, it has been observed that they perrished by the same. And
this poison spreads it self the further when it is dead, because it is
strengthened by putrefaction, and wine or water wherein Brasauolus, howbeit I
have heard and read, that if at this day a Salamander g^ heap of corn, she so
infecteth it, that whatsoever eats of that Corn, dyetl* sit were of poison,
and the Kine of Helueria, which are sucked by Salamanders, do ever after
remain barren, and without milk, and sometime also they dye of that evil.
And as Arnoldus writes, it casts forth a certain mattery white humor like
milk out of the mouth, whereupon, if a man or any other living creature do
but tread, he is poisoned thereby, and at the least, all the hair of their
body falls off, and in like sort they in^ect herbs and plants of the earth
by their poison.

Sometimes it happens that beasts or men have swallowed Salamanders, and then
the tongue is inflamed, and all the body falls into grievous torment, by cold
corruption and putrefaction, part after part, and also pains in the fundament
and in the stomach, likewise dropsies, and impostumation, in the belly, crampe
of the guts, and relention of urine. For the cure whereof they give sweet
water, Calamynts, Saint Iohns-wort, ^od with the shells Pine-apples, leafes of
Cypress, Galbanus, and honey or Rozen, Ammoniacke, and Styrax. New cow-milke,
the meal made of flax-seede with sweet water, sweet wine and oil to cause
vomits: Scammony, and a decoction of Calamints and figs, fat Ba^on or
hogges-flesh, and also the eggs of a Torteyse, with the flesh thereof; besides
infinite other remedies, ordained by the goodness of Almighty God, as
Physicians know Carromus.

Out of the Salamander it self arise also some medicines, for it has a
septick power to eat and corrode to take away hayres, and the powder thereof
cures corns and hardness in the feet. The heart tied to the wrist in a black
skin, takes away a quartane-Ague, and also Kiradides writes, that being
bound unto a woman's thigh, it stays her monthly flowers, and keeps her
barren: But this is worthily reproved for untruth, and therefore I will not
commend it to the Reader. And thus much for the Salamander.

OF THE SCORPION.


SCorpios in Greek is attributed both to the Scorpion of the Land Scorpios
chersaios. The deriuation is manifold according to some Writers, either of
Scorpizein ton+'ion, that is, dispersing his poison, or of Sckanoos erpein,
because the motion of it is oblique, inconstant, and uncertain, like as the
flame of fire beaten with a small wind. The Graecians also use for a Scorpion
Blestas, because it casts poison, and octopos from the number of his eight
feet. And in Ethyopia there is a kind of Scorpion which the Greeks call
Sybritae. The Latins do use indifferently Scorpius, Seorpio nepa, and Cancer
also vinula Geptaria, as we find in Ponzettus. The Arabians have many words, as
Harrab, Acrob, Achrach, and Satoracon, Hacparab, algerarat, algeterat, and
algenat and alkatareti, for little Scorpions which draw their tails after
them. Howbeit, among these names also Algarat signifies that little kind of
scorpions, and Algararat, the Scorpion with bunches on his back. The Hebrews,
according to the opinion of some, call a Scorpion Acchabim. The Italians
Scurtigicio, and Scorpione terrestre. The French, Un scorpion, the Spaniards,
Alacram and alacrani, which name they have also given to an Island in the
West Indies subject to their dominion. In Castilia it is called Escorpion, and
in Germany Ein scorpion.

The Countries which breed Scorpions, are these that follow, in Egypt near the
City Coptus, are many very great and pestilent stinging Scorpions, who kill as
soon as they (...)
smite. Also Ethyopia and Numidia abound with Scorpions, especially the latter,
wherein (as writes Leo Affric:) are every year found very many that die of
their wounds. Tenas (...). (...)
one of the Cyclades Islands, is called Ophiessa, because it yeeldes many
Serpents and Scorpions. Also in that part of Mauritania which is near the
west, are Scorpions with wings and without wings: likewise in Iberia, Caria,
and Lybia. And it is also said, that once there were many Scorpions brought
into India, into that part of the Country where the Rhicophagi (...) Leo Afric:
dwell. By the way betwixt Susis in Persia and Media, there were wont to abound
Scorpions under every stone and turffe, for which cause, when the King of
Persia was wont to go into Media, he gave commandment unto his people to
scour the way, by using all means to kill them, giving gifts to them that
killed the greatest number of Scorpions. There is an ancient town in Affricke
called Pescara, wherein the abundance of Strabo.
Scorpions do so much harm, that they drive away the inhabitants all the
Sommer-time every year until November following. And in like sort Diodorus
declares of many other places, utterly forsaken to avoid the multitude of
Scorpions, as namely, one part of Arabia, and the region of India about
Arrhatan, or the river Estumenus, likewise near the Cynamolgi in Ethyopia.
There is also a City called Alabanda, standing betwixt two hills or
mountains, like as a chest turned inward, which Apollonius calls Cistam
inuersam Scorpionibus plenam: a chest turned inward full of Scorpions. In an
Island of Canaria also are many Scorpions, and those most pestilent, which the
Turks gather as often as they may to make oil of Scorpions. In Italy,
especially in the Mount Testaceus in Rome, are Cordus
also Scorpions, although not so hurtful as in Africa, and other places, and
it is thought that Psylli, whose nature cures all kind of venomous Serpents
harms, did only for lucers sake bring Serpents and Scorpions into Italy, and
there they left them, whereby they increase to that number and multitude which
now we see them have. And thus much may suffice to have spoken of the Countries
of Scorpions.

The kinds of Scorpions I find also to be many, but generally they may be
referred unto twain, whereof one is called the Scorpion of the earth, and the
other the Scorpion of the water or of the Sea, whose discourse or history is to
be found among the fishes, for we in this place do only write of the Scorpion
of the earth, which is also called by Auicen a wild Scorpion. Of this kind
there are many differences. First they differ in sex, for there are males and
females, and the female is greater then the male, being also fat, having a
grosser body, and a greater and sharper sting, but the male is more fierce then
the female. Again, some of these have wings, and some are without wings, and
some are in Gillius.
quantity greater then a Bean, as in Heluetia, near Rapirsnill by Zuricke.
The Scorpions called Vinulae, are of reddish color, as it were rose water and
wine mixed together:

The first is white, and the biting of this is not deadly.

The second is reddish, like fire flamant, and this when it has wounded
causes thirst.

The third is of a pale color, and therefore called by the Graecians
Zophorides, and these when they have wounded a man, cause him to live in
continual motion and agitation of his body, so as he cannot stand still, but
remains distract and without wit, always laughing, like a fool.

The fourth kind is greenish, and therefore termed Chloaos, which having
wounded, causes intolerable trembling, shaking and quiuering, and also cold,
so that if the patient

The fifth kind is blackish-pale, and it is called Empelios, it has a great
belly and broad, whereof the poison is great, and causes after stinging an
admirable heaviness, and sorrowful spirit. This kind is called by Gesner,
Ventricosum, because of the large belly, by the Arabians Algetarat, and by
Ponzettus, Geptaria. It eats herbs, and the bodies of men, and yet remains
insatiable, it has a bunch on the back, and a tail longer then other
Scorpions.

The sixth is like a Crabbe, and this is called by Elianus a flamant Scorpion,
it is of a great body, and has tongues and takers very solid and strong, like
the Gramuell or Creuish, and

The seventh is called Mellichlorus, because of the honny-colour thereof, or
rather waxe-colour, and the wings it has on the back, are like the wings of a
Locust.

Also Scorpions do differ among themselves in regard of their outward parts,
for some of them have wings, as those in India, which are spoken of by Strabo,
Nicander, and others, and therefore many times when they settle themselves to
fly, they are transported by the wind from one country to another.

There is also another difference observed in their tails, and in their
stings, for some of them have six knots on their tails, and some of them
seven, and those which have Elianus. Pliny.
seven, are more hardy and fierce, but this falls out very sildome that the
Scorpions have Apollodorus. For if any have seven, then is there likewise in
them a double sting, for there is also another difference, some of them having
a single, and some a double sting, yea sometimes Aristotle
a treble one, and the sting of the male is more thick and strong then the
sting of the female.

And to conclude, there is also a difference in motion, for some of them hold
up their tails from the earth, and these are not much venomous, others again
draw them along upon the earth, a little rolled together, and these are most
deadly and poysonfull, some of them also fly from one Region to another, as we
have showed already.

Again, there is nothing that gives a man a more lively difference then the
consideration of their poison, for the Scorpions of Pharus, and that part of
the Alps near Noricum, do never harm any living creature, and therefore are
they suffered to abound, so as they live under every stone. In like sort, in
the I Will Sanguola, the Scorpions are like unto those that are in Castilia or
Spain, for there the sting of the Scorpion does not bring death, yet they
cause a smarting pain, like the pain that comes by the stinging of a
Pescara in Afric, who ever with their tails vvound mortally. And those in
Scythia, which are great, and hurtful unto men and beasts, kylling Pliny.
Aelianus.
swyne, who do not much care for any other serpent, especially the black
swyne, who do also dye the sooner, if they drink immediately after the wound
received. The like may be said of the Scorpions of Egypt. And thus much for the
different kinds of Scorpions, wherein nature produces a notable variety, as
may appear by all that has been said. Now it follows that we likewise make
some relation of their congruity one with

They are all little living creatures, not much differing in proportion from
the great Scarabee or Horse-flie, except in the fashion of their tails. Their
back is broad and flat, distinguished by certain knots of seames, such as may
be seen in Sea-crabbes, yet their head differs, and has no resemblance with
the Crabbe, because it is longer, and hangs far out from the body, the
countenance whereof is fawning, and virgin-like, and all the color a bright
brown. Notwithstanding the fair face, it bears a sharp sting in the tail,
which tail is full of knots, where-withall it pricketh and hurts that which
it touches. And this Pliny affirms to be proper to this insect, to have a
sting in the tail and to have arms: For by arms he means the two cross
sorkes or tongues which

It has eight feet, four on the one side, and four on the other, from
whence, as we have showed already, it is called Octopos. For the feet and
arms thereof is very much like unto the Sea-crabbe, and therefore may not
unfitly be called either the Mother or the Daughter thereof. They have also
tongues, where-withall they use often to lick and smooth over their own
bodies. And seeing of all other things they love fresh and clean linen,
whereinto they insinuate and wrappe themselves when they can come unto it, then
also first of all they cleanse their whole bodies all over with their tongues,
and next

As we have said already, it has a tail, wherein the sting thereof is
placed, but what this sting is, diverse Authors are of diverse opinions
concerning the same, some affirming it to be hollow, others denying it, finding
in it no passage at all to contain or couay poison. Aelianus again says,
that there must needs be in it a passage or cauitie, although it be so small,
as by no means it can be perceived with the eyes of any mortal man, and in
that sting is the poison less visible, which when it strikes, disperseth it
self instantly into the wound. But what should this poison be? whether a
substance or spiritual humor, surely a substance, which although it be Mole
minima, yet facultate maxima, that is, of great power, although of small
quantity. And therefore another Author (namely Gerardus,) writes thereof
after this manner; Scorpius e centro quod cauum esse creditur emittit humorem
venenosum: That is to say, the Scorpion out of a hollow center, sends forth
a venomous humor. And of this venom we will afterward discourse more at
large. Thus much in this place may serve, to make known the several parts and
members of this Serpent.

Now then it follows, that we enquire about the manner of their breed or
generation, which I find to be double, as diverse Authors have observed, one way
is by putrefaction, and the other by laying of eggs, and both these ways are
consonant to nature, for Lacinius writes, that some creatures are generated
only by propagation of seed, such are men, Vipers, Whales, and the Palm Tree,
some again only by putrefaction, as the louse, the fly, grass, and such
like imperfect things, and some both ways, as myce, scorpions, emmets,
spyders, Purslaine, which first of all were procuced by putrefaction: and since
their generation are conserved by the seed and eggs of their own kind. Now
therefore we will first of all speak of the generation of Scorpions by
putrefaction, and afterward by propagation.

Pliny says, that when Sea-crabbes dye, and their bodies are dried upon the
earth when the Sun enters into Cancer and Scorpius, out of the putrefaction
thereof arises a Scorpion; and so out of the putrified body of the Creuish
burned, arise Scorpions, which caused Ovid thus to write;

Concaua littoreo si demas brachia cancro,
Caetera supponas terrae, de part sepulta
Scorpius exibit, caudaque minabitur vnca.
And again:
Obrutus exemptis Cancer tellure lacertis,
Scorpius exiguo tempore factus erit.
In English thus;

If that the arms you take from Sea-crab-fish,
And put the rest in earth till all consumed be,
Out of the buried part a Scorpion will arise,
With hooked tail does threaten for to hurt thee.
And therefore it is reported by Elianus, that about Estamenus in India, there
are abundance of Scorpions generated, only by corrupt raine-water standing in
that place. Also out of the Baziliske beaten into pieces and so putrified, are
Scorpions engendered. And Basilica on a wall, in the room or place thereof he
found two Scorpions. And some say that if a man chaw in his mouth fasting this
herb Ia: Lacinius
Basil before he wash, and afterward lay the same abroad uncovered where no
sun comes at it for the space of seven nights, taking it in all the day
time, he shall at length find it transmuted into a Scorpion, with a tail of
seven knots.

Hollerius, to take away all scruple of this thing, writes that in Italy in
his days, there Kramdes
was a man that had a Scorpion bredde in his brain, by continual smelling to
this herb Basil, and Gesner by relation of an Apothecary in France, writes
likewise a story of a young maid, who by smelling to Basil, fell into an
exceeding headache, whereof she dyed without cure, and after her death being
opened, there were found little Scorpions in her brain.

Aristotle remembers an herb which he calls Sisimbriae, out of which
putrified Scorpions are engendered, as he writes. And we have showed already
in the history of the Crocodile, that out of the Crocodiles eggs do many
times come Scorpions, which at Philes Aelianus.
their first egression do kill their dam that hatched them, which caused
Archelaus which wrote Epigrams of wonders unto Ptolomaeus, to sing of Scorpions
in this manner.

In vos dissoluit morte, and redigit Crocodilum
Natura extinctum, Scorpij omnipotens.
Which may be englished thus;

To you by Scorpions death the omnipotent
Ruins the Crocodill in natures life extinct.
And thus much for the generation of Scorpions out of putrefaction. Now we will
proceed to the second manner of their generation, which is by propagation of
seed: for although Ponzettus make some question about their copulation, yet he
himself inclines to that opinion, as nearer unto truth, which attributes
carnal copulation unto them, and therefore he alleges the example of flies,
which admit copulation although they engender not thereby. Wherefore we will
take it for granted, that Scorpions lay eggs after copulation, which happens
both in the Spring and Autumn.

And these are for the most part in number eleven, upon which they sit and
hatch their young ones, and when once they are perfected within, those eggs
(which are in sight like the little worms out of which Spyders are engendered)
then do they break their eggs, and drive the young out. For as Isidorus
writes, otherwise the old should be destroyed of the young, even as are the
Crocodiles. Some again say, that the old Scorpions Pliny.


Being thus produced by generation, they live upon the earth, and those which
are bredde of the Sea-crabbe, do feed upon the foame of the Seawater, and a
continual white mould or chalk near the Sea. But the Scorpions of Ethyopia
do eat all kind of worms, flies, and small Serpents. Yea those Serpents
whose very dunge being trodden upon by man, brings exulcerations: And a
trial that Scorpions eat flies, was made by Wolphius at Montpelier, for
having a young one in a box, for one whole month together it lived upon flies,
and grew by the devouring of them bigger, being put into the glass unto him.

They live among tyles and bricks very willingly, and for this cause they
abound in Testaceus. They are also in Bononia found in the walls of old houses,
betwixt the stones and the mortar. They love also clean clothes, as we have
said already, and yet they abhor all places whereon the Sun shyneth. And it
seems that the sun is utterly against their nature, for the same Scorpion
which Wolphius had at Montpelier, lived in the glass until one day he set in
the Sun, and then presently after it dyed.

To conclude, they love hollow places of the earth near gutters, and sometimes
they creep into men's beds, where unawares they do much harm: and for this
cause the Lybians, who among other Nations are most of all troubled with
Scorpions, do use to set their beds far from any wall, and very high also
from the floor, to keep the Scorpions

And if the bed be so placed that they cannot get any hold thereof beneath,
then they clymbe up to the sieling or cover of the house, and if there they
find any hold for their pinching legs to apprehend and fasten upon, then in
their hatred to mankind, they use this policy to come unto him. First one of
them (as I have said) takes hold upon that place in the house or sieling over
the bed wherein they find the man asleep, and so hangs Aelianus.
thereby, putting out and stretching his sting to hurt him, but finding it too
short, and

By this may be collected the crafty disposition of this Scorpion, and the
great subtlety and malice that it is endued withal in nature, and seeing they
can thus accord together in without harm, favoring their own kind, I see no
cause but that nature has grafted much more love betwixt the old and the young
ones, so as neither the old do first destroy the young, nor afterward, that
young one preserved, in revenge of his fellows quarrel, kills his Parents.

It is reported by Aristotle, that there is a hill in Caria wherein the
Scorpions do never sting any strangers that lodge there, but only the
natural borne people of that country. And hereunto Pliny and Elianus seem
to subscribe, when they write that Scorpiones extraneos leniter mordere, that
is, Scorpions byte strangers but gently. And hereby it may be collected, that
they are also by nature very sagacious, and can discern betwixt nature and
nature; yea the particular differences in one and the same nature. To conclude,
Scorpions

The natural amity and enmity they observe with other creatures comes now to
be handled, and I find that it wants not adversaries, nor it again has no
defect of poison or malice to make resistance and opposition, and to take
vengeance on such as it meets withal. The principal of all other subjects
of their hatred are virgins and women, whom they do not only desire to
harm, but also when they have harmed, are never Albertue.
perfectly recovered. And this is at all times of the day, but unto men they
are most dangerous in the morning fasting, before they have vented their
poison, and this is to be observed, that their tails are never unprovided of
stings, and sufficient store of venom, to hurt upon all occasions.

The Lion is by the Scorpion put to flight wheresoever he sees it, for he
fears it as the enemy of his life, and therefore writes S. Ambrose, Exigno
Scorpionis aculeo exagitatur Leo, the Lion is much moved at the small sting of
a Scorpion. Scorpions do also destroy other Serpents, and are likewise
destroyed by them. There was one Cellarius a Physician in Padua, who put
together into one vial a Viper and a Scorpion, where they continually fought
together until they had killed one another. The Swyne of Scythia, which do
safely eat all other kind of Serpents and venomous beasts, without all harm,
Aelianus
yet are destroyed by eating of Scorpions, and so great is the poison of the
Sibarite Scopion, that the dung thereof being trod upon, breeds ulcers.

And as in this manner we see the virulence, and natural evil of Scorpions
against other

First of all therefore men, which are the chief, and head of all living
creatures, do by natural instinct, kill and destroy Scorpions, and therefore
Galen writes thus, Let us (says he) kill Scorpions, Spyders and Vipers, not
because they are evil in themselves, but because it is ingrafted in us by
nature, to love that which is good unto us, but to hate and auert from that
which is evil unto us, Non consider antes genitum ne it a sit an secus, not
considering whether it were so bred or not. As we have showed their generation
out of putrefaction to be by heat, so also is their destruction by heat, for
they are not able to abide

It is also reported, that if Scorpions do at any time behold a Stellion, they
stand amazed and wonderfully astonished. The Viper also having killed a
Scorpion, becomes Gallen.
more venomous, and the Ibis of Egypt destroys Scorpions. There are a little
kind of Emmets, called by the Arabians Gerarets, which are eaters of Scorpions.
The quicke-sighted Hawks also, from whose piercing eye no Serpent can be
hid, when he sees a Scorpion, he neither fears nor spares it. It is also
thought that Hares are never molested Ponzettus
by Scorpions, because if a man or beast be anointed with the rennet of a Hare,
there is no Scorpion or Spyder that will hurt him. Wild-goates are also said to
live without fear of Scorpions, even as the Affrican Psylli of whom we have
often spoken.

Now this virtue against Scorpions, is not only in living things, but also in
the plants of the earth, and therefore Sestius writes, that the seed of
Nose-wort burned or scorched does drive away Serpents, and resist Scorpions,
and so does the root of the Mast-tree, and the seed of Violets, and the same
virtue is ascribed to the herb Lychius, which is englished Calucs-snout, and
also to the seed of Wild-parsenip.

The smell of Garlic and Wild-mints set on fire, or strewed on the ground,
and Dittany have the same operation: and above all other, one of these
Scorpions burned, dryueth away all his fellows which are within the smell
thereof, and therefore this is a most usual thing in Asia and Affricke, to
perfume their houses with Scorpions burned, and in Arnoldus Aetius
steed thereof they make as it were little pills of Galbanume sandaracha, with
butter, and the fat of Goats, and thereof altogether make their perfume:
also Bittony and wild-Pellitory with Brimstone. They use also to cover pannes
with certain things called by them Alkitran and Asa, and with these they
compass the place wherein the Scorpion lodges, and then it is found that they
can never stir any more from that place. And some in steed Palladius Rasis.
thereof, pour oil into their holes after them for the same effect. And the
Husbandmen of Mauritania do tie and fasten to their bedde-sides sprigs of
White-thorne, and Hasell-nuts, where-withall, by a secret antipathy in nature,
they drive away, and keep themselves Strabo. Plutarch.
safe in their beds from the annoyance of Scorpions.

By touching of Henbane they lie dead and overcome, but if one touch them
again with white Ellebore, they revive, and are released from their former
stupefaction. It is also said, that the leafes of water-mallowes do also
astonish Scorpions, and so also does the Radish-roote. The Sea-crabbe with
Basil in her mouth destroys the Scorpion, and so Gillius.
does tunicle and mushrom of Trees. To conclude, the spettle of a man is death
unto Scorpions; and therefore when a certain fellow took upon him to be a
cunning Charmer, and by incantation to kill a Scorpion, he added to the words
of his charm a treble spetting in the mouth of the Serpent, and so it dyed:
whereupon Wolphius which was present Aetius.
and saw this Charmer, did afterward by himself alone at home, make trial of
spettle without a charm, and so found that it alone kills Scorpions,
especially the spettle of a man fasting, or very thirsty. Moreover, there be
certain Lands wherein no Scorpions Solinus.
(...) live, as that about Clupea in Affricke, and the dust of the Island Gaulus
near Cercina, being sprinkled upon a Scorpion, does incontinently kill it.
And so much also writes Hermolaus, of the Region Galatha.

These and such like things are observed by our painful and industrious
Ancestors about the nature of Scorpions, as well that which is hurtful unto
them, and they are afraid of, as those to which they are enemies in nature, and
wound mortally when they light upon them. It is remembered by Textor, that
Orion was slain by a Scorpion, whereupon the Poets have made many tales. They
say that when he was grown to be a man, he was a great hunter, and a
continual companion of Diana, who glorying much in his own strength, boasted
that he was able to overcome any Serpent, or other wild beast, whereat the
Gods being angry, for revenge and taking down the pride of this young man,
caused the earth to bring forth a Scorpion, who killed Orion. Whereat Diana was
very sorry, and therefore in lamentation of her champion, and for the good
deeds he had done unto Lucan on the other side says, that Diana sent this
Scorpion to kill him, envying his famous success in hunting, and that
afterward the Goddess taking pity on him, translated him into heaven. Others
write again, that he had his eyes put out by Oenopion, and that he came blind
into the Island Lemnus, where he received a horse of Vulcan, upon which he
rode to the Sunrising, in which journey, he recovered again his eyesight,
and so returning, he first determined to take revenge upon Oenopion for his
former cruelty. Wherefore he came into Creete, and seeking Oenopion, could not
find him, because he was hid in the earth by his Citizens, but at last coming
to him, there came a Scorpion and killed him for his malice, rescuing Oenopion.
These and such like fables are there about the death of Orion, Orion was slain
by a Scorpion. And so says Anthologius was one Panopaeus a Hunter.

There is a common adage, Cornix Scorpium, a Raven to a Scorpion, and it is
used against them thar perrish by their own inventions: when they set upon
others, they meet with their matches, as a Raven did when it preyed upon a
Scorpion, thus described by Alciatus, under his title Iusta vlcio, just
revenge, saying as follows.

Ruptabat volucer oaptum pede coruus in aur as
Scorpion, audaci praemia parta gulae.
Ast ille infuso sensim per membra veneno,
Raptorem in stygias compulit vltor aquas.
O risu res digna, alijs qui fat a parabat.
Ipse perijt, proprijs succubuit que dolis.
Which may be englished thus;

The ravening Crow for prey a Scorpion took
Within her foot, and there-withall aloft did fly,
But he impoyson'd her by force and stinging stroke,
So rauener in the Stygian-Lake did dye.
O sportfull game: that he which other for bellyes sake did kill,
By his own deceit should fall into deaths will.
There be some learned Writers who have compared a Scorpion to an Epigram, or
rather an Epigram to a Scorpion, because as the sting of the Scorpion lies in
the tail, so Gyraldus.
the force and virtue of an Epigram is in the conclusion, for velacriter and
false mordeat, vel iucunde and dulciter delectet, that is, either let it bite
sharply at the end, or else delight pleasingly. There be many ways of bringing
Scorpions out of their holes, and so to destroy Pliny writes, that ten
water-Crabs beaten with Basil is an excellent perfume for this purpose, and so
is the ashes of Scorpions. And in Padua they use this Art, with small sticks
or straw they touch and make a noise upon the stones and morture wherein they
have their nests, then Cardan.
they thinking them to be some flies for their meat, instantly leap out, and
so the man that deluded them, is ready with a pair of tongues or other
instrument, to lay hold upon them and take them, by which means they take
many, and of them so taken, make oil of Scorpions. And Constantius writes,
that if a man's hand be well anointed with juice of Radish, he may take them
without danger in his bare hand.

In the next place we are to proceed to the venom and poison of Scorpions, the
instrument or sting whereof, lies not only in the tail, but also in the
teeth, for as Ponzettus writes, Laedit scorpius morsu and ictu, the Scorpion
harmeth both with teeth and tail, that is, although the greatest harm do
come by the sting in the tail, yet is there also some that comes by their
biting. This poison of Scorpions, (as Pliny out of Apollodorus writes) is
white, and in the heat of the day is very fervent and plentiful, so as at
that time they are insatiably and vnquenchably thirsty, for not only the wild
or wood Scorpion, but also all other, are of a hot nature, and the symptoms of
their bytings are such as follow the effects of hot poisons: and therefore
says Rasis, all their remedies are of a cold quality. Yet Galen thinks
otherwise, and that the poison is cold, and the effects thereof Rondeletus
prescribes oil of Scorpions to expel the stone, and also the cure of the
poison is by strong Garlic and the best Wine, which are hot things. And
therefore I conclude, that although Scorpions be most hot, yet is their poison
of a cold nature.

In the next place, I think is needful to express the symptoms following
the striking or stinging of these venomous Scorpions, and they are (as Aetius
writes) the very same which follow the biting or poison of that kind of great
Phalanx Spyder, called also Teragnatum, and that is, they are in such case as
those persons be which are smitten with the Falling Sickness.

He which is stung by a Scorpion, thinks that he is pressed with the fall of
great and or sinew, and so the member harmed, swells immediately into an
exceeding great bulk and quantity and aching, with insufferable torment. But
yet (as we have already said) there is a difference of the pain, according to
the difference of the Scorpion that stingeth. If a man be stung in the lower
part of his body, instantly follows the extension of his virile member, and
the swelling thereof: but if in the upper part, then is the person affected
with cold, and the place smitten, is as if it were burned, his countenance or
face discorted, glewish spots about the eyes, and the tears viscous and
slymie, hardness of the articles, falling Aetius. Aelianus.
down of the fundament, and a continual desire to egestion, foaming at the
mouth, coughing, conuulsions of the brain, and drawing the face backward, the
hair stands upright, palenesse goes over all the body, and a continual
pricking like the pricking of

Also, Gordomus writes, that if the prick fall upon an artery, there
follows swouning, but if on a nerve, there speedily follows putrefaction
and rottenness. And those Scorpions which have wings, make wounds with a
compass like a bow, whose succeeding symptoms are both heat and cold, and if
they hurt about the caniculer days, their wounds are very sildome recovered.

The Indian Scorpions cause death three months after their wounds. But most
wonderful is that which Strabo relates of the Albenian Scorpions and Spyders,
whereof he says are two kinds, and one kind kills by laughing, the other by
weeping. And if any Scorpion hurt a vain in the head, it causes death by
madness, as writes Paracelsus.

These and such like are the symptoms that follow the bytings and stingings of
Scorpions, for the cure whereof I will remit the Reader to that excellent
discourse written by Wolphius, wherein are largely and learnedly expressed,
whatsoever Art could collect out of nature. And seeing we in our Country are
free from Scorpions, and therefore shall have no need to fear their poison, it
shall not I trust offend my Reader, if I cut off the relation of Scorpions
cures, as a thing which cannot benefit either the English-Reader, or else much
adorn this history, and so I will proceed to the medicines drawn out of
Scorpions.

The application or use of Scorpions in medicine, is either by powder, or by
oil, or by applying them bruised to their own wounds, wherefore every one of
these are to be handled particularly; and first of all for the powder, it is
made by vstion or burning in this manner. They take ten Scorpions and put
them alive into a new earthen pot, whose mouth is to be dammed up with loame
or such like stuff, then must it be set upon a fire of Vine-tree-shreddes,
and therein must the pot stand day and night until all within it be Haly.
consumed to powder, and you shall know by their white color when they be
enough; otherwise, if they be brown or burned, they must be continued longer,
and the use of this powder is to expel the stone.

Again, they use to make this powder another way, they take twenty Scorpions,
and put them in a little earthen pot with a narrow mouth, which mouth must be
stopped, and then the pot put into a Furnace by the space of six hours,
which Furnace must also be kept close within, and with a gentle fire: then
after six hours take off the pot, and bruise the Scorpions into powder, and
keep that powder for the use aforesaid. There are other ways also to prepare
this powder, but in all preparations the attendant and assistant must take
heed of the fume or smoke that comes from it, for that is very venomous and
contagious.

But besides, there are many things to be observed herein, as first, that the
Scorpions be alive, and that they be killed in oil, then, that they be put in
whole, with every member, Leo, and not in Scorpius, as some without reason have
imagined.

The oil so made, is distinguished into two kinds, one simple, and the other
compound. The simple is made of a convenient number of Scorpions, (as it were
twenty if they be great, and more if they be little, and they being put into a
glass vessel, oil of bitter-Almonds must be poured upon them, and so the
vessel stopped close and set in the sun by the space of thirty days, and
then stirred and used. Yet the women of Ferrara use Oyle-oliue in steed of
oil of Bitter-almonds, and also observe no quantity of Brasauolus
oil, but fill the pot full, and likewise no order in the number of the
Scorpions, putting one to day, and another to morrow, and so more the next
week or month, as they can find them.

The compound-oyle is thus made, they take round Astrologe, Cypress, and
Gentian, the roots of Capars, and upon these they pour oil of
Bitter-almonds, and soake the roots in the oil in the hot sun for the space
of twenty days, then take they a complete Brasauolus, as the former simple,
because the first has more Scorpions, and the second is stuffed or seasoned
with Spyces.

The green Scorpion which is bredde of Basil, having seven knots in the
tail, being beaten and pounded with the herb Scorpion, and so made into
pills, then dried and Kiranides.
put into a glass, are very profitable to him that has the Falling Sickness,
if he take of them three every morning fasting in temperate Wine, but these
being given to a sound man, puts him clean out of his wits. If a man take
a vulgar Scorpion and drown the

The oil of Scorpions made of common Oyle-oliue, is good for the pain in the
ears infused by distillation; also it cures a Pluresie in this manner. They
take meal out of a Windmill, and make thereof with water, paste, or little
cakes, in quantity like a Frenchcrowne, these must be sodde in a frying-panne
in oil of Scorpions, and so applied as hot Alexius
Galenus.
stone of the bladder and the reins. And the like operation has a vulgar
Scorpion eaten, with vinegar and Rose-cakes applied to the gowtie members, it
many times eases the inflaming pains thereof.

The oil of Scorpions is very auayleable in the time of plague, both by
ointment and also in potion: where-withall one did affirm to Wolphius that he
gained a great sum of money, which he prepared in this manner. He took a
hundred Scorpions, and sodde them in the oldest Oyle-oliue he could get, until
such time as the Scorpions were consumed,

OF THE SCYTALL.


THis Serpent called by the Graecians Scytale, is likewise termed by the
Latinists Scytalis, and by some Scicalis, Picalis, Sciscetalis and Seyseculus,
and by Albertus, Situla, which we have already interpreted a Dypsas, but all of
them are most manifestly corrupted from Scytale, the first Grecian word. And
therefore I will not stand to confute them that call it also Caecilia, a
blind-worme, because (after the manner of other Serpents) it eats no Fennel,
but this Caecilia or Blind-worme, we shall afterward demonstrate to Lucan.

Et Scytale sparsis etiam nunc sola pruinis
Exuuias positura suas.
That is in English thus;

None but the Scytall while Winter-frosts abide,
Out of his spotted skin and scales does glyde.
The outward form or visible proportion of this Serpent, is like that which
we have already called a Double-head, and the Latins Amphisbena, except that
the tail hereof is flatter and thicker. The length of this Serpent is like
the longest worms of the earth, and the thicknes like a helue or handle of a
spade. And the greatest difference betwixt this and the Double-head, is that
this goes but one way, and the Double-head goes as well Nicander:

Bifronti similem reperis Scytalam Amphisbenae,
Pinguior est tamen, and cauda, quae nulla fere exit,
Crassior, vt quantum solita est comprendere lignum,
Curua manus strictum quoties tenet ipsaligonem.
Tam prolixa, vagans pluuio quam reptile coelo,
Quod foecunda genus sua gignit viscera tellus.
Nec postquam iuuenis venienti tempore veris,
Magna Deum quando profert serpentia matter,
Liquerit obscuram consueta cubila petram,
Et nitidos tepido sub sole extriuerit artus,
Pandentis se foeniculi teneram exedit herbam,
Sed per opaca morans imi decliuia montis
Se tenet, and multo grauiter latet obruta somn^,
Eque alta sua conquirit sibi pabula terra:
Nec licet id magno cupiat, studeatqque labor
Arescente sitim potis est depellere fauce:
Which may be englished thus;

The Scytall like the Double-head thou shall in feature find,
Yet is it fatter, and tail that has no end much thicker is,
As big as crooked hand is wonted for to wind
The haft and helue of digging-spade the earth that rifts.
As long it is as that thin crawling worm which heavens rain
Begets on fruitful earth, when bowels warmely moystened are,
And when the mother-Goddesse great sends forth her creepine train,
Which is Yeeres-youth, fresh time of Spring, both calm and fair.
Then leaves it off his wonted bed in rock obscure,
And in what sun he stretches out his limbs and sinnewes all,
Eating the new spring-blades of Fennell-herbe, so putting teeth in ure,
In holes of the declining hills so keeps both great and small,
Where time in deepest sleep of buried nature it does pass,
And being hungry, the earth in top of hole it eats,
Quenching the thirst by force of dryest chappes as grass,
Though without pain, desirelesse it seeks these drinks and meats.
The biting of this Serpent, is like the biting of the Double-head, and
therefore the cure is in the same manner, wherefore I shall not need to
repeat the signs thereof, or the cure in this place. And so I will conclude
the story of this Serpent.

OF THE SEA-SERPENTS.
AMong the manifold kinds of Sea-serpents, as well known as Myrus, and many
other like the Serpents of the earth, except in their head, as Aristotle
writes, for that is more like the head of a Conger then a serpent) it
peculiarly has one kind, in color and form not unlike an Eeele, in length
about three cubits, in the gylls and finnes resembling a Conger, but it has a
longer snout or beak, which is also fortified inwardly with very many small
sharp teeth, the eyes not so great, a smooth or pield skin, and hanging over
at the back, having no Pliny called the Dragon of the Sea, which comes out
of the Sea into the Sands, and therein with an admirable celerity and
dexterity makes his lodging place. For the snout thereof is sharper then the
Serpents of the earth, therefore therewith it diggeth and hides it self in
the hole or hollow place which it has made. This is also called by Pliny
Ophidion, but I think it better to follow Aristotle, who does call it Ophis
thalattios, a Sea-serpent, the color whereof is blacker or dymmer then the
Conger.

There be also Vipers of the Sea, which are in show little fishes, about a
cubit long, having a little horn in their forehead, the biting or sting
whereof is very deadly, and therefore Aranei, or Spyder-fishes, saving that
they are said to have a sharp sting in their head, and this a horn, for all
Water or Sea-Serpents, have harder and less heads then the Serpents of the
Land.



In the Germaine-Ocean there is found a Serpent about the bigness of a man's
leg, which in the tail carries a sting as hard as any horn, this haunteth
only the deepest part of the Sea, yet is it some-time taken by the Fishermen,
and then they cut off the tail and cate the residue of the body. Yet I will
not expressly define whether this may be called a Sea-Serpent, or a
Serpentine-fish; it may be it is the same that is a Forke-fish, or Ray, which
by reason of the tail thereof, it might give occasion to Albertus to call it a
serpent of the Sea.

There be also Snakes or Hyders in the Sea, for although all water-serpents, as
well of the fresh, salt, and sweet waters may be called Hyders, or Snakes, yet
there be some peculiar Snakes, such are those in the Indian-Sea, where they
have broad tails, and they harm Elianus
Pliny vvriteth, that once before Persis, upon the coasts of certain Islands,
there were seen of Solinus
these Sea- Hyders very many, of the length of twenty cubits, where-withall a
whole Navy or fleet of ships were mightily affrighted. And the like is reported
of three other Islands, lying betwixt the promontory of Carmania and Arabia; and
such were those also in the Affrican-sea, who are said by Aristotle, not to be
afraid of a Gally, but will set upon the men therein, and ouer-turne it. And
he himself saw many bones of great wild-oxen, who had been destroyed by these
kind of Sea-snakes or Hyders.

The greatest River that falls into the Red Sea, is called Sinthus, the fall
whereof a far Graae about Persis. And the Coast of Barace has the same noisome
premonstration, by occurrence of many odious, black, and very great
Sea-serpents. But about Barygaza, they are less, and of yellow earthy color;
their eyes bloody, or fiery red, and their heads like Dragons. Keranides
writes of a Sea-dragon, in this manner, saying: The Dragon of the Sea is a fish
without scales, and when this is grown to a great and large proportion,
whereby it does great harm to other creatures, the winds or



Here is also the picture of another Sea-serpent, very like to the serpent of
the earth, being Rondoletu.
the upper chap is longer, and stands out further then the nether chap; the
teeth grow therein as they do in Lampreys, but they are not so thick, and it
has two small finnes near the gills like an Eele. The color of it is yellow,
but the beak and belly is of Ash Color, the eyes yellow, and in all the
inward parts it does not differ from a Lamprey, and there is no man of any
understanding, (as writes Rondeletius) but at the very first sight, will judge
the same to be a Serpent, although the flesh thereof be no more harmefull then
the Conger or Lamprey; yet for similitude with other Serpents, I could not
choose but express the same in this place.



There be also in the Sueuian-Ocean or Balthicke-sea, Serpents of thirty or
forty foot in Olaus Magnus, and he further writes, that these do never
harm any man until they be provoked.



The same Author also expresses likewise the figure of another Serpent, of a
hundred and twenty foot long, appearing now and then upon the coasts of
Norway, very dangerous and hurtful to the Seamen in calmes and still weather,
for they lift up themselves above the hatches, and suddenly catch a man in
their mouths, and so draw him into the Sea out of the Ship: and many times
they ouer-throw in the waters, a laden vessel of great quantity, with all the
wares therein contained. And sometimes also they set up such a Spire above
the water, that a boat or little Bark without sails may pass through the
same. And thus much for the Sea-Serpents.

OF THE SEPS OR SEPEDON.
ALthough I am not ignorant that there be some which make two kinds of these
Serpents, because of the two names rehearsed in the title, yet when they have
labored to describe them severally, they can bring nothing or very little
wherein their story does not agree, so as to make twain of them, or to handle
them asunder, were but to take occasion to tautologize, or to speak one thing
twice. Wherefore Gesner wisely pondering both parts, and after him Carronus,
deliver their opinions, that both these names Sepein, because it rotteth the
body that it byteth: in color it nearly resembles the Haemorrhe, yet it
usually goes by spyres and halfe-hoopes, for which cause as it goes, the
quantity cannot be well discerned, the pace of it being much swifter then the
Haemorrhe. The wound that it gives is smarting, entering deep and bringing
putrefaction, for by an inexplicable celeritie, the poison passes over all the
body, the hair rotteth and falls from all parts, darkness and dimnesse is in
the eyes, and spots upon the body, like as if a man had been burned in the
sun. And this Serpent is thus described unto us by Nicander.

Iam quae Sepedonis species sit, qualeque corpus
Accipe: diuersa tractum ratione figurat.
Quin etiam mutilae nulla insunt cornua fronti,
Et color, her suti qualem est spect are tapetis,
Grande caput, breuior dum currit, cauda videtur:
Quam tamen obliquo maiorem tramite ducit.
Quod fit ab hoc vulnus, magnos nocuosque dolores
Excitat, interimens quia fundit and ipse venenum,
Quo sata marcentes tabes depascitur artus,
Indeque siccata resolutus pelle capillus
Spargitur, and volitans candentis pappus achantae,
Praeterea foedum turpi vitiligine corpus,
Et veluti vrenti maculas a sole videre est.
Which may be englished thus;

Sepedons shape now take, and what his form of body is,
It does not go as Haemorrhe does, but trayleth diversely,
His powled head of Haemorrhs horns full happily does miss,
And colors are as manifold as works of Tapestry:
Great is his head, but running seems the tail but small,
Which winding, it in greater path draws after to and fro,
But where it wounds, by pains and torments great it does appall,
Killing the wounded, infusing poison so
Whereby consumed are the lean and slender sinews,
And dried skin lets hair fall off apace,
Like as the winds drive whites from top of thistle Cardus,
Besides the body filth, as with sun parched, loses grace.
Thus does Nicander describe the Sepedon: now also we will likewise relate that
which another Poet says of the Seps, that both compared together, may appear
but one, therefore thus writes Lucan, upon occasion of one Sabellus wounded by
this Serpent.

-- Miserique in crure Sabelli
Seps stetit exiguus, quem flexo dente tenacem
Auulsitque manu, piloque affixit arenis.
Parua modo serpens, sed qua non vlla cruentae
Tantum mortis habet: nam plagae proxima circum
Fugit rapta cutis, pallentiaque ossa retexit.
Iamque sinu laxo nudum est sine corpore vulnus:
Membra natant sanie, surae fluxere, sine vllo
Tegmine poples erat: femorum quoque musculus omnis
Liquitur: and nigra distillant inguina tabe.
Dissiluit stringens vterum membrana, fluuntque
Viscera, nec quantum toto de corpore debet,
Effluit in terras saeuum sed membra venenum
Decoquit: in minimum mors contrahit omnia virus.
Vincula neruorum, and laterum textura, cauumque
Pectus, and abstrusum fibris vitalibus omne,
Quicquid homo est, aperit pestis: natura profana
Morte patet: manant humeri, fortesque lacerti:
Colla caput fluunt, calido non ocyus Austro
Nix resoluta cadit, nec solemn cera sequetur.
Parua loquor, corpus sanie stillasse perustum:
Hoc and flamma potest: sed quis rogus abstulit ossa,
Haec quoque discedunt, putresque secuta medullas
Nulla manner sinunt rapidi vestigia fati.
Cynphias inter pestes tibi palma nocendi est:
Eripiunt omnes animam, tu sola cadauer.
Mole breuis seps, peste ingens, nec viscera solum,
Sed simul ossa vorans tabificus Seps.
Which is to be englished thus;

On wretched Sabells leg a little Seps hung fast,
Which with his hand from hold of teeth he plucked away
From wounded place, and on a pyle the Serpent all aghast
He staked in sands, to him o woeful wretched day,
To kill this Serpent is but small, yet none more power has,
For after wound falls off the skin, and bones appear full bare,
As in an open bosom, the heart whole body gnaweth,
Then all his members swamme in filth: corruption did prepare
To make his shankes fall off, uncovered were knee bones,
And every muscle of his thigh resolved, no more did hold,
His secrets black to look upon, distilled all consumptions,
The rym of belly brake out fierce, which bowels did infold,
Out fell his guts on earth, and all that corpse contain,
The raging venom still heating members all,
So death contracted all by little poisons maine,
Unloosing nerves, and making sides on ground to fall:
This plague the hollow breast and every vital part
Abstrused, where the fibers keep the life in ure
Did open unto death. The life, the lungs, the heart:
O death profane, and enemy unto nature.
Out flow the shoulders great, and arme-blades strong,
Both neck and head gush out in matter, all does run.
No snow does melt so soon the Southern blast among,
Nor wax so fast dissolve by heat of shyning sun.
These things which now I speak I do account but small,
That corpse should run with filthy core, may caused be by flame,
Yet bones are spared in fire, here all away they fall,
Of them and marrow sweet, fate lets no sign remain.
Among the Cyniph plagues this still shall bear the bell,
The soul they take, this soul and carcass both,
The Seps, though short it be, in force it is a hell,
Devouring bones, the body all undoes.
Thus you hear that more largely expressed by Lucan of the Seps, which was
more briefly touched by Nicander of the Sepedon, and all comes to one end,
that both kill by putrefaction. The length of this Serpent is about two cubits,
being thick toward the head, but thin and slender toward the tail. The head
thereof is broad, and the mouth sharp, it is of many colors, so as some have
thought that it could change color like a Camaelion. The four under teeth are
hollow, and in them lies the poison, which are

Pausanias affirms that he himself saw one of them, and that Egyptus the
son of Elatus a King of Arcadia was slain by one of these. They live in
Rocks, in hollow places of the valleys, and under stones, and they fear no
winter, according to this verse of Pictorius.

H^^ hyemis calidus frigora nulla time^.
Which may be englished thus;

Of Winters coldit has no fear,
For warm it is throughout the year.
First of all after the wound appears some blood, but that symptom lasts
not long, for by and by follows matter smelling very strong, swelling tumor,
and languishing pain, and all the parts of the body affected herewith become
white, and when the hair falls off, the patient sildome lives above three
or four days after. The cure hereof is by the same means that the poison of
the Viper, the Ammodyte and Horned-serpent is Aetius prescribes a spu^ge wet
in warm vinegar to be applied to the wound, or else to lay the ashes of chafe
with the earth upon which they are Aetius.
burned, to the place, and to annoint it with butter and honey, or else lay unto
it Millet and Honey, likewise Bay-springs, Oximell, Purslaine, and in their diet
salt fish.

Aristotle writes of a little Serpent which by some is called a sacred or holy
Serpent, and he says that all other Serpents do avoid it, and fly from it,
because whatsoever is bytten by it, presently rotteth. It is in length (as he
says) a cubit, and it is rough all over, and therefore I take this Serpent to
be a kind of Sepedon. Also Aristoxenus says, that he knew a man by touching
this Serpent to dye, and afterward that the garment which he wore at the time
of the touching the Serpent, did likewise rot away. And thus much for

OF THE SLOVV-VVORME.


THis Serpent was called in ancient time among the Graecians Tythlops and
Typhlines, and Cophia, because of the dimnes of the sight thereof, and the
deafenes of the ears and hearing, and vulgarly Tephloti, Tefliti, and
Tephlini, and from hence the Latins have taken their word, Caecilia quasi
caecus serpens, a blind serpent, and it is also called Cerula, Caecula, and
Ceriella, as witnesses Albertus, because the eyes thereof Scaliger
are none at all, or very small. The Italians call it, Bisa orbala, and the
Florentines Lucignola, the Germans Blyndenschlycher, the Heluetians En vieux,
al' annoilx, and the people of Narbon Nadels.

It being most evident that it receives name from the blindness and deafenes
thereof, for I have often proved, that it neither hears nor sees here in
England, or at the most womb: they have such a belly by nature, as may be
distended and stretched out accordingly as the young ones grow in their womb.
It has a smooth skin without all scales. The nether eye-lidde covers all
the eye it has, which is very small: about the head they are more light
colored, then about the other parts of the body: The tongue is cloven, and
the top thereof very black. They are in length about a spanne, and as thick
as a man's finger, except toward the tail which is more slender, and the Female
is more black then the Male. The passage or place of excrements or conception
is transuerse. If they be killed with the young in their belly, the little ones
will instantly creep out at their dammes mouth, and some times (as witnesses
Bellonius) in this little serpent are found forty little young ones. They are
in Greece and England, and come not abroad Aqua-vitae, with this some men are
cured of the plague. And thus much of this Oswaldus
little Serpent.

OF THE SNAKE.
THere is no reasonable Learned-man that makes question, that Anguis in Latin
is a general word for all kind of Snakes and Serpents, and therefore when
Virgill writes of the Fury Alecto, how she cast a Snake into the bosom of
Amata, he first of all calls it Anguis, a Snake, and presently after Coluber
and Vipera, a Serpent, as appears by these verses of his following. Aeneid. 7.

Huic dea coeruleis vnum de crinibus anguem
Conijcit, inque sinum praecordia adintima subdit:
Vipeream inspirans animam, fit tortile collo
Aurum ingens Coluber:
Which may be englished thus;

To her the Goddess a Snake made of the Gorgons hair,
Which to the bottom of her breast and entralls made to slide,
Inspyring to her a Vipers soul though she were fair,
For chain of gold an Adder bout her neck did glyde.
And this is the less to be admired or doubted, seeing the very word Anguis
seems to Angulosus, winding or turning, for every kind of Serpent may be
folded or winded up together almost in every fashion. Yet sometimes, as the
Graecians use Ophis for one kind, as Haemorrhe or Hor for Aspe, so also is the
word Anguis used for one kind, which we call a Snake, that is, a little
Serpent living both in the water and on the earth. Howbeit, as we shall show
afterward, when it is in the water it is called Hydrus and natrix, and when it
is on the land, it is called Chersydrus.

Among the ancient Pagans, Snakes were accounted the Gods of the Woods, and
this caused Perseus to write this verse following; Pinge duos angues, pueri
sacer est locus.


That is, o ye children, draw the figure of two Snakes, for this place,
(meaning the grove of vvood) is a holy place, and sacred to the Gods. And in
like sort, the Snake in ancient Aesculapius, because it was thought to be
without venom, and to contain in it many excellent medicines or remedies
against other evils, and also a kind of divine power or help to drive away
calamities, whereof I remember that I have read this story in Valerius Maximus.

Rome (says he) our City was for three years together continually vexed with
pestilence, so as neither the mercy of God could be obtained for the release of
this evil, nor all wit, power, or industry of man put an end unto it. At last
by the care and travail of the Priests, it was found in the writing and
Books of Sybill, that unless they could obtain of the Epidaurians the
Holy-Snake of Aesculapius, there should be no end of that pestilence.

For which cause there were Ambassadors sent to the City of Epidaurus, to
entreat at the hands of the Citizens and Priests, that holy beast or Snake (as
was profanely supposed) and they attained the end of their journey, for the
Epidaurians did kindly entreat them, and sent with the Snake of Aesculapius,
and then (says he:) Tam promptam Epidauriorum indulgentiam numem ipsius dei,
subsecutum, verba mortalium coelisti obsequio comprobauit: That is, The very
grace and power of God seconded that favorable indulgence of the Epidaurians,
and with an heavenly obsequiousnes allowed and performed the words and writings
of mortal creatures, (meaning the Sibils writings aforesaid. For that Snake
(which the Epidaurians never see but they worship, with as great reuereuce as
they would Aesculapius himself; for it never appears but for their exceeding
great good and commodity) began to slide about the broadest streets and
noblest part of the City, gently looking upon every body, and licking the
earth, and so continued three days, to the religious admiration of all the
Beholders, bearing an undoubted aspect and alacrity, for the obtaining and
aspiring a more beautiful habitation: so at last it came to the Isle near
Triremis, whereinto in the sight of all the Mariners it did ascend and enter,
and lodged it self round in that place, where stands the house of Quintus
Ogulimus: which story is thus most excellently followed by Ovid in his
Metamorphos:

The folk of Rome came hither all by heaps, both men and wives,
And eke the Nuns that keep the fire of vesta as their lives
To meet the God, and welcome him with joyful noise: and as
The galley rowed up the stream, great store of incense was
On altars burnt on both the banks, so that on either side,
The fuming of the Frankincense, the very air did hide,
And also slain in sacrifice full many cattle dyed.
Anon he came to Rome, the head of all the world: and there
The Serpent lifting up himself began his head to bear
Right up along the mast, upon the top whereof on hye,
He looked round about a meet abiding place to spy:
The Tyber does divide it self in twain, and does embrace
A little I Will Triremis, for so the people term the place,
From either side whereof, the banks are distant equal space:
Apollas Snake descending from the mast, conuayed him thither,
And taking of his heavenly shape, as one repayring hither,
To bring our City healthfulnesse, did end our sorrows quite.
Thus says Ovid: But the truth is, that the Poet did but feign this thing for
the excitation and stirring up of the minds of men to religion and religious
worship of the Heathen Gods; and therefore this Snake of Epidaurus was but a
fiction, and therefore in the beginning of the History he makes it to be
Aesculapius in the likeness of a Snake, for in a vision he shows how that
Aesculapius appeared to the Roman Ambassador, and told him that he would
appear in that form, saying;

Pone metus, veniam, simutachraque nostram relinquam,
Hunc modo serpentem, baculumque neribus ambit,
Perspice and vsque not a visum vt cognosceri possis,
Vertar in hunc, sed mayor ero, tantusque videbor:
In quantum verti coelestia corpor a possunt.
Which may be englished thus;

Fear not, for I will come and leave my shryne.
This Serpent which does wreath with knots about this staff of mine,
Mark well and take good heed thereof, for into it transformed will I be,
But big to I will be, for I will seem of such a size,
As wherein may celestial bodies turn suffize.
But all Poets are so adicted to fayning, that I my self may al^^s^^me while I
imitate them, to set down fables for truth: and if ever there were such a
Snake as this, it was diabolical, and therefore in nature nothing to be
concluded from (...), and in that place of Biremis and Tiremis, was Aesculapius
worshipped. And at this day in the Gardens called S. Bartholomewes-Gardens,
there is a Marble-shyppe, on the side where of is the figure of a crceping
Snake, for the memory of this fact, as writes Gyraldns.

But in the Emblems and documents of the ancient Heathen, it is certain that
Aesculapius, and the Snake and the Dragon, did signify health, and from hence
it came to have the name of the Holy-Snake, and also to be accounted full of
medicine. The true occasion in nature, was for that about the countries of
Bononia and Padua, they have a Snake Phurnut:
which they call Bisse, and Bisse-angue anca, and about Padua, Autza, which
they say is harmless. And as well children as men, do often take up the same
into their hands; with no more fear and dread then they would do a conny, or
any other tame and meek

By the relation of Pellinus, it is in length five spannes and five fingers,
the head also compared with the body, is long, and in the neck thereof are two
blanches, and betwixt them a hollow place, the back part whereof is attenuated
into a thin and sharp tail, and upon either chappe they have many teeth,
which are sharp, and without poison, for when they byte, they do no more
harm then fetch blood only, and these, men for ostentation sake wear about
their necks, and women are much terrified by them in the hands of wanton young
boys. The back of this Snake, (as writes Erastus) is blackish, and the other
parts green, like unto Leekes, yet mixed with some whiteness, for by reason
it feeds upon herbs, it bears that color. They are also carried in men's
bosoms, Erastus affirms, that he saw a Friar knit one of them up together
like a garter, but when he pulled it harder then the Snake could bear, it
turned the head about and bytte him by the hand, so as the blood followed, yet
there came no more harm, for it was cured without any medicine, and therefore
is not venomous.

In the mountain of Mauritania called Ziz, the Snakes are so familiar with
men, that they wait upon them at dinnertime like cats and little dogs, and
they never offer any L^o Asrie:
harm to any living thing, except they be first of all provoked. Among the
Bygerons inhabyting the Pyrenes, there be Snakes 4. foot long, and as thick
as a man's arm, which likewise live continually in the houses, and not only
come peaceably to their tables, but

Among the Northern people they have household-Snakes, as it were
houshold-gods, and they suffer them both to eat and to play with their
Infants, lodging them in the cradles Olaus.
with them, as if they were faithful Keepers about them, and if they harm any
body at any time, they account it Pium piaculum, a very divine and happy
mischaunce. But after they had received the Christian-fayth, they put away all
these superstitions, and did no more foster the Serpents brood, in detestation
of the devil, who beguiled our first Parents in the similitude of a Serpent.
Yet if it happen at any time that a house be burned, all the Snakes hide
themselves in their holes in the earth, and there in short space they so
increase, that when the people come to reedifie, they can very hardly displant
their number. Plautus in his Amphitryo, makes mention of two-maned-Snakes,
which descended from the clouds in a shower; but this opinion grew from the
fiction of the Epidaurian-Snake, which only by the Poets is described with a
mane and a comb, and therefore I will not express the Snake to have a mane.

There is no cause why we should think all Snakes to be without poison, for
the Poet has not warned us in vain, where he says;

Frigidus, o pueri fugite hinc, latet Anguis sub herba:
Which may be englished thus;

Fly hence you boys as far as feet can bear,
Under this herb a Snake full cold does leare.
For this cause we will leave the discourse of the harmless Snake, and come
to those which are no way inferior to any other Serpent, their quantity and
spirit being considered, wherefore we are to consider, that of Snakes which
are venomous and hurtful, Hydra, hydros, hydrales, karouros, and Enhydris, in
Latin Natrix, and Lutrix. Munster calls it in Hebrew, Zepha, and Auicen
relates certain barbe, rous names of it, as Handrius, Andrius, and Abides,
and Kedasuderus, Echydrus and Aspistichon. The Germans call it Nater,
Wasser-nater, and Wasser-schlange: and they describe it in the manner as it is
found in their Country, which does not very far differ from them of our
Country here in England. It is (as they say) in thicknes like the arm of a
man or child, the belly thereof yellow, and of a golden color, and the back
blackish-greene, and the very breath of it is so venomous, that if a man hold
to it a rod newly cut off from the Tree, it will so infect it, that upon
it shall appear certain little bags of gall or poy^on.

And if this Serpent fortune to byte a man in the foot, then is the poison
presently dispersed all over the body, for it has a fiery quality, and
therefore it continually ascends, but when once it comes to the heart, the
man falls down and dies. And therefore the meetest cure is to hang the
party so wounded up by the heels, or else speedily to cut off the member
that is bitten. And that which is here said of the vvater-Snake, does also as
properly belong to the Land-snake, seeing there is no difference betwixt these,
but that at certain times of the year they forsake the water when it draws
or falls low, and so betake themselves to the Land.

They live in the water and in the earth, (but they lay their eggs on the land
in hedges, or in dunghills) and especially in those waters which are most
corrupt, as in pooles where there is store of Frogs, Leaches and Newtes, and
but few fishes, as in the Lakes about Puteoli and Naples, and in England all
over the Fennes, as in Ramsey, Holland, Ely, and o^ such like places, and when
they swymme they bear their breast above the water. They abound also in
Corcyra, and about Taracina in Italy, and in the Lake Nyclea, and especially in
Calabria, as the Poet writes:

Est etiam illa malus Calabris in saltibus Anguis,
Squammea conuoluens sublato pectore terga
Atque notis longam maculosus grandibus aluum,
Qui dum amnes vlli rumpuntur fontibus, and dum
Vere madent vdo terrae ac pluuialibus austris
Stagna colit, ripisque habitans hic piscibus atram
Improbus ingluuiem, ranisque loquacibus explet
Postquam: exhausta palus terraeque ardore dehiscunt,
Exilit in siccum and flammantia lumnia torquens
Saeuit agris, asperque siti, atque exterritus ^st^.
Which may be thus englished;

That evil Snake in the Calabrian coasts abides,
Rolling his scaly back by holding up the breast,
And with great spots upon large belly glydes,
When as the Rivers streams in fountains all are ceast.
For whiles the moystened spring with rain from Southwind falls,
It haunts the pooles, andin the water all blaoke it feeds,
In ravening wise both fish and frogs do fill his gall*
For why* when Summers drought enforce, then must in needs
Fly to dry Land, rolling his flaming eye,
Rage in the fields to quench his thirstfull dry.
There be some Writers that affirm, that there is a certain stone in a
Water-Snakes head, which it casts or ^omiteth up when the skin thereof is
^eyed from the body, and after it is so cast up* it must be received into a p^
of silk, the virtue where of is to be proved after this manner; Fill a brass
caldron or kettle full of water, and about the Kiranides affirms that he
bound to a woman that had the Dropsy, and she was thereby delivered from her
disease; for every day he found that her belly did fall the quantity of four
fingers, until it came to the natural bigness, and then he took it off, for
he says that if he had not then taken it off, it would also have dried up the
native humidity.

In like sort, the virtue of this stone is applied against the rhume in the
legs, or any flux of the eyes, ears or head, but the use of it must not
exceed the quantity of three hours at a time. It also drives out of the
body all venomous worms, and is a special remedy Serpentinus and Draconit^s,
but it is questionable whether it be generated in the head of the Snake, or by
their vapourous breath, concurring together in the Spring or Winter-season.
Some of these stones are said to be of a blewish-greene color, and the form
thereof pyramidall. Albertus says, he has seen one of them that was black,
and not lightsome, only about the edges of it there was some palenesse
apparent, and in the superficies or upper part thereof, there was (as he
writes) a beautiful picture of a Snakes proportion, and the virtue thereof did
put to flight venomous beasts, and also eure their harmefull poisons.

Such like things we have already showed to be in the stone which the Toade is
said to have, but this stone is more likely to be the Ophites, for in the
Castle of Tangra, once the Charles the fourth, there is a Chapel wherein are
many precious stones, wrought in the vvalls and doors, and among diverse other
these Ophites. But where as there is a pyramidall form attributed to these
stones, I take it therefore that it is the same which Pliny calls
Glossapetra, for in show it resembles the tongue of a Snake, and the tongue of
a Snake being great or broad at the root, and smaller toward the end or
typpe thereof, is rightly said to be of a pyramidall form: and among the
Germans it is called by a peculiar word, Naterzungen, that is, Snakes-tongue.

And such a kind of stone as this Snakes-tongue, (as Agricola and some other
Authors vvriteth) is found in a certain earth near Linuburgh in Saxony. And
Conradus Gesner affirms, that there is a certain Town in Germany called
Aenipon, where there is one Sugne, because there be Serpents seen in it
twyning their tails together, or folding them one within another.

There (...) wont to be a superstitious way to extract or express this stone
from out of the Snake, which was done in this manner; First, when they had
taken the Snake alive, they did presently hang her up by the tail, then just
underneath her they did make a suffumigation of Laurel, and so did conjure the
Snake, saying; Per Dominum qui te creauit, lapidem tuum quem in capite tenes te
instanter eijcere iubeo: This kind of enchaunting Charm, I hold not worthy to
be translated, and yet let me not be blamed for the relation of it, seeing it
is pertinent to this story to know all the good and evil about these Serpents.

And for mine own opinion, I account no better of these Snake-stones then I
do of the Toade-stones, concerning which I have already given my opinion in
another place. And therefore what here is related of this stone, let it be
examined, and then be either received or refused.

Many, and almost infinite are the Epithets which are given to Snakes, whereby
their nature is expressed, as Aliger anguis, the winged-snake, black, fierce,
blew, greedy, wild, cold, Gorgonean, wreathen, slyding, deadly, lightsome,
spotted, martial, threatening, purple, wholesome, scaly, terrible, winding,
grym, swelling, fearful, venomous, green, infolded or implicit, horrible,
hissing, marsian, maurian, pestilent, retorted, and such other like, as it has
pleased the several Authors writing hereof to ascribe and attribute

There is great account or reckoning made of their eggs, which they lay in the
Sommer-time, for first of all they are so glewed and conjoined together, partly
with the spettle and moystnes which proceeds from their mouths, and partly
with the spume and froath of their own body, that a man seeing their heaps,
would judge them to be coupled together by some artificial devise. These eggs
thus knotted together in bunches, the Latins call Anguinum. The Druides or
ancient Wisards of England and Scotland, have delivered, that if the Snake
hysse, these will of their own accord fly up into the air, and then if
some Wiseman take them by prevention, before they touch the ground

And the folly of these also proceeded so far, that they were not a shamed to
report, that if one of these anguines or bunches of eggs, were tied to a piece
of gold, it would swym in a River against the stream. These they commended
unto Princes and great men to carry about with them in the time of wars and
other contentions, and that therefore when a Roman Knight of Volontij, was
found by Claudius to carry one of these about him, he was by the Emperors
commandment put to death.

But to leave vanities, we will prosecute the true and natural description of
their eggs in this manner. They are round and soft, in color white, cleaving
(as we have already Gesner reports, that he had one sent him of the
proportion of a Lentill, and as great as the fist of a man, and within every
egg appear certain small things, like the tails of Serpents, or Leaches,
being in number ten, five greater and five smaller, one folded or lapped
within another. And these have also little pustules upon the skin or crusts,
whereof one does not touch the other.

Out of these eggs come the young ones, but I cannot affirm what great
affection the

Their ordinary food for the most part, is earth, frogs, worms, Toades,
and especially Paddocks, or crooke-backed Frogs, Newtes, and small fishes.
The Foxes and Snakes which are about the River Nilus are at continual
variance, and besides, the Hearts are by nature common enemies to all Serpents.

They are not in venom inferior to other Serpents, for they infect the waters
near to houses, and are many times the causes of diseases and death, whereof
the Physicians cannot discern. When they bite or sting, there follows
extreme pain, inflammation, greenenes or blacknes of the wound, dizzines in
the head, and death within three days. Whereof dyed Phyloctetes, General of
the Fleet of Greece, in Lemnos, Daedalus and Menalippus.

The cure of this evil must be by Origan stamped and laid to the sore with lie
and oil, or ashes of the root of an Oak with pitch, or Barly-meale mixed
with honny and water and sod at the fire. And in drink take wild Nosewort,
Daffadill-flowers, and Fennellseede in Wine. And it is also said, that a man
carrying about him the Liver of a Snake;

Of Spyders and their several sorts: And first of those that are commonly
called Phalangies.
THIS kind of venomous creature, of the Latins is called Arnanaeus, or
Aranea, and of Cicero in his books Denatura Deorum, Araneola, and Araneolus.
Of the Graecians, Arachnes or Arachne. Hesichius terms it Stibe. The Hebrews
Doctor Bonhams discourse of Spyders.
name it Acobitha, Acbar, Acabith, and Semamith. The Arabians, Sibth, and
Phihib. In the German tongue, Spinn, and Banker. In English, Attercop,
Spyder, and Spynner. Of the Brabanders, Spinne. In France, Araigne. In Italy,
Ragno, and Ragna. In Spain, Arana or Taranna. Of the Illyrians it is called
Spawanck. Of the Polonians, Pajak, and Pajeczino. Of the Hungarians, Pox. Of
the Barbarians, Roatan, and Kersenat. Isidore in his twelfth book says, that
the Spyder is termed Araneus, because she is both bred and fed in the air:
but herein he has fallen into a double error. For if they lived only in
the air, and by the air, as he would seem to enforce, I marvel to what end
and purpose they should so busily make and pitch their nets for the ensnaring
of flies? And if they receive their first being and breeding in the air, I
cannot see to what purpose they do either lay eggs, or exclude small little
worms after their coupling together.

But we will easily pardon this presumptious Etymologist, and deep diuer into
Interpretations, with others also of the same humor, whose ordinary custom
thus to dally and play with words, is with them esteemed as good as
Statute Law, for the most part. There are many sorts of Spyders, and all of
them have three joints apeece in their legs.

Estque caput minimum toto quoque corpore paruum est,
In latere exiles digiti pro cruribus haerent,
Latera venture habet, de quo tamen illa remittet
Stamina.
Which may be englished thus;

Little is their head, likewise the body small
All over is, and fingers thin upon the sides
In steed of legs, out of the bellyes flancke do fall:
Yet out of which she makes her web to glyde.
All Spyders are venomous, but yet some more, and some less. Of Spyders that
neither gut, and greedy devouring maw, have purchased to themselves the names
of wolfes, and hunting-Spyders. The least sort of these weaue no webbes at all,
but the greater begins to make a small and harsh web about hedges nie unto
the earth, spreading and setting the same abroad in the very entry, and in
void places near their lurking holes, their deceitful nets, observing very
diligently the stirring of their deceitful webbes, and peroeiuing them
moving, though never so lightly, she makes no stay, but with all speed
possible hasteneth her self to the place, and whatsoever she there finds,
she seazeth upon as her lawful prize.

The most dangerous and hurtful Spyders are called Phalangia, if they byte any
one, (for they never strike) their poison is by experience found to be so
perrillous, as that there will Aristotle in his xj. book De Animal. Psullas, or
Pulices, and Pitheci or Simij. Of some they are called Oribates, because they
are usually found among Trees that grow upon Mountains. They are also called
Hypodromi, because they live under the leaves.

The Phalangium or Phalanx Spyder, is unknown in Italy (as Pliny says) and
there are found many sorts of them. One sort of them is very like unto a great
Pismire, but much Phalanx, of Aetius is described to have a body much
resembling soote in color, his neck ash-colored, and his back glistering,
as it were with many stars on it. Nicander calls it Agrostes, and Aetius,
Lucos. The Latins term it Venator, that is, the Hunter. This stingeth but
weakly, without any pain at all, but yet it is somewhat venomous, though not
very much. This kind of Phalanx is often found among Spyders-webbes, where,
(after the fashion of some Hunters) they beguile and entrap flies, gnats, and
Bees, gad-flyes and Waspes. (And if Lonicerus write no more then may be
warranted for truth,) those great horse-flyes or oxe-flyes and Brimsees, that
in Sommer-season vex cattle, and what-soeuer

There is no man (I think) so ill advised, that will confess this to be the
same creature which Aristotle calls Pulex, for the body of that by his
description is broad, rolling, round, and the parts about the neck have
certain lines or cuts: and besides, about the mouth there appear and seem to
bud forth three eminenties or standings out.

There is another sort of Phalangiu^, called by Nican: Rox, of Aetius, Ragion,
of Aelianus, Rhax, (because it is so like the kernel or stone that is found in
Grapes,) and this kind of Spyder is of a round figure, black in color, the
body glistering, and round as a ball, with very short stumped feet, yet
nevertheless of a very swift pace. They have teeth, and their Aetius, Aelianus
and Pliny do wholly consent and agree in opinion, and yet Aelianus was a little
besides the way, when he set down podas macrous, for microus, long feet for
short feet, and that this kind of Spyder was only found in Lybia, and not else
where.

That kind of Spyder termed of Pliny, Asterion, seems to be all one with the
former, saving that this is more known by his little white spots made
starre-wise, and the glistering stripes or rays wherewith his body seems to
be ouer-sprinckled. Pliny only mentions this, as if Aristotle, Galen, Aetius
and Auicen, had never heard of it.

The most venomous and hurtful of all these, is that which Nicander calls
Pedeoros, Dasu and meteoron, that is, lanugiosum and sublime, soft like cotton
or wool, and lofty or high, and not sublime lanuginosum, as Lonicerus
translateth it. Pliny says, that this Spyder has a black mossines or soft
down, although it will scarce sink into my head, that any Spyder that is of
an azure or blew color, has any soft hayres, or woollie substance of a black
color.

There is another kind of Phalangium Spyder called of Nicander, Dysderi, which
name is neither to be found in Aristotle, Pliny, nor Aetius, nor yet in any
other ancient Author that ever I could read, which some others call, and that
very properly, Sphekion, quasi vesparium, because it is so like a red Waspe,
saving that it lacks wings, and this waspelike Spyder is of a passing deep
read color, and counted far worser then the blew-Spyder, although the azure
or blew-spyder only by touching does infect with poison, and will break any
Crystal glass, if it run over it though never so speedily, or do but
touch it in glauncing wise, as Scaliger bears witness.

There are two sorts of Phalangie-Spyders called Tetragnatha, and the worser is
that Aetius says, that the Tetragnathus is a kind of Phalangium, having a
broad and a whitish body, rough footed, with two swelling or little bunches
standing out in the head, the one somewhat broad, the other standing right
forth, so that at the first, one would imagine that it had two mouths, and
four jaws.

Aelianus in his xvij. book, chap. 40. says, that there is great store of
these to be found in India about the River Arrhata, where their multitude is so
dangerous and mischiuous, Strabo the Geographer, in his xvj. book tells us,
that beyond the Lybians and on the westerne-side of Affricke, there is a
Country left destitute of inhabitants, having goodly large fields and
pastures, being uninhabitable by reason of the multitude of Scorpions there
bred, and of the Spyders called Tetragnathoi.

There is to be found in Haruest-time amongst Pease, Beans, and other sorts of
pulse, (when they are gathered and reaped by the hand) certain small Spyders
called Kantharidessi Eikela, in show like unto Cantharides or Spanish-flyes, of
a very read and fiery color, such as we Englishmen call Twinges, by eating or
licking up of which, both oxen and other beasts do many times dye. There is
another kind of phalangium that breeds altogether Ervum, which is like unto
Tares, and likewise in the Peachtree, which Nicander and Aetius term
Cranocalaptes, and Dioscorides names it Kephalokroustes, because it is so
presumptious bold as to strike at the hands of trauailers by the highways,
when as either it passes down in glyding manner by her fine thredde, or that
she tumbleth down without any stay of thread or other support. It is a small
creature to see to, keeping on the pace very fearfully, nodding with the head,
reeling, and as it were staggering, being great and heavy in the belly,
somewhat long of body, and of a greenish color. It carries a sting in the
top of her neck, and striking at any, she commonly aymeth at those parts
which are about the head. And as Aetius says, En tois phullois tes perseias
trepheteis, kai taptera echei homoia tais en tais kustais psuchais: That is,
they

Whereupon the Scholiast seems to insinuate to us, that this kind of Spyder
is winged, which no man (as I judge) has hitherto observed. Ponzettus and
Ardoynus do take the Cranocalaptes to be a Tarantula, but herein they are both
mistaken, as was Rabbi Moses before them. The Spyder called Sclerocephalus, in
form differs but little from the former. It has a head as hard as a stone,
and the lineaments and proportion of the body do much resemble those small
creatures which are seen about Lamps-lights, or candles in the night time.

There comes in the last place to be described, the Phalangie-Spyder of
Apulia, commonly known by the name of Tarantula, taking his denomination from
the Country Tarentum, where there are found great store and plenty of them.
Firdinandus Ponzettus imagines, that it has but only six feet, and
Ardoynus is of the same judgment, and further faineth, that it has a stretched
out tail. Rasis calls a Tarantula, by the name of Sypta, Albucasis, Alsari,
Rabbi Moses, Aggonsarpa, Auicen, Sebigi: Doctor Gilbert, Taranta therein
following Ardoynus, which makes two sorts of Tarantulaes, the one of a brown,
the other of a yellow color and clear shyning, such as are to be found in
Egypt. Pliny (as you read a little before) said that the Phalangiu^ was not
known in Italy, but in these days they are found throughout all the Southern
parts of that Country, especially ^^e the Seashore, as both Haruest-men and
Hunters can well testify by their own woeful experience.

Ponzettus was much deceived, when in his third book and xv. chapter
entreating of the Scorpion, he expressly affirms the Phalanx to be such a
venomous fly. It is a vengible and cruel creature (as Alexander ab Alexandro
says,) and to be touched, horrible venomous and pestilent: and most especially
their biting is exceeding venomous in the Phalangies at all, or if there be
any, yet have they very little poison in them, and nothing comparable to them
of hoter Clymates.

All the sorts of Phalangies do lay their eggs in a net or web, (which
for the purpose they make very strong and thick,) and sit upon them in very
great number, and when their brood is increased to some growth, they kill
their damme by their hard embracements, and fling her clean away; and further,
casting off all fatherly affection, they many times serve the male with the
same sauce, if they can come handsomely by him, for he is a helper to the
female in sitting over their eggs. They hatch at one time three hundred,
Bellonius, in his Book Singul obseruat. chap. 68. The Tarantulaes commonly lie
lurking in holes, chincks, and chappes of the earth, and with their teeth they
bite and wound at unawares, incircumspect Mowers, and Haruest-folkes, and rash
Huntsmen, who think of no such matter: and therefore they that are acquainted
with their sleights, do wear boots and gloves on their hands and legs, for
their further defense, so often as they go forth, either to hawking, hunting,
or to reaping and mowing, or any such like labor in the common fields.

All these Spyders are venomous even naturally, for that is so settled and
deeply fastened in them, as it can by no means be eradicated or taken away.
Neither suck they this The signs to know when one is bitten of any Phalanx and
the effects of the same.
venom and poisonous quality from plants or herbs, as many men think, which
in very Phalangie do byte any man, there will presently follow most fearful
accidents: for it brings an exceeding great tumor upon the wounded place, the
knees are loose and feeble, trembling of the heart, and decay of strength do
succeed, and sometimes it induces death it self.

Nicander says, that they who are bytten of this kind of Spyder, do fall into
such a profound sleep, as that they will never be awaked, for they have and
suffer that which Histories Cleopatra Queen of Egypt, who to escape the
fingers of Pompey, because she would not be brought to Rome in triumph, caused
two Serpents called Aspes, to be set to her breasts, which did sting her to
death, whose nature is to give a heaviness and sleep, without any shrinking
or mark in the skin, only putting forth a gentle sweat out of the face, as
if one were in a trance and hard to be awaked.

The Spyder called Agrostis, makes but a small wound with her biting, and in a
manner without any pain at all, and no ways deadly, unless it be but
slightly regarded, or that no care be had for the cure in the beginning. The
Phalangie that is called Dusderus, which is fashioned like a Waspe, if he hurt
any one by his biting, it causes the same accidents that the azure or
blewish-coloured Spyder does, but yet not altogether so terrible Dusder-Spyder
with her poison, brings a wasting and pyning away of the whole body by
degrees, without any great sense.

If a man be poisoned with that kind of Spyder which is found among pulse, and
is (as I said before) like unto Spanish-flyes, there will presently arise
certain pustules, risings or swellings, much like unto blisters, as if one
were scalded with hot water, in which swellings there will commonly be much
yellowish matter, besides, the patient is much disquieted, vexed, and too much
out of order, the eyes seem to be writhed, deformed, looking asquint on the
one side, the tongue faltereth and stammereth, not being able to sound their
words, or to pronounce directly: their talk is idle, they wander and roue up
and down in great perplexity, their heart being tormented, tossed and
turmoyled with an extraordinary kind of furious passion.

The Spyder that is found in the pulse, called Ervum, which is very like to
Tares or Vetches, produces by his venom the same evil effects that the former
does, and if horses or other beasts do by chance devour any of them, their
bodies are so inflamed by means of the unquenchable thirstines the poison
causes, that many times they burst asunder Cranacalaptes wound any man (as
Pliny assures us) it is not long before death it self do succeed. And yet
Nicander and Aetius hold the contrary, and would make us believe that his hurt
is soon remedied, without any great ado: yet herein they do consent, that
if any be hurt with any Spyder of this kind, there will follow a great pain
of the head, coldness, swymming and gyddines of the brain, much disquietnes of
the whole body, and pricking pains of the stomach. But notwithstanding all
this (says Nicander,) the patient is soon remedied, and all these above
rehearsed passions quickly appeased and brought to an end.

The Sclerocephalus, as it much resembles the Cranocalaptes-Spyder in form
and proportion, so in his force, effect and violence they are much alike,
causing the same symptoms, Ragion inflicteth, is very small, so that a man can
hardly discern it with his eyes, but yet if one be hurt therewith, the
lowerparts of the eyes, and the eye-liddes wax very read. Besides, the
patient feels a shyuering cold or chyldnes in his loins, with weakness and
feebleness in the knees, yea the whole body is taken with a great quaking
cold, and the sinews by means of the violence and rankness of the poison,
suffer a convulsion. The parts serving to generation, are made so impotent and
weak, as that they are not able to retain the seed, nor yet to contain
their urine, which they void forth much like in color to a Spyders-webbe, and
they feel the like pain as they do which are stunge with Scorpions.

Of the wounding of the Starre-Spyder feeblenes and weakness follows, so that
one cannot stand upright, the knees buckle, sleep and shaking drousines
seaseth upon the hurt parts: and yet the worst of all is the bluish Spyder,
for this brings dimnesse of the eyesight, and vomiting, much like unto
Spyders and cobwebs in color, fainting and swounding, weakness of the knees,
heavy sleeps, and death it self.

If a man be wounded of the Tetragnathian-Spyder, the place waxes whitish,
with an intolerable, vehement, and continual pain in it, and the member it
self withers and pyneth away even to the very joints. Finally, the whole
body by receiving any wholesome sustenaunce, is nothing at all relieved
thereby, yea and after a man has recovered his health, yet is he nevertheless
disquieted by much watching for a long time after, (as Aetius writes.)
Nicander in express words confesses, that the Ash-colored Tetragnath, does
not by his biting infuse any venom or like hurt. If the speckled Phalangie of
Apulia, which is usually known by the name of Tarantula, do byte any one,
there will follow diverse and contrary accidents and symptoms, according to the
various constitution, different complexion, and disposition of the party
wounded. For after they are hurt by the Tarantula, you shall see some of them
laugh, others contrariwise to weep, some will clatter out of measure, so that
you shall never get them to hold their tongues, and othersome again you shall
observe to be as mute as fishes: this man sleeps continually, and another
cannot be brought to any rest at all, but runs up and down, raging and
rauing like a mad man.

There be some that imagine themselves to be some great Lords or Kings, and
that their imagination they cannot be otherwise diswaded but that they are
taken prisoners, that they lie in some deep dungeon or prison, with bolts and
shackles about their feet, so many as their legs can bear, or that their
neck and feet lie continually in the stocks. You shall see some of them to be
cheerful, quick of spirit, and lively, with dancing, swinging, and shaking
themselves. With others again you shall have nothing but sadness, and
heaviness of mind, browne-studies, unaptness to do any thing, as if one were
astonished, so that nothing but numnesse, and dulnes of moving and feeling,
seems to pinch them, being to see to very senseless.

In conclusion, as drunkenness to sundry persons is not all one, but much
different, according to the diversity of complexions, and natural
constitution of the brain: so neither Tarantulaes poison: but some of them are
fearful, silent, ever trembling and quaking: and others again are more
foole-hardie, rash, presumptious, clamorous, full of noise, doing nothing else
but call and cry out, and some few seem to be very grave, constant and
steadfast, that will not alter their purposes for a world of wealth. But let
the^ be affected either with this or that passion, yet this is common to them
all, as well to one as to another, that they are generally delighted with
musical instruments, and at their sound or noise, will so tryp it on the toes
dauncer-like, applying both their minds and bodies to dancing and frisking up
and down, that during the time of any musical harmony, they will never leave
moving their members and lymbes, like a Iack-an-apes that cannot stand still.
And which

And thus doing and dancing both day and night, without any notorious
intermission, and by their continued sweating, the poison being dispersed into
the pores of the skin, and euaporated by insensible transpiration or breathing
out, are arlength by this means recovered to their former health and state of
body. And if the Pypers of Fiddlers cease playing Tarantula, they will dance so
well, with such good grace and measure, and sing so sweetly, and withal descant
it so finely and tunably, as though they had spent all their lifetime in some
dancing and singing-schoole.

Nevertheless, Cardan, contrary to all authority and experience, calls in
doubt and question this point, and at last concludes that they cannot be
restored to health again by music. Wherein he does maruailously repugne and
contrary, both Foelix Platerus, Theodorus Zuingerus, Andreas Matthiolus,
Bellunensis, Ponzettus, Paracelsus, and many other famous learned men. Truly,
a bare contradiction against so great authorities, is fatre unworthy and
unbeseeming a man any thing (though never so little) seen or exercised in
Philosophy: much more so great a Philosopher and Physician as Cardan was. Yet
surely I am of the opinion, that Cardan did not err in Philosophy through
ignorance, but having a desire continually to appear more learned, he did
ever bend himself to impugn that, which he knew the soundest and best part of
men did hold and maintain. But this little which I have here spoken, shall
serve sufficiently for the discussing of Cardans opinion.

And surely, if the harmonicall sound and melody of warlike drums and
trumpets, Asclepiades has written, I see nothing to the contrary, but that it
may help those persons that are wounded of any Tarantula. The Pope, with his
poll-shorne generation, have mustered diverse of the Saints together, and have
assigned and appointed to each his sundry charge and several office apart, for
the cure of sundry diseases. As for example, S. Anthony can heal the burning,
S. Roch the pestilence, notwithstanding that, S. Sebastian has some skill in
it also. Saint Cosmus and Damian are good for all byles and swelling diseases.
S. Job for the pocks. S. Appolin for the toothache. S. Petronella can drive
away all manner of Agues. And S. Vitus or Vitulus, (we may well call him S.
Calfe) that in times past excelled in the musical Art, does direct all
Dauncers, or such as will leap or vault: So that if this Saint be invocated and
pacified with musical harmony and melodious sound of instruments, he will be
an excellent Apothecarie and Doctor for the curation of any that are wounded
with a Tarantula. Supersticious people fondly imputing that to the Patron and
Proctor sometimes of Music, which ought rather to be attributed to Music it
self, and motion of the body.

Dioscorides concerning the common bytings of hurtful Spyders or Phalangies,
vvriteth thus. The accidents (says he) that do accompany the bytings of
Spyders, are these that follow. The wounded place waxes red, yet does it not
swell nor grow very hot, but it is somewhat moist. If the body become cold,
there will follow trembling and shaking, the groyne and hammes do much stroute
out, and are exceeding distended, there is great provocation to make water, and
striving to exonerate nature, they sweat with much difficulty, labor and
pain. Besides, the hurt persons are all of a cold sweat, and tears destill
from their eyes that they grow dym-sighted therewith. Aetius further adds,
that they can take no rest or sleep, sometimes they have erection of the
yard, and the head itcheth, other-whiles the eyes and calfes of the legs
grow hollow and lanke, the belly is

Sometimes they can hardly void urine, they have great pain in the lower
parts, the urine that they make is waterish, and as it were full of
Spyders-webbes, the part affected, has a great pricking and swelling, which
Dioscorides (as you read a little before) will by no means yield to, and it
is a little red. Thus far Aetius, from whom Paulus Aegineta, Actuarius,
Ardoynus and some others differ but a little. In Zacynthus an I Will in the
Ionian-Sea, on the West of Peloponesus, if any there be hurt of a Phalangium,
they are otherwise and more grievously tormented then in any other place, for
there the body grows stiff Dioscorides, in his Chapter of Trifolium
asphaltites, in these words following.

The decoction (says he) of the whole plant being used by way of fomentation,
bathing or soking the body, cease all those pains which are caused by the
biting or stinging

Galen in his book De Theciaca ad Pisonem, ascribes this to miracle,
accounting it a thing exceeding common reason and nature: but I stand in doubt
that that Book was never Galens, but rather fathered upon him by some other
man. And yet Aelianus writes more miraculously, when he affirms that this
happens to some helthy persons, and such as be in good plight and state of
body, never so much as making any mention of ulcer or sore. Thus much of the
symptoms, accidents, passions or effects which stick and wait upon those
that are hurt by Spyders. And now come I to the cure.

The general cure, according to the opinion of Dioscorides, is, that first
there must be Absyrtus counsel is to make a fumigation with egge-shells first
steeped in water, and then being cast on the coals with Harts-horne or
Galbanum, to perfume the venomed part therewith. After that to use
sacrifications, to let blood, or to suck the place, or to draw out the venom
with cupping-glasses: or (which is the safest course of them all) to apply an
actual cautery, except the place affected be full of sinnewes. Lastly to
provoke sweat well, either in bed, covering the patient well with clothes, or
it is better by long and easy walking to procure sweating. In some to attain
to the perfect curation, you must work both with inward and outward means,
such as here shall be prescribed and set before your eyes: whereof the most
choice and approved I have set down for the benefit of the Reader: and first I
will begin with Dioscorides.

Inward Medicines out of Dioscorides.
TAke of the seeds of Sothern-wood, Annise, Dill, the wild Cicer, of the
fruit of the Cedar-tree, Plantine and Trifolie: of each a like quantity, beat
them to powder by themselves, before you do mix them. The dose is two drammes
to be taken in Wine. Likewise one dram of the seeds of Tamariske drunk in
Wine, is very effectual. Some use a decoction of Chamaepytis, and the green
Nuts of the Cipres-tree in Wine. There be some which praise the juice of
Croy-fishes, to be taken with Ashes, Milk, and Smallage-seede, and this
Medicine experience has approved

It is good also to take the fruit of the Turpentine-tree, Bay Berries, leaves
of the Balm, and the seeds of all sorts of Carrets: or to drink the juice of
Mirtle-berries, of the berries of Iuy, or Mull-berries, the juice of
Colewort-leaues, and of Cliues or Goose-grease with Wine or Vinegar. A dram
of the leaves of Beane-Trifoly drunk in wine, the decoction of the roots of a
Sparagus, Juice of Sen-greene, or any opening juice, is good for the same. Some
use with very good success, the leaves of the Herb called Balm with Niter,
and Mallows, boiled both leaf and root, and so taken often in a potion. The
leaves of the Herb called Phalangium, with his flowers and seeds. The seeds
of Nigella also serve to the same end.

Medicines out of Galen.
TAke of Aristolochia, of Opium, of either alike much, four drammes, of the
roots of Pelletorie of Spain three drams. Make thereof Trochisces, to the
quantity of a Bean. The dose is two Trochisces, with three ounces of pure
wine. The Ashes of a Ramms hoof tempored with Honey, and drunk with Wine.
Remedies of Diophantes against the bytings of Phalangies. Take of Astrologe or
hartwort 4. drams, of Pelletorie Opium one dram, make thereof Trochisces, to
the quantity of a Bean, and take two of them in a good draught of pure Wine.
Another more excellent. Take of the seeds of wild Rue, Rocket-seede, Styrax,
Sulphur viuum, of either alike much six drammes, of Castoreum two drammes,
commix them to make Trochisces, as before, with the blood of a Creuish. The
dose is one scruple and a half in Wine. Another. Take of Myrrh, Castoreum and
Styrax, of either one dram, Opium two drammes, of Galbanum three drammes,
Smallage-seedes and Annise-seedes, of either alike two ounces and a half,
Pepper thirty grains, make them up with Wine so much as is sufficient.
Another. Take of Myrrh five ounces, of Spiknard six drammes, Iuncus Rotundus
two drammes and a half, Cassia four drams, Cynamon three drammes, white
Pepper one dram and a half, Frankincense one dram, and half a scruple,
Costus one dram, make them up with Atticke Honey. The dose is the quantity of
a Hasell-Nut, to be taken either in Mulse or water.

Remedies out of Apollodorus.
TAke of wild Comin two ounces and a half, the blood of a Sea-Tortoyce four
drammes, the rennet of a Fawn or Hare, three drammes, the blood of a Kid four
drams, make them up with the best Wine, and reserve it to your use. The dose is
the quantity of an Olive, in a draught of the best and purest Wine. Another.
Take of the seeds of Trifolium Bituminosum, of round Astrologe, the seeds of
wild Rue, the seeds of Ervum dried in the Sun, of each alike, 6. drams:
work them with Wine and make Trochisces thereof, every one of them weighing
four drams. The dose is one Trochisce. Read more in Galan in his second book
De Antid. where any man may find many for the same purpose, which he had
gathered and selected from diverse Authors.

Out of Aetius, and Paulus Aegeneta.
TAke of Sulphur Viuum, and of Galbanum, of either four drammes, of bitter
Almonds excorticated one dram, of the Gum called Benzoin four drammes,
temper them in Wine, and after their Maceration, work them up with some Honey
to be taken inwardly. Being thus prepared, it may likewise be applied
outwardly. Another. Take of Ameos two drammes, roots of Floure-deluce one dram,
or else of Saint Iohns-wort, or Trifolium Bituminosum, drink them out of Wine.
Or take of Annise-seedes, wild Carrets, Comin, Nigella Romana, Pepper and
Agaricke, of either one dram, and drink them. Or take the leaves of the
Cipres-tree, or the Nuts beaten in Wine, and three quarters of a pint of the
best Oil, and give it to drink.

And to this end they do prescribe Bay Berries, Scorpion-grasse, wilde-Timbe,
Calamint, Chamepytis, either to be taken by themselves alone, or with Rue and
Pepper. Asclepiades used these that follow. Take of the seeds of Angelica and
Calamint, of either alike much, and powned together, to be taken in six
ounces of Wine oftentimes in a day. Another. Take of Benzoin, the seeds of the
wilde-Carret, of dry Mintes and Spicknard a little quantity, temper them up
with Vinegar. The dose is one dram with pure water and Vinegar mixed together
about five or six ounces. Another more excellent. Take Garlic and eat it,
and a bath made of the same with Wine, and likewise al those Medicines which
do heal the bytings of Vipers, are notable in these cases. Paulus Aegineta
commendendeth all these very highly, and so does he the seeds of Agnus
Castus, or the leaves of the White-Popler.

Out of Nicander.
TAke of the purest Turpentine that distilleth out of the Pine Tree, and eat
or drink it: for this is a very effectual medicine, which as Bellonius
reports he has found to be true by experience.

Out of Auicenna.
THE fruit of the Mirtle-tree, Doronicum, Masticke, Assa Faetida, Dedder, or
With-wind and his root, the Nut of India, and white Bdellium drunk with wine.
Take of the roots of Aristolochie, roots of Floure-deluce, of Spicke,
Pellitory of Spain, the seeds of the wild Carrot, black Hellebor, Commin,
the roots of the true Daffadill, of the fruit of the Carob-tree, the leaves
of Dates, tops of Pomgranates, Cynamon, of the juice of Rue, Crai-fishes,
Styrax, Opium, and Carpobalsamum, of either alike, one ounce, all of these
being powdered, make thereof Trochisces the weight of one dram or four
scruples, which is their dose. Take also in Wine the decoction of the seeds of
Trifolium Bituminosum, Cipres-Nuts, and the seeds of Smallage. Besides let him
drink the graynes or fruit of the Pine Tree, Comin of Aethiopia, the leaves
and rind of the Plane-tree, the seeds of Siler Montanum, black and wild
Cicers, the seeds of Nigella, Sothern-wood and Dill, Astrologe or Hartwort, the
fruit of the Tamariske tree: for all these are very effectual to cure the
hurtes that come by biting of any venomous

The juice also of wild Lettice and of Houselike is excellent. The decoction
of Cypres Nuts being boiled, especially with Cynamon, the broth of
Crai-fishes, and of Goose-flesh, and likewise the decoction of the roots of
Asparagus in Wine and water. Another. Take of Astrologe and Comin, of each
three drammes to be drunk in warm water: an excellent and approved antidote.
Take of the seeds of Git or Nigella ten drammes, Comin-seede, Dancus-seede
(or wilde-Carret) of either five drammes, Spiknard, Bay Berries, round
Aristolochie, Carpobalsamum, Cynamon, roots of Gentian, seeds of the Mountain
Siler, and Smallage, of every one alike two drams, make a confection with Honey.
The dose is the quantity of a Nut with old Wine. A confection of Assa. Take of
Assa Faetida, Myrrh, and leaves of Rue, of every one alike quantity, temper
them together with Honey. The common is one dram, or two at the most in Wine.

Certain other selected Medicines out of Absyrtus, Albucasis, Lullus, Rhazes
and Ponzettus.
TAke of white Pepper thirty graynes, drink it often in a draught of old Wine.
Give also the Herb Tymbe in Wine. Absyrtus. Let him drink after it a
Spoonefull of Wine distilled with Lullus. Take of dry Revv, of Costus,
Horsemint, Pelletory of Spain, Cardamomum, of each alike, of Assa Faetida a
fourth part, Honny so much as is sufficient, commixe them, The dose is the
quantity of a Hasell Nut in drink. Albucasis. The brain of a Hen drunk with
a little Pepper out of sweet Wine, or Vinegar and Water myxed together.

A notable Treacle or Antidote against the bytings of Phalangies or venomous
Spyders. Take of Tartarum six drammes, of yellow Sulphur eight drammes,
Rue-seedes three drammes, Castoreum and Rocket-seede, of either two drammes,
with the blood of a Sea-Tortoyce make an Opiate. The dose is two drammes to
be taken in Wine. Diassa with svveete strong Wine, Comin, and the seeds of
Agnus Castus. Another. Take of the seeds of Nigella ten drammes, of Daucus
and Comin-seedes, of each alike five drammes, seeds of wild Rue, and Cypres
Nuttes, of either three Drammes, Spiknard, Bay Berries, round Astrologe,
Carpobalsamum, Cynaomn, the root of Gentian, seeds of Trifolium Bituminosum,
and of Smallage-seede, of either two drammes, make a confection with Rhazes.

Out of Pliny, Celsus, and Scaliger.
IT is good to give five Pismires to them that are bitten of any Phalangium, or
the seeds of Nigella Romana one dram, or Mulberries with Hypocistis and Honey.
There is a secret virtue and hidden quality in the root of Parsely, and of
wild Rue, peculiarly against those hurts that Spiders infect by their venom.
The blood of a Land-Tortoyce, the juice of Origanum, the root of Behen Album,
Veruaine, Cinquefoile, all the sorts of Sengreene, Castoreum to provoke
vomiting being relented in some mulse. Apollodorus one of the disciples of
Democrates says, there is an herb called Crocides, which if any Phalangium or
other poisonous Spider do but touch, presently they fall down dead, and their
poison is so dulled and weakened, as it can do no hurt. The leaves of the
Bullrush or Mat-rush which are next to the root being eaten, are found to give
much help. Pliny. Take of Myrrh, of Vna Taminea, which is the berry of the
herb called Ampelos Agria, being a kind of Bryony, which windeth it self about
trees and hedges like a vine, of some called our Ladies seal, of either alike,
and drink them in 3. quarters of a pint of sod wine. Celsus. But the
excellentest Antidote of all other is that which Scaliger describes, whom for
his singular learning and deep conceit, I may term Nostris orbis and seculi
ornamentum: The form whereof in this place I will prescribe you. Take of the
true and round Aristolochia, and of the best Mithredate, of either one ounce,
Terra Sigillata half an ounce, of those Flies which are found to live in the
flower of the Herb called Napellus, in number 18. juice of Citrons so much as
is sufficient, mix them altogether. For against this mischief of Spyders,
oragainst any other shrewd turns, grieuances, or bytings of any Serpents
whatsoever. Are as yet never found out so effectual a remedy, or so notable an
alexipharmacall. Thus far Scaliger. The juice of Apples being drunk, and
Endive, are the propper Bezoar Phalangie Petrus de Albano. Thus much of inward:
now will I proceed to general outward medicaments and applications. Five
Spiders putrified in common Oil, and applied outwardly to the affected place,
are very good. Ashes made of the dung of draught beasts tempered with vinegar,
and used as an ointment, or instead of vinegar, water and vinegar boiled
together, and applied as before, are proved to be singular. Take of vinegar 3.
pints and a half, Sulphur viuum two ounces, mix them, and foment, bath, or
soke the wounded part with a Sponge dipped in the liquor, or if the pain be a
little assuaged with the fomentation, then wash the place with a good quantity
of Seawater.

Some hold opinion that Achates (which is a precious stone, wherein are
represented Venus, etc. will heal all bitings of Phalangies, and for this
cause being brought out of India it is held at a very dear rate in this
Country. Pliny. Ashes made of fig-tree-leaues, adding to them some Salt and
wine. The roots of the wild Panax being beaten to powder, Aristolochie and
Barley Meal kneaded together and wrought up with vinegar. Water with honey and
salt applied outwardly for a fomentation. The decoction of the herb Balm, or
the leaves of it being brought to the form of a Pultes, and applied: but we
must not forget to use warm bathes, and sometimes to the place agrieued.
Pliny. Cut the veins that appear under the tongue, rubbing and chafing the
swelled places with Salt and good store of Vinegar: then cause the patient to
sweat carefully and warily for fear of cold. Vigetius. Theophrastus says,
that practitiones Panax Chironia, Moysten the wound with Oil. Garlike bruised,
Knot-grasse or Barly-meale, and Bay-leaues with wine, or with the dregs or Lees
of wine, or wild Rue applied in manner of a Cataplasme to the wounded place.
Nonus. Take of Sulphur Vivum, Galbanum, of each alike, 4. drams and a half, of
Euforbium half a dram, Hasell-nuts excorticated two drams, dissolve them, and
with wine make toward the curation. Flies beaten to powder and applied upon
the place affected. The fish called a Barble cures the bitings of any venomous
Spider, if being raw it be slit asunder in the midst, and so applied (as
Galen says.) Anoint the whole body with a liquid Cerote, and foment the place
affected with Oil wherein Trifolium Bituminosum has been infused, or bath it
often with Spongies soked in warm Vinegar: then prepare and make ready
cataplasmes of these Ingredients following; that is, of Knot-grasse, Scala
Caeli, called Salomons-seale, Leekes, Cheesill or Branne decocted in Vinegar,
Barley-Meale and Bay Berries, and the leaves boiled in Wine and Honey. Some do
also make Cataplasmes of Rue or herb-grace, and Goats dung tempered with wine,
Cypres, Margerom and wild Rue with Vinegar. An emplaster of Asclepiades. Take
of the seeds of wild Stauesackre, Rosemary-seedes, Agnus-Castus, Apples and
Nuts, or in stead of these two, of the leaves of the Cipres-tree, of each
alike, beat and temper them altogether with vinegar and honey. Aetius. Apply
the decoction of Lupines upon the affected place, the eschar being first
removed, then anoint it in the warm Sunshine, or against the fire with the
fat of a Goose tempered with wild Rue and Oil, or else of the pap of Barley,
and the broth of Lupines make a cataplasme. Oribasius. The Filberd-Nut that
grows in India, heals the bytings of the Phalangies. Auicenna. Goats dung
dissolved with other convenient Cataplasmes, and Oil of Worme-wood, and the
juice of Figs helps much. Kiranides. Apply oftentimes a cold piece of iron to
the place. Petrus de Albano. Foment the place very often with the juice of the
Herb Plantine. Hildegardis.

The artificial Oil of Balm is singular. Euonimus. A fomentation made of the
leaves and stalks of Imperatoria called Master-wort, and continued a good
space: or else Veruaine bruised and stamped, the juice being taken in wine, and
further, the herb outwardly applied, is much commended of Turneiser. Beat and
stamp Hearb-agrace with Garlic and some Oil, and apply it outwardly.
Celsus. There be but a fevv particular cures for the bytings of Spyders that
Physicians mention: yet some they do, although the general be most
effectual. Pliny against the biting of the Formicarion or Pismire-like-
Phalangie, that has a red head, commends much another Phalangie of the same
kind, only to be showed to the wounded patient to look upon, and to be kept

There is a certain little beast called Ichneumon, of some it is called Mus
Pharaonis, Pharoes Mouse, and for the enmity unto Serpents, it is called
Ophiomorchus, (as Bellonius reports) being bruised and applied to the biting
of any Waspe-like- Phalangie, does utterly take away the vemone of them. It
often enters and searches out the seats and holes of venomous Spiders and
Phalangies, and if it find any of them, she haleth and tuggeth them clean
away as a Pismire does a small grain of Corn: and if the Phalangie offer any
Ichneumon sparing no labor, pulls her the contrary way: and by this
struggling and striving, sometimes it so falls out that the Ichneumon is
wearied, and then she breaths a little, and gathering new strength and
courage, sets again upon the Phalangie with a fresh assault, and wounds
her many times, so that at length she carries her to her own lodging there to
be devoured.

If the Tarantula have hurt any one, the best remedy is to stir and exercise
the body continually without any intermission, whereas in all hurtes that are
caused by any other Spyders, rest and quietness are the best means (as Celsus
affirms.) But their Antidote is Music and singing.

Christophorus de Honestis counsels to take forth with Theriaca Andromachi
without Ponzettus in his book De venenis, advises to take ten graynes of the
Lentisktree in Milk, or an ounce and a half of the juice of Mull-berry-leaues.

In the increase of the grief, he cures them with Agaricke, or the White
Vine: and after much sweating, they are to be comforted and refreshed or
strengthened with cold Medicines, as with the Water of Poppy, and the like
(Meru^a says) they are to be remedied with the stone of Musical Instruments,
dancing, singing and colors: concerning the three former I will not contend,
but how they should receive any part of help or health from vewing of any
colors I do not well understand: considering that the eyesight of all those
that are bitten of a Tarantula, is quite taken away, or they see but obscurely,
as being mightily deceived in their objects.

Andreas Matthiolus in his Commentaries, upon the sixth book of Dioscorides
Chap. 40. reports a very strange story of a cerraine Hermit, his old
friend and acquaintance Caro Caruze, sanum reduce, reputata sanum, Emanuel
paracletus.

Then immediately he pared away the earth with the same whittle, so that all the
Characters were quite defaced, putting the same earth into a little earthen
vessel full of Water, letting it there so long remain, until the earth sunk
to the bottom: Lastly he strayned the water with a piece of the Messengers
shirt, or some other Linen that he wore next to his skin, and being signed
with the sign of the cross, gave it him to drink: but surely (says
Matthiolus) it was marvelous strange, and a wonderful thing to consider, how
that the wounded patient was perfectly healed, even at that very hour and
moment of time, that the Messenger took the aforesaid potion of the Hermit,
as it is plainly

And thus much of this heremiticall curation by the way. Now will I come into
my path again. A man may find a great sort, both of these, and the like
remedies both in Pliny, Dioscorides, and other concerning the hurts of Spiders,
but I think I have been a little to tedious, and you may imagine that I do
nothing but Ta arachina hiphainein, Aranearum telas texere: That is, In a
frivolous matter and of small moment spend infinite and curious labor: so that
I had more need to crave pardon for my long discourse about this subject:
wherein though many things may want to the satisfaction of an afflicted and
searching head, yet I am sure here is enough to warrant the discharge of my
good will, and

-- Nunc imus ad illam
Artificem, men's nostra cui est conformis, Arachnem
Quae medio tenerae residens in stamine telae.
Qua ferit eurus atrox, trepidat volitantibus auris
Tangitur, veresono vagus illi byssus ab aestro.
In English thus;

Unto Arachne, skillful mistrisse let us come,
To whom conformed seems the mind of man,
She sits in midst of web, her tender feet upon:
Whiles she is tossed with Eastwind now and than,
She trembles at the noise of rattling winds,
As when the humming Fly hard wagging finds.
OF THE TAME OR HOUSE* Spyder.
ARistotle, that diligent searcher and seeker out of Nature and natural
causes, terms this kind of Spyder a very gallant and excellent wise creature.
King Solomon himself, at whose high wisdom all succeeding ages have and will
admire, amongst those four small creatures, which in wisdom do out-strippe
the greatest Philosophers, reckons the Spyder Arachne, was in times past a
maiden of Lydia, who being instructed of Minerua in the cunning skill of
Embroiderie and spynning, grew therein so excellent, and took such a pride in
the same, (for you must remember she was a woman) that she sti^ly denied,
facing it out in brauing-wise, that Minerua was never the Instructor, and so
arrogant presumpteous she was, as that she feared not to challenge her
Mistresse-Goddesse to work with her, if she durst for her ears enter the
list, in all manner of Embroidery, Tapestry-workes, and the

At which, Mistres Minerua being netled, and taking the matter in dudgeon thus
to be provoked, and withal reprehending the maid very sharply for her
saucines, in a pelting chafe she brake all to pieces the wenches imagery work,
that was so curiously wouen, and so full of variety, with her shittle. The
Maid heereat being sore grieved, half in despair not knowing what to do,
yielding to passion, would needs hang herself. But Minerua taking compassion
upon her, would not have her die forthwith, but transformed her into a
Spyder, hanging by a fine small thread or line.

Atque ita viue quidem, pende tamen, improba, dixit*
Lexque eadem paenae, ne sis secura futuri
Dicta tuo generi, serisque nepotibus esto.
In English thus;

So live indeed, yet hang, thou woman vile
She said, and let the selfsame law of punishment
Be unto thee and all thy of spring, while
All kindred lasts: shall not futures thee content.
If any be desirous to know more of this fable, let him read the famous Poet
Ovid, who has excellently written thereof in the sixth book of his
Metamorphosis, although some Pliny. The Graecians besides do write, as Coelius
Rodoginus in his 7. book Lectionum Antiq: chap. 16. affirms, how that there
was in the Country of Attica a certain man called Phalanx, who had also a
Sister named Arachne, and when Phalanx had perfectly learned of Minerua the
Military-Science, and all other warlike exercises and offices that belong to a
Soldier, and that she had like wise instructed his Sister Arachne in
weauing, spynning, and needle-worke, they concluded a match between
themselves, but the Goddess being much displeased with such a shameful and
incestious marriage, marring their fashion, she disfigured them both into the
number oc creeping creatures, laying to his as a just punishment upon them, to
be destroyed of their own young ones.

But it is at every ma ns choice to interpret these to be either fables and
Canterburietales, or true historical narrations: yet most are of this mind,
that Arachne first invented spynning of lynnen, weauing, and working with the
needle, which this maid of Lydia first learned from the Spyders, taking her
first samplers and patterns from them for imitation; which no man ought to
think to be strange, since the craft of playstering or working things in earth,
and the Art of curing the eyes, was first taken from the Swallows. The Eagles
have taught us Architecture, and men first received the light of Phlebotomie or
letting of blood from the Hippopotamus, which is a Beast living in the River of
Nilus, having feet like an ox, and his back and mane like a horse, with a
winding tail, and tusked like a Bore. The byrd of Egypt called Ibis, first
gave knowledge to Physicians how to use the Glister; yea, dogs, Goats,
Hearts, Storkes, Swallows and Weasells, have taught men many medicines for many
diseases.

To begin therefore to make an enumeration of their praises, I will declare
unto you, the rich virtues and external goods of the body, fortune and mind.
And first to begin with the good gyfts of their bodies. If you will weigh and
consider the matter and substance Cardan may be credited, they grow other
whiles as great as a Sparrow: yet for all that, if you cast your eye on them
against the light, hanging in their web, she glittereth and shines on all
parts like unto the Chrisolite, which is a kind of precious stone, shining with
a golden color quite through, causing

The color of a Spyder is somewhat pale, such as Ovid ascibeth to Lovers, and
when she hangs aloft in her web, with her legs wide and large spread
abroad, ^h^e perfectly and lively expresses the shape and proportion of a
painted star: as if Nature had intended to give and bestow on her, not only
the resemblance and counterfeit similitude of heaven, but also the very luster
of the stars themselves. The skin of a Spyder is so soft, smooth,
exquisite, pure, clean and neat, that it far surpasses by many degrees,
the polished skins of those mayds that have the Greene-sicknes, or those
young whores that are so careful in sparing no cost to preserve their
beauties; And it is of such creerenes and perspicuitie, that it will easily
represent the visage and phisnomie of any beholder of

Nos aper auditupraecellit, Araneatactu
Vultur odorata, Lynx visu, Simiagustu*
Which may be englished thus;

To hear, the Bore, to touch, the Spyder us excells,
The Linx to see, the Ape to taste, the Vulture for the smells.
It has also feet, but yet not such a multitude as Scolopendraes have, nor
yet none at all, as the meanest rank and sort of creatures, nor yet six
only, as the common sort of insects: but it has eight, a number which the
meanest Sophister in Cambridge can resolve, is next to the perfectest of all
numbers, and these feet consisting of a sesquitertiall proportion, which of
all Mathematicians is esteemed to be wonderful and admirable, so that although
the hinder be shorter then the fore-legges, yet notwithstanding they retain a
mutual harmony, equality, and semblable concordance. Many Philosophers have
not dared to affirm that they are blind, but they themselves in this point are
most blind. For if they be deprived of their eyes and eyesight, I would feign
be resolved how they by chance, or have the skill to mend them, being either
shaken or burst in sunder. Besides, we may all observe by our own experience,
that if one take a fly, and hold her at the side of the web, the familiar,
tame, or domestical Spyder espying her, will make all the have she can through
thick and thin, yea though she be far off, and will boldly assail and
devour her, and will (as a man may say) take her out of your hands into her
own, which thing I have often seen done. Surely therefore those persons are
half blind, who neither can conceive nor see, that Spyders can see.

Now in that a Spyder seems to some to be an ugly and loathsome creature, and
even at the first sight to be detested in regard it is so misshapen, I will not
impute this to any defect or default that is in their form or proportion, but
I rather ascribe it to their exceeding great melancholy (for this humor is
most predominant in them) and to their strange

Amongst the blessings of Fortune, or rather Fate, I esteem this to be the
excellentest that is conferred upon them, in that they bear about with them an
inexhausted matter or substance in their bellyes to make infinite webbes, yea
such a matter as can never be consumed, wasted or spent, of which they have
such foyson, as they are able to draw out in length and breadth, and to spinne
and devise innumerable threads and stuff to make and finish their cobwebbes of,
so that if a hundred flies light in them, they are of force sufficient so to
entangle and ensnare them all, as they shall never get out again. Furthermore,
although they have neither food nor sustenaunce laid up in Barnes or
Storehouses, as Pismires have, nor yet any meat set or sowed for them as Bees
have, but get their commons only by taking of booties casually, by hunting at
all adventures, and by chaunceable

Besides, I must tell you that Spyders have not the least benefit of Fortunes
favor bestowed upon them, when as being inglutted with courtly viands, they
have been glad to exchange lodgings with an old Courtier, called Padagra, or
the Gowte, for it skilleth not whether of these two names you will choose. For
you have heard before, the wise king Solomon to have given them the most prime
and chiefest places in Princes Courts, that

And yet for all these virtues, (since Salomons time) there have risen up and
followed some Princes and Governors, unadvised, desperately naught, and
unthrifty, and such as were not well in their wits, and of those it cannot
easily be spoken how churlishly they entertained her, how they sent out their
proclamations and warrants, to expel the Spyder, to cast her down to the
earth, tread underfoot, undo and kill, as a night-thiefe, with beesoms,
broomes, brushes and long poles, so that by and by in a trice, there flocked
certain Furies of hell, (for so I think I may justly term them) rubbing,
brushing, spunging, making clean sluts-corners, beating and sweeping together,
and whatsoever they found curiously wrought, all that either they swept clean
away, or tore all to pieces, so that hardly they could escape the busy beesoms
of these quick-sighted and lewd naughtypacks.

Surely, miserable was her condition and estate, which in all that abundance of
wealth, she only being indigent and bare, detesting idleness withal, might
not yet be admitted tenant for some short term of time, in some small odd
corner, in such large and spacious buildings, nor yet find one hole to live at
peace in. Again, the great men, the rich mysers

This same Spyder which now we treat of, in times past, (it was when dogs
and cats could speak, for now because there are so many languages in the
world, they turn all to plain barking) took a long journey into a strange
Country, and by good hap, fell into company with my Lady Podagra, although
(being none of the best footers,) she could hardly keep way with the Spyder,
but legged still behind, and having now spent one whole day in travel, the
night approaching that they should take up their Inn to lodge Nicholas time,
when days are at the shortest.

Now in the mean space, Podagra, having none of the best feet, but indeed
being somewhat lame, when she could travail no further, she by chance
light into a poor Cottage or cabin of turffes, builded with Elder-poles at
the Towns end, and yet in this poor shed she could hardly be received, but
yet at length, through her incessant solicitation being admitted, she sat
down to rest her weary bones, so at length, supper being prepared, the
tender-harted Lady found course fare, and commons far shorter and more
homely, then ever Lipsius found in Westphalia: she endured all the miseries in
the World, that pity it was to see. There was no infelicitie, no distress,
misfortune and adversity to Podagra had fetched but one sound carouse, it would
have made her run through an Alphabet of faces: but there was no remedy,
hunger breaks stonewalls, and hard need makes the old wife trotte, she must
either quench her thirst with that, or fast.

Having thus thinlie supped, she called for her Chamber, where they showed her
to and his wife, thought that none but the Lord of the Town, and women in
childbed used pillowes.) But Podagra not knowing how to mend the matter,
groned and made a lamentable noise, and fetching a thousand sighs, she couched
herself down. But alas what ill rest she poor heart took that night, and how
ill her soft and tender limbs agreed with such cold cheer and
entertainment, I refer my self to your secret thought. So soon therefore
as the day began to break, she started up, and the Spyder and she met together
again at the appointed time and place: and first of all the Spyder began
much to complain of the inciuilitie of the rich chuffe his host the Citizen.
Podagra contrariwise found as much or more fault with the short and sharp
commons, thin diet, miserable poverty, and indigencie of his poor, bare and
lean host, showing her black and blew marks and prints, into whose tender
skin the bordes and plancks had made a deep impression. Podagra should bend
her course unto Noble and great men's houses, to Kings courts and princely
Palaces, to see what good was to be done there. So Podraga not being
unmindful of her word, went with a fine and Snayle-like pace to the house of a
certain fat, rich, and well-monied man, and quietly laid herself down at the
feet of this corsie sire: which as soon as the gentle host cast an eye upon,
it is strange to tell with what mildness, with what alurement and gentle
entreatie, with what promptitude and alacrity she was welcomed; they
prepared soft pallats of

Iam dapibus mensas onerant et pocula ponunt.
In English thus:

Spread are the tables, and laded with store
Of delicates, the cups filled, could receive no more.
Briefly, he was in all points for person and provision such a one, as
Chaucer in his works describes his Franklin to be.

White was his beard as the Daisie,
And of complexion he was sanguine,
Well loved he by the morrow a soppe in wine:
To liuen in delight was ever his won,
For he was Epicures own son,
That held opinion, that plain delight,
Was very felicity parfite.
An householder, and that a great was he,
Saint Julian he was in his Country,
His bread, his ale, was always after one,
A better viended man was never none.
Without bake-meate was never his house,
Of fish and flesh, and that so plenteouse,
It snewed in his house of meat and drink,
Of all dainties that men could think.
After the sundry seasons of the year,
So changed he his meat and his suppere.
Full many a fat Partrich had he in mue,
And many a Breame, and many a Luce in stue,
Woe was his Cook, but his sauce ever were,
Poynant and sharp, and ready all his gere.
His table dormaunt in his Hall always
Stood ready covered all the long day.
Nay, hither thy brought fat and crammed Capons, Phesants, Quails,
Turtle-doues, Larkes, and Nitingales. I pass over Turbot or Byrt, Gilt-heads,
Sturgion, Salmonds, Soales, and the like, for they were not unfurnished of all
these, and of other store of shellfish, as Lobsters, Creuishes, Oysters, and
whatsoever the Sea yielded that might by love or money be purchased: for I will
not speak of a great number of Riuer-fish and Fowls that are to be had about
Peterborow, Wittlesey-mare, and those Fennish-countries, for thither he sent
his people to puruay for him all that was rare and dainty. Here was Reddewine,
Falernum, of the Islands of Creta, Chio, Madera, and those that are called
Baleares, lying near unto the coast of Spain.

To speak nothing of their reare-suppers, their fine Marchpanes and curious
confections, made with sundry devises, and exquisite skill of the Apothecarie.
And to conclude, there was no wanton fare unsought for, no delicate iuncate, no
curious trimming and pickednes that might gratify, no fair words, and
pleasant enticements fit to draw and allure, nor no delectation whatsoever
omitted, that might seem to please this great Lady Podaga, (for you must
understand she was none of the coursest sort of Ladies, whereof there be many
now adays, for all men know she was a gentlewoman borne, both by the Bacchus
and Venus,) and all this, I say, was done, to please both her and her two sweet
Sisters, Chiragra and Congra, a pox take them all three, and so I will let
them go, and come to the Spyder, who likewise being directed by some
favorable Planet, boldly and luckily trudged to the poore-mans house.

-- Atque ibimiro
Dogmate, quidve marem deceat, deceatque maritam
Addocet, atque suo sese studore saginat.
Which may be englished thus;

And there by strange instructions and documents,
She teaches male and female how to live,
That is, both man and wife how to increase their rents,
Whilst she, on her own sweat and fat does thrive.
But some man may here object and say, I see here no such great blessings of
Lady Fortune, more then besides a bare commendation, and good hap in this
their exchange of lodging and lodgers. Yes surely, very much, not only because
she spends her days more freely and safely from danger, but also because as
out of a high watchtower, she no longer beholds in the houses of poor
persons, lavish and needless prodigality, bankettings, quaffings, ryotting,
plays, dancing, dicing, and whoring, and a thousand vanities and villainies
besides, whereof she knew herself conscious, and a privy witness unto, whilst
she Podaga, arrested them. Had it not been better for them (think you) to
have granted a dwelling place, to a saving, wise, prudent and harmless
little creature, then to have given entertainment to such a base, blockish
companion and guest as the Gowte is? Let not therefore, rich, covetous men
wonder, if many times they be tormented with this sore grief, since they will
neither admit true Physician nor Physic, I mean, travail, diligence,
industry, moderation and paines-taking, with the like.

Now, to touch the rich and rare gifts and graces of the mind, and other noble
qualities Philanthropia, Philoponia, Autarkeia, their humanity and love
toward men, their studious industry and love of labor, their contentation as
having sufficient, and coveting no more then is allotted unto them. Their
wittiness, policy, quicknes and sharpnes of sense, their cleannie neatenes,
with many other virtues, or else her admirable cunning and skilfulnesse in
their weauing trade. Their prudence, sagacity, and wittines to conjecture
things future, appears in this one thing, that when great abundance of
rain, floods, swelling and ouerflowings of Rivers, are like shortly to come to
pass, and thereby to threaten houses, they then begin to build their webs
higher by a great deal, then their usual custom heretofore has been. And
this is another proof of the same, in that they weaue not at all in a clear
Sun-shine-day, or when it is fair and calm weather, when Flies are most busy
in flying about to and fro, that they may be the better at leisure to give
themselves to hunting and watching after them, to take advantage, and if any
chance to light into their nets, forthwith to seize upon them for their
repast.

Again, when houses are ready to drop down, they with their Copwebs first of
all fall, and get them away packing, alter their clymate to some other surer
place and dwelling to rest in. If any thing touch her body that is hard or
painful, she immediately draws up her Legs round on a heap: for this end
as I think, to feel the less pain, and the better to provide for the health
and safety of her head, the director and governor of the whole body: for if any
other part be hurt, she can easily cure it. Who has manifested and made known
this unto them? Has any Chaldaean Starre-gazer, or figure-flinger, by the
sight and position of the stars showed it unto them? No certainly. But a
divine prudence and forefeeling knowledge, originally inbred by Nature to
eschew that which is hurtful, which is diffused into the Spyder, and as that
famous Poet Virgilius has

Spiritus intus alit, totosque infusaper artus
Men's agitat molem.
In English thus;

Mind bred within, infused in all limbs,
Mind mooues the bodies lump, and skins.
Furthermore, so soon as they espy their enemy to be caught in their nets,
they do not first of all bite and prick him to death in any hostile manner,
but they seem with their

They only feed on the juice of Flies, and the dry carkase without any
moisture, they cast away as unprofitable stuff to be used about any business.
Moreover, because Charybdis, they fall into Scilla, out of the smoke into the
fire: for though in regard of her bodies magnitude, she be unwieldy, and very
unfit to bestir her self in this hunting office: yet the crafty Male-Spyder
playing Bo-peepe, and pretending some other business, though minding another,
playing the disembling Hypocrite, hydeth himself in the top of the Web,
noting well all occurrents, and being seen of no body, there he lurketh till
some fish (as we say) come to his net, and having espied his prey, being more
Euro velocius, as quick as a Be from the upper unto the lovver part (as I
have said) of the Copweb, he makes a very quick dispatch, and having
royally feasted himself, he reserueth and lays up all his other enemies in
one place, hanging the^ all by one of his own threads till some convenient time
to feast himself again withal. Then again when as by reason of long
continuance and length of time, the webs have lost their binding, viscosity,
and tenacious substance, either the Spyder vnweaueth them again, or else
confirms and new strengthens them afresh as it were, with another new
glutinosity, or fast-bynding clamminesse. This their work being finished, they
either contain themselves in the center of it, or keeping sentinel and
warding in the upper part, they hold as it were in their hands a thread drawn
from the midst or Center, by which they have easy access and recesse to and
fro to their beguiling nets; and withal this thread scrueth to another
profitable use, for if any prey be entangled by the light moving and stirring
of it, they presently

Then first, withal celerity possible she hies her to the Center, which thing
the silly flies being fast, and having some sense and feeling (as it should
seem) that they are taken Tardie, and fordeeming some hurt, are as quiet as a
Mouse in a trappe, making no noise at all, least either they might bewray or
betray themselves, and so be further enfolden in danger. But alas in vain
does he avoid war, that cannot enjoy peace, and bootlesse does he shun
pain that has no means to feel rest: for this avails but little,

But yet it is more to consider what great justice and equity is observed to be
in Spyders. For there is not one of them so ill bent, so malepartly saucy, and
impudently shameless, that can be seen to lay claim unto, or to take away
another wife or mate: there is none that entermedleth with another substance,
business, or weauing: every one lives contented by the sweat of his own
brows, by their own proper goods and industrious pains taking procured by
their own bodily labor: so that not one of them dare enter his Neighbors
freehold, but it is accounted a heinous matter, and very unlawful, not

Non it a mortales, quos (proh doler) vrget habendi
Tantus amor, domibus domus, aruis additur aruum,
Monticulus monti, maribus mare, sique potessint
Addiderint mundum mundo, suaque omnia dixint.
In English thus;

Then would not mortal men so far engaged in love to have
(A death it is to think) house to house, and land to land to lay
Hyllocke to hill, sea unto sea, to add they crave,
And if they could, world unto world, and all their own would say.
Again they spread not their ginnes and nets to entrap and deceive good
Creatures, and such as serve for man's use and benefit, but for Waspes,
Horse-flyes, or Gad-bees, and Brimsees, or Oxe-flyes, that in Summertime vex
Cattle: for Drones, Gnats, and other Flies, which to us are like to Thieves,
Parasites, Bawdes, Pandors, and such Merchants that bring whoores and Knaves
together, being Telluris mutile pondus, an unprofitable burden of the earth,
serving to no good use. And besides being a vermin of singular, and
incomporable courage, she dare adventure to give the onset upon those young
Lyzardes, who if they offer to contend and strive against her fury, she quickly
enclaspeth them round about, and very nimbly and eagerly seizes upon both
their lips, biting and holding them together so fast, that she never gives
over till they be dead: and at length having vanquished her enemies, she like
another Cacus carries them into her cave, or some secret corner.

Now if it happen in this hot bickering, that the nets be either broken,
entangled, or platted together, by and by without further delay she falls to
mending what was amisle, to unwind, spread open, and to set them again in due
order and frame very ingeniously. What say you to this? That the Spyder bears
a deadly feude and mortal haired to Serpents: for if so be the serpent at any
time lie in the shadow under any tree to cool himself where Spyders do resort,
some one of the^ leuelleth directly at him, descending down perpendicularly to
the Serpents head, and with such a violence strikes and dasheth at his head
with her beak or snout, that her enemy withal making a whizzing noise, and
being driven into a giddiness turning round, hisleth, being neither able to
break asunder the thread that comes from above, nor yet has force enough to
escape it. Neither is this spectacle or pageant ended, until this our champion
with her battering, has sent her life to Pluto, the God of Hell for a present.
Let men therefore be silent and cease wandering at the amphitheatriall fights
of the Romans, which were made with seats and Scaffoldes to behold plays and
sightes, and where were presented to the Spectators the bloody fights of
Elephants, Bears and Lions, sithence a small Spyder dare challenge to the
field, and fight hand to hand with a black and blew Serpent, and not only to
come down to him in daring-wise, but also victoriously to triumph over him,
entirely possessing all the spoil. Who would not marvel that in so small or
in a manner no body at all, which has neither bones nor sinnewes, nor flesh,
nor scarce any skin, there could be so great force, such incredible audacity
and courage, such sharp and hard bytings, and invincible fury? Surely we must
conclude necessarily, that this cannot proceed altogether from their valiant
Pliny and Albertus do recite and set down for a certain truth, but Erasmus
also in his Dialogue entitled De Amicitia, makes mention of, reporting how a
certain Monk lying fast asleep, on whose mouth a foul Toade sat, and yet by
the Spyders means was freed from all hurt. Yea, they dare enter the combat
with winged and stinged Hornets, having not soft, but stiff bodies, and almost
as hard as horn, who although she many times breaks through their Cobwebbes
with main strength (as Rich men undo and make away through Laws with Gold,
and by

I will not omit their temperance, a virtue in former ages proper only to men,
but now it should seem peculiar to Spyders. For who almost is there found (if
age and strength permit) that contenteth himself with the love of one as he
ought, but rather applies his mind, body, and wandering affections to strange
loves But yet Spyders so soon as they grow to ripeness of age, do choose
them Mates, never parting till death it self make the separation. And as they
cannot abide corriualles, if any wedlock breakers, and

But yet commonly the Female-Spyder being enstructed of her Parents when she
was young and docible, the art of spinning and weauing (which custom was
amongst us also in times past) begins the cobweb, and her belly is
sufficient to minister matter enough for such a piece of work, whether it be
that the nature or substance of the belly grows to corruption at sun set
and appointed time (as Democritus thought) or whether there be within them a
certain lanigerous fertility naturally as in Silke-wormes. Aristotle is of
opinion, that the matter is outward as it were a certain Shell or pill, and
that it is vnwound, loosened, and drawn out by their fine weauing and
spinning. But how soever it be, certain it is they will not by their good-wils
loose the least jot of a threads end, but very prouidently see to all though
never so little. The love they bear to their young breed Pallas was so much
offended: for the Scholar excelled her Masters, and in fine cunning and
curious worke-manship, did far surpass her. First then let us consider the
matter of the web, whose substance is tough, binding, and glutinous, plyant,
and will stick to ones fingers like Birdlime, and of such a matter it is
compounded, as it neither loses his clamminesse and fast-holding quality,
either by siccity or moisture.

The matter whereof it is made, is such as can never be consumed, wasted, or
spent Autumnall Spyders called Lupi or Holci, Wolves or Hunters, are thought to
be the most artificial and ingenious: For these draw out a thread finer and
thinner then any Silk, and of such a subtilty, that their whole web being
folded together, will scarce be so heavy as one fine thread of Linen being
weighed together. Edouardus Monimius has very finely and eloquently described
both the Males and Females, Heptam. Lib. 7. in these words following;

-- Ille domum venatu pascit, at ista
Moeonio graciles orditur tegmine telas.
Stanniparus venture, vomifilus lanifer, ipsi
Palladiam cumulatque colum, calatosque ministrat
Ipsius est fusum pondus, quod fila trahendo
Nectit and intorquet parili sub tegmine ducta.
Illo suam a medijs orditur Daedala telam,
Et gracili tenues intendit stamine tractus.
Tela iugo iuncta est stamen secernit arundo,
Inseritur medium radijs subtegmen acutis,
Atque oram a centro panum sibi staminat illam
Peruia tela patet gemina de part, feroci
Ne concussa euro frangantur stamina, quoque
Musca v^lax tenij stretur sinuamine cassis,
Reticul^ primam vix muscula contigit oram.
Mors abit in telae centrum, vt discrimine parua
Vinciat ipse suo perigrinam Casse volucrem.
Which may be englished thus;

The Spider-male by hunting game the houses charge does feed,
The female with Moeonian art begins to spin fine thread,
Out of web-breeding-belly, breast woolly, vp-casting twine,
Whereto the distaffe she applies by art of Pallas fine:
To her belongs the pressed weight, which does the teale out draw,
Both matter, art, and substance she, does shield by natures Law.
Like Daedala out of her midst, her web she does begin,
And stretching out her tender work, by pressing it full thin;
The which is joined as in yoke, yet parted by a cane,
And planted is the middle roof, in a sharp beamy frame.
And from the Center draws a thread like wool to lie upon
While double work on every part does fortify her wone:
Wherewith the blasts of Eastern wind unbroken web resists,
And tender Fly ensnarled, is fallen into those lists.
While scarce upon the edge or brim, this little Fly does fall,
But by and by death seazeth her within webs center thrall:
And so the stranger winged fly with little or no ado,
She over comes speedily when it the nets comes too.
Of these Cobwebs there is great diversity, variety, and difference: for some
of them are loose, weak, slack, and not well bound: other contrariwise well
compacted, and close couched together, some Triangular, othersome Quadrangular;
and some are made with all sides equal, but yet not right angled or cornered
like a quarry of Glass: others are made of such a form as will best fit the
place where they hunt, you shall perceive some of them to be orbicular, if they
weaue between two trees, and you shall find this fashion also among Weeds,
and oftentimes in Windows hanging together with many

Surely Euclides that famous Geometrician, who was Scholar to Socrates, and
lived in the time of Ptolomy the first, need not be ashamed to learn from
Spyders the drawing of diverse of his figures and Geometrical proportions. And
Fishermen also from them have been glad to learn the trade of Net-making. For
from whom else could they borrow and fetch such lively representations, and
such express patterns, then from such a skillful and industrious
Schoole-Maister. But the strength of the web seems to be very strange,
which although it seems to be the most weak of all other things, yet we see
it is able

And yet this is the strangest of all, which many a man would think impossible
but that it cannot be called in question, in regard we may daily see and
observe the proof thereof comes to pass, that a Spyder should begin to
place the one end of her thread on the one side of a little River or Brook,
and how she should fasten the other end on the other side of the water,
considering that Nature never taught them the art either of flying or swimming.
I would feign be resolved of this scruple, by what means they sail and pass
over. Or do you imagine that they iump over, or convey themselves over in

The next that best deserves to be Marshalled in the second rank and place,
for cunning work in weauing and spinning, be those kind of Spyders who build
and labor about the rafters of Houses, in Sellers, flowers, and about boardes,
plankes, and such like, and of these some are wilder which do fashion and
dress a broad, thick, and plain web in the grass and fields all about,
stretching out the same like a sail, or some fine spread Sheet or Curtain.

If you would duly look into their work, and thoroughly consider the strange
trydles of their Loomes, the Shittles they use, their Combs to make all clean,
the stay of their Loomes wherewith they dress their Webbes, their
Crosse-lines, the frame, Woufe, their fine spinning-stuffe, and so their whole
Cobwebs, you shall therein very plainly behold the finger of God working in
his poor and weak creatures. And questionless in this excellent mystery they
are able to put down, and far Surmount the Egyptians, the Lydeans,
Penelope, Tenaquil, (who was Wife to Tarquinius, Priscus) Amestris, that famous
Queen of Persia, Claudiana, Sabina, and Iulia, Noble Roman Ladies Macedonia,
who were esteemed and renowned throughout the whole world, to be the most
curious and exquisite in this kind of faculty, and who in needle-worke,
Tapestry, and all Embroidery were thought to be peerless. For these Spyders
(even contrary to all reason and Art, as we think) make a firm, strong, and
well compacted Web with no lines or threads drawn Crosse-wise or overthwart,
but only made out and continued still in length. When their work is perfected
and brought to an end, they lay over it, and cover it round about with a
certain glutinous kind of Ielly, or slimed juice, by touching of which their
prey being entangled, pay full dearly for their ignorant rashness, unadvised
heede-taking, and lack of foresight: Their web is of the color of the air,
or rather none at all, which easily deceives the foolish unwary Flies,

The baser and vilder sort of Spyders, and such as be least reputed of, are
those that live in holes, Caves, and corners of Houses, and these in respect of
the former are slow, slothful, and lazy: fat, gross, and bigge-bellyed
corner-creepers, and these spinne a very homely, rough, and course thread, which
they spread abroad, and set before the hollow places and chinkes of Walls.
These kinds of Spyders have a more heavy and ponderous body, shorter feet,
and more unhandsome to work or finish any Webbes in their Loomes, and as for
separating, dividing, picking, carding, or suting their stuff, they are

They apprehend and take their preyes rather casually, then take any great
pains to seek far for it, because their hole being great outwardly, seems
to be a good and convenient lurking corner, and a safe corner for Flies to hide
themselves in: but being entangled and arrested in the very entry, they are
snatched up suddenly by the watchful Spider, and carried away into the more
inward places of their dens, there to be slaughtered. For they watch and Ward
aloft in high Walls and buildings, as well to deceive such Birds as lie in
weight to entrappe and take them at unawares (as Sparrowes, Robin-redbreasts,
Wrennes, Nightingales, and Hedge-Sparrowes which are all sworn enemies to
Spyders: and besides, the more easily to beguile the silly flies suspecting no

There be certain other sorts of Spyders which as yet I have not described, as
for example, there is one (the greatest of all that ever I saw) which spreads
her artificial nets in the Haruest-time amongst the leaves and branches of
Roses, and entangleth either any other little Spyder that is running away, or
else Gnat-flies, and such like, being caught at unawares, and hanged by a kind
of thread, whom she first pursues and lays hold on with a wonderful
dexterity and quickness: and being fast hanged, and so made sure, she there
leaves them, for the satisfieng of her hungry appetite till another time. The
body of this Spyder is in color somewhat whitish, resembling S^umme or frothy
some, and almost of an Oule-figure. The head very little, placed under her
belly, being withal crooked or bending like hooks, as is to be seen in the
Crab-fish, and her back garnished

This is one kind of Autumnall Lupi, or Wolfe-Spyder, which in a very short
space of time do grow from the bigness of a little Pease, to a very great bulk
and thickness. There are also found in all places of this Country,
Long-legged-Spyders, who make a very homely and disorderly Web. This kind of
Spyder lives altogether in the fields, her body is almost of a round figure,
and somewhat brownish in color, living in the grass, and delighting in the
company of Sheep: and for this cause I take it, that we Englishmen do call her
a Shepherd, either for that she keeps and loves to be among their flocks,
or because that Shepherds have thought those grounds and feedings to be very
wholesome wherein they are most found, and that no venomous or hurtful creature
abides in those fields where they be: And herein their judgment is to be
liked, for they are indeed altogether unhurtful, whether inwardly taken, or
otherwise outwardly applied; and therefore because I am tied within a Teather,
and thereby restrained from all affectionate discoursing or dilating unless of
poisonous and harmefull Creatures, I will come into my path

In rotten and hollow trees there are also to be found exceeding black
Spyders, having great bodies, short feet, and keeping together with Cheese-lips
or those creeping vermin with many feet, called of some Sowes. We have seen
also (says the learned Gesner) Spyders, that were white all over, of a round
compact and well knit body, somewhat broad, living in the flowers of Mountain
Parsely, amongst Roses, and in the green grass: their Neque enim nostra fert
omnia tellus, The ages ensuing peradventure will find more.

I will only put you in remembrance of this one thing worthy to be observed,
that all weauing and Net-making Spyders, according as they grow in years, so
do they acquire more knowledge, and attain to greater cunning and experience
in their spinning trade: but carrying a resolute and ready will to keep both
time and measure with that Music which best contents most ears, I will now
pass to speak of the propagation and use of Spyders, and so I will close up
this discourse.

The propagation of Spyders for the most part is by coupling together, the
desire and action whereof, continues almost the whole Spring time, for at that
time by a mutual and often drawing, and easy pulling of their Web, they do as
it were woe one another, then approach they nearer together: and lastly are
joined with their hippes one against Phalangies join together, and are
generated by those of the same kind, (as Aristotle says:) But the Phalangies
couple not in the Spring-season, as the other Spyders do, but toward Winter,
at what time they are very swift, quick, nimble, and of most certain hurt,
more dangerous, and more venomous in their bytinges. Some of them after their
coupling together, do lay one Egg only, carrying it under their belly, it is
in color as white as Snow, and both Male and Female sit upon it by turns.

Some Spyders do exclude many little Eggs very like unto the seeds of Poppy,
out of which it has been observed, that sometimes there have been hatched
three hundereth they sit on their eggs for three days space together, and
in a months space their young ones come to perfection. The domestical or
House-Spyder, lays her eggs in a thin web, and the wilde-Spyder in a
thicker and stronger, because they are more exposed to the injuries of winds,
and lie more open to the rage of and fury of storms and showers.

The place and country where they are, helps much, and is very available to
their generation. There is no country almost, but there be many Spyders in it.
For in the country about Arrha, which is in Arabia foelix, there is an infinite
number of them to be found, and all the Island of Candie swarmeth with
Palangies. Strabo says, that in Ethiopia there be great number of Phalangies
found, of an exceeding bigness: although as Pliny says in his eight book and
58. chapter, there are neither Wolfes, Foxes, Bears, nor no hurtful Wight (a
member of England,) the contrary is to be found, for although there were never
dwelling in it, Foxes, Bears, nor Wolfes, yet there be Spyders ynow.

The Kingdom of Ireland never saw Spyders, and in England no Phalangies will
live long, nor yet in the I Will of Man, and near unto the City of Grenoble, in
that part of France which lies next Italy, Gaudentius Merula says, there is
an old Tower or Castle standing, wherein as yet never any Spyder has been
seen, nor yet any other venomous creeping creature, but rather if any be
brought thither from some other place, they forthwith die. Our Spyders in
England, are not so venomous as in other parts of the world, and I have seen a
mad man eat many of them, without either death or deaths harm, or any other
Phalangie is deadly.

We see the harmless Spyders almost in every place, they climb up into the
Courts of mighty Kings, to be as it were myrrours and glasses of virtue, and
to teach them honest prowess and valiancie. They go into the lodgings,
shoppes and Warehouses of poore-men, to commend unto them contentment,
patience, labor, tolerance, industry, poverty and frugalitie. They are also
to be found in rich-mens chambers, to admonish

Who would not therefore be touched, yea and possessed with an extreme wonder
at these virtues and faculties, which we daily see and behold with our eyes.
Philes has briefly and compendiously described their nature, properties,
inclinations, wit and invention in his Greek verses, which being turned into
Latin, sound to this effect.

Araneis natura per quam industria est,
Vincens puellarum manus argutias.
Nam ventris humores super vacaneos
Ceu fila nent, textoris absque pectine
Et implicantes orbium volumina,
Aduersa sublegunt ijs subtegmina:
Sed licijs hinc densioribus plagas
In aere appendunt, nec vnde conspicor
Sejuncta cum sit omnis a medio basis
Quae fulciat mirabilem operis fabricam.
Et staminum fallit ligamen lumina
Subtilitatis sub dio discrimine.
Firmatur autem densitas subtegminis,
Raras in ambientis oras aeris.
Muscis, culicibus, et id genus volantibus.
Intensa nectens fraudulenter retia,
Quod incidit, jejuna pascit hoc famem,
Vitamque degit haud quietis indigam.
Suspensa centro, cassibusque prouidens,
Ne fila rumpat, orbiumque dissuat
Nexus retertos flaminis vis irruens.
Which may be englished thus;

Industrious nature Spyders have,
Excelling Virgins hands of skill,
Superfluous humors of bellyes save,
And into webbes they weaue them still,
And that without all Weauers combs
Their folding Orbs enrolled are,
And underneath their woofes as tombs,
Are spread, the worthy work to bear,
And hang their threads in air above,
By plages unseen to the eye of man,
Without foundation you may prove
All their buildings firmly stand:
Nor yet clear light to eyes most bright
Can see the coupling of their thread,
The thinness of the woofe in sight,
On pinnes of air are surest spread.
On gnats, and silly winged flies,
Which guilefully in nets they take,
They feed their fill when they espy,
And yet their life much rest does make.
They labor to, and do provide
Against winds and things that break their twayles,
That bands from tacklings may not slide,
When greater strength does them assail.
And although Minerua has nicknamed the Spyder, calling her malepart,
shameless, and saucy. Martial, wandering, straying and gadding. Claudianus,
rash, presumpteous, and aduenturous. Politianus, hanging and thick. Iuuenall,
dry. Propertius, rotten. Virgill, light. And Plautus, unprofitable and good for
nothing, yet it is clear that they were made to serve and stead us to many
excellent uses: so that you may plainly gather and perceive, that this is
rather an amplification, rather then any positive or measured truth, concerning
the fond Epithets, vile badges and liueries, which these rehearsed Authors have
unworthily

The Spyder put into a lynnen clowre, and hung upon the left arm, is an
excellent medicine to expel a Quotidian-Ague, as Trallianus says: and yet it
will be more effectual if Their use.
many Spyders be boiled with oil of Bay to the co^sistence of a liniment, to
annoint the wrists and the temples a little before the fit, for by this means
the Fever will be absolutely cured, or will sildome return again. Kiramides.
A Spyder tempered and wrought up with Milt-wast or Ceterach, and so spread
upon a cloth, to be applied to the temples, cures the fits of a
Tertian-Feauer. Dioscoride. The Spyder that is called a Wolf, being put into a
quill, and so hanged about the neck, performs the same effect, as Pliny
reports. The domestical Spyder, which spinneth and weaueth a thin, a
white, or a thick web, Dioscorides and Fernelius have thought. For the pain
in the ears, take three live Spyders, boil them with oil upon the fire, then
destill or drop a little of this oil into the payned ear, for it is very
excellent, as witnesses Marcellus Empiricus. Pliny steepeth them in vinegar
and oil of Roses, and so to be stamped together, and a little thereof to be
dropped into the pained ear with a little Saffron, and without doubt, says
he, the pain will be mittigated, and the same affirms Dioscorides. Or else
strain out the juice of Spyders, mixing it with the juice of Roses, and with
some wool dipped in the same liquour, apply it to the ear.

Sorastus in his book Peri Dakeon writes, how that the Spyder which is called
Cranocalaptes, being stifled or choked in oil, is a very present help
against any poison taken inwardly into the body, as the Scholiast of Nicander
reports. There be some that catch a Spyder in the left hand, and beat and
stamp it with the oil of Roses, putting some of it into the ear, on the same
side the tooth aketh, and as Pliny tells us, it does exceeding

What should I talk of the white spots of the eyes, a most dangerous grief?
and yet are they clean taken away with very small labor, if so be one take
the legs, especially of those Spyders which are of the whiter sort, and
stamping them together with oil, do make an ointment for the eyes. Pliny. The
moist juice that is squiesed out of a house-Spyder, being tempered with oil of
Roses, or one dram of Saffron, and a drop or two thereof dropped into the
eyes, cures the dropping or watering of them, by means of a rhume issuing out
thereat: or else the moisture of a Spyder or his urine being taken by
themselves, laying a little wool on the top of the part affected, works the
same effect;

Against the suffogation of the belly, Aetius does counsel to apply a Cerote
to the navel made of Spyders, and says that he has found it to prevail much
in this kind of passion. Pliny says, but he yields no reason for it, that
Spyders do help the pain and swelling of the Spleen. He writes also
further, that if a man catch a Spyder as she is glyding and descending
downe-wards by her thread, and so being crushed in the hand, and then applied to
the navel, that the belly will be provoked to the stool, but being taken as
she is ascending, and applied after the same former manner, that any loosenes
or flux is stayed and restrained thereby. The same Pliny also writes, that if
a man take a Spyder, and lay

If any be vexed with store of lyce, and do use a suffumigation made only
with Spyders, it will cause them all to fall and come away, neither will there
afterward any more breed in that place. The fat of a Goose tempered and mixed
with a Spyder and oil of Roses together, being used as an ointment upon the
breasts, preserves them safely, as that no milk will coagulate or curdle in
them after any birth. Anonymus. Yea, that same

Antonius Pius was wont to say, that the sharp words, witty sayings, quirkes
and subtilties of Sophisters, were like unto Spyders webbes, that contain in
them much cunning Art, and artificial conceit, but had little other good
besides. If any one be newly and dangerously wounded, and that the miserable
party fears a bleeding to death, what is a more noble medicine, or more
ready at hand, then a thick Spyders web, to bind hard upon the wound, to
stay the inordinate effusion of blood? Questionless, if we were as diligent
and greedy to search out the true properties and virtues of our own
domestical remedies, which we would buy of others so dearly, we would not
enforce our selves with such eager pursuit after those of foreign Countries,
as though things fetched far off, were better then our own near at hand; or
as though nothing were good and wholesome unless it came from Egypt, Arabia or
India. Surely, unless there were some wild worm in our brames, or that we
were bewitched and possessed with some Fury, we would not so far be in love
with foreign wares, or be so much besotted, as to seek for greedy new
physic and physical means, considering that one poor Spyders web will
do more good, for the stanching of blood, the curation of ulcers, the
hindering of sanies, slyme, or Sorcocolla, Sandaracha, or that earth which is
so much nobilitated by the impresse of a seal, and therefore called Terra
Sigillata, the clay of Samos, the dirt of Germany, or the loame of Lemnos. For
a cobwebbe adstringeth, refrigerateth, soldereth, joins, and closes up
wounds, not suffering any rotten or filthy matter to remain long in them.

And in regard of these excellent virtues and qualities, it quickly cures
bleedings at the nose, the Haemorrhoides, and other bloodie-fluxes, whether of
the opening of the mouths of the veins, their opertions, breakings, or any
other bloody euacuation that too much abounds, being either given by it
self alone in some Wine, either inwardly, Crocus Martis, and other the like
remedies fit for the same intentions.

The cobwebbe is also an ingredient into an unguent which is made by
Physicians, against the disease called Serpego, and being bound to the
swellings of the fundament, if there be inflammation joined withal, it
consumes them without any pain, as Marcellus Empiricus testifies. It
likewise cures the watering or dropping of the eyes, as Pliny reports, and
being applied with oil, it consolidateth the wounds of the joints: and some
for the same intent, use the ashes of cobwebbes, with fine Meal and
White-vvine mixed together.

Some Surgeons there be that cure Warts in this manner; They take a
Spyders-web, Marcellus Empiricus takes Spyders webbes that are found in the
Cypresse-tree, mixing them with other convenient remedies, so giving them to a
podagricall person for the asswaging of his pain. Against the pain of a
hollovv tooth, Gallen in his first book De Compos: medicum, secundum loca,
much commends, (by the testimony of Archigenes) the eggs of Spyders, being
tempered and mixed with Oleum Nardinum, and so a little of it being put into
the tooth. In like sort Kiramides gives Spyders eggs for the curation of a
Tertian-Ague. Whereupon we conclude with Gallen, in his book to Piso, that
Nature as yet never brought forth any thing so vile,

I will add therefore this one note before I end this discourse, that Apes,
Marmosets or Monkies, the Serpents called Lizards, the Stellion, which is
likewise a venomous beast like unto a Lizard, having spots in his neck like
unto stars, Waspes, and the little beast called Ichneumon, Swallows,
Sparrowes, the little Titmouse, and Hedge-sparrowes, do often feed full
sauourlie upon Spyders. Besides, if the Nightingale, (the Prince of all
singing-byrds) do eat any Spyders, she is clean freed and healed of all
diseases whatsoever.

In the days of Alexander the Great, there dwelled in the City of Alexandria
a certain young maid, which from her youth up, was fed and nourished only
with eating of Spyders, and for the same cause the King was premonished not to
come near her, least peradventure he might be infected by her poisonous
breath, or by the venom euaporated by her sweating. Albertus likewise has
recorded in his writings, that there was a certain noble young Virgin
dwelling at Colen in Germany, who from her tender years was fed only with
Spyders. And thus much we Englishmen have known, that there was one Henry
Lilgraue, living not many years since, being Clarke of the Kitchen to the
right noble Ambrose Dudley Earl of Warwick, who would search every corner for
Spyders, and if a man had brought him thirty or forty at one time, he would
have eaten them all up very greedily, such was his desirous longing after them.

OF THE STELLION.


THey are much deceived that confound the green Lyzard, or any other vulgar
Lyzard, for because the Stellion has a rustie color: and yet (as Matthiolus
writes) seeing Aristotle has left recorded, that there are venomous Stellions
in Italy, he thinks that the little white beast with stars on the back,
found about Tarentula, is the Stellion of which Aristotle speaks, and there
it lives upon Spyders. Yet that there is another and more noble kind of
Stellion aunciently so called of the Learned, shall afterward appear in the
succeeding discourse.

This Beast or Serpent, is called by the Graecians Colottes, Ascalobotes, and
Galeotes, and such an one was that which Aristophanes faineth from the side of
a house eased her belly into the mouth of Socrates as he gaped, when in a
Moone-shine night he observed the course of the stars, and motion of the
Moon. The reason of this Greek name Ascalabotes, is taken from Ascalos, a
circle, because it appears on the back full of such circles Perottus.
Howbeit, that seems to be a feigned Etymology, and therefore I rather take
it, that Ascala signifies impuritie, and that by reason of the uncleanness
of this beast, it was called Ascalabetes, or as Suidas deriueth it, of
Colobates, because by the help and dexterity of the fingers, it clymbeth up
the walls even as Rats and myce; or as Kiramides will have it, from Calos,
signifying a piece of wood, because it clymbeth upon wood and Trees. And for
the same reason it is called Galeotes, because it clymbeth like a Weasill, but
at this day it is vulgarly called among the Graecians Liakoni, although some
are also of opinion, that it is also known among them by the words
Thamiamithos, and Psammamythe.

Among the vulgar Haebrewes, it is sometimes called Letaah, and sometimes
Semmamit, as Munster vvriteth. The Arrabians call it Sarnabraus, and Senabras,
a Stellion of Guarill, Guasemabras, Alurel, and Gnases. And Syluaticus also
uses Epithetes for a Stellion. And the general Arabian word for such creeping
biting things, is Vasga, which is also rendered a dragon of the house. Instead
of Colotes, Albertus has Arcolus. The Germans, English, and French, have no
words for this Serpent, except the Latin word, and therefore I was justly
constrained to call it a Stellion, in imitation of the Latin word.

As I have showed some difference about the name, so it now ensues that I
should do the like about the nature and place of their abode. First of all
therefore I must put a difference betwixt the Italian Stellion or Tarentula,
and the Thracian or Grecian, for the Stellion of the Ancients is propper to
Gracia. For they say this Stellion is full of Lentile spots, or speckles,
making a sharp or shrill shrieking noise, and is good to be eaten, but the
other in Italy are not so. Also they say in Sicilia that their Stellions
inflict a deadly biting, but those in Italy cause no great harm by their
teeth. They are covered with a skin like a shell or thick bark, and about
their backs there are many little shining spots like eyes, Ovid.

-- Aptumque colori.
Nomen habet varijs Stellatus corpor a guttis.
Which may be englished thus;

And like his spotted hiew, so is his name,
The body starred over like drops of rain.
It moves but slowly, the back and tail being much broader then is the
back and Tarentulaes are white, and in quantity like the smallest Lyzards:
and the other Grecian Lyzards, (called at this day among them Haconi,) is of
bright silver color, and are very harmefull and angry, whereas the other are
not so, but so meek and gentle, as a man may put his fingers into the mouth of
it without danger. One reason of their white bright shining color, is because
they want blood, and therefore it was an error in Syluaticus to say that they
had blood.

The teeth of this Serpent are very small and crooked, and whenever they
byte, they stick fast in the wound, and are not pulled forth again except
with violence. The tail is not very long, and yet when by any chance it is
broken, bytten, or cut off, then it grows again They live in houses, and
near unto the doors and windows thereof make Socrates mouth, and when they
descend of their own accord, they creep side-long. They eat Honey, and for
that cause creep into the hiues of Bees, except they be very carefully
stopped, as Virgill writes; Nam saepe fauos, ignotus adedit Stellio.


Many times the Stellion at unawares meets with the Honey combs. They also of
Italy many times eat Spyders. They all lie hid four months of the year,
in which Theophrastus and other Authors write, is an envious part in this
Serpent or creeping creature, because they understand that it is a noble remedy
against the Falling Sickness: wherefore to keep men from the benefit and
good which might come there-by, they speedily devour it.

And from this envious and subtle part of the Stellion, comes the crime in
Vlpianus called Crimen Stellionatus, that is, when one man fraudulently
preuenteth another of his money, or wares, or bargain, even as the Stellion
does mankind of the remedy which comes unto them by and from his skin.

This crime is also called Extortion, and among the Romans, when the Tribunes
did withdraw from the Soldiers their provision of victual and Corn, it is
said, Tribunos qui per Stellatur as Militibus aliquid abstulissent, capitali
poena affecit. And therefore Budaeus relates a history of two Tribunes, who
for this stellature were worthily stoned to death by the commandment of the
Emperor. And all frauds whatsoever, are likewise taxed by this name, which
were not punishable but by the doom of the supreme or highest Judge, and
there-vppon Alciatus made this Emblem following.

Parua lacerta, atris Stellatus corpore guttis
Stellio, qui latebras and caua busta colit
Inuidiae prauique doli fert symbola, pictus:
Heu nimium nuribus cognita Zelotypis
Nam turpi obtegitur, faciem lentigine, quisquis
Sit quibus immersus Stellio, vina bibat.
Hinc vindicta frequens, decepta pellice vino,
Quam formae amisso flore relinquit amans.
Which may be englished thus;

The little Lyzard, or Stellion starred in body grain
In secret holes, and graves of dead which does remain,
When painted you it see, or drawn before the eye,
A symbol then you view of deep deceit and cursed envy:
Alas, this is a thing to jealous wives known too well,
For whosoever of that Wine does drink his fill
Wherein a Stellion has been drencht to death,
His face with filthy lentile spots all ugly it appears,
Here-with a Lover often requites the fraud of concubine,
Depriving her of beauties hiew by draught of this same wine.
The Poet Ovid has a pretty fiction of the original of this cursed envy in
Stellions, for he writes of one Abas the son of Metaneira, that received
Ceres kindly into her house, and gave her hospitality, whereat the said Abas
being displeased, derided the sacrifice which his mother made to Ceres: the
Goddess seeing the wretched nature of the young man, and his extreme impiety
against the sacrifice of his Mother, took the Wine left in the goblet after
the Sacrifice, and poured the same upon his head, whereupon he was immediately
turned into a Stellion, as it is thus related by Ovid, Metam: 5.

Combibit os maculas, and quae modo brachia gessit
Crura gerit, cauda est mutatis addita membris:
Inque breuem formam, ne sit vis magna nocendi
Contrahitur, paruaque minor mensura lacerta est.
In English thus;

His mouth sucked in those spots: and now where arms did stand,
His legs appear, and to his changed parts was put a tail,
And least it should have power to harm, small was the bodies band,
And of the Lizards poisonous, this least in shape did veil.
Their bodies are very brittle, so as if at any time they chance to fall, they
break their tails. They lay very small eggs, out of which they are
generated: and Pliny writes that the juice or liquor of these eggs laid
upon a man's body, causes the hair to fall off, and also never more
permits it to grow again. But whereas we have said, it deuoureth the
skin, to the damage and hurt of men, you must remember, that in ancient time
the people did not want their policies and devises to take away this skin
from them before they could eat it. And therefore in the Sommer-time they
watched the lodging place and hole of the Lyzard, and then in the end of the
winter toward the Spring, they took Reeds and did cleave them in sunder,
these they composed into little Cabonets, and set devour it. Thus is this
wily Serpent by the policy of man justly beguiled, loosing that which it so
greatly desires to possess, and changing nature, to line his guts with his
coat, is prevented from that gluttony, it being sufficient to have had it for
a cover in the Winter, and therefore insufferable that it should make food
thereof, and it the same in the Summer.

These Stellings (like as other Serpents) have also their enemies in nature, as
first of all they are hated by the Asses, for they love to be about the
maungers and rackes on which the Ass feeds, and from thence many times they
creep into the Asses open nostrills, and by that means hinder his eating. But
above all other, there is greatest antipathy in nature betwixt this Serpent and
the Scorpion, for if a Scorpion do but see one of these, it falls into a
deep fear, and a cold sweat, out of which it is delivered again very
speedily:

We have showed already, the difference of Stellions of Italy from them of
Greece, how these are of a deadly poisonous nature, and the other innocent and
harmless, and therefore now it is also convenient, that we should show the
nature and cure of this poison, which is in this manner.

Whenever any man is bytten by a Stellion, he has ache and pain thereof
continually, and the wound received looks very pale in color, the cure
whereof, according to the saying of Aetius, is to make a plaster of Garlic
and Leekes mixed together, or Aetius.
Nigella Romana, Sesamyne, and sweet water unto it. Some (as Arnoldus writes)
prescribe for this cure the dunge of a Faulcon, or a Scorpion to be bruised all
to pieces, and laid to the wound. But sometimes it happens, that a man's meat
or drink is corrupted with Stellions that fall into the same from some high
place where they desire to be clymbing, and then if the same meat or Wine so
corrupted be eaten or drunk, it causes unto the party a continual vomiting
and pain in the stomach. Then must the cure be made also by vomits to avoid
the poison, and by Glysters to open the lower passage, that so there may be no
stop or stay, to keep the imprisoned meat or drink in the body. And
principally those things are prescribed in this

The remedies which are observed out of this Serpent are these: Being eaten by
Hawks, they make them quickly to cast their old coats or feathers. Others
give it in meat after it is bowelled, to them that have the Falling Sickness.
Also when the head, Cres^
feet, and bowels are taken away, it is profitable for those persons which
cannot hold in their urine, and being sodden, is given against the
Bloody-flixe. Also sodde in wine with black Poppy-seede, cures the pain of
the loins, if the wine be drunk up by the sick Pliny.
patient.

The oil of Stellions being anointed upon the arme-holes or pittes of
children, or young persons, it restrains all hair for ever growing in those
places. Also the oil of Stellions, which are sod in Oyle-oliue with Lyzards,
do cure all boyles and wennes, consuming them without launcing or breaking. And
the ashes of the Stellion are most principally commended against the
Falling-sicknes, like as also is the skin or truncke, as we have said before.
The head burned and dried, and afterward mixed with Honny-attick, is very good
against the continual dropping or running of the eyes; and in the days of
Pliny, he writes that they mixed Stibum here-withall. The heart is of so great
force, that it being eaten, brings a most deep and dangerous sleep, as may
appear by these verses.

Mande cor, and tantus prosternet corpora somnus,
Vt scindi possunt absque dolor manus.
Which may be englished thus;

Eat you the heart, and then such sleep the body will possess,
That hands may from the same be cut away painelesse.
To conclude, the Physicians have carefully observed sundry medicines out of
the eggs, gall, and dunge of Stellions, but because I write for the benefit of
the English Reader. I will spare their relation, seeing we shall not need to
fear the biting of Stellions in England, or expect any drugges among our
Apothecaries out of them, and therefore I will here end the history of the
Stellion.

OF THE TIRE.
THere be some which have confounded this Serpent with Actorius
the Tire to be a kind of Viper, because the Arabians call a Viper Thiron, of
the Greek word Therion, which signifies a wild beast, and whatsoever the
Graecians write of their Echidna, that is their Viper, the same things the
Arabians write of the Tire, and Leonicenus compiled a whole book in the
defense Caelius Rho:
of that matter: and from hence comes that noble name or composition
antidotary, called Theriaca, that is, Triacle. But Auicen in the mention of the
Triacle of Andromachus, Amatus.
Trohiscos Tyri, and the other, Trohiscos Viperae. So Gentilis and Florentinus,
do likewise put a manifest difference betwixt the Tire and the Viper, although
in many things they are alike, and agree together.

This Tire is called in Latin Tyrus and Tyria, and also among the Arabians, as
Syluaticus writes, Eosmari, and Alpfahex. Rabbi Moses in his Aphorisms
writes, that when the Hunters go to seek these Serpents, they carry with
them bread, which they cast unto them, and while the Tire does eat it, he
closes his mouth so fast, that his teeth cannot suddenly open again to do
his hunting adversary any harm, and this thing (as he writes) is very
admirable at the first, to them that are ignorant of the secret in nature.
Galen also writes so much to Piso of Vipers, and he says that the
Circulators, Iuglers or Quacksaluers, did cast certain mazes or small cakes to
them, which when they had tasted, they had no power to harm any body.

This Tyrus is said to be a Serpent about the coasts of Jericho in the
Wilderness, where it hunteth Birds, and lives by devouring of them and their
eggs. And a confection of the flesh of this Serpent, with the admixture of
some few other things, takes away all intoxicate poison, which confection is
called Triacle. It is also reported, that whereas the Dragons have no poison of
themselves, they take it away from this Serpent, and so poison with a borrowed
venom. For this poison is very deadly: and there is a tale (which I will not
tell for truth) that before the coming and death of our Savior Jesus Christ,
the Christ his passion, one of them was found by chance in Jerusalem, which
was taken alive, and brought to the side of our Savior hanging upon the
Cross, where it also fastened the teeth, and from that time ever since, all
the kind have received a qualified and remediable poison, and also their flesh
made apt to cure it self, or other venoms.

It is reported that when the Tyrus is old, he casts, or rather wresteth off
his coat, in this manner following; First it gets off the skin which
grows betwixt the eyes, by which it looks as if it were blind, and if it be
strange to a man, (I mean the first time that ever he saw it) he will verily
take it to be blind: afterward, it also fleyeth off the skin

I take it by the relation of Gesner, that the Dypsas in Italy is called Tyrus.
Also Cardan writes, that there is a supposed and false conceit, that with the
flesh of this Tire, mixed with Hellebore and water, is made a confection to
restore youth: but the truth is, it rather weakeneth and destroys bodies,
then helps them, and makes a counterfeite or varnished false youth, but no
true youth at all. Thus far Cardan, and thus much of this Serpent, the other
things written of it, are the same that are written of the Viper.



OF THE TORTEYSE.
THe last foure-footed egge-breeding beast, comes now to be handeled in due
order and place; namely, the Torteyse, which I have thought good to insert also
in this place, although I cannot find by reading or experience, that it is
venomous, yet seeing other before me have ranged the same in the number and
Catalogue of these Serpents and creeping creatures, I will also follow them;
and therefore I will first express that of the Torteyse, which is general and
common to both kinds, and then that which is special, and propper to the Land
and Sea Torteyses.

The name of this Beast is not certain, among the Hebrews some call it
Schabhul, some Kipod, and some Homet, whereas every one of these do also
signify another thing, as Schabhul a Snayle. Kipod a Hedge-hogge, and Homet a
Lyzard. The Chaldeans call this Beast Thiblela. The Arabians term it Sisemat.
Also Kauden salabhafe, and Halachalie.

The Italians call this Testuma testudine, vel testugire, tartuca, enfuruma,
tartocha, and cosorona. And in Ferraria, Gallanae, tartugellae, biscae scut
llariae. The inhabitants of Taurinu, Cupparia. The Portugalls, Gagado. The
Spaniards, Galapago, and Tartuga. The French, Tortue, and Tartue. And in Sauoy,
Boug coupe. The Germans, Schiltkrot, and Tallerkrot. The Flemings, Schilt
padde, which answers our English word Shell-crab. The Graecians call it
Chelone, and the Latins Testudo: which words in their several Languages,
have other significations, as are to be found in every vocabular Dictionary,
and therefore I omit them, as not pertinent to this business or History.

There be of Torteyses three kinds, one that lives on the Land, the second in
the sweet waters, and the third in the Sea, or salt-waters. There are found
great store of these in India especially of the Wate^ Torteyses, and therefore
the people of that part of the Country, are called Chelonophagi; that is,
Eaters of Torteyses, for they live upon them: and these people are said to be
in the East-part of India. And in Carmania the people are likewise so called.
And they do not only ear the flesh of them, but also cover their houses with
their shells; and of their abundance, do make them all manner of vessels. And
Pliny and Solinus write, that the Sea Torteyses of India are so big, that
with one of them they cover a dwelling Cottage. And Strabo says, they also row
in them on the waters, as in a Boat.

The Islands of Serapis in the Redde-Sea, and the farthest Ocean Islands,
toward, the East of the Red Sea, has also very great Torteyses in it: and
every where in the Red Sea they so abound, that the people there do take them
and carry them to their greatest Marts and Fayres to sell them, as to Rhaphtis,
to Ptolemais, and the Island of Dioscorides, whereof some have white and small
shells. In Lybia also they are found, and in the night time they come out of
their lodgings to feed, but very softly, so as one can scarcely perceive their
motion.

And of one of these Scaliger tells this story. One night (says he) as I was
trauayling, being ouer-taken with darkness and want of light, I cast about
mine eyes to seek some place for my lodging, safe and secure from Wild-beasts;
and as I looked about, I saw (as I thought) a little ^ill or heap of earth,
but in truth it was a Torteyse, covered all over with moss: upon that I
ascended and sa^e down to rest, where-vppon after a little watching I fe^l
asleep, and so ended that nights rest upon the back of the Torteyse. In the
morning, when light approached, I perceived that I was removed far from the
place, whereon I first chose to lodge all night; and therefore rising up, I
beheld with great admiration the face and countenance of this Beast, in the
knowledge whereof, (as in a new nature) I went foreward, much comforted in my
wearisome journey.

The description of the Torteyse and the several parts thereof now follows
to be handled. Those creatures (says Pliny) which bring forth or lay eggs,
either have feathers as Fowls, or have scales as Serpents, or thick hides as
the Scorpion, or else a shell like the Torteyse. It is not without great cause
that this shell is called Scutrem, and the Beast Scutellaria, for there is no
buckler and shield so hard and strong as this is. And Palladius was not
deceived when he wrote thereof, that upon the same might safely pass over a
Cart-wheele, the Cart being load^d. And therefore in this, the Torteyse is more
happy then the Crocodile, or any other such Beast.

Albertus writes that it has two shell^s, one upon the back, the other on
the belly, which are conjoined together in four places and by reason of this
so firm a cover and shell, the flesh thereof is dry and firm, also long
lasting, and not very easy or apt to putrefaction. This shell or cover is
smooth, except sometimes when it is grown old, it has moss upon it, and it
never casts his coat in old age, as other creeping things do. In the head
and tail it resembles a Serpent, and the great Torteyses have also shelles
upon their heads like a shield, yet is the head but short, and the espect of it
very fearful, until a man ^e well acquainted there with. And by reason of the
hardness of their eyes, they move none but the nether eye lidde, and that
without often winking. The Liver of it is great, yet without any blood. It has
but one belly without division, and the Liueris alwa^es foul, by reason of the
vicious temperature of the body. The Melt is exceeding small, coming far short
of the bodies proportion.

Be^e, the common nature of other thicke-hided-creatures. It has also reins,
except that kind of Tortoyce called Lutaria, for that wants both Reins and
bladder, for by reason of the softness of the cover thereof, the humor is
over fluent; but the Tortoy^e that brings forth Eggs has all inward parts
like a perfect Creature: and the Females have a singular passage for their
excrementes, which is not in the Males The Eggs are in the body of their
belly, which are of a party-colour like the Eggs of Birds.

Their stones cleave to their loins, and the tail is short, but like the
tail of a Serpent.

They have four Legs, in proportion like the Legs of Lizards, every foot
ha^ing five fingers or divisions upon them, with nails upon every one. And
thus much for the several parts.

They are not unjustly called Amphibia, because they live both in the water and
on the Land, and in this thing they are by Pliny resembled to Beauers: but this
must be understood of the general, otherwise the Tortoyces of the Land do
never dare come into the Water: and those of the Water can breath in the water,
but want respiration, and likewise they lay their Eggs and sleep upon the
dry Land. They have a very slow and easy pace; and thereupon Pauuiu^ calls
it Tardigrada, and also there is a Proverb: Testudineus incessus, for a slow
and soft pace, when such a motion is to be expressed. The Tortoyce never
casts his coat, no not in his old age. The voice is an abrupt and broken
hissing, not like to the Serpents, but much more loud and diffused. The Male is
very salacious and given to carnal copulation, but the Female is not so; for
when she is attempted by the Male, they fight it out by the teeth, and at last
the Male overcomes, whereat he rejoices as much, as one that in a hard
conflict, fight, or battle, has won a fair Woman; the reason of this
unwillingness is, because it is exceeding paynefull to the Female. They
engender by riding or covering one another. When they have laid their Eggs,
they do not sit upon them to hatch them, but lay them in the Earth, covered,
and there by the heat of the Sun is the young one formed, and comes forth at
due time without any further help from his parents.

They are accounted crafty and su^tle in the^r kind, for subtlenesse is not
only ascribed to things that have a thin blood, but also to those that have
thick skins, hides, and Couers, such as the Tortoyce and Crocodile have. The
Tortoyce is an enemy to the Bariridge, as Philes and Aelianus write: Also the
Ape is as frayde thereof, as it is of the Snayle: and to conclude, whatsoever
enemy it has, it is safe enough as long as it is covered with his Shell, and
clyngeth fast to the Earth beneath; and therefore came the Proverb: Oikos
philos, oikos aristos. That House which is ones friend, is the best house.

The Poets give a fabulou reasons, why the Tortoyce does ever carry his House
upon his back, which is this: They say, that on a time Jupiter badde all
living Creatures to a banquet or Marriage feast, and thither they all came at
the time appointed, except the Tortoyce: and she at last also appeared at the
end of the feast when the mea^e was all spent: whereat Jupiter wondered, and
asked her why she came no sooner? Then i^ answered him, Oikos philos, oikos
aristos; at which answer Jupiter being angry, adjudged her perpetually to
carry her house on her back, and for this cause they fable, that the Tortoyce
is never separated from her house.

Flaminius the Roman diswading the Achaeans from attempting the Island of
Zacynthij, used this Argument; and so afterward T. Liuius. Caeterum sicut
Testudinem, vbi collecta, in suum tegumen est, tutam ad omnes ictus ^^di esse:
vbit exerit parts aliquas quodcunque nudauit, obnoxium atque infirmum habere:
Haud dissimiliter vobis Achaei, clausis vndique maris, quod intra Peloponnesum
est, termino, ea and iungere vobis, and iuncta tueri facile: si semel auiditate
plura amplect endi hinc excedatis, nuda vobis omnia quae extra sint and
exposita ad omnes ictus esse. Thus far Pliny. That is to say, Even as when
the Tortoyce is gathered within the compass of her shell, then is it safe and
free from all strokes, and feels no violence, but whenever she puts
forth a Limb or part, then is it naked, infirm, and easy to be harmed: So
is it with you Achaeans, for by reason of the enclosed seat of Peloponnesus
within the straights of the Sea, you may well wind all that together, and
being conjoined, as well defend it: But if once your auidious and couctous
minds to get more, appear and stretch it self beyond those limits, you
shall lay open your naked infirmity and weakness, to all force, blows, and
violence whatsoever. Wherefore, the Torteyse cares not for flies, and men with
good armor care not much for light and easy adversaries.

Alciatus has a witty Emblem of a Torteyse to express a good huswife, and
that the same of her virtues, spreads much further then either beauty or
riches.

Alma Venus quaenam hac facies quid denotat illa
Testudo, molli quam pede diuapremis?
Mesie effinxit Phidias sexumque referri
Foemineum nostraiussit ab effigy,
Quodque manner domi, and tacitas debet esse puellas
Supposuit pedibus talia signa meis.
Which may be englished thus;

Loves holy God, what means that ugly face?
What does that Torteyse signify in deed?
Which thou o Goddess under soft foot dooest pace,
Declare what means the same to me with speed?
Such is the shape that Phidias did me frame,
And bade me go resemble women kind,
To teach them silence, and in house remain,
Such pictures underneath my feet you find.
There is a manifold use of Torteyses, especially of their cover or shell, and
likewise of their flesh, which comes now to be handled. And first of all, the
ancient ornament of Beds, Chambers, Tables, and Banqueting-houses, was a
kind of artificial work, called Caruilius, and this was framed in gold and
silver, brasle and wood, Iuory and Torteyse-shells; but, Modo luxuria non
fuerit contenta ligno, iam lignam emi testudinem facit: That is to say; Riot
not contented, sought precious frames of wood; and again, the use of wood,
caused Torteyse-shells to be dearly bought; and thereof also complained the
Poet Iuuenall, where he says;

-- Nemo curabat
Riualis in Oceani fluctu tectudo nataret
Clarum Troiugenis factura and nobile fulerum.
In English thus;

Then none did care for Torteyse in the Ocean-flood,
To make the noble beds for Troyans blood.
We have showed already that there are certain people of the East called
Chelophagi, which live by eating of Torteyses, and with their shells they cover
their houses, make all their vessels, row in them upon the water, as men use
to row in boats, and make them likewise serve for many other uses.

But as concerning the eating of the flesh of Torteyses, the first that ever
we read that used this ill diet, were the Amozons, according as Caelius Rhod:
and other Authors writes. Besides, Aloysius Cadamustus affirms, that he
himself did taste of the flesh of a Torteyse, and that it was white in color,
much like unto Veale, and not unpleasant. But Rasis is of a clean contrary
opinion, condemning it for very unsavory, and unwholesome, because the taste
and temperament thereof, is betwixt the Land and the Water, it being a beast
that lives in both Elements. And in eating hereof the Graecians have a
proverb, Chelones kreas he phagein, he me phagein: That is, either eat
Torteyse flesh, or eat it not. Meaning that when we eat it, we must eat
nothing else, and therefore must be filled sufficiently only with that kind of
meat: For to eat little, breeds fretting in the belly, and to eat much is
as good as a purgation, according to the observation of many actions, which
being done Frigide and ignauiter, that is, coldly and slothfully to halues, do
no good, but being done, Acriter and explicatie, earnestly and thoroughly bring
much content and happiness.

But I marvel why they are used in this age, or desired by Meat-mongers,
seeing Apicius in all his book of Variety of Meats, does not mention them; and
I therefore will conclude the eating of Tortoyces to be dangerous, and hateful
to Nature it self, for unless it be taken like a Medicine, it does little
good, and then also the Sawces and decoctions or compositions that are
confected with it, are such as do not only qualify, but utterly alter all
the nature of the^, (as Stephanus Aquaeus has well declared) in his French
discourse of Frogs and Tortoyces. And therefore to conclude this History of
the Tortoyce, Tertullian out of Pacuuius makes mention of, and also in Greek
by Moschopulus, which is thus translated.

Animal peregrinae naturae, sine spiritu spiro, geminis occulis retro iuxta
cerebrum, quibus ducibus antrorsum progredior Super ventre coeruleo pergo, sub
quo venture latet albus, apertus and clausus. Oculi non aperiuntur, neque
progredior, donec venture intus albus vacuus est. Hoc saturato, oculi apparent
insignes, and pergo aditer: Et quanquam mutum varias edo voces: That is to say,
I am a living creature, of a strange nature, I breath without breath, with two
eyes behind near my brains do I go forward, I go upon a blew belly, under
which is also another white, open and shut, my eyes never open, I go forward
until my belly be empty, when it is full, then they appear plain and I go
on my journey, and although I am mute or dumb, yet do I make many voices. The
explycation of this riddle, will show the whole nature of the beast, and of the
Harp called Chelys. For some things are related herein of the living Creature,
and some things again of an Instrument of Music made upon his shell and
cover. And thus much for the Tortoyce in general, the Medicines I will reserve
unto the end of this History.

OF THE TORTOYCE OF THE earth, whose shell is only figured.


THese Tortoyces which never come in water, either sweet or Salt, clear or
muddy, are called by the Graecians Chelone Chersaie, by the Latins Chersinae,
and Testudines, Terrestres, Syluestres, and Montanae, and by Nicander, Orine:
and the French peculiarly Tortue des Boys, a Tortoyce of the wood.

These are found in the deserts of Africa, as in Lybia and Strabo
Mauritania, in the open fields, and likewise in Lidia in the Corne-fieldes,
for when the Plow-men come to plowe their Land, their shares turn them out of
the earth upon the furtowes as big as great Glebes of land. And the shells of
these the Husbandmen burn on the land, and dig them out with Spades and
Mattocks, even as they do Worms among places full of such vermin.

The Hill Parthenius, and Soron in Arcadia, do yield many of these
Land-Tortoyces. The Shell of this living Creature is very pleasantly
distinguished with diverse colors, as earthy, black, bluish, and almost like
a Salamanders. The Liver of it is small, yet apt to be blown or swell with
wind, and in all other parts they differ not from the common and vulgar
general prefixed description.

These live in Corne-fieldes, upon such fruits as they can find; and therefore
also they may be kept in Chestes or Gardens, and fed with Apples, Meal, or
Bread without Leaven. ^nus.
will also eat Vipers, but presently after they eat Origan, for that herb is
an antidote against Viperine poison for them, and unless they can instantly
find it, they dye of the poison. The like use it is said to have of Rue, but
the Tortoyces of the Sandy Sea in Affrique, live upon the fat, dew, and
moystnesse of those Sands. They are ingendered like other of their kind, and
the Males are more venerous then the Females, because the female must needs
be turned upon her back, and she cannot rise again without help: wherefore
many times the Male after his lust is satisfied, goes away, and leaves the
poor Female to be destroyed of Kytes, or other adversaries: their natural
wisdom therefore has taught them to prefer life and safety before lust and
pleasure. Yet Theocritus writes,

The Tortoyces of India in their old and full age change their shells and
couers, but all Chelonophagoi aetoi, Tortoyce-eating-Eagles: for although they
cannot come by them out of their deep and hard Shell, yet they take them up
into the air, and so let them fall down upon some hard stone or Rock, and
there-vpon it is broken all to pieces, and by this means died the famous Poet
Aeschilus, which kind of fate was foretold him, that such a day he should dye:
wherefore to avoid his end, in a fair Sunshine clear day he sat in the
fields, and suddenly an Eagle let a Tortoyce fall down upon his head which
brake his scull, and crushed out his brains, whereupon

Aeschulographonti, epipeptoke Chelone,
Which may be englished thus;

Eschilus writing upon a rock,
A Tortoyce falling, his brains out knock.
The uses of this Land Tortoyce, are first for Gardens, because they clear the
Gardens from Snayles and Worms: out of the Arcadian Tortoyces they make Harps,
for their shelles are very great, and this kind of Harp is called in Latin
Testudo, the inuentor Mercury, for finding a Tortoyce after the falling in of
the River Nilus, whose flesh was dried up, because it was left upon the
Rocks, he struck the sinnewes thereof, which by the force of his hand, made
a musical sound, and thereupon he framed it into a Harp, which caused other to
imitate his action, and continue that practice unto this day.

These Tortoyces are better meat then the Sea or Water-Tortoyces; and
therefore they are preferred for the belly; especially they are given to
Horses, for by them they are raised in flesh, and made much fatter. And thus
much shall suffice for the Tortoyce of the earth.

OF THE TORTOYCE OF THE sweete-water.
PLiny makes four kinds of Tortoyces, one of the earth, a second Lutaria,
and the fourth called Swyda, living in Sweete-waters, and this is called by the
Portugalls Cagado, and Gagado, the Spaniards Galapag, and the Italians Gaiandre
de aqua. There are of this kind found in Heluetia, near to Zuricke, at a
Town called Andelfinge: but the greatest are found in the River Ganges in
India, where their shells are as great as tuns, and Damascen writes, that he
saw certain Ambassadors of India, present unto Augustus Caesar at Antiochia,
a Sweete-water-Tortoyce, which was three cubits broad. They breed their young
ones in Nilus. They have but a small Melt, and it wants both a Bladder and
reins. They breed Nilus follow the Crocodiles, and remove their nests and
eggs from the violence of the floods.

There was a magical and superstitious use of these Sweete-water-Tortoyces
against Aelianus
Hayle, for if a man take one of these in his right hand, and carry it with
the belly upward round about his Vineyard, and so returning in the same manner
with it, and afterward lay it Palladius
Vineyard. But such diabolical and foolish observations were not so much as to
be remembered in this place, were it not for their silliness, that by knowing
them, men might learn the weakness of human wisdom when it erreth, from
the Fountain of all science and true knowledge (which is Divinity) and the
most approved operations of Nature: And so I will say no more in this place of
the Sweete-water-Tortoyce.

OF THE TORTOYCE OF the Sea.
IT were improper and exorbitant to handle the Sea-Tortoyce in this place, were
it not because it lives in both elements, that is, both the water and the
Land, wherefore seeing the earth is the place of his generation, as the Sea is
of his food and nourishment, it shall not be amiss nor improper (I trust) to
handle this also among the Serpents and creeping things of the earth.

Pliny calls this Sea-Tortoyce Mus Marinus, a Mouse of the Sea, and after him
Albertus does so likewise. The Arabians call Asfulhasch, and the Portugalles
Tartaruga, and in Germany Meerschiltkrott, which the common Fisher-menne call
the Soldier, because his back seems to be armed and covered with a shield
and Helmet, especially on the forepart: which shield is very thick, strong,
and triangular, there being great veins and sinnewes which go out of his
Neck, shoulders, and hippes, that tie on and fasten the same to his body.

His forefeet being like hands, are forked and twisted very strong, and with
which it fights and takes his prey, and nothing can press it to death
except the frequent strokes of Hammers. And in all their members except their
quantity, and their feet, they are much like the Tortoyces of the Earth, for
otherwise they are greater, and are also black in color. They pull in their
heads as occasion is ministered to them, either to fight, feed, or be defended,
and their whole shell or cover seems to be compounded of fine Plates. They
have no teeth, but in the brimmes of their beakes or snouts are certain
eminent divided things like teeth, very sharp, and shut upon the under lip
like as the cover of a Box,

Their eyes are most clear and splendant, casting their beams far and
near, and also they are white in color, so that for their brightness and
rare whiteness, the Apples are taken out and included in Rings, Chains, and
Bracelets. They have reins which cleave to their backs, as the Reins of an
Bugle or Ox. Their feet are not apt to be used in going, for they are like to
the feet of Seals or Sea-calues, serving in stead of Oars to swim withal.
Their legs are very long, and stronger in their feet and nails, then are the
claws of the Lion.

They live in Rocks and the Sea-sands, and yet they cannot live altogether in
the water, Pliny writes, that many times they sleep on the top of the water,
Brasauolus
and his reason is, because they lie still immovable, (except with the Water)
and snort like any other Creature that sleeps, but the contrary appears,
seeing they are found to sleep on the Land, and the snorting noise they make
is but an endeavor to breath, which they cannot well do on the top of the
Water, and yet better there then in the bottom.

They feed in the nightime, and the mouth is the strongest of all other
Creatures, for with it they crush in pieces any thing, be it never so hard, as
a stone or such things: Aristotle
they also come and eat grass on the dry Land. They eat certain little
Flshes in the Pausanius writes, that in Africa there are Maritine Rocks
called Scelestae, and there dwells among a creature called Scynon, that is
Zytyron, a Tortoyce, and whatsoever he finds on that Rocks which is a
stranger in the Sea, the same he takes and casts down headlong. They
engender on the Land, and the Female resists Oppianus. Plinius
the copulation with the Male, until he set against her a stalk or stem of
some Tree or Plant. They lay their Eggs and cover them in the earth, planing
it over with their breasts, and in the nightime they sit upon them to hatch
them. Their Eggs are great, of diverse colors, having a hard shell, so that
the young one is not framed or brought forth within less compass then a
year, (as Aristotle writes) but Pliny says

And for as much as they cannot by Nature, nor dare for accident long tarry
upon the Land: they set certain marks with their feet upon the place where
they lay their Eggs, whereby they know the place again, and are never
deceived. Some again say, that after they have hid their Eggs in the earth
forty days, the Female comes the Plutarch.
just fortith day, not failing of her reckoning, and uncovers her Eggs
wherein she finds her young ones formed, which she takes out as ioylfully
as any man would do Gold out of the earth, and carries them away with her to
the Water. They lay sometimes an hundred Eggs, and sometimes they lay
fewer, but ever the number is very great.

There is upon the left side of Hispaniola, a little Island upon the Port
Beata, which is Altus-Bellus, where Peter Martyr reports strange things of
many Creatures; especially of the Tortoyces, for he writes, that when they
rage in lust for copulation, they come on shore, and there they dig a Ditch
wherein they lay together three or four hundred Eggs, being as great as
Goose-Egges, and when they have made an end, they cover them with Sand and go
away to the Sea, not once looking after them: but at the appointed time of
Nature, by the heat of the Sun, the young Tortoyces are hatched, engendered,
and droduced into light without any further help of their Parents.

Great is the courage of one of these, for it is not afraid to set upon three
men together, but if it can be turned upward upon the back, it is made weak
and irresistable. And if the head be cut off and severed from the body, it
dies not presently, nor closes Aelianus
the eyes, for if a man shake his hand at it, then will it wink, but if he
put it near, it will also byte if it can reach it. If by the heat of the Sun
their backs grow dry, they also grow weak and inflexible; and therefore they
hasten to the Water to remollifie them, or else they dye within short time: and
for this cause this is the best way to take

They are also taken on the tops of the Water after they return weary from
their feeding in the Nightime, for then two men may easily turn them on
their backs, and in the meane-while another casts a Snare upon them and
draws them safely to the Land. In the Phaenician Sea they are taken safely
without danger, and generally where they may be turned on their back, there
they can make no resistaunce, but where

Bellorius writes, that there be of these Sea-Tortoyces two kinds, one long,
the other round, and both of them breath at their Noses, because they want
Gilles, and the long ones are most frequent about the Port Torra in the red
Sea, whose cover is variable, for the Males shell is plain and smooth
underneath, and the Females is hollow. The Turks have a kind of Tortoyce,
whose shell is bright like the Chrysolite, of which they make haftes for Knives
of the greatest price, which they adorn with Plates of gold. In Iambolus, an
Island of the South, there are also found certain Monsters or living Boemus
creatures, which are not very great, yet are they admirable in Nature, and in
the virtue of

Their bodies are round and like the Tortoyce, having two cross lines over
their backs, in the ends of which is an eye and an ear at either side, so as
they seem to have four ears, the belly is but one, into which the meat
passes out of the mouth. They have feet round about, and with them they go
both backward and forward. The virtue of their blood is affirmed to be
admirable: for whatsoever body is cut asunder and put together, if it be
sprinkled with this blood during the time that it breaths, it covniteth as
before.

The ancient Troglodytes had a kind of Sea-Tortoyce, which they call Celtium,
which had horns, unto which they fastened the strings of their Harpes, these
also they worshipped Celetum then Celtium, but I think Hermolaus does better
call them Chelitium apo tes Cheluos, which signifies both a Tortoyce and their
broad breasts, and with their Horns they help themselves in swimming.
Albertus also makes mention of a Tortoyce called Barchora, but it is thought
to be a corrupt word from Ostra Codermus. These Sea-Tortoyces are found
sometimes to be eight cubits broad, and in India with their shelles they cover
houses, and such use: they also put them unto in Tabrobana, for they have them
fifteen cubits broad. And thus much for all kind of Tortoyces.

OF THE VIPER.


NOtwithstanding the asseueration of Suessanus, who will needs exclude the
Viper from the Serpents, because a Serpent is called Ophis, and the Viper
Echis, yet I trust there shall be no reasonable man that can make exeption to
the placing of this living Creature among Serpents, for that great learned man
was deceived Ophis, and yet might he also have been better advised, then to
affirm a Viper not be called a Serpent: for even in Aristotle whom he
expounds and approoueth, he might have found in his fifth Book of Gen:
animal: and the last Chapter, that the Viper is recorded, Inter genera opheon:
That is, Among the general kinds of Serpents, although as we shall show
afterward, it differs from most kinds of Serpents, because it breeds the
young one in his belly, and in the wintertime lies in the Rocks Mercuriall.
and among stones, and not in the earth.

The Haebrevves as it appears Esaias. 59. and Job. 6. call it Aphgnath, and
according to Munster Aphgnaim, plurally for Vipers, because of the variety of
colors, wherewithal they are set all over. The Arabians from the Greek word
Thereon, signifieng all kind of wild Beasts, do also call it Thiron, and
that kind of Viper whereof is made the Triacle, they call a Alafafrai, and
Alphai: they also call it Eosman, (as Leonicenus writes.) Beside, it is called
Alphe, which seems to be derived of the Haebrevves, and Afis which may
likewise be coniectured to arise from the Greek word Ophis.

The Greeks call the Male peculiarly and properly Echis, and the Female
Echidna, and it is a Question whether the vulgar word among the Gaecians at
this day Ochendra, do not also signify this kind of Serpent. Bellonius
thinks, that it is corrupted of Echidna the Female Viper. The Germans have
many words for a Viper, as Brandt Schlangen, Natet-Otter, Heck-Nater, and
Viper-Nater. The French Vne Vipere. The Spaniards Biuora, and Bicha, The
Italians Vipera, Maraesso, Scurtio, and sometimes Scorzonei, although Scorzo,
and Scorzone, be general words in Italy for all creeping Serpents without
feet, and that strike with their teeth.

There is also about the word Maraeso some Question, although Leonicenus
decideth the matter, and makes it out of all Controversy, and Rhodigimus
thinks it a very significant word derived from the people Marsi, because
they carried about Vipers. The Mountebankes do also call Suffili, from Sibila,
the hissing voice which it makes. Some will have Nepa to be also a Viper, yet
we have showed that already to signyfie a Scorpion.

The Graecians say, that the Viper is called Echidna paro to echinin eaute ten
gonen achri thanaton: because to her own death she bears her young one in
her belly; and therefore the Latins do also call it Vipera, quasi vipariat:
because it dies by violence of her birth or young: and they attribute unto it
venom and pestilence, and generally Echites, (greenish in color) which
seems to be like a Viper, and therefore takes name from it. Also an Herb
Echite, like Scammony, and Echidmon or Viperina. In Cyrene there are Myce,
which from the similitude of Vipers are called Echenatae. Echion was the name
of a man, and Echionidae and Echionij, of people, and Echidnon a City beside
the Sea Aegeum: Also the Eagle which by the Poets is feigned to eat the heart
of Prometheus, is likewise by them said to be begotten betwixt Typhon and
Echidna, and the same Echidna to be also the Mother of Chimaera: which from the
Navel upward was like a Virgin, and down-ward like a Viper, of which also
Diodorus Siculus, and Herodotus tells this story.

When Hercules was dryuing away the Oxen of Geryon, he came into Scythia, and
there fell asleep, leaving his Mares feeding on his right hand in his Chariot,
and so it happened by divine accident, that vvhiles he slept they were
removed out of his sight and strayed away from him. Afterward he awaked, and
missing them, sought all over the Country for them; at last he came unto a
certain place, where in a cave he found a Virgin of a double natured
proportion, in one part resembling a Maid, and in the other a Serpent, whereat
he wondered much, but she told him, that if he would lie with her in carnal
copulation, she would show him where his Mares and Chariot were: whereunto
he consented and begat upon her three Sons, famous among Poetical Writers:
Nmely, Agathyrsus, Gelonus, and Scythus: but I will not prosecute either

The head is very broad, compared with the body, and the Neck much narrower
then the head: The eyes very read and flaming, the belly winding, upon which
it goes all in length, even to the tail, and it goes quickly and nimbly:
some affirm, that it has two canyne teeth, and some four. And there is some
difference betwixt the Male and Auicen says besides, that the tails of Vipers
make a noise when they go or move. Those are taken to be the most generous
and lively, that have the broadest and hollowest head like a Turbot, quick and
lively Cardan
eyes, two canyne teeth, and a gristie or claw in the Nose or tail, a short
body or tail, a pale color, a swift motion, and bearing the head upward. For
the further description Bladder they carry poison, which they infuse into the
wound they make with their teeth: They have no ears, yet all other living
Creatures that generate their like, and bring forth out of their bellies have
ears, except this, the Sea-Calfe, and the Dolphin, yet in stead hereof, they
have a certain gristly cave or hollownesse in the same place where the ears
should stand. The Womb and place of conception (says Pliny) is double, but
the meaning is, that it is cloven as it is in all Females (especially women,
and Cowes.) They conceive Eggs, and those Eggs are contained near their
raynes or loins. Their skin is soft, yielding also to any stroke, and when it
is fleyed off from the body, it stretches twice so big as it appeared while
it covered the living Serpent: To conclude, Phyliologus writes, that their
face is somewhat like the face of a man, and from the Navel it resembleh

There is some difference among this kind also, according to the distinction
of place wherein they live, for the Vipers in Aethiopia are all over black
like the men, and in other Countries they differ in color, as in England,
France, Italy Greece, Asia, and Egypt, as writes Rellonius. There is scarce
any Nation in the World wherein there are not found some Vipers. The people of
Amyctae which were of the Grecian blood, drove away all kind of Serpents from
among them, yet they had Vipers which did byte mortally; Herodotus.
and therefore could never be cured, being shorter then all other kinds of
Vipers

Likewise in Arabia, in Syagrus, the sweet Promontory of Frankincense, the
Europaen Mountains, Seiron, Pannonia, Aselenus, Corax, and Riphaeus: the
Mountains of Asia, Aegages, Bucarteron, and Cercaphus, abound with Vipers.
Likewise Egypt, and in all Africa they are found also, and the Affrycans
affirm, (in detestation hereof) that it is not so much, Animal, as Malum
naturae: Thar is, A living Creature, as evil of Nature: To conclude, they are
found in all Europe. Some have taken exceptions to Crete, because Aristotle
vvriteth, that they are not found there, but Bellonius affirms, that in
Creete also he saw Vipers which the Inhabitants call by the name of Cheudra,
which seems to be derived from the Greek Echidna. At this day it is doubted
whether they live in Italy, Bellonius saw here, for I my self have killed of
them, not knowing at that time the difference or similitude of Serpents, but
since I have perceived to my best remembrance that the proportion and voice of
it did show that it was a Viper. The most different kinds of Vipers are found
in Egypt and Asia.

Concerning the quantity, that is the length and greatness of this Serpent,
there is some difference, for some affirm it to be of a cubit in length, and
some more, some less. The Vipers of Europe are very small, in comparison of
them in Africa, for among the Troglodytes (as writes Aelianus) they are
fifteen cubits long, and Nearchus affirms as Aristobulus also writes of a
Viper that he saw which was nine cubits long, and one hand breadth: and some
again (as Strabo affirm) that they have seen Vipers of sixteen Cubits long,
and Nicander vvriteth thus of the Vipers of Asia;

Fert Asia vltra tres longis q^i tractibus vlnas
Se tendant, rigidum quales Bucarteron, atque
Arduus Aegagus, and celsus Cercaphus intra
Se multos refouet.
In English thus;

Such as Asia yields in length, as are three else,
In Bucarteron steepy rough, these Vipers flourish,
Hard Aegagus and high Cercaphus cells:
Within their compass many such do nourish.
Others there be in Asia sixteen foot long, and some there be again
twenty, as in the Golden Castiglia, where their heads are like the heads of
Kiddes. There be some that make difference betwixt Echis and Echidna, because
one of them when it byteth, causes a conuulsion, and so does not the other,
and one of them makes the wound Scaliger. Cardan
look white, the other pale, and when the Echis byteth, you shall see but the
impression of two teeth, and when the Echidna byteth you shall the impression
of more teeth. But these differences are very idle, for the variety of the
pain may arise from the constitution of the body, or the quantity of the
poison, and so likewise of the color of the wound, Aelianus
and it is already set down, that the Echis or Male-Viper has but two Canyne
teeth, but the other: namely, the Echidna has four, thus says Nicander;

Masculus emittit, notus color, ipse caninos
Binos perpetuo monstrat, sed foemina plures.
Which may be englished thus;

The Male two canyne teeth, whose color well is known,
But in the Female more continually are shown.
But yet the Male has beside his Canyne teeth, as many as has the Female: and
besides the Male is known from the Female, as the same Nicander vvriteth,
because the Female when she goes, draws her tail as though she were
lame, but the Male more manlike and nimble, holds up his head, stretches
out his tail, restrayneth

The Meat of these Vipers are green Herbs, and also sometimes living
Creatures: and namely, Hore-flyes, Cantharides, Pithiocampes, and such other
things as they Gallen.
can come by, for these are fit and convenient meat for them. Aristotle
writes, that sometimes also they eat Scorpions, and in Arabia they not only
delight in the svveete juice of Balsam, but also in the shadow of the same. But
above all kinds of drink, they are most insatiable of wine. Sometime they make
but little folds, and sometime greater, but in their wrath their eyes flame,
they turn their tails and put forth their double tongue. In the wintertime
as we have said already, they live in the hollow Rocks, yet Pliny affirms,
Aristotle
hands of man, for in the cold weather they are nothing so fierce as they are
in the hot, and in the Summer also they are not at all times alike furious, but
like to all other Serpents. They are most outrageous in the Canicular days,
for then they never rest, but with continual disquiet move up and down till
they are dead or emptied of their poison, or feel an abatement of their heat.
Twice in the year they cast their skins, that is to say, in the Spring, and in
the Autumn: and in the spring time when they come out of their hole or
Aristotle
winter lodgings, they help the dimnesse of their eyesight by rubbing their
eyes upon fennel. But concerning their copulation and generation, I find much
difference among writers: Auicenna.
bold to interpose my own judgment for the better information of the Reeder.
Herodotus in his Thalia writes, that when the Vipers begin to rage in lust,
and desire to couple one with another, the Male comes and puts his head
into the mouth of the female, who is so insatiable in the desire of that
copulatio^, that when the male has filled her with all his seed-genitall, and
so would draw forth his head again, she byteth it off, and destroys her
husband, whereby he dies and never lives more: but the female departs and
conceiueth her young in her belly, who every day according to natures
inclination, grow to perfection and ripeness, and at last in revenge of their
fathers death, do likewise destroy Nicander;

Cum durum fugiens morsu ignescentis echidnae
Frendit echis, vel vbi feruente libidinis aestu
Saeuo dente sui resecat caput illa mariti.
Ast vbi post vegetam coeperunt pignora vitam,
Iam propinqua adsunt maturi tempora partus,
Indignam chari mortem vlciscentia patris
Erosa miseraenascuntur matris ab aluo.
In English thus;

When the Male Viper gnasheth, avoiding Females bite,
Whose fiery rage is all on ardent lust,
Yet when he burns for copulation right,
Her cruel tooth does Husbands head off crush.
But yet alas, when seeds begins to live,
And birth of young ones ripen in her womb,
Then they for Fathers, death a full revenge do give,
Eating forth their wretched mothers strong.
Unto this agrees Galen, Isidor, Plutarch, Aelianus: and Lucan who writes;

Viperei coeunt abrupto corpore nati.
That is to say:

The geniture of Vipers blood
Engender, breaking bodies good.
Pliny agrees with the residue for the death of the Male in carnal
copulation, but he differs in this, about the Female, affirming that when
the young Vipers grow ripe and perfect in their Mothers belly, she casts
forth every day one for three days together, (for her number is sometimes
twenty) at last the other, impatient of delay, gnaw out her guts and belly, and
so come forth, destroying their Mother: And here is no great difference, for
in the sum and destruction of Father and Mother, they all agree, and Saint
Ierom, Saint Basil, and Horus do agree and subscribe to the truth of these
opinions. Thus we have showed the opinions of the Ancient and first Writers:
now it follows that we Pierius therefore writes, that in his time there were
learned men desirous to know the truth, who got Vipers, and kept them alive,
both Males and Females, by shutting them up safe where they could neither
escape out, nor do harm, and they found that they engendered, brought forth,
and conceived like other Creatures, without death or ruin of Male and Female.

Amatus Lusitanus also writes thus. The Male and Female Viper engender by
wreathing their tails together, even to the one half of their body, and the
other half stands upright, mutually kissing one another. In the Male there
is a genitall member in that part beneath the Navel, where they embrace, which
is very secret and hidden, and against Amatus.

Theophrastus he likewise writes in this manner. The young Vipers do not eat
out their way, or open with their teeth their Mothers belly, nor (if I may
speak merrily) make open their own passage by breaking up of the doors of
their Mothers womb, but the womb being narrow, cannot contain them; and
therefore breaks of it own accord: and this I have proved by experience,
even as the same falls out with the Fish Acus: and therefore I must crave
pardon of Herodotus, if I affirm his relation of the generation of Vipers to
be merely fabulous. Thus far Theophrastus. Apollonius also writes, that
many have seen the old Vipers lycking their young ones like other Serpents.

Thus have I expressed the different judgments of sundry Authors both new and
old Caelius
touching the generation of Vipers, out of which can be collected nothing but
evident co^tradictions, and unreconcilable judgments, one mutually crossing
another. So as it is impossible that they should be both true, and therefore it
must be our labor to search out the truth, both in their words, and in the
conference of other Authors. Wherefore to begin, thus writes Aristotle. The
Viper amongst other Serpents, almost alone brings forth a living creature,
but first of all she conceiueth a soft egg of one color, above the eggs
lies the young ones folded up in a sins skin, and sometimes it falls
out, that they gnaw in sunder that thin skin, and so come out of their
mothers belly all in one day, for she brings forth more then twenty at a
time.

Out of these words of Aristotle, euilly understood by Pliny and other ancient
Writers, came that error of the young Vipers eating their way out of their
mothers belly, Aristotle says they eat thorough, other Authors have turned it
to the belly, which was clean from Aristotle's meaning. And another error like
unto this, is that wherein they affirm, that the Viper does every day bring
forth one young one, so that if she has twenty young ones in her belly, then
also she must be twenty days in bringing of them forth.

The words of Aristotle from whence this error is gathered, are these, Tectei
de en mia emera kathon, Tictei de pleio he ei kosni, which are thus translated
by Gaza, Parit enim singulos diebus singulis, plures quam viginti numero: That
is to say, she brings forth every day one, more then twenty in number. But
this is an absurd translation, and agrees neither with the words of Aristotle,
nor yet with his mind, for his words are these: Parit autem vna die singulos,
parit autem plus quam viginti numero. That is to say in English, she brings
forth every one in one day, and she brings forth more then twenty: so that
the sense of these words shall be, that the Viper brings forth her young ones
severally, one at a time, but yet all in a day.

But concerning her number, neither the Philosopher, nor yet any man living, is
able to define and set it down certain, for they varry, being sometimes more,
and sometimes fewer, according to the nature of other living creatures. And
although the Viper do conceive eggos within her, yet does she lay them after
the manner of other Serpents, but in her body they are turned into living
Vipers, and so the eggs never see the sun, neither does any mortal eye
behold them, except by accident in the dissection of a female Viper Nicander
and Greuinus, do truly affirm, with the constant consent of all other
Authors, that the horned Serpent called Cerastes, of which we have spoken
already, does likewise bring forth her young ones alive. And besides,
Herodotus writes of certain winged-Serpents in Arabia, which do bring forth
young ones as well as Vipers, and therefore it must not be concluded with
apparent falsehood, that only the Viper brings her young ones perfect into
the world.

The like fable unto this, is that general conceit of the copulation together,
betwixt the Viper and the Lamprey; for it is reported that when the Lamprey
burns in lust for copulation, Basil writes in this manner: Vipera
infestissimum animal eorurquae Serpunt cum murena congreditur. etc. That is to
say, the Viper a most pernicious enemy to all living creeping Nicander writes
thus thereof in his verses.

Fama est, si modo vera, quod haec suapascua linquat
Atque eat in siccum cogente libidine, littus
Et cum Vipereo coiens serpente grauetur.
Which may be englished thus;

Fame says (if it be true) that she her feed forsakes,
I mean the shore, and goes upon dry land,
Where for her lust the Viper-male she takes,
In fleshly coiture to be her husband.
But this opinion is vain and fantastical, as Pliny and diverse others have
very learnedly

Although I have elsewhere confuted this error, yet I must here again
remember that which is said already. The occasion of this fable is this; the
male Lamprey is exceeding like a Viper, for they want feet, and have long
bodies, which some one by chance Myrus, which some have made a kind of Viper,
and others a Snake: but Andreas has notably proved against Archelaus, that
this Myrus neither is nor can be any other then the male Lamprey: and so I will
conclude, that neither Vipers engender with Lampreys, nor yet the femall Vipers
kill the male in copulation, or that the young ones come into the world by the
destruction of their dammes.

In the next place we are to consider, the antipathy and contrariety that it
observes with other creatures, and the amity also betwixt it and others.
First of all therefore it is certain and well known, what great enmity is
betwixt mankind and Vipers, for the one Elianus
always hates and fears the other: wherefore, if a man take a Viper by the
neck, and spet in his mouth, if the spettle slide down into his belly, it
dies thereof, and rotteth as it were in a consumption. Vipers also are enemies
to Oxen, as Virgill writes, Pestis acerba boum peccorique aspergere vinus:
that is, a sharp plague of Oxen, casting his poison upon all other Cattle.
They are also enemies to Hens and Geese, as Columella vvriteth, wherefore in
ancient time they were wont to make sure walls for the custody of their
pullen'against Vipers. They are likewise enemies to the Dormouse, and they hunt
very greedily after their young ones, whereof Epiphanius in a discourse against
Origin writes thus; When the Viper comes to the nest of a Dormouse, and
finds there her young ones, she puts out all their eyes, and afterward
feeds them very fat, yet kills Strabo.
the little Dormise receive harm by the poison, but grow fat thereby, nor yet
the Viper be poisoned herself while she eats them, and yet a man or beast
which is a stranger unto it, dies thereof.

All kind of Mice are as much afraid of Vipers, as they be of Cats, and
therefore whenever they hear the hyssing of a Viger, instantly they look to
themselves and their young ones. There is a kind of harmless Serpent called
Parea, whereof I have spoken before in his proper place, which is an enemy unto
Vipers, and that same which is harmless Albertus also tells a story of a
Viper that climbed up into a tree, to the nest of a Megpye, where-vppon the old
one was sitting, this poor Pie did fight with the Viper, until the Viper
took her fast by the thigh, so as she could fight no more, yet she ceased not
to chatter and cry out to her fellows to come and help her, whereupon the
male Pie came, and seeing his female so gryped by the Viper, he ceased not to
pecke upon his head until the brains came out, and so the Viper fell down
dead. This story is also alleged by Cardan.

The Scorpions and the Vipers are enemies one to another, for at Padua a Viper
and a Scorpion (for the trial of this matter) were both included in a vial,
where they continued fighting a little while, but at last they both dyed by one
another poison. The Torteyse of the earth is also an enemy to the Viper, and
the Viper to it, wherefore if it can get Origan, or wild-Sauorie, or Rue, it
eats thereof, and then is nothing afraid to fight with Elianus
the Viper, but if the Torteyse can find none of these, then they die
incontinently by the poison of the Viper, and of this there has been trial,
as both Aristotle and other Authors affirm.

And as there is this contrariety betwixt Vipers and other living creatures,
so there is betwixt them and Plants of the earth, and this blessing God in
nature has bestowed upon many beasts, that when they feel themselves to be
hurt by one herb, they know another to cure them; as for example, Garlic is
poison to the Viper, and therefore having tasted thereof she dies, except she
eat some Rue. A Viper being struck with a Reed once, it amazeth her, and
makes her senseless, but being struck the second time, she recouereth and
runs away: and the like is reported of the Beech-tree, saving that it
stays the viper, and she is not able to go from it. But most maruailous is
the antipathy betwixt the viper and the Yew-tree, for it is reported by
Mercuriall, that if you lay fire on the one side, and a piece of Yew on the
other side, and then place a viper in the middle betwixt

The Viper is also afraid of Mustard-seede, for it being laid in her path, she
flies from it, and if she taste of it, she dies. There is an herb called
Arum, if the hands or body of Gallen.
a man be anointed with the juice of the root thereof, the viper will never
byte him; the like is reported of the juice of Dragons, expressed out of the
leaves, fruit or root. It is also said, that if a viper do behold a good
Smaradge, her eyes will melt and fall out of her head. But above all other
plants in the world, the Viper is most delighted with Vetches, Dioscorid. Rasis.
and the Sauyne tree, for in Italy (as Cardan writes) there was once seen a
great number of Vipers about a Sauyne-Tree, and many of them did climb up and
down upon that

There is no love between this Serpent and other creatures, save only to his
own kind, and therefore there are two things memorable in the nature of this
savage Serpent, the one is the love of the male to the female, and the other of
the female to her young ones. It is reported by Saint Ambrose and Saint Basil,
that when the male misseth the female, he seeks her out very diligently, and
with a pleasing and flattering noise, calls for her, and when he perceives
she approaches, he casts up all his venom, as it were in reverence of
matrymoniall dignity. The female on the other side, makes much of her young
ones, licking and adorning their skins, fighting for them unto death, both
against men and beasts. For this occasion and some medicinal uses, the
Arabians counted

Now forasmuch as we read that Porus King of India sent many great Vipers for a
gift unto Augustus, it is profitable to express the means whereby Vipers are
safely taken, without doing any harm. Wherefore Aristotle writes, that they
are very much desirous Pliny reports, that in ancient time, the Marsians in
Lybia did hunt vipers, and never received harm of them, for by a secret and
innate virtue, all vipers and serpents are afraid of their bodies, as we have
already showed in other places. Yet Gallen in his discourse to Piso, writes
that the Marsians in his time had no such virtue in them, as he had often
tried, save only that they used a deceit or slight to beguile the people,
which was in this manner following.

Long after the usual time of hunting Vipers, they use to go abroad to take
them, when there is no courage nor scant any venom left in them, for the
Vipers are then easily taken if they can be found: and them so taken, they
accustom to their own bodies, by giving them such meats as does euacuate all
their poison, or at the leastwise does so stop up their teeth, as it makes
the harm very small; and so the simple people being ignorant of this fraud,
and seeing them apparently carrying vipers about them, did ignorantly Paul,
who did so deceitfully carry themselves, that in the presence and sight of
many people, they suffered Vipers to bite them without any manner of harm.

Others again when they had taken a Viper, did drown her head in man's
spettle, by virtue whereof the viper began to grow tame and meek. Besides
this, they made a certain ointment which they set forth to sale, affirming it
to have a virtue against the biting of Vipers, and all other Serpents, which
ointment was made in this manner. Out of the oil of the seed of Wild-radish,
of the roots of Dragons, the juice of Daffadill,

We do read that in Egypt they eat Vipers and diverse other Serpents, with
no more difficulty then they would do Eeles, so do many people both in the
Eastern and weasterne parts of the New-found-Lands. And the very selfsame
thing is reported of the Inhabitants of the Mountain Athos, the which meat
they prepare and dress on this manner. First they cut off their heads and also
their tails, then they bowell them and salt them, after which they sees them
or bake them, as a man would sees or bake Eecles, but

Now it follows that we proceed to the handling of that part of the Vipers
story, which concerns the venom or poison that is in it, which must begin
at the consideration of themperament of this Serpent. It is some question among
the learned, whether a viper be hot or cold; and for answer hereof it is
said, that it is of cold constitution, Gallen. Mercuriall makes a treble
diversity of constitution among Serpents, whereof the first sort are those
which with their wound do infuse a mortal poison that kills instantly, and
without delay: a second sort are those that kill, but more leysurelie, without
any such speed: and the third are those whose poison is more slow in operation
then is the second, among which he assigns the Viper. But although by this
slownes of operation he would enforce the coldness of the poison, yet it is
always to be considered, that the difference of vipers, and of their venom,
arises from the place and Region in which they are bredde, and also from the
time of the year wherein they byte and wound,

Likewise the Region wherein they live, begets a more lively working spirit
in the Serpent, and therefore before all other, the Vipers of Numidia are
preferred, because of the heat of that Country. Also their meat causes in
them a difference of poison, for those that live in the woods and eat Toades,
are not so vigorous or venomous, but those that live in the mountains, and
eat the roots of certain herbs, are more poysonfull and deadly. And
therefore Cardan relates a story, which he says was told him by a Phaenecian,
that a Mountaine-Viper chased a man so hardly, that he was forced to take a
tree, unto the which when the Viper was come, and could not climb up to
utter her malice upon the man, she emptied the same upon the Tree, and by and
by after, the man in the tree dyed, by the savor and secret operation of the
same.

But of the Arabian Vipers which haunt the Baulsom-trees, I have read, that if
at any time they byte, they only make a wound like the pricks of iron, void
of poison, because Pausanius
while they suck in the juice of that tree, the acerbitie and strength of the
venom is abated. About the Mountain Helycon in Greece, the poison also of
Vipers is infirm and not strong, so that the cure thereof is also ready and
easy. But yet for the nature of Vipers poison, I can say no more the^ Wolphius
has said, that it is of it self and in it self considered, hot: and his
reason is, because he saw a combat in a glass betwixt a Viper and a Scorpion,
and they both perished one by the others poison. Now he says that it is
granted, the Scorpion to be of a cold nature, and his poison to be cold;
therefore by reason of the antipathy whereby one dyed by the malice of another,
it must needs follovv that the Viper is hot, and her poison likewise of the
same nature. For a Serpent of a cold nature,

All the Vipers that live near the waters, are of more mild and meek poison
then others. If there be any such, but I rather believe there be none, but that
the same Author which wrote of the vipers of the water, did intend Serpents of
the water. But concerning the poison of vipers, there is nothing reported more
strange then that of Vincentius Belluacensis, who writes, that if a man
chance to tread upon the reins of a Viper unawares, Pliny Nicander.
it paineth him more then any venom, for it spreads it self over all the
body incurably. Also it is written, that if a woman with child chance to
pass over a viper, it causes her

The Scythians also do draw an incurable and irresistable poison out of vipers,
where-withall they annoint the sharp ends of their darts and arrows when they
go to war, to the end that if it chance to light upon their adversary,
he may never any more do them harm. They make this poison in this manner.
They observed the lyttering places and time of the vipers, and then with
strength and Art, did take the old and young ones together, which they
presently killed, and afterward suffered them to lie and rot, or soake in some
moist thing for a season: then they took them and put them into an earthen pot
filled with the blood of some one man; this pot of man's blood and vipers they
stopped

We have showed already, that there is outwardly a difference betwixt the
biting wound of the Male and the Female viper, for after the male has bitten,
there appears but two holes, but after the female has bytten, there
appears four; and this is also a great deal more deadly then is the biting
of the male, according to the verses of Nicander, where he says;

Porro ex Vipereo, quod noris germine peior
Foemina: quae veluti maiori accenditur ira,
Sic vehemente magis fert noxia vulner a morsu,
Et plus glicenti se cauda and corpore voluit,
Vnde citatior hac ict as mors occupat artus.
Which may be englished thus,

But of the Vipers brood the female is the worst,
Which as it were, with greater wrath does burn:
And therefore when she bytes, makes bodies more accursed,
Inflicting hurtful wounds, to vehemence turned.
Rolling her bulk and tail more often about,
Whereby a speedier death does life rydde out.
But Auicen is directly contrary to this opinion, and says, that as the
bytings of male-Dragons Mercuriall, namely, that it is true, that the wounds
which the female makes by her biting, being well considered, is more deadly
then the wounds which the male gives: yet for the proportion of the poison
which the male venteth into the wound he makes, it is more deadly then is the
females; so that with respect of quantity, they both say true which affirm
either the one or the other. But which soever is the greatest, it skilleth not
much, for both are deadly enough, as may appear by the common symptoms and
signs which follow, and also death.

Matthiolus reports a history of a Countryman, who as he was mowing of
grass, chanced to cut a Viper clean asunder about the middle, or somewhat
nearer the head, which being done, he stood still, and looked upon the
dying disseuered parts a little while, at last, either presuming that it had no
power left to hurt, or thinking it was dead, he took that part in his hand
whereupon the head was: the angry viper feeling his adversaries warm hand,
turned the head about, and bitte his finger with all the rage, force, and
venom that it had left, so that the blood issued out. The man thus bitten for
his boldness, did hastily cast it away, and began to suck the wound, putting
his hand to his mouth, which when he had done but a little while, he suddenly
fell down dead.

The like story unto this, is related by Amatus Lusitanas of another, which
more boldly

By both which examples, we may well see the danger of the Vipers poison, so
that if once it come into the stomach, and touch the open passage where the
vital parts go in and out, it never stays long but death follows.
Wherefore Aetius says well, that sometimes it kills within the space of
seven hours, and sometimes again within the space of three days, and that
respite of time seems to be the longest, if remedy be not had with more
effectual speed.

The signs or effects of the Vipers biting, are briefly these, first there
issues forth a rotten matter, sometimes bloody, and sometimes like liquid
or molten fatness, sometimes again with no color at all, but all the flesh
about the sore swells, sometimes having a red, and some-time a pale hiew or
color upon it, issuing also forth a corrupted mattery matter. Also it
causes diverse little blysters to arise upon the flesh, as though the body
were all scorched over with fire, and speedily after this, follows
putrefaction and death.

The pain that comes by this Serpents wounding, is so universal, that all
the body seems to be set on fire, many pitiful noyses are forced out of the
parties throat by sense of that pain, turning and crackling of the neck, also
twinkling and wrying of the eyes, like black, and anon as green as the rust
of brass, the gumbes flow with blood, and the Liver it self falls to be
inflamed, sleepiness and trembling possesses the body and several parts, and
difficulty of making urine, with Feauers, neezing, and shortness of breath.

These are related by Aetius, Aegineta, Greuinus and others, which work not
always in every body generally, but some in one, and some in another, as the
humors and temperament of nature does lead, and guide their operation. But I
marvel from whence Plato in his Symposium had that opinion, that a man bytten
and poisoned by a Viper, will tell it to none, but only to those that have
formerly tasted of that misery: for although among other effects of this
poison, it is said that madness, or a distracted mind also follows, Platoes
opinion, except he mean that the patient will never manifest his grief at
all. And this how-soeuer also, is confuted by this one story of Greuinus. There
was (as he writes) a certain Apothecarie which did keep Vipers, and it
happened one day as he was meddling about them, that one of them caught him by
his finger, and did byte him a little, so as the prints of his teeth appeared
as the points of needles. The Apothecary only looked on it, and being busied,
either forgot, or (as he said afterward) felt no pain for an hours space:
but after the hour, first his finger smarted and began to burn, and afterward
his arm and whole body fell to be suddenly distempered therewith, so as
necessity constrayning him, and opportunity offering it self, he sent for a
Physician at hand, and by his good advise, (thorough

Therefore by this story, either Plato was in a wrong opinion, or else Greuinus
tells a fable, which I cannot grant, because he wrote of his own
experience, known then to many in the world, who would quickly have
contradicted it: or else if he had consented to the opinion of Plato, no doubt
but in the relation of that matter, he would have expressed also that
circumstance.

Thus then we have, as briefly and plainly as we can, delivered the pains and
torments which are caused by the poison of Vipers; now therefore it follows,
that we also briefly declare the virtue of such Medicines, as we find to be
applied by diligent and careful

Galen reports, that when he was in Alexandria, there came to the City a
Countryman which had his finger bytten by a Viper, but before he came, he had
bound his finger close to the palm of his hand, and then he showed the same
to a Physician, who immediately cut off his finger, and so he was cured. And
besides, he tells of another countryman,

Sometime it happens that the byte is in such a part that it cannot be cut
off, and then they apply a Hen cut insunder alive, and laid to as hot as can
be, also one must first wash and annoint his mouth with oil, and so suck out
the poison. Likewise the place must be scarified, and the party fed and
dieted with old Butter, and bathed in milk or Seawater, and be kept waking,
and made to walk up and down.

It were too long, and also needless, to express all the medicines which by
natural means Caronus. In Norcheria, the In Uipera.
country of that great and famous Gentilis who translated Auiten, there is a
fountain, into which if any man be put that is stung or bytten by a Serpent,
he is thereof immediately cured; which Amatus Lusitanus approoueth to be very
natural, because the continual cold water kills the hot poison. The same
Author writes, that when a little maid of the age of thirteen years, was
bytten in the heel by a Viper, the leg being first of all bound at the knee
very hard, then because the maid fell destract, first he caused a Surgeon to
make two or three deeper holes then the Viper had made, that so the poison
might be the more easily extracted, then he scarified the place, and drawed it
with cupping-glasses, whereby was exhausted all the black blood, and then also
the whole leg over, was scarified, and blood drawn out of it, as long as it
would run of it own accord. Then was a plaster made of Garlic, and the
sharpest Onyons roasted, which being mixed with Triacle, was laid to the bytten
place. Also the maid drank three days of Triacle in wine,

The second day after the abatement of the pain, he gave her the juice of
Yew-leaues fasting, which he commends as the most notable Antidote in this
kind, and so made a second plaster, which lay on three days more, and in the
mean time she drank fasting every day that juice of Yew-leaues, whereby her
trembling and distracted estate was abated, but from the wounded place still
flowed matter, and it looked black. Then the four next days, the said matter
was drawn out by a linen cloth, wherein was Goatesdunge, powder of Laurel,
and Euphorbium in Wine, all mixed together, and afterward he made this
ointment, which did perfectly cure her, Rec: of long Aristolochij two ounces,
of Briony and Daffadill one ounce, of Galbanum and Myrrh, of each one ounce,

Ambrosius Paraeus cured himself, with binding his finger hard that was
bytten, and applying to it Triacle dissolved in Aquavitae, and drunk up in
lynt or bumbast: and he advises in stead of old Triacle, to take Mithridate.
Gesner says, that he saw a maid cured of the eating of V^pers flesh, by being
constrained to drink Wine abundantly. Theophrastus and Asclepiades do write,
that many are cured by the sound of good Music, as the like is already
showed, in the cure of the poison of the Phalangium: and no marvel, for
Ismenias the Theban affirms, that he knew many in Baeotia, that were cured of
the

Of the Medicines which may be made of the Uiper.
THe eating of Vipers is an admirable remedy against the Leprosy. And being
prepared after that sort as was mentioned immediately before in the former
Section, they are ministered to the sick person sitting in the sun, yet his
head must be

The flesh of Vipers is in temperature apparently hot and dry, and purges the
whole body by sweat; here-vppon many sore tormented with Leprosy, by eating
and drinking them have been cured.

Auerroes says, the flesh of Tyrus cleanses Leprosy, because it drives the
matter thereof to the skin, and therefore they that drink it, fall first
into the passion of Tyria, that is, the pilling of the skin, and after are
cured of it.

Choose the Vipers of the Mountain, especially being white, and cut off their
heads and tails at once very speedily, and then if the issue of blood be
plentiful, and they continue Funamellus
alive, and wallow to and fro a long time, these are good. After their
beheading, let them be made clean and sod, and let the diseased party eat of
them, and of their broth.

And by the drinking of wine wherein a Viper dies or lives, certain have
been cured accidentally, or by an intent to kill them.

The Leaper must first drink the broth of Vipers decocted, in manner as
afore-saide, Auicen. Amatus.
then let him eat the flesh, no otherwise then as mutton or fowls, which
daily men dine with, but fasting and in the morning this flesh must be eaten,
half a Viper at once, and some-time a whole viper, according to the strength
of the party diseased. After the eating whereof, he must not eat or drink
in the space of six hours; but if he do sweat, it is most expedient that in
his sweat he look to himself very carefully. And the skin is

A man may easily see the flesh of Viders to be hot and dry, when they are
dressed as E^les. And that they purge the whole body through the skin, thou
may learn even by those things, which my self being a young man, had
experience of in our Country of Asia, which things severally and in order I
shall relate.

A certain man infected with the disease which men call Elephas, that is,
Leprosy, for a time conuersed still with his companions, till by his company
and conversation, some of Gallen.
them were infected with the contagion of the disease, and he now became
loathsome to smell, and filthy to sight. Building therefore a cottage for him
near the Village, on the top of a bank, hard by a fountain, there they place
this man, and daily bring to him so

Wherefore the Reapers amazed thereat, and fearing least if they drank it,
they should receive some harm thereby, chose rather indeed to quench their
thirst by drinking water: but when they departed thence, of humanity and in
piety, gave the wine to this Leper,

Another example by a chance not much unlike, happened in Mysia, a Country of
Asia, not far from our City. A certain Leper went to wash himself in
Spring Water, hoping thereby to receive some benefit. He had a maid-seruaunt,
a very fair young woman, importuned by diverse suitors: to her the sick man
committed both certain other things pertaining to the house, and also the
storehouse. When they therefore were gone,

These are two examples of experiment by casual occasion. Moreover, I will
add also a third, which proceeded from our imitation. When one was sick of
this disease, in mind more then the common sort philosophical, and despising
death, took it exceeding grievously, and said it were better once to suffer
death, then to live so miserable a life: and drinking wine so mingled with
poison, he became a Leper; and afterward we cured his Leprosy by our
accustomed medicines.

Also a fourth man took Vipers alive, but that man had only the beginning of
this disease; therefore our care and industry was very speedily to restore him
to health: wherefore having let him blood, and by a medicine taken away
melancholy, we bad him use the Vipers he had taken, being prepared in a pot
after the manner of Eeles. And he was thus cured, the infection euaporating
through the skin.

Lastly also, a certain other man very rich, not our Countryman, but of the
middle of Thracia, admonished by a dream, came to Pergamus, where God
commanded him by a dream, that he should daily drink the medicine which was
made of Vipers, and outwardly he should annoint his body, and not many days
after, his disease became the Leprosy: And again also, this infirmity was
afterward cured by the medicines which God commanded.

Matthew Grady fed Chickins and Capons with the broth and flesh of Vipers
mingled with bread, till they cast their feathers, purposing by them to cure
the Leprosy. Gallen.


A certain Noble-woman in this City, infected with this malady (the Leprosy)
after diverse unfortunate attempts of many, came to my hands, in whose cure,
when generous (...)
Galen prescribes in his book De Theriaca, mingling the flesh of the Viper
with Galangall, Saffron, etc. I sod her very well. Then I took a chicken,
which I commanded well to be sod in the juice and broth of the Viper. And
least she should take any harm there-by, I first ministered unto her
Methridate, then the Chicken with the broth, by eating whereof she said she
felt herself better: Which when I saw, I took another male viper, whom I sod
alone without adding any other thing, and the broth thereof I ministered to her
three days, whereupon she began to sweat extremely, the sweat I restrained
by syrop of Violets and pure water. After six days, scales fell from her, and
she was healed.

Antonius Musa a Physician, when he met with an incurable Ulcer, he gave his
patients Vipers to eat, and cured them with maruailous celeritie. When the
scruaunt of Craterus Pliny
the Physician fell into a strange and unusual disease, that his flesh fell
from his bones, and that he had proved many medicines which profited him
nothing, he was healed by eating a Viper dressed as a fish.

Vipers flesh if it be sod and eaten, clears the eyes, helps the defects of
the sinews, and represseth swellings. Porphyrius


They say they that eat vipers become lousie, which is not so; though Galen
affirm it. Isogonus affirms the Dioscorid.
Cirni, a kind of Indians, to live an hundred and forty years. Also he
thinks the Ethyopians, and Seres, and the inhabitants of Mount Athos, to be
long lived, because they eat Vipers flesh.

The Scythians cleave the head of the viper betwixt the ears, to take out a
stone, which Pliny.
they say she deuoureth when she is affrighted.

The heads of Vipers burnt in a pot to ashes, and after beaten together with
the grosest decoction of bitter Lupines, and spread as an ointment on the
temples of the head, stays the continual rhume of the eyes. Their ashes
lightly beaten alone, and applied as a dry medicine for the eyes, greatly
amendeth a dim sight.

The head of a viper kept dry and burned, and after being dipped in Vinegar
and applied, cures wild fire. Aetius.


The gall of the viper does wonderfully cleanse the eye, and offends not by
poison. It is manifest against the stinging of all Serpents though incurable,
that the bowels of the Albertus.
very Serpents do help and avail; and yet they who at any time have drunk
the liver of a sod Viper, are never stung of Serpents.

The fat of a viper is effectual against the dimnesse and suffusions of the
eyes, mixed Pliny.
with Rosin, Honny-attick, and a like quantity of old oil.

For the Gowte they saint avails much to annoint the feet with the fat of
Vipers. Vipers fat heals them that are burned.

The slough of the Viper cures the Ring-worme. The skin of the viper beaten
to Gallen.
powder, and laid upon the places where the hair is fallen, it does
wonderfully restore hair again.

Some extend and dry whole Vipers, and after beat them to powder, and minister
the^ in drink against the Gowte. Others about the rising of the Dog Star, cut
off the head and Aetius.
tail of Vipers, and burn the middle, then they give those ashes to be drunk
21. days, so much at a time as may be taken up with three fingers, and so cure
the swelling in the Auicenna.
neeke. Joints payned with the Gowte, are profitably anointed with oil
wherein a Viper has been sodden, for this cures perfectly.

The making of oil of Vipers, is described in these words. Take three or four
Vipers, Le^ F^tin:
cut off their extreme parts, the head and the tail, in length four fingers,
divide the rest into four gobbets, and put them in a pot open above and below,
which pot must be put into another greater pot; then the mouth of them must be
well shut with clay, that they breathe not forth; then put them into a
caldron full of seething water, and there let them continue boiling two hours
in those pots: then will distill a liquour from the Vipers, which were in the
pot open above and below, with that oily liquour annoint the members

Of Triacle and Trochuks of Uipers.
THeriace or Triacle, not only because it cures the venomous Galen.
biting of Serpents, but also because the Serpents themselves are usually
mingled in the making thereof, fitly is so named of both significations. Here
also we will insert something concerning

Triacle is very ancient, and has always very carefully and not without
ambition, been refined by the Physicians, till Andromochus Nero his Physician,
added the flesh of Vipers, as the full accomplishment of this drugge. The flesh
of Vipers alone is mingled in Triacle, and not the flesh of other Serpents,
because all the rest have something malignant more then Vipers. Vipers are
thought to have less poison in them then other Serpents.

Vipers for Triacle must not be taken at any time, but chiefly in the
beginning of the Spring, when having left their dens they come forth into the
sunshine, and as yet

Take female Vipers, for we must take heed how we take male vipers for the
confection of Antidotes. For Trochuks all vipers are not convenient, but those
which be yellow, Auicen.
and of the yellow, the females only.

Vipers great with young you must refuse, for being pregnant, they are more
exasperate Galen.
then themselves at other times.

Of Vipers be made Trochisches, which of the Graecians are called Ther^acy,
four fingers Aetius
being cut off at either end, and the inwards taken out, and the pale matter
cleaving to the backe-bone: the rest of the body must be boiled in a dish in
water, with the herb Dill, the backbone must be taken out, and fine flower
must be added. Thus these Trochuks being

The use of Triacle is profitable for many things, for not only by his own
nature it avails (...)*
against the biting of venomous creatures and poisons, but also it is found by
experience, to help many other great infirmities. For it caseth the Gowte and
pain in the joints, it dries fluxes, it very much profits men molested with
the Dropsy, leaprous and melancholicke persons, those that have
Quartane-Agues, or the Iaundise, those that have a weak voice, or that spet
blood: those that are troubled with aching of the reins, with disentery, with
the stone, with short breath, with passion of the Liver or Milt, with

Even to the^ that are in health the often use of it is wholesome, for it
promises long life, and firm health, it consumes excrements, it
strengthens natural actions, it quickneth the wit, and sharpneth all the
senses; it preserves the body from poison and other offenses, and makes it
scarce subject to danger by such casualties, it begets good blood, it
corrupts the air, and waters; neither alone does it deliver from instant
diseases, but also preserves from those that be emminent.

OF EARTH-WORMES.
ALthough there be many and sundry sorts of worms which do contain in them
some poisonous quality, yet for all Doctor Bon^ discourse of Worms.
that, at this time my purpose is to discourse especially of Plautus and
Columella Lumbrici, peradventure as being derived a Lubricitate. They are
called also Terrae Intestina of the Latins, as well because they take their
first beginning and breeding in the very bowels and inward parts of the Earth,
as because being pressed and squised betwixt the f^ngers, or otherwise, they
do void forth excrements after the fashion of living beasts that have
Intrals in them. The Greeks call them Ges entera. Hesichius calls them
Embullous. Brunfelsius Otho in his Physic Lexicon writes, Gaphagas, fetching
the deriuation of the word Para To gaian phagein, for they feed upon the
earth. Of the Englishmen they are called Meds, and Eearth-wormes, Of the French
Verse de Terra. Of the Germans Eertwurm, and Erdwurmem, Melet, Ode Regenwurm. Of
the Belgians Pier-wuorm, or Ranganwuorm. Of the Italians Lumbrichi. Of the
Spaniards Lumbrizes. Of the Polonians Glisti. Of the Hungarians Galisza. Of the
Arabians they are called Charatin. Manardus in his second Book and 40. Epistle
writes, that in times past they were called Onisculi, and Nisculi.

There are found especially two sorts of Earth-Wormes, which are either greater
or lesser. The greater Earth-wormes are somewhat long, almost like in
proportion and shape

They breed of the slime of the earth, taking their first being from
putrefaction, and of the fat moisture of the same earth they are again fed and
nourished, and into earth at last are resolved. When there falls any shewer
of Rain, then this kind of worm creeps soddenly out of the earth, whereupon
old Euclio in Plautus being very careful of Strobilus in these words;

For As, for as Lumbrice qui sub terra erepsisti modo
Qui modo nusquam comparebas, nunc autem cum compares, peris. In anluraria

Which may be englished thus;

Away, away thou Worm, late from the earth crept out,
Safe thou wast unseen, but seen, life fayles I doubt.
Here Euclio very properly terms his Bondsman Strobilus, a Worm, because not
being espied of his Master before, he suddenly came sneaking out from behind
an Altar out the remaynder, as an unprofitable burden, nothing fit for
nourishment. At the entrance of their doors, which yet steadeth them to some
commodious use, for stopping and damming up their holes that the rain cannot
so easily soke in, they are by these means safely defended from many
annoyances and dangers, that otherwise might light upon them.

Their delight is to couple together, especially in a rainy night, cleaving
together until the Morning: and in the same they are not folded round about
one another like unto Serpents, but are straightly closed together side-wise,
and thus do they remain sticking close the one to the other. They send forth
a certain froathy slyme or Ielly when that they join together. They do ever
keep the middle part of their body within the

The lesser Earth-Wormes for perspicuities sake, we with Georgius Agricola will
name Ascarides: and these are often found in great numbers in Dung-hilles,
Mixens, and under heaps of stones. Of this sort some are read, (which we
Englishmen call Duggs) and these be they that Anglers and Fishers do so much
desire, for Fishes will greedily devour them, and for that end they with them
do bayte their hooks.

There be some others of these lesser Earth-Wormes that are somewhat of a blew
color, othersome again are yellow only about the tail: whereupon they have
purchased the name of Yellow-tayles. Some again are ringed about the Necks,
withal very fat. Some others there be that have neither chains nor rings, and
these commonly be more Aristotle's opinion. Both kinds do live long in the
water, but yet at length for want of sustenance there they dye. They move from
place to place with a kind of reaching or thrusting forwards, for we cannot
properly say that they do either role or tumble. Olympio in Plautus would go
about to make a simple plain fellow believe that Worms did eat noting but
very earth, because he used these words to Chalinus;

Post autem nisi ruri tu eruum comederis:
(for thus Lambine reads)
Aut quasi Lumbcicus terram.
In English thus;

And afterward thou naught but Tares shall eat,
Or else like Worms, the earth shall be thy meat.
But by earth here in this place, he understands not pure earth, and such as
is without any other mixture, but rather the fat, juice, and moisture of the
same. And this is the reason, that Earth-wormes are not to be found in all
soyles alike, as in barren, sandy, stony, hard, and bare grounds, but only in
fat, grauilly, moist, clammy and fertile. And Lutretius in his second book
writes, that Worms are bred most when it showreth, as in rainy seasons and
moist weather;

Quatenus in pullos animaleis vertier oua
Lerminus alitum, vermesque efferuare, terram
Intempestiuos cum putror coepit ob imbres.
In english thus;

Even as in time of rain, we see
Birds Eggs their young forth hatch,
And worms in heat of gendering be
When they clouds rot do catch.
And to this opinion of Lucretius, Nicander seems to lean, when he
affirms, that In Theriaea.
or with some smoking shewer: for making a difference between the Serpent
Scytale, and the Amphisbaena, he thus wtiteth;

Steileies pachetos, tes elminthos pelei ogros
He cai enterages oia trephei ombrimos aia. Id est.
Manubrij ligonis latitudo, longitudo vero ei quae Lumbrico,
Aut terrae intestinis, quae imbribus irrigata terra alit.
That is to say;

As broad as haft of Spade, his length like little Worm,
And fed with dreary earth, moist by clouds rainy form.
The greater sort of Earth-Wormes live in the bowels of the Earth, and most of
all in an open free air, and where there is some repair and confluence of
people. Every morning they withdraw themselves into their secret holes and
corners within the ground, fencing the entrance of them with their excrements
they have voyded forth, in a fair and Sunshine weather: but in rainy weather
they use to stop the mouths of their holes with some stalk or leaves of herbs
or trees, being drawn a little inwardly into the earth. They feed upon the
roots of those Plants which have any sweet juice or moisture in them;

Besides, if you dig into the earth, or make a great motion, trampling, or
hard treading upon the same, pouring in any strange liquor or moisture into the
same, wherewithal they are unacquainted; as for example, the juice of
Wall-nut-trees, the water wherein Hemp, either seeds or leaves are soked, or
bin laid to rottein common Lie, and the

In like manner, they cannot endure Salt, or aromaticall things, nor by their
good will come near them, for but touching any of these they will draw
themselves on a heap, and so dye. Worms are found to be very venomous in the
Kingdom of Mogor, and the Inhabitants there do stand in so great fear of
them, that they be destroyed and slain by them when they travel any journey;
and therefore there they use ordinarily to carry Besomes with them to sweep
the plain ways for fear of further hurt. Georgius Agricola says, that the
little Worms called Ascarides, are not all of one color: for some are white,
some yellow (as I remembered a little before) and others again are very black:

Some say, that those worms do most mischief to corne-grounds, which in some
places of Italy the people term Zaccarolae, and these are thick, almost a
finger long, being natural- of a very cold constitution of body; and therefore
they never use to come forth of the earth, but when the weather is passing
hot, for then will they come forth, even to the surface of the ground, as it is
notably set down, by the famous Poet Ovid:

-- a quo ceu font perenni, Oui. amo. l. 3

Vatum Pierijs labra rigantur aquis.
In english thus;

By whom, as by an everlasting filling Spring,
With Muses liquor, Poets lips are bathed to singe.
Homer very fitly compares Harpalion when he fell down dead amongst his
Companions, Meriones, shooting an arrow or steele-dart into his hanch or hip,
his verses be these;

Meriones d'apiontos iei chalkere oiston,
Kai r'ebale glouton kata dexion autar oistos,
Antikron kata kustin vp'osteon exeperesen:
Ezomenos de cat' authi philon en chersin etairon,
Thumon apopneion, oste scolex epi gai
Keito tatheis ecd' aima melan ree, dene de gaian. Id est.
Meriones autem in abeuntem misit aream sagittam,
Et vulnerauit coxam ad dextram, ac sagitta
e regione per vesticam sub as penetrauit:
Restidens autem illic chararum inter manus sociorum
Animam efflans, tanquam vermis super terram
Iacebat extensus: sanguisque effluebat, tingebat erutem terram.
That is to say,

But as he went away, behold Meriones
With brazen dart, did his right hip-bone wound,
Which near the bladder did the bone thorough pierce:
In friends dear hands, he dyed upon the ground.
So stretched upon the earth he lied,
Black blood out flowing, the same bedyed.
Mark well the slenderness of this comparison, whereby he would give us to
understand the base estate, and faint heart of Harpalion. For in other places
having to write of Noble, valiant, and magnanimious persons, when they were
ready to give up the ghost, he uses the words Sphadazein, Bruchein, and the
like to these, secretly insinuating to us, that they fell not down dead like
impotent Cowards, or timorous abiects; but that they raged like Lions, with
grinding and gnashing their teeth together, that they were blasted, Harpalion,
seemed to be disgraced by his resembling to a poor Worm, being peradventure
a man of so small estimation, and vile condition, as that no greater comparison
seemed to fit him. It seems he was a man but of a faint courage, and very
weak withal, because striking and thrusting with his spear or I aucling at
the Shield or Target of Atrides, he was not able to strike it through. But
although this famous Poet does so much seem to extenuate and debase a weak
Worm: yet others have left us in their writings such commendations of their
singular use and necessity for the recovery of man's health (then which no
earthy thing is more precious) and have so nobilitated the worth of these poor
contemptible Creatures, as I think, nature Paracelsus by the distillations of
his Limbeck has made known to the world, any secret endued with so many
virtues and excellent properties against so many diseases: and for proof
hereof, it shall not beside the purpose to examine and describe the rarest and
most probable that are recorded amongst the learned.

Earth-Wormes do mollify, conglutinate, appease pain, and by their
terrestrial, and withal waterish humidity they do contemper any affected
part, orderly and measurably moderating any excess whatsoever. The powder of
Worms is thus prepared. They use to take the greatest Earth-Wormes that can
be found, and to wrappe them in Moss, suffering them there to remain for a
certain time, thereby the better to purge and cleanse them from that clammy and
filthy slimynesse, which outwardly cleaves to their bodies. When all this is
done, they press hard the hinder part of their bodies near to the tail,
squising out thereby their excrements, that no impurity so near as is possible

Thirdly, they use to put them into a pot, or some fit vessel with some
white wind, and a little Salt, and streyning them gently between the fingers,
they first of all cast away that Wine, and then do they pour more wine to
them, and after the washing of the worms, they must also take away some of the
Wine, for it must not all be poured away (as some would have it) and this must
so often be done and renewed until the Wine be passing clear without any
filth or drossinesse, for by this way their slymy ielly, and glutinous evil
quality is clear lost and spent. Being thus prepared, they are to be dried by
little and little in an oven, so long till they may be brought to powder: which
being beaten and searsed, it is to be kept in a Glasse-vessell far from the
fire by it self. A dram of this powder Muscadell, Bastard, or the Metheglin
of the Welchmen. It helps the Dropsy. With white wind and Myrrh, the
Iaurdise, with New-Wine, or Hydromell the Stone, Ulcers of the Reins and
Bladder. It stays also the looseness of the belly, helps barrenness, and
expels the Secondine, it asswageth the pain of the haunch or hippe, by some
the Sciatica, it opens obstructions of the Liver, dryueth away Tertian-Agues,
and expels all Worms that are bred in the Guts, being given and taken with
the decoction or distilled Water of Germander, Worme-wood, Sothern-wood,
G^rlicke, Scordu^, Centory, and such like.

The decoction of Worms made with the juice of Knot-grasse, or Comfery,
Salomons Seal, or Sarasius compound, cures the disease teramed by Physicians
Diabetes, when

Hieronimus Mercurialis a learned Physician of Italy, advises Nurses to use
this confection following in case they want Milk, always provided that there
be not a Fever joined withal. Take of the Kernels of the fruit of the
Pine Tree, sweet Almonds, of each Pliny witnesses, or a little of it put into
the contrary ear, will perform the same effect, as Dioscorides testifyeth.
And thus far of Earth-Wormes taken into the body, and of their manifold
virtues, according to the evidence and testimony of Dioscorides, Galen, Aetius,
Paulus Aegeneta, Myrepsus, Pliny, and daily experience which goes beyond the
precepts of al skillful Masters: Manilius in his second Book has written;

Per varios vsus artem experientia fecit,
Exemplo monstrante viam.
In English thus;

Experience teaches art by use of things,
When as example plainest way forth brings.
Being also beaten to powder, and outwardly applied, they do close and solder
up wouudes, and conglutinate sinnewes that are cut, and consolidating them
again in the space of seven days, and to perform this cure the better,
Democritus advises to keep them in Honny. The ashes of Earth-Wormes duly
prepared, cleanses So^dious, stinking and rotten Ulcers, consuming and wasting
away their hard lips, or Callons edges, if it be tempered with Tar and
Simblian Honey, as Pliny affirms. Dioscerides says, that Sicilia was taken
for that of Simblia in his time. Their ashes likewise draws out Darts or
Arrows shot into the body, or any other matter that sticks in the flesh, if
they be tempered with Oil of Roses, and so applied to the place affected. The
powder also cures Kibes in the heels, and Chilblaynes on the hands, as
Marcellus testifies, for hurts that happen to the sinnewes when they are cut
in pieces, Quintus Serenus has these verses;

Profuerit terrae Lumbricos indere tritos,
Quets vetus and rancens sociari axungia,
Debet.
It is good (says he) to apply to sinnewes that are dissected. The powder of
Earth-Wormes mixed and wrought up with old, Rammish, and unsavory Barrowes
Grease, to be put into the grief. Marcellus Empiricus. Besides, the powder of
Earth-Wormes and Axunger, adds further, Grounswell, and the tender tops of
the Boxe-tree with Olibanum: all these being made up and tempered together to
make an Emplaster, he counsels to be applied to sinnewes that are laid
open, cut asunder, or that have received any puncture, or suffer any pain or
aching whatsoever. Pliny says, that there cannot be a better Medicine found out
for broken bones, then Earthworms and field Mice dried and puluerised, and so
mixed together with Oil of Roses, to be laid in the form of an emplaster
Russius, Absyrtus, and Didymus: whereupon Cardan has observed, that all pains
whatsoever may be mitigated by their apt using. Carolus Clusius says, that
the Indians do make an excellent unguent of Earth-Wormes against the disease
called Erysipelas, being a swelling full of heat and redness with pain round
about, commonly called S. Anthonies fire: And thus it is prepared.

They first take Earth-Wormes alive, feeding them either with the leaves of
Moeza, or else with fine Meal, until by this means they grow fat; afterward
boiling them in an earthen vessel, (remembering ever to scumme the same) they
do strain them, boiling

Pelagonius much commends Earth-VVormes as an excellent Medicine for the bots
or Worms that are in Horses, and in the bodies of Oxen and Kine, affirming
that the best way is to put them alive into their Nosthrils, although without
question it were far better to conueigh them into their mawes by the means
of some horn. Tardinus advises to give the powder of Earth-VVormes with some
hot flesh, to Hawks when Varro writes) by their turning up the mudde, and
rooting in the earth with their snouts, do by this means dig up the Worms,
that they may eat them.

Albertus Magnus says, that Toades do feed upon Worms. Bellonius says,
that Lizards and Tarentinus, that the Seafish called Gryff or Grample, does
greedily devour the^, and finally experience it self witnesses, that Frogs,
Eeles, Gudgeons, Carpes, Breames, Roches, and Trowts, do satisfy their hungry
guts by feeding upon them. Aristotle in his eight book De Not. Animal. Chap.
3. describes a certain Bird that lives in the waters, which Gaza
interprets Capella, though the Philosopher calls it Aix, and some have
called it Vdhelius, that lives for the most part upon worms: yea, Thrushes,
Robinredbreasts, Munmurderers, and Bramblings, Hens, Chaffinches,
Gnat-snappers, Bullfinches, and all sorts of Crows will feed upon them; and
therefore it is that there be Polydorus Virgilius in his first book of the
History of England, (which he dedicated to King Henry the eight) has
excellently delivered.

The people of India, if we will credit Monardus, do make of these Worms
diverse iuncats, as we do Tarts, Marchpanes, Wafers, and Cheese-cakes, to eat
in stead of other daynties. And the Inhabitants of west India, do devour them
raw, as Francis Lopez testifies. The people of Europe in no place that ever I
heard or read of, can endure them to be set on their Tables, but for medicinal
uses only they desire them. Plautus uses in ^chide.
Nunc ab transenna hic turdus Lubricum petit.


It is an allegory taken and borrowed from a ginne or snare wherewith Birds
are ta(...) by which Chrysalus the bondsman bringing certain Letters to
Nicobolus an old man, ^th and gives warning, that the weak old man was by the
reading of the letter no otherwise ensnared, entangled, and deceived, then some
birds are taken by subtle and crafty sleights. For Transenna is nothing but a
deceitful cord stretched out to take Birds, especially Thrushes or Mauisses
withal, and Worms is there proper food, which while they endeavor to
entrappe, they themselves are deceived and taken. Surely I should not think
that those Fishers and Anglers to be very wise, who to take Worms, use to
pour Ambrosia, the very meat of the Gods.

Earth-Wormes do also much good to men, serving them to great use in that they
do prognosticate and foretell rainy weather by their sudden breaking or
issuing forth of the

Some there be found, that will fashion and frame Iron after such a manner, as
that they

Another. Take of Earth-wormes l. ij. destill them in a Limbecke with an easy
and gentle fire, and temper your iron in this destilled water. Another. Take of
Goats blood so much as you please, adding to it a little common salt, then
bury them in the earth in a pot well glased and luted for thirty days
together. Then destill after this the same blood in Balneo, and to this
destilled liquor, add so much of the destilled water of Earthworms. Another.
Take of Earth-wormes, of the roots of Apple Trees, of Rapes, of each a
likemuch, destill them apart by themselves, and in equal portions of this
water so destilled, and afterward equally mixed, quench your iron in it, as is
said before. Antonynus Gallus.

It shall not be impertinent to our matter we handle, to add a word or two
concerning Theophanes in Strabo calls Oripas: but because it may seem very
strange and incredible, to think that any worms breed and live only in the
snow, you shall hear what the Ancients have committed to writing, and
especially Strabo his opinion concerning this point. It is (says he) received
amongst the greater number of men, that in the snow there are certain clots or
hard lumpes that are very hollow, which waxing hard and thick, do contain
the best water as it were in a certain coat; and that in this case or purse
there do breed worms. Theophanes calls them Oripas, and Apollonides,
Vermes.

Aristotle says, that living creatures will breed also even in those things
that are not subject to putrefaction, as for example, in the fire and snow,
which of all things in the Pliny is of the same judgment, and the Author of
that book Lib: 11. cap: 35.
which is entitled De Plantis, falsely fathered upon Aristotle.

Yet some there be that denying all these authorities, and rejecting whatsoever
can be objected for confirmation thereof to the contrary, do stoutly
maintain by diverse reasons, that creatures can breed in the snow: because
that in snow there is no heat, and Aristotle writes that nothing will come of
Ise, because it is (as he says) most cold: and heere-vpon they infer that
in all reason, nothing likewise can take his beginning from snow; neither is it
credible, that husbandmen would so often wish for snow in Winter to destroy and
consume worms, and other little vermin, that else would prove so hurtful to
their corn and other fruits of the earth. And if any worms be found in the
snow, it follows not straightwaies that therein they first receive their
beginning, but rather that they first come out of the earth, and are afterward
seen to be wrapped up, and lie on heaps in the snow.

But by their leaves these reasons are very weak, and may readily be answered
thus, Auerrhoes, there is nothing compounded and made of the three Elements,
that is absolutely without heat. And Aristotle in his fifth book De
Generatione Animalium, tells us precisely, that there is no moisture without
heat. His words are Ouden hugron aneu thermou. Now snow is a compact, and
fast congealed substance, and somewhat moist, for although it proceeds by
congelation, which is nothing else but a kind of exsiccation, yet
notwithstanding, the matter whereof it first comes is a vapor, whose nature
is moist, and with little ado may be turned into water.

I must needs say that congelation is a kind of exsiccation, but yet not
simply: for exsiccation Aristotle in his first book of his Meteors says, that
Snow is Nubes congelata, a cloud congelated or thickened together, and that in
snow there is much heat. And in his fifth book De Generatione Animalium, he
further adds, that the whitenes of the snow is caused by the air, that the
air is hot and moist, and the snow is white; whereupon we conclude, that snow
is not so cold, as some would bear us in hand. I well hold that nothing will
take his original from Ise, inregard of his excessive coldness, but yet snow is
nothing nie so cold as that. So then all the hinderance and let, is found to
exceed of cold, which is nothing so effectual or forceable as in Ise, and the
cold being proved to be far lesser, there can nothing be alleged to the
contrary, but that it may putrefie.

Now in that snow is such an enemy to worms, and many other small creatures,
as that for the most part it destroys them, yet it follows not, that the
reason of Aristotle is quite ouer-throwne: because (as we daily see) that
those creatures which live in the Aristotle witnesses, it is so far unlikely
that the same snow should be the destroyer of that it first was bred of, as I
think rather it cannot live seperately, but of necessity in the same snow; no
otherwise then fishes can live without water, from which they first sprung and
had their beginning.

And to this opinion leans Theophrastus, in his first book De Causis
Plantaru^, whose words be these, Apanta gar phainet ai ta zoa, kai ta phuta,
kai diamenonta, kai genomena, en tois oikeiois capois: For all creatures (says
he) whatsoever, seem, both plants to remain, and to be generated and bred, in
their own due and proper places. And after this he adds and urges a little
further, Aparthe men hupo touton: from his own home and special particular
place of abode, nothing can suffer, sustain harm, or be corrupted. And in his
fifth book De cause. Plan: he sets it down more perspicuously, how that
Worms which are bred in some special trees, being afterward translated and
changed to other trees, where they never came before, cannot possibly live.
Wherefore it is more consonant to reason, and more agreeable to common sense,
to affirm that those worms which

Neither are we to make any question or scruple concerning their food; for
there is no doubt, but the mother from whence they proceeded, will provide
sufficient nourishment for her own children. For as we said a little before,
the snow is no simple thing, but compacted and concrete together of many, and
of this nature ought every aliment to be. Julius Caesar Scaliger is of this
mind, that worms are ingendered and brought forth in the very snow, because
there is in it much air and spyrit, which afterward being heated and brought
to some warmth together, may cause them to generate; for it is the nature and
quality of snow to make fat the earth, of which fattish moisture or Ielly,
there

There be some that do constantly hold, that in the midst of certain stones,
of which they use to make Lime, there do breed diverse creatures, of very
different kinds, and sundry proportions and shapes, and likewise worms, with
hairy backs, and many feet, which are wont to do much hurt to Fornaces and
Limbekills where they make Limb. Yet Caesalpinus in his first book De Metal.
chap. 2. thinks the contrary, assuring us that in Mettall-mines, Quarries of
Marble, and other stones, there can never any living body be found. And yet in
Rocks of the Sea, within the hollow places and riftes of the stones, they do
commonly find certain small living things called Dactili.

I do not doubt, whatsoever he says to the contrary, but that many creeping,
and other Harlestone, a mile from Holdenbie in Northamptonshiere, there was a
Quarry of free stone found out, of which they dug for the building of Sir
Christopher Hattons house, where there was taken up one being a yard and a
half square every way at the least, and being cloven asunder, there was found
in the very midst of it a great Toade alive, but within a very short space
after, coming to the open air, it dyed. This stone amongst others, was taken
very deep out of the earth, it was splyt and cut asunder by one whose name is
Lole, an old man yet living at this day, it was seen of five hundred persons,
Gentlemen and others, of worthy repute and esteem, the most part of them
living at this hour, whose attestation may defend me in this report: and
surely, if Toades may live in the midst of stones, I can see no reason but that
worms may therebe found, but as yet I could never see it.

In the year of Grace 970. at what time Romualdus the son of Sergius a young
Monk, was advanced by the Nobility of Rauenna to be their Archbishop,
there followed a Carolus Sigonius in his Chronicle of the Kingdom of Italy
declares. Henry Emperor of Rome, the son of the Emperor Henry the third,
as Cramzius has written, when he took his voyage into Italy, being suddenly
stayed of his intended course, with an Army sent against him by Matild, that he
should pass no further then Lombardie, yet having taken Mutina, there appeared
a strange and uncouth sign in the air, for an innumerable company of Worms,
smaller and thinner then any Flies, did fly about in the air, being so
thick that they might be touched with any small stick or wand, and sometimes
with the hand, so that they covered the face of the Holy Land.

In the year of our Lord God one thousand, one hundred and four, there were
seen diverse fiery and flying Worms in the air, in such an infinite
multitude, that they darkened the light of the Sun, seeming to deprive men's
eyesight thereof; and shortly after this monstrous and unnatural wonder,
there followed other strange and sildome-seene prodigious sights on the earth:
and what a boisterous storm of troubles, and raging Whirlwind of War and
blood-shedde shortly after ensued, the event thereof did plainly manifest.

FINIS.
EPILOGUS GRATVLATORIUS HONORANDO ATQVE IN OMNI ART, and MART, CVMVLATISSIMO
VIRO, D: LVDOVICO LEWRNORO, EQVITI AVRATO, ET AVLICARVM CEREMONIARVM MAGISTRO
PRINCIPALI.
NEC-NON DOCTISSIMO ET CLARISSIMO UIRO D: THOMAE BONHAMO, IN MEDICINIS DOCTORI.
EXorientes stellae (secundu^ Astronomos) primu^, aspectu transuerso atque
laterali huius vniuersitatis montium cacumina, atque arborum summitates
salutant, neque hoc vel illud regnum, aliquemue locum, personamue particularem
conspicantur: verum altius ascendentes, and gradus plures ab ortu supergressae,
non solum magis oppositae, terrae apparent, sed omnium intuentium oculos
vultusque videntur direct verberare. Ita mihi (absit iactantia) vsu-venit
acciditque, illustrissime Miles; atque Doctor venerande, postquam enim
praecedente^ de Quadrupedibus historiam (pro meo posse) absoluissem, non sine
Epilogo, tanto labori valedicebam: verum neminem cuiuscunque conditionis vel
specialiter respiciebat, sed generaliter, omnibus huius Britanniae orbis, tum
studiosis tum pijs insulanis proponebam. Longius vero in istiusmodi Epicyclo,
seu laborum aetherea sphaera progressus, calamus, oculus, animusque in vestram
coniunctissima^, mutuamque erga has lucubrationes humanitatem, quasi
irreuerberato studio conuertuntur, vobis enim, prae omnibus huius augustissimi
regni, vel generosis, vel studiosis, se deuinctam atque obligatam, fatetur
praesens de venenatis animalibus, historia. Quapropter, si tantum honoris,
memoranda aliqua vestrorum (erga hoc opusculum) meritorum, recognitione, in vos
confer potui, quantum vestra miranda ingenua studia merentur, laborem alterum
in panegyricam sieve Heroicam vestram laude^ praedicandam, libentissime subirem.
Sed ne plus honest quam modeste vobiscum agere videam, canat Musa mea hoc
distichon vnum: Et vestrae curae testis pia charta manebit
Quam recinet quidquid posteritatis erit.


Pergamus igitur, (summo fauente numine) si vobis placet ad tertiam de
viuiparis historiam, quae est de volatilibus coeli: tenues licet sunt fortunae
meae, infinitaeque tum paupertatis, tum pastoralis Euangelicique officij curae
me quotidie circumstant affliguntque, non tamen quiescam, donec alte volantia,
and profunde natantia animalia, (si Christus mihi propitius erit) in coenaculis
and contubernijs vestris, sine omni feritate and falsitate, tractanda,
conspicanda, legenda, cognoscenda demonstr^uero. O Beatissima Trinitas, tu
creasti Angelos Coeli, and vermiculos terrae, non es in illis superior, in
istis non es inferior, non est possibilius tibi creare vermiculu^ quan Angelum,
extendere folium quam coelum, formare capillum quam corpus, non fecisti me
lapide^, vel Auem, vel Serpentem, quia bonitas tua me ordinauit vt laudem tuam
in creaturaru cognitione annu^tiarem. O Sanctissime, si amabilis est sapientia
in cogitatione vel cognitione rerum cognitarum, quam amabilis est sapientia
tua, quae omnia condidit ex nihilo. Differunt certe Creator and creatura, nam
ea quae per se considerata pulchra sunt, pulchrioribus comparata vilescunt:
ideo vt omnibus tui numinis pulchritudinem enarrem, secundu^ misericordiam
tuam, da mihi sensum capacem, intellectum facilem, memoriam tenacem, efficaciam
in opere, profectum in studijs, progressum in conceptis, and gratiam in
conuersatione, vt quocunque me conuertam, vbique tua manus praecedat, tuaque
benedictio sequatur, quousque omnis anima spiraculum trahens vitae, tuam
laudauerit maiestatem.

Amen.
A Table of the names of all the Foure-footed-Serpents.
Greca.
AMys Authedon 64 Anthrenas 92 Arachne 246 Arurae 205 Ascalabotes 276 Aspis 54
Batrachos 176 Batrachos Kalamites 180 Batrachos Dryopetes 180 Batrachos Chloros
180 Batrachos Eleios Lymnaios Blestas 222 Telmaticos Egemones 64 Eleiobatrachos
Brexantes 185 Chameleon 112 Champsai Chebne 282 Chelone Limnaia Chelone
Chersaie 285 Chelone Orcia 285 Chloro-saura 209 Dendrites 128 Dryopetes 185
Eleios Emys Garazum 276 Galeotes 276 Kalabotes Kampe 102 Kantharis 96 Kephen 78
Kikeros 142 Kolisaura 203 Kordulos Kordule 126 Kolotes 276 Krokodilos 128
Kolobotes Lalages 176 Lyakoni 276 Mantis Melissa 64 Melie ibid Mys Neilo
crocodolylos 128 Ophiomaachos Ophionikos Plastis 64 Psammamythe 276 Puriphrunos
Phrunos 187 Salamandra Sauros 203 Sauros Enydros 213 Saura Eliake Saura Chalcei
Saura Chalkidike 203 Saura Chlora 203 Scorpios 222 Skinke Skigkos 142 Seps 236
Stibe 246 Syrenes Thamiamithos 276 Toichobates Thronaz Zanthai 64 Zulobates
Latin.
BRexantes. 185 Bufo 187 Cantharides. 96 Caudiuerbera. 141 Chalcis seu
chalcidica Lacerta vide Lacerta. Chamaeleon 112 Cordulus, Cordyle 126 Crabrones
92 Crocodilus 126 Eruca 102 Fucus 78 Geptaria 222 Scincus, quem aliqui
crocodilum terrestrem vocant 142 Phattage idem Lacertus aquaticus 203 Lacertus
203 Lacertus viridis 209 Lacerti alij diuersi 204 Mantis 185 Muri-Lacertus 112
Nepa 222 Phalangium 246 Rana aquatica and in genere 176 Ranae temporariae 177
Ranunculus viridis, vel rana calamites aut dryopotes. 185 Rana sieve rubeta
gibbosa, and aliae ranae mutae in genere. 186 Ranae rubetae cum palustres tum
terrestres, contra omnes venetas ranas. 187 Rana venenata fossilis 178 Rubeta
187 Rimatrix 217 Cordula sieve cordulus 126 Salamandra 217 Scorpius, Scorpio 222
Stellio 276 Testudines in genere 280 Testudo terrestra 387 Testudines quae in
aqua dulci vivunt sieve palustri sieve fluente. 281 Testudo Marina 287 Testudo
polipus Tinea agrestis 102 Vespa 83 Vinuula 222
Italian.
APe che non fa mele 78 Bisca scutellaria 282 Boffa 187 Botta 187 Boug circa
Neocomum buffo. 187 Buffo, Buffa, Buffone 187 Brucho 103 Calauron 92 Cantarella
96 Ciatto 287 Chatt Rhaetis buffo 187 Coforone 282 Crabrona 92 Cufuruma 382
Gaiandre de aqua 207 Galana 282 Galanron 92 Gez 9 Leguro 203 Liguro 203 Lucerta
203 Lucertula 203 Marasandola 203 Muscone 85 Racanella 187 Racano 203 Racula
185 Ragno 203 Ragna 246 Ramarro 187 Rana 176 Ranaiuoto 185 Ranocchia 185
Ranonchia de rubetto ibid. 185 Rospo 187 Rosada 217 Rugauerme 103 Salamandra
217 Saraffon 92 Scurtigicio 222 Scorpio terrestre 222 Tarantula 276 Tartocha
282 Tartuce 282 Tartugella 282 Testudine 282 Testugine 282 Testunia 282 Vespe
83 Vrespa. 83
Hispanica.
ABispa 83 Alacram, Alocroni 222 Aranna 246 Cagado 287 Cubillo 96 Escorpion 222
Gagado 282 Galapago 282 Lacerta 203 Lagardixa 203 Lagartisa 203 Lagarto 203
Oruga 103 Rana 176 Salamantegua 217 Sapa escuerco 180 Taburros o moscardos 83
Tartaruga 282. 287 Tartuga 282 Vespa 83 Zangano 78
Gallica.
ALebrenne 217 Arrassade 217 Araigue 246 Baradon 78 Blande 217 Boug coupe circa
Neoco: 282 Cantaride 96 Chamelyon 112 Crapault 187 Crocodile 128 Croisset 185
Graisset 185 Grenouille 76 Guespe 83 Fullon 78 Foulons 92 Lysarde 203 Lysarde
verde 209 Renogle 185 Scorpion 222 Sourd 217 Stinco 142 Tartue 282 Tassot 213
That Neocomi 203 Tortue 282 Tortue des boys 285 Tortue de mer 282 Trellons 92
Trasons 92 Verdier 185
Illyrica.
CZeno 78 Gesscierka 203 Gesslier 203 Zaba 176 Czezo 78 Zabatrawna 185
Germanica.
ADer 203 Wasser ader 213 Crocodill 128 Egles 203 Egochs 203 Egdetsch 203
Froesch or frosch 176 Gartem frosch 181 Gruene Refer 96 Goldkaer 96 Laubfrosch
185 Rein froschlin 16 Furt krott 187 Garten Krott Gschertzenfider Gruner Heydor
209 Gullen Krottle Hoptzger Krott 187 Gullen Krottle Schiltkrott 282 Taller
Krott 282 Lindtwurm 112 Maal 217 Punter Maal 217 Moule Molch Meerschiltkrot 287
Moldwurm Moll 217 Wassermoll 213 Ein Wespe 83 Olm 217 Padde 187 Punt 187 Quapp
187 Quattertetsch 217 Ein Raup 102 Reinfroschle Immeer 282 Shiltpadde 282
Borsch, Fland Traen 78
A Table of all the Latin names of Serpents without legs, as well corrupted
as those in use.
Latin.
AContias 143 Affodius 193 Afudius 193 Alidras draco alatus Amiudutus 53
Amoatis 148 Ammodytes 53 Amphibaena 151 Amphisbaena 151 Amphisilene 151
Amphisilenes 151 Andrius draco alatus Anger Anguis 240 Anguis Aesculapius 241
Anguis alatus 241 Anguina pellis Anguirana Apis 64 Aranea Aracis 211 Araneus
Arges 54 Argolae serpents 54 Aspis 54 Arunducus idem Assilus idem Aspis 54
Aspis hypnalis idem Aspis Thermutis idem Aspis sicca idem Athaes idem Baron 203
Basiliscus 119 Boa 111 Boua 111 Caecila 239 Caecinia 239 Caecula 239 Caecus
serpens 239 Cancros Caharus Carmen Carnen Caubaerus, Causon Causonius Causus
Cenchriae 53. 211 Cenchrites 53. 211 Cenchrines 53. 211 Cenchros 211 Cenchreis
211 Cenchriti 211 Cenchrus 211 Cenchris 211 Cenchrines 211 Centria 53 Centrites
53 Ceraftes 198 Cerchnia Cerchria Ceriella 239 Ceristalis 198 Ceruini serpents
Cerustes Chamaeleon Chelidonia vide aspis Chelydrus 174 Chersidal Chersea vid:
natrix Colubra 51 Coluber 51 Corium anguis Cornuta Cornuta aspis Cornutus
C^phi^s 234 Christalis 198 Cruciator Cylindri 175 Decurtatus Dendrogailla 175
Dipsas Draco 154 Draco Pythius vide dracon: Draco marinus Dracones Alati 158
Drinas 174. 175 Dryinus 174. 175 Durissos Echidna Echidrus Elaps 176 Elaphis
176 Elephantiae serpents 167 Elops 276 Enhydris 243 Enydris 243 Epid aurius
anguis vide dracon: Excetra Exvuiae serpentis Fucus 78 Glandosa Graae serpents
Haemorrhois 193 Haemorrhous 193 Halfordius 193 Haren Hipnale vide aspis
Hippupix Hirundo Hyaena 200 Hydra 240 Hydrus 240 Hydra lernaea 201 Hydra
fabulosa 201 Hydri marini 233 Hypnalis Iaculus 143 Ilicinus Irundo Laphiati
Leberis Lernaea Hydra vid. Hydra fabulosa. Libyae serpents 203 Lutrix Lumbrici
306 Marinus serpents Melanurus Merguli serpents Mill peda Miliaris 211
Molurus 203 Multipeda Mustaca 205 Myagrus 203. Mylacris 203 Naderavide coluber
Natrix 243 Natrix 243 Natrix torguata Nepavide Scorpio Ochendra vide Viper
Ophiomachus 209 Orophias 203 Padera 203 Paderotae serpents 203 Pagerina 203
Palmerts serpens Pareas 203 Parous 203 Pediculus serpens Apuleius Pelias 204
Pennatus serpens vide alati serp: Porphyrus 214 Prester 214 Ptytas vide aspis
Putria Querculi 175 Regulus 119 Sabrine 199 Sauritae 194 Sacer serpens vide
dracon Scytala 232 Semereon Semurion Senectus anguina Senecta Sepedon 236 Seps
236 Serpagerina Serpens 10 Serpens Epidaurius vid: dracon: Serpens benignus
Serpens a croylis denominatus Serpens volucris vide dracon Serpens alatus vide
dracon Serpens palmaris Serpens Niger Serpens septiceps vide hydra Serpens
rubescens 216 Serpens Marina 233 Serpens Marinus 233 Serpens sacer vid: dracon.
Serpens marinus in Norueg: 233 Serpens Epidaurij vide dracon Serpens Magalaunae
Serpens flaui marini vid: 233 Serpula 10 Seyseculus Sibilus 119 Siphedon
Sirtalls Situla, Solifuga Spartarius Spathiurus 203 Spectaficus Spolium
serpentis Spondylis Syrenae Testini 239 Testiti 239 Tephloti 239 Tristalis 198
Tyliacus, Typhlae 239 Typhlinae 239 Typhlos 239 Typhlinus 239 Tyria 280 Tyrus
280 Vermis 306 Vespa Vipera 290 Vraeus Aegyptiorum
A Table of the Haebrew, Chaldae, Arabian, and Persian names of Serpents.
AGmelon 172 Abides 243 Acbar, Acabith, Acobitha. 246 Acchabim 222 Acrob Acoran
143 Adare 205 Adhaya 142 Afis 240 Affordius Afudius Agestim 10 Akchub 54 Alphai
290 Alafafrai 290 Albara 64 Albedisimon 154 Alchalha Allesilati Alrabian 142
Alganarat 222 Alfabai Alfahex 280 Alfordius 193 Alguarel Alhathaie 203
Alhartraf 154 Alhatraf 154 Ahahaul 176 Alhedysimon 154 Almsa 127 Alkatereti 222
Alkismus 151 Alphe Alsalach Altararat 145 Altinanti 145 Al-Timasch 127
Altynatyci Aluka 127 Alurel 276 Ames Amiuduti 53 Andrius 243 Ankesimen 151
Apgnath 290 Apertias 10 Affulhasch 287 Arab 20^ Arach Armene 119 Aschanchur 142
Aspistichon 243 Ataia 203 Atussi 10 Ballecola, Ballekara 142 Blefaricon 185
Butrisa. Cafezaeci 143 Cafezati 143 Carbo 203 Carmene 119 Carnen Cedebroa 103
Cerust 198 Certris 103 Cheueia 1 Chaldaicum 10 Charatim 306 Cucunoines 185
Curman 119 Deborah 64 Difdah. Difdaha. Deibrane 83 Dracon. 10, 153. Dunios
Eglose 203 Eosman 290 Eosmaeri 280 Eratron Faget 127 Faliuisus 211 Famusus 211
Falcalhaileb Ghazain 303 Geluc Genlut Gereschine 127 Guaril 276 Guasseuabras
276 Hacparab 222 Hadaie 10 Haie 10 Halachalie 281 Halfordius 193 Haltetha 203
Handrius 243 Hardun 112, 176, 203 Haren Carnen 154 Harmene 154 Hascos 54 Hasyos
54 Hauden 154, 172 Haudion Humet 281 Humetha 203 Hazab 112 Kauken salabhafe
^^rmene Kedasudarus 243 Koah 127 Koach 187 Koah, Koach 112 Kipod 281
Lanigermusha 203 Letaah 203, 276 Lyserda 203 Maskar 176 Mysoxus 187 Nahalea. 64
Nachasch 10 Nigri Nudalep, Nudalepi 142 Oach 153 Pelipah 203 Pethen 54, 119
Phihib 246 Sabin Saambras 203, 217 Samabras 203, 217, 276 Senabras 205, 276
Sapidi, Sabrim, Sabtin Skabhul 281 Schanchur 142 Schephiphon 10, 198
Sciseptalis, Sciscetalis Selach alhaie, Selsir Semabras Semamith 246, 276
Semurion Sibth 246 Sipiti Sisemat 281 Siscetati Suchus 127 Tenchea 127 Tenstu
10, Testuh 10 Thaninim 10 Thanim 153 Thanninim ibid. Thannin ibid. Taninai^
Tisma Thible^^ 281 Thiron. 290 Tsirhah 92 Vasga 276 Vrdea Akruka Zab 176, 127
Zaba. ibid: Zabar 64 Zabor 92 Zambor 83 Zambor 92 Zamia ibid: Zaphna Zaphnaim
119 Zepha 143 Zephardea 127, 176 Zipheoni 54
Graeca nomina Serpe^tiu^ communium apedoon.
AImorrhoos Ophis 193 Akontias 143 Amodytes 53 Amphisbaina 151 Amphisthmaina
151 Ammoatis 147 Argas, Arges 54 Aspis 54 Basilikoon therion Boas 111 Geras
Opheos Graai, Gesentera 306 Dakos Daketon Dermestes, Diban. Diph^^on, Dypsas
Drakon 154 Drakos 154 Drakaina, Dryinos 174 Dryinas 174 Eleoon. Elops. Embrua,
ton opheon 10 Enchelin thropos, Echis 290 Echidna, 290 Embullos 306 Enhydris
243 Therion Kauson 147 Karorus 243 Kegchrine 211 Kegchros 211 Kegchridion 211
Kegchrit^s Kenchrias (...) Kegchris, Kerastes, K^ Kinadros, Knodolon (...)
Kolobourous (...) Kophiaes (...) Leon, Lebaeis (...) Lib^ai libys Melamiros
(...) Maloueoi, Muaigros Muagros Nerophis (...) Ochendra 296 Orophias, Ophis
(...) Ophis Ophidi 1^ Ophees derma, Ophidion Ophis oikoacos Ophis thalattio^
Pareias pacoua^ Parias, Prester Pria notoi opheis Pyrrhias, Pythono Rophias
Saetta 143 Scorpion, Skytale Sepedon, Sepi, Sipa, Seps Situla Sitis 147
Spondele, Syphae Trissos, Tuphlon, Typilyne Typhotes, Typhlones Typhlinos,
Typhlios Ydrales ydra 243 Ydros 24^
Italica.
AMiroldo Ancea Ange Antza 242 Aspe 54 Aspide 54 Aspido del cotuo. 53 Baro
Basilisco 119 Biscia buona Bisse ange 242 Bisse 242 Bisa Orbula 239 Carbon 203
Carbonazzo 203 Colubra Drago 154 Dragone. idid. Lucignola 239 Lumbri chi 306
Marasso de aqua 290 Maresso. 290 (...) ^90 Scorloni 51 Scorzone 10, 51, 290
Scorzonei 290 ^ara 51 ^na 51 ^rtio 290 ^ta 143 Sa^tto^ 143 Sagitta^ ^43 ^rpe 10
Serpente 10 S^rpe de aqua S^rpa serena S^rpe negro 203 S^oglia delle scrpi.
S^pera 290
Hispanic^ Lusitanica.
ABeia 64 Basilisco 119 Bicha 290 ^ora 54, 290 ^bra ^lebra 51 ^mbrizes 306 ^rpe
10
Gallica.
ASpic. 54 Anquille de haie 203 Basilic 119 ^steon serpent cornu 198 ^oleuure
51 (...) ^4 Double march(...) 251 En Vieux al'^ 239 Mousches au m^ 64 Nadels
239 Serpent 10 Vipere 290
Gothica.
BOol Gelnigh. 83 Slall Snock Tuuar
Polonica.
GZeno 78 Glisti 306 Ossa 83 Padalitza Paiak 246 Ptzota 64 Ruphansenka 103
Spawanck 246 Vuodnyuuaz Wazilla 64
Turcicum
Ochilanne. 143
Germanica.
ANgel-schlang, Apen 64 Ein schlang 10 Ein schlang gennant 54 Baggen-schlang
Banker ^4^ Bergschlang 211 Blind en schlycher 239 Brand schlangen 290 Eycs^ang
Ey^ schoss oder angelsch 143 Ertz schlengle 119 Eyn ymbe 64 Ert-wurm 306
Gehurnt schlang 198 Grunlinge 194 Haselwurm Heck nateren 290 Hauschlang
Lindtwurm 154 Melet 306 Mere schlangen 233 Mere nateren 233 Nater 243
Orientischervnck Otter 290 Punter schlang 211 Schlang Schlangen haut
Schlangenbalg Schaffschlange Spinne 246 Stinckschlang Trach Uiper nater 290
Unck Wasser nater 243 Wasser schlang. 243
FINIS.

