A TREATISE OF LIBERTY FROM IVDAISME, OR An Acknowledgement of true Christian
LIBERTY, indicted and published By JOHN TRASKE: Of late stumbling, now happily
running again in the Race of Christianity.

ISID. in MAT. 11. 29. Quid iugo Christi suauius? quid onere leuius? a scelere
abstinere, bonum velle, omnes amare, nullum odisse, aeterna consequi,
praesentibus non capi, nolle infer alteri, quod sibi perpeti sit molestum?

LONDON, Printed by W. Stansby, for N. Butter, and are to be sold at his shop,
at the sign of the pyde Bull, near S. Austens gate. 1620.

TO MY HOLY AND TENDER MOTHER, THE CHVRCH OF ENGLAND, ALL INCREASE OF Peace,
Prosperity, and holy Vigilance, unto the glorious appearing of JESUS CHRIST.
To whom
ON Earth, rather then to you, (blessed and blessing Mother) should I direct my
Supplications, Deprecations, and my Thanks? Seeing by Gods grace and your
prudent patience amidst so many sore trials, I have yet a breathing time left;
and may for a while sit down, contemplate and admire: O the unspeakable love
of God, in reducing me into nesse of my pollutions, made me both afraid and
ashamed to point at mine own deformities. Encumbered I was with many thoughts
how to discover my minds change; and how to walk for the time to come, and yet
after a few days, I could not but disclose it: It was within me like a fire in
my bones, I was weary with forbearing and could not stay, and I resolved that
it was both my duty and safety to address my self to those whose lips
preserve knowledge, and hands authority. If a Leaper was to show himself to
the Priest, and such as were full of uncured Blaines and Sores, to show
themselves to the High Priest: why should I be afraid to present my self in
my Scars to the Guides and Governors of this Church, for the glorifying of
that grace which purged my Corruptions, and healed my Sores? I therefore
forthwith addressed me to the most Reverend Father of this renowned Church, by
him imploring reconciliation to my justly offended Mother: And since, how open
has her bosom been to her returning son, how joyfully has she received,
readily instructed, and willingly restored me to my sacred Office again: and
how blessedly have some been reduced by my weak help into the the way of
peace: from which they had swerued with me, (though not all by me) I am not
able to express with Pen. Neither shall I cease to use all my industry to
bring again all that have straied by my word or example, as by my Mothers leave
I shall be authorized so to do: seeing through Gods Mercy they are not
many, and those that are, no way dangerous, being such as have little force to
persuade any, and the most such as embraced those things, without my advice,
and some contrary to my judgment at that time: and as I have publicly by
preaching again proclaimed my true change, so shall I privately by practice
confirm it to all with whom I shall converse (by Gods grace) unto my lives end.

And who am I, that I should be any more troublesome to so indulgent and
gracious a Mother? No verily, I shall never forget her mercy, wisdom, bounty,
and meekness toward one so far gone, though I should participate no more
of her love: And I am the more bold to disclose my whole heart unto her,
because she knows that greater, more eminent, learned, and glorious members,
have had their foul slips. And though I for bear to name any, lest some
should think I do parallel my self with them: nor had we any to name either
under the Law or Gospel, as examples to induce us to be willing to acknowledge
own our deformities; for the magnifying Gods Mercy, edifying his Church, and
humbling our selves: yet we cannot but know, that there is nothing so covered
that shall not be reueiled, nor hidden that shall not be known. Neither shall
hidden things of darkness, lurk always in secret. The Lord will come, and
all men's sins shall be laid open: such as go not before to judgment to
their saving, they must follow after to their eternal torment. Neither can I
conceive, that in this light, and love of the Gospel, in the midst of true
Israelites, in whom is no guile; especially in the knowledge of my tender
Mother, any derider shall be suffered to disport himself with the nakedness
not of a father, but a failing brother: or any scoffing Ismaclite, to mock at
Isaacs minority, or any uncharitable inconsiderate brother, to vpbraid with
what has been formerly done; much less, any Idolatrous Rabsakeh, to rail on
the least servant of God. But that on any such just occasion given, it shall be
lawful for such as have an heart to the combat, to enter the lists again, in
the spirit of Meekness, though only with a sling, and such smooth stones as
may be chosen in our holy river of life. And in the confidence of this later,
with the excitement of those former motives, I am encouraged to pen what is
done, concerning the Christian Liberty I do now understand. And though I am
yet far short of what my most judicious Mother may expect for my large time;
yet well knowing, that she is so like our Lord of glory, that she has learned
long since, to accept of weak works, where she perceiues willing minds,
according to what her children have, and not according to what they have not: I
now rest, and am resolved to reremaine, though of late seemingly departed for a
season, yet sincerely returned for ever,

And at this time, thy dutiful and obedient son, JOHN TRASKE.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
Courteous READER,
IF I may not question thy Christianity, then, I hope, not suspect thy
charity, in the view of this short Treatise. And though it be somewhat
confused, yet better is a tattered habit, where the body is sound, and the
heart sincere, then gorgeous and well set attire on a false heart, and rotten
carcass. And what ever this book may seem to portend, yet I aim at nothing
but mine own discharge of duty, in the free acknowledgement of all my
failings. I meddle not with the instruction of any, but the help of such as
have been hurt by me; and that all may know that I have done with Iudaisme.
Help me, therefore, as I should help thee, against secret slanders, and
willing mistakings of some maleuolent ones: And tell them that with me, that
Pentameter is so true: (...),
Every forced business is grievous,
That I should never have done ought by costraint: Yea, I know certainly, that
Nemo inuitus been agit, etiamsi bonum est, quod facit, No man unwillingly does
any thing well, though that which he does he very good. It is almost a whole
year since God graciously relieved me in so great a strait. And though some
pens have run (as I since perceive) and tongues been exercised, in
wounding me causelessly in other things; yet God is sufficient to take just
revenge, if my obedience were once fulfilled: Which vengeance, God auert, if it
be his will, by giving them hearts to raze out some untruths out of their more
then satyricall Inuectiues, and forbear reproaches for time to come. And
desiring thy patience to read the whole over, passing by the quotations in
reading, though not in trying the truth of them all: I rest,

Thy brother,
May 5. 1620.
A TREATISE OF LIBERTY: Against Judaisme.
CHAP. I.
The Authors preparation of himself to write, and help to some others, to
read profitably, what follows in this Book.
AMongst the manifold fruits of the holy Spirit, there is one, which is often
read, freely acknowledged, much commended, yet least practiced by the most,
that should be the greatest proficients in Christ's School: and it is
Meekness, which is expressly required of all; whether Instructors, or
instructed; in authority, or under government; Pastors, or people; men, or
women; and has been ever of great price with God, in the time of the Law: as
it is now much set by, and highly valued, in the Gospels peace. As beneficial
it is, as any other grace, attended with as many precious promises: as manifest
a sign of the truth of Gods grace, as may be had. So that, though a Lions
boldness, a Serpents wisdom, a Doves simplicity, or rather innocence, be
true badges of sound Christianity; yet it may be said, and that truly, that a
Lambe-like meekness surmounts them all. Neither is it left to every man's
choice, to be meek, or no; but the man of God is enjoined it, and to all other
men it is commanded, in plain words; as to Timothy, Thou, O man of God, fly
these things, (namely doting about questions, strife of words, perverse
disputings, the love of money,) and follow after righteousness, godliness,
faith, love, patience, and meekness: 1. Tim. 6. 11. And, The servant of God
must not strive, but be gentle to all men, apt to teach, patient, in meekness
instructing those that oppose themselves, if God, peradventure will give them
repentance, to the acknowledging of the truth: 2. Tim. 2. 24* 25. And to Titus,
the first Bishop of that Church of the Cretians, he says, Put them in mind, to
be subject to principalities, and authorities, to obey Magistrates, to be
ready to every good work, to speak evil of no man, to be no brawlers, but
gentle, showing all meekness to all men: Tit. 3. 1, 2. So that such as set
light by this duty, are no better then Rebels against God, and what ever
pretense they may have, Rebellion is written in all their foreheads. Besides,
Christ himself has pronounced them blessed, Math. 5. 5. They shall inherit
the earth: when ianglers, and such as are contentious, and full of strife,
shall be authors of their own woe, and plunge themselves into much misery,
and be an occasion of rooting themselves out of their habitations, meek ones
shall peaceably possess the places where God has graciously planted them: so
says the Psalmist; Yet a little while, and the wicked shall not be; thou shall
diligently consider his place, and it shall not be. But the meek shall
inherit the earth, and delight themselves in abundance of peace, Psalm. 37.
10, 11. Neither shall meek ones err in judgment, but they shall be taught
Gods way, Psalm. 25. 9. Yea such is the excellency of their condition, that
Gods Kingdom is their undoubted possession, seeing against them, there is no
Law; Gal. 5. 23. And it is an evident note of election; Col. 3. 12. And a
notable help, to make Gods Word a saving Word, to such as hear it, Iam 1. 21.
And; a meek and quiet spirit, God highly prizeth, 1. Pet. 3. 4. Meek ones, of
all others, have a possibility of being hidden in the day of the Lords wrath,
Zephan. 2. 2, 3. Who then is he, or where is he, that will be slack at all in
laboring to be as meek as a Lamb, in all his conversation? And that such as
are desirous, may attain it, the blessed Spirit, has left directions how such
may be helped thereunto. As first, by the due and serious view, of what we our
selves have been, and at left our pronenes to the same or like evils with
which others are, or have been entangled, and overcome. So Paul, willing Titus
to teach his Disciples, to show all Meekness to all men, uses this as a
reason or motive thereto: We our selves also were unwise, disobedient,
deceived, serving diverse lusts, and pleasures, living in malice and envy,
hateful, and hating one another, Tit. 3. 3. As if he should have said, Why
should we behave us angerly, or proceed bitterly, or disdainfully against any,
seeing none are so odious, but we have been as vile as they? They be foolish,
and have not we been unwise? they rebellious, and we were disobedient: they
deceived and entangled with errors, and we once knew not the way of peace:
they serve lusts and pleasures, and we have been as base slaves to our own
desires: they are now malicious, and we have lived in malice and envy: they
deserve contempt, and we have been worthy of all manner of hatred. Moreover,
if we consider, that which may yet befall our selves, seeing we stand not by
any power or strength of our own, this will much avail us, to work in us,
Meekness: Not only to open profane, and such as are not yet called, but to
failing brethren, especially as have been overtaken by some subtle and strong
temptations: that they may be restored again to their former standing, and
that in the Spirit of Meekness, Gal. 6. 1. If spiritual men did but weigh
this, duly, there would not be so bitter inueighing against others, in the
state of lapse, much less in the case of recovery; when men are known to
acknowledge willingly all their failings; or have in them a good forwardness
to confess, and forsake them, as they daily perceive them to be faults indeed.
And if we set before our eyes examples, it may help much thereto: Seeing it is
left as Moses chief praise, that he was a very meek man, above all the men
that were on the face of the earth, Numb. 12. 3. And our Lord proposes his
own example, in this above all other things, where he says, Learn of me,
for I am meek, and lowly in heart; and adds a promise unto it, You shall
find rest to your souls, Matthew. 11. 29. And if these help not, pray for it
earnestly, as Zephany wills, where he says: Seek the Lord, ye meek of the
earth, seek righteousness, seek meekness. Zeph. 2. 3. So that to shut up
all, This Meekness is an excellent ornament to all, and the proper livery of
Gods Elect, whereby they may be discerned from such as are filled with gall,
and wormwood. By this, the pen that is truly guided, is kept from dropping
down any poison of bitterness, to grieve any; from all proud scorning of
failing brethen; and by it men are helped to read things written, with such
respect, as if they had been written with their own pen: yea, to do to all
men as they would be done unto, and to forbear to do ought to any, which they
would be loath should be done to themselves: And thus much, for some
preparation, to that which follows, concerning the truth of that Liberty,
which true Christians do all enjoy.

CHAP. II.
A small taste of true Christian Liberty.
GReat was the Liberty, those Senators (in conceit) vaunted of, at the wound of
that beast, which yet lived, though mortally wounded, by Chereas Sword: so that
Liberty, and only Liberty, is the Soldiers watch word. But how great!
glorious! costly! and certain this Liberty is! no heart can conceive, nor
tongue express, much less any Pen describe, the glory, and admirable
excellency it does contain. This true Christian Liberty, this sonnelike
freedom, is that, which God himself has bestowed, Christ Jesus purchased,
and the holy Spirit declared to such as truly believe; and such Liberty it is,
that if the giver be respected? it must be greatly esteemed: the cost be
valued? it must be highly prized, or the commodity thereof weighed? it cannot
but be earnestly desired, and zealously defended, against all, that in any
wise would limit, such boundless love.

Wherefore, seeing, God the Father, has bestowed, Gal. 4. 4, 5, 6. God the
Son, purchased it, at the price of his own blood: John 8. 36. Act. 20. 28.
1. Pet. 1. 17, 18. God the Holy Ghost declared it to all, in whom he also vouch
safeth to dwell, 2. Cor. 3. 17 and seeing I am one of them that profess such
freedom, and have testified before many witnesses, that I do now understand
more clearly, the mystery thereof: I shall in a few words labor to express
it to all that are endued, but with the least beginnings of the same free
spirit, Psalm. 51. 11, 12.

That a Liberty there is, if any were so impudent, as to deny; yet can none be
so ignorant, as not to conceive, that such a thing must of necessity be
confessed, seeing it is so often mentioned, and a Law for it declared, to all
that understand. James 1. 25. But all the strife is what Liberty it is? and
who they are, who may be truly said, to enjoy such freedom? For answer to
both; it is affirmed, that this Liberty is a freedom from the Law, from
Sin, and so from Hell, and all fear of condemnation: from sins accusation;
the Laws condemnation: and Hels anguish and that eternal separation, from
Gods comfortable presence for evermore: We are divorced from the flesh, and so
free from it, yea dead thereto, and so at liberty from the Law, as it is
written, The Law has dominion over a man, as long as he lives; for the woman
which has an Husband, is bound by the Law, to her Husband: so long as he
lives; but if the Husband be dead, she is loosed from the Law of the Husband:
so then if while her Husband lives, she be married to another man, she shall
be called an Adulteress; but if her Husband be dead, she is then free from
that Law; so that she is no Adulteress, though she be married to another man
Wherefore, my Brethren, ye are also become dead, to the Law, by the body of
Christ, that ye should be married to another, even to him who is raised from
the dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto God: Romans 7. 1, 2, 3, 4. By
this similitude is our Divorce exemplified, yea, our freedom from the Law, by
the death of Christ; and our death in Christ, is most plain to all that do
understand. And lest any one should yet doubt, and not rest fully satisfied,
the Apostle a little after does instance in himself, and says thus, I was
alive without the Law once; but when the Commandment came, sin revived, and I
dyed; and the Commandment which was unto life, I found to be unto death, Verse
9. 10. and then having put a manifest difference between his flesh and his
faith: his inward and outward man he concludes with an exclamation thus: O
wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from this body of death? And in
another place, he says, I through the Law am dead to the Law, that I might
live unto GOD, I am crucified with Christ: Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but
Christ lives in me, Gal. 2. 19, 20. What can be more plain then this? that
being thus baptized into Christ's death we are free from the Law: and it has
no more such authority to condemnation, over us at all. By this also are we
dead to sin, Romans 6. 1, 2. That is, as obey we cannot, so disobey we do not;
and so has Hell, nor Devil, no more to do against us. If sin would stand
up to accuse, God himself has discharged us: by himself we are esteemed
just: If the Law would judge or condemn, Christ himself has dyed, to yield
it the due, and is risen again, being set down at Gods right hand to make
iutercession for us. If trouble, yea the powers of Hell it self, would
endeavor to separate us from the love of God; it cannot, they can never
prevail, Romans 8. So that a Liberty here is, but none to the flesh, Gal. 5.
13. None to sin, 2. Pet. 2. 18 19. No cloak for malice, 1. Pet. 2. 16. But a
liberty to Righteousness and Holiness, Luke* 1. 74, 75. yea, to run the
way of Gods Commandments, Psalm. 119. 32. As it may stand with faith in Jesus
Christ, Reu. 12. 17.

But for that Liberty from sins power is granted, and freedom from Hell
defended, or at least desired, by all; and willingly acknowledged by men of
sound judgment, to all believers: therefore it is Liberty from the Law, which
is here to be proved, to such as are willing to know the same: we are set free
from the whole Law which says, Cursed is every one which continues not in all
things, which are written in the Book of the Law, to do them: Gal. 3. 19.
Free we are from that service, in the oldnesse of the Letter, Romans 7. 6. Free
from that form, which was written in stony Tables: and presented to those
natural Israelites, in Moses hand, 2. Cor. 3. And Christ is the Laws end, for
rightousnesse to all that believe, Romans 10. 4. Free we are from all punishment
which the Law exacteth, for time past; and from all rigorous and strict
performance, of every part thereof for time to come. The same man's nature, yea,
flesh and blood which transgressed, and is obliged to such formal obedience,
and exact service, has now satisfied, and borne the fury due to that
transgression, Heb. 2. 14, 15, 16. And we by faith in him have yielded
obedience, and all satisfaction: and are so accepted as obedient, Romans 4. 7,
21. Our Liberty from sin being nothing else but an effect of this freedom
from the Law, though that from sin be first known, ere this from the Law
can be perceived, Romans 6. 14. For where no Law is, there is no transgression,
Romans 4. 15. And whosoeeuer is not free from the Laws rigor, must needs be
subject to sins tyranny. Free then we are from the Law, as it is wraths
Minister, as it can do us no good, as it is weak through the flesh, Romans 8.
4. Neither does it at all avail us to justification: though for obedience it
still serves to curb our old man: and to quicken the new man: though the
flesh be now become so contrary to it, as it is not nor can ever be subject
thereto, Romans 8. 7. And Christ in us, does the will of God for us, in truth;
and without us has satisfied Gods wrath for us, and also performed that
formal obedience, which God requires: so that within and without, all our
perfection is nothing else but the perfection of Christ himself. If then we
are free from the moral Law, in respect of Justification, how much more from
that Law of Commandments, contained in Ordinances? Ephesians. 2. 15. called also
the handwriting of Ordinances, Col. 2. 14. which was against us, and contrary
to us, being a middle wall of partition: to keep us that are Gentiles, in the
flesh, from any fellowship with Isreal's Commonwealth, and from all
participation, in their glorious privileges: Ephesians. 2. 14. The bondwoman,
that Law: and her Son, the flesh, is now cast out and quite expelled by true
Believers: and the freewoman, the Promise: with her Son the Spirit: is only
to be respected, for that the inheritance is now by promise. The Law as Hagar,
was added after the promise was made. And as Abraham after the Promise, that he
should have a Son, took Hagar, Genesis 16. and of her begat Ismael, who was not
the Seed who must inherit; so also long after the free Promise of Salvation
made to Mankind, through Christ alone, and that only by Faith in him:
Abraham's Seed took the Law, and by the works thereof sought to inherit, but
found the Law not it, by which any inheritance could be obtained.

From all this learn we, not to burden our selves, beyond our power, nor to
hold fellowship with one that is mightier, and richer then our selves, for that
the Earthen Pot and the Kettle agree not together; nor our outward man the
flesh, with the spiritual Law: and for us in the point of Justification, to
seek to bring our old man the Laws obedience, is to bring dross to fire: to
put a weak Infant, or a liuelesse Carrion, to the Combat with a mighty
Giant: yea, to bring the Laws works, to the corrupt man's practice: is to set
a new piece in an old Garment; to put new Wine into old Bottels: neither can
such an earthen Pot as is our old man, and the Kettle, the Law, be smitten
one against another, without the Pots danger: for as the event of these, would
be the greater rent of the garment, so fondly patched; the bursting of the
Bottels so ignorantly filled; and the dashing of the earthen Pot in pieces: so
all that ever endeavor, to yield that Law-obedience, as to seek to be
righteous thereby, with this dead body, though a delight they may have in the
inward man: and a desire, and endeavor so to do, with the outward man: yet the
good, they would, they shall never perfectly effect, and the evil they would
not, that shall they perform, Romans 7. This was that made Paul cry out, for our
example to be delivered, or set free from so dead a body. And concludes also
that from it he is freed by CHRIST'S own death: God has delivered him from
his dead body, by Jesus Christ, and so from the Law, and from sin, and
consequently from Hell; and this is that Liberty of which we are possessors;
and of this, and only this it may be said, If the Son has made you free,
you shall be free indeed. If then the flesh be crucified, the Law is
satisfied: If the flesh have obeyed, the Law is fulfilled: And this is done,
even in our own whole nature, and that as it is said by Jesus Christ we live,
now no more the life of the flesh: For that all such, as so live, are all their
life time subject to bondage, and in fear of death and damnation. And yet that
this Liberty, may the better appear, we may consider in the next place, the
persons set free.

And they are all such, as are borne, not of blood, nor of the will of the
flesh: nor yet of the will of man, but of GOD: John 1. 12. For that which is
borne of the flesh, is flesh: John 3. 6. And flesh and blood, can never enter
the Kingdom of GOD, neither may corruption, inherit incorruption, 1. Cor. 15.
50. And we have learned, that all flesh is as grass, and all the glory of
man, as the flower of grass; the grass must wither, and the flower fall away,
but the Word of the Lord indureth for ever, Isa. 40. 1. Pet. 1. 24, 25. And we
are borne again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the Word of
GOD which lives, and abides for ever. So that the free men, and such as are
set at Liberty, are not such as are borne of men, but those that are borne of
God; they only know this Liberty, and are truly acquainted with the
privileges thereof; they are such, as do now find in them, the power of the
Spirit of Life: they do mind heavenly, and spiritual things: are quickened,
in their dead bodies. Col. 2. 13. in part to yield true, and sound obedience,
to the spiritual Law: They have the Spirit of the Son inabling them with
boldness, to call God Father; and the same Spirit witnesses to their spirits,
that they are the children of GOD; Romans 8. 15, 16. They can deny themselves,
groaning in themselves to be set free in body, as they are in spirit, from the
bondage of corruption, and yet can wait patiently, for that full Redemption:
they have the spirit of Prayer, and Praise, and are conformable, in a great
measure, to Christ himself. These are called to Liberty, and entered into the
glorious Liberty, of the sons of GOD, Romans 8. 21. Neither are such free men,
Lawless, or at all fruitless: for as sin, that is, serve sin, they can
never, as they have formerly done: Romans 6. 1. John 3. 9. So are they exercised
in the spirits fruits, and in them they abound: Love, Joy, Peace,
Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance, they can
now declare. Gal. 5. 22, 23. These envy not, vaunt not themselves, are not
puffed up, behave not themselves unseemly; seek not their own; are not easily
provoked; think no evil; rejoice not ininiquitie, but rejoice in the Truth;
bear all things, believe all things, hope all things, and endure all things.
And if this be lawlessenesse, such lawless persons are we become: yet are we
sure, that such are not without Law to God, but in the Law to Christ: It is the
royal and perfect Law of Liberty, which these have attained, and in it they
walk. That is their mirror, and continual glass, in which they behold
themselves, day by day. Moses glory is now no glory to them: Nor Moses face do
they any longer look after: It is the glory of Christ Jesus which they
admire, and on his most glorious face, they are bold to gaze, and thus are they
changed, from glory to glory, 2. Cor. 3. 18. have received grace, for grace.
John 1. 16. And are indeed procceded, from faith to faith: Romans 1. 17. They
have the glory of Christ, for the glory of Moses; the grace of the Truth, for
the grace of the type: And are come from faith of conditional Promises, to
faith of free Promises: They are so far from being obliged, to any Judicial
Ceremonies, or Mosaicall Rites, that they are free from the burden of the
Ceremonial as utterly abrogated, and the Curse of the Moral Law, for which
Christ has satisfied.

These then are those free men, true inhabitants of our new Jerusalem, Gal. 4.
having that white Stone, with the new name, Revel. 2. have eaten of the tree of
life, in the midst of Gods Paradise, verse. 7. Have on the wedding garment.
Mat. 22. Live by faith. Gal. 3. 11. Walk by faith. 2. Cor. 5. 7. Work by
faith, Iam. 2. 18. Are clothed with that fine white Linen. Revel. 19. These
do declare the truth of their faith, by the power of their love. Gal. 5. 6.
Perform no works of the Mosaicall Law, nor can perform them, but in the
works of faith these do abound, Romans 3. 28. So that albeit by the flesh in
form, these do no work perfectly, yet by Love in Truth they are fruitful,
and rich in good works, they have willing minds, and their works are
accepted according to the truth of their affections which God only can see: 2.
Cor. 8. 12. Abraham's example makes it manifest: who being commanded to
sacrifice a son, sacrificed a Ram; and the Ram was accepted, where a
son was exacted: Abraham offered his son Isaac but how? not by sight, that
was a Ram; but by faith, that was a Son: Heb. 11. 17. And James expressly
names this as Abraham's work, though by sight, and sense he did no such work
at all. Iam. 2. 21 This is that great Mystery of Godliness, and herein lies
the sound comfort of Christians, that are so free from the worldly Rudiments
and intolerable bondage of shadows and Ceremonies, as that for Justification
the exact fulfilling of the Moral Law is not now required at their hands: but
if they consent to the goodness thereof, are willing to do it, and rejoice
therein; though the good which they would they can never perfectly effect, nor
exactly perform, but the evil they would not is ever mixed there with, yet is
this will, this free consent, this lasting and increasing delight, cleared
through Jesus Christ, as if they had perfectly done what God requires, Romans 7.
2. Cor. 8. 12. And by this it is cleared that our Liberty is no carnal, but a
spiritual: no servile but a sonlike, no short or momentanie, but a lasting and
eternal Liberty we do defend. And as men do highly esteem small things if
they be but favors from great ones, and do value things at the rate they
cost, or rejoice in them for the goodness they have or the benefits they
bring: If Princes favors be so much esteemed, and Soldiers skarres so
charily kept, Diamonds of so great value, and Oriental Pearls, so much set
by: At what rate should this Liberty be valued? how dearly prized? how much
desired? and how valiantly defended, by all that hear of the excellency
thereof, and are entered within the limits of the same? Let Libertines then, be
as presumptuous, and lawless, as they list: and Jews as envious, as they may:
and false Christians as careless as they are, or as superstitious, as some are
known: yet we all, should prize this Liberty, at far more then our lives
worth, much more then Wife, Lands, Friends, or whatsoever else might be most
dear unto us. And in this Liberty, let us live and dye, and for it, let us
constantly stand: and not be so foolish as to begin in the Spirit, and seek
perfection by the flesh: to subject our selves, to Jewish Fables, to stretch
out our necks to receive that heavy yoke, to turn again to that Prison
wherein the Jews were shut up: to those weak and beggarly elements, and be
bond-slaues to them, to go again to the Schoolmaster, as if we had not yet
learned Christ. To leave the contemplation of the present body for the empty
shadows: like mad men, to fly from the day light, to the twilight: Knowing
now, that those shadows were for the present, viua, but never (as the body)
viuificantia; they were once quick, but not quickening: But since that, they
had a time, wherein they were moribunda, about to dye, after once John Baptist
appeared in his Ministry, Luke 16. 16. a time, in which they were mortua,
when once the veil of the Temple was rent: at the death of our Lord Jesus;
Mat. 27. And albeit, they had also a time of solemn Burial, wherein their
Funeral Obsequies were dispatched: as namely, while the Apostles tolerated
Circumcision, as appears by the circumcising of Timothy, Ast. 16. 3. and the
vindicating of Liberty, from Circumcision by refusing to have Titus
circumcised, Gal. 2. Yet now they are, long since become mortifera, deadly to
all that turn back again unto them, seeing they do question thereby the
validity of faith in Jesus; and do become debtors to the whole Law, and
Christ is made of none effect, unto them, they are fallen from grace. Gal. 5.
1, 2, 3, 4. So that by this Liberty, and only by this, have we all the
comfort we do enjoy. And whosoever dare, either oppose it, or scorn it, or at
all limit it in any fleshly manner, as by forbearing of meats, or by legal
observation of days: they are they, who at least ignorantly, do scorn Gods
love, set light by Christ's Merit, and do set themselves against the Truth of
Gods grace, for which and in which, we do with comfort stand. And yet not
withstanding, the Law Moral stands firm, not abolished, but established by
this doctrine, and of it we say, that he that observes the whole Law and
fails in one point, is guilty of all, lam. 2. 10. And except our
righteousness do exceed that of the Scribes and Pharisees, there is no
entrance for us into the Kingdom of God, Mat. 5. 20. But this exceeding
righteousness, is not ours, but Christ's; as is before showed, for that
allours, is as filthy rags, Isay 64. 5. And who can bring a clean thing out of
filthiness? Job 14. 4. And we have learned, with holy Paul, to esteem all
other righteousness, but that of faith, as dung and loss, Phil. 3. This is
the Righteousness of God by Faith unto all, and upon all that do believe,
Romans 3. and 9. we seek no promise, by the old, but by the new Covenant: not by
the Law, but by Faith only: the Law Moral, is of force, but not fulfilled by
the flesh, but by Faith only. So that by Christ we do fulfill both the
Form, and the Truth: the Letter, and Spirit: the old and new Covenant. By
Faith, we are formally righteous, according to the Laws exact rule: by Love
truly righteous, according to the Moral Truth of the same Law. So that by this
the Moral Law is confessed to be still holy, just, and good, if lawfully used,
1. Tim. 1. 8, 9. It serves still to convince all men, of sin, and to bring
them to Christ, for perfect obedience, and full satisfaction; yea, so far are
we from granting the Laws abolishing, in part, or in whole; that we still
affirm God will be ever just, and transgressors shall never escape his
terrible and powerful hand. Neither shall this Law lose its force in all sorts
of men, yea, in the godly themselves, to weaken the old man and to humble them
daily, until it may be triumphantly said, O death! where is thy sting? O
Hell! where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin, and the strength of
sin is the Law: But thanks be unto God who has given us the Victory
through our Lord Jesus Christ, 1. Cor. 15 55, 56, 57. And this is that, by
which all Enmity is slain, and Peace made: yea, all that believe, whether
Jews, or Greeks; Male or Female; bond or free; have free access by one
Spirit, to worship the Father, through the Sons mediation, and this Liberty
is part of that Glory, which the very Angels themselves desire to behold, 1.
Pet. 1. 22.

CHAP. III.
Answers to some Objections, which seem to be against this Liberty.
Having now expounded, and testified, there are some Questions to be examined,
that do concern this Liberty; that all lets being removed, the embracing
thereof, may be the more boldly persuaded, to all that shall acknowledge so
glorious a condition, and the contrary appear as it is an intolerable
bondage, too heavy for any to undergo.

Object. And first, some say: If it be so, that the Law Moral is still of
force, why then have we left off the Seventh Day Sabbath, which that Law
expressly inioynes, our Lord observed, the Apostles were taught to keep, and
did observe after Christ's death and Resurrection?

Resol. The answer is: That a Sabbath we do keep, and a Seventh Day we do
still observe unto the Lord: yet not that Sabbath, not that Seventh Day; so we
have learned to observe no days, nor months, nor times, nor years, as that
Law enjoined, Gal. 4. 10. But we have learned to esteem all days alike, in
respect of that Law, that old Letters service, Romans 14. 5. we are not now so
to serve God, Romans 7. 6. A new spiritual service we are to yield. And that a
Sabbath Day, we do still acknowledge, it is by virtue of the Commandment it
self, as far as it is Moral; which says, Remember that thou keep holy the
Sabbath Day, or remember the Sabbath Day to sanctify it, as the Lord thy God
has commanded thee. Exodus 20. 8. Deuteronomy. 5. 12. But all the strife is, what day
it must be kept? seeing the seventh from the creation was blessed to that end;
and made holy for that purpose. And what God has blessed, is blessed for ever,
what he has made holy, no man may pollute: He is not as man, that he should
repeat; he has spoken, and it cannot be reuersed. This is granted, to be
undoubtedly true: but withal the end must be considered, why that day was
instituted, upon the ground of creation, to be also observed in that manner:
And for this let us hear the doctrine of the Lord of the Sabbath, where he
says, That the Sabbath was made for man, not man for the Sabbath. Mat. 2.
Matt. 12. If then man were not made for the Sabbath, but the Sabbath for man,
God may also dispose and change it for man's good, for whom it was made as well
in the day it self, as the manner of keeping it.

Neither may it be said that the day remains any longer blessed and holy,
then man for whom it was made, and whom it serves, can receive holiness and
happiness thereby. Seeing man is not subject to it, but it is subject to man,
by virtue of Christ's Lordship, which as the Son of man he has of the
Sabbath. Mark. 2. 27, 28. And as it partly appears by some bodily labors
which Christ himself commanded some to do in case of necessity: as to take
up their beds, and go to their houses, which some held utterly unlawful, at
that time; and by that the Priests might without scandal, kill, and dress,
and offer the sacrifices on that day. Mat: 12. And Children were also
circumcised, on that very day. John 5. 8. 9. John 7. 22, 23. Now then as with
the destruction of Isreal's commonwealth, the holy temple, which served their
use was destroyed, and the holiness vanished: and Canaans blessedness is also
gone: as it stood distinguished from other lands: And all man's holiness, and
happiness natural is now vanished: the Jews prerogative, above all other
nations abolished: So also the holiness, and blessedness of that seventh day,
is vanished, and quite done away, with the death and destruction of man
himself. Indeed had man to this day, retained, and continued in his first
estate, that day had retained its first blessedness, and continued its
holiness still: but as little comfort as man has left in himself at this
day, of any holiness or bliss, by virtue of creation, so little benefit shall
man find in that days observation, on that ground, and in that manner as it
was enjoined. And in steed of blessedness, and holiness, which he may for a
while fondly expect, by observing that day: he will soon find the great
arerages of curses, which he runs daily into, by that laws transgression. So
that if God at this day, did require that days observation, in that manner no
flesh could stand with any comfort before his majesty. As for their Argument,
a principio, from the beginning. Man himself has been also from the
beginning, yea man's creation is more ancient then that days institution: yet
as that proves not man's blessedness, now, by that his creation is so ancient,
unless he seek it another way: so is that no sound reason, to prove that day
to be now observed by man: seeing we have many probabilities, that it was
never observed (...) resurrection, Mat. 13. 34. Ioh. 16. 25. And it might
parabolically denote, that they should pray, that they might not be utterly
extirpate, and rooted out, as they must be, if surprised in the Winter, when
they cannot fly far; or on the Sabbath day when they were secure, and not
willing to escape or take filght at all. For that if they be set upon, when
they were either unwilling, or unable to escape, they must then perish, and be
utterly destroyed for evermore. The sum then of that Prayer is, that God would
lay no more upon them then they were able to bear, but give them an issue with
the trial, Math. 6. 13. 1. Cor. 10. 13. As for the Apostles observing that
day, as the manner was, and according to that present custom: It was that they
might become all things to all men: that if it were possible they might win
some, 1. Cor. 9. And for this cause was Paul a Philosopher at Athens, a Jew at
Jerusalem, a Gentile at Antioch, he made use of all places, took advantage of
all assemblies, and neglected no fit times to publish the Gospel, that, if it
were possible, some might be saved. And if of conscience he kept it, why find
we not one word, in all his so large, fluent, and excellent Epistles, sauouring
that way? nor in that holy History of the Apostles acts, but many denoting
that Sabbaths abolishing, and the practice of meeting on our Sabbatisme or
Lords day. And if that day were granted, and might by some few in our Church be
observed, as it was enjoined, what an intolerable yoke, and heavy burden
were this for old folks, and young children? How many questions would it breed
about kindling fires? dressing meat, and many other such things? How should
some Nations be utterly excluded; who can never keep it so by reason of the
temper of their climate? And by this any face of a Church shall be utterly
denied these many hundred years, the judgments of our own Martyrs
questioned, and our own present reformed, and glorious Churches quite
excluded. Let one such absurdity be but granted, and a thousand follow. But it
is further affirmed by us:

That the reason or ground, the very Basis or foundation of the Sabbaths
observation, is now changed, therefore the day is also changed. The reason of
that Seventh days rest, was Gods own rest, from the work of Creation, Exodus
20 9. 10. And the Apostle to the Hebrews, urges expressly another certain day
of hearing: and pressing the absolute necessity of mutual exhortations, for
the holding fast of our confidence, Heb. 3. 6, 7, 8, 9. in the prosecuting of
that argument, to the conclusion thereof, in the tenth Chapter where he
vehemently enforces, the cleaving close to holy assemblies, upon the hazard of
wilful sinning, and utter departure from the faith, out of which there is no
recovery, and for whom no Sacrifice is left, Heb. 10. 23, 24, 25, 26. By the
way, in the fourth Chapter he speaks of the universal Day of grace, by
saying, To day, and on this day, tells us of a particular Day, of hearing
that quick and powerful Word of God: so that as on that Day of the Law, there
was a Day of hearing, that other Seventh Day, Heb. 4. 4, 5. so on the Day of
the Gospel another Day, yet a certain known Day, and one of the seven still
remains for hearing. The words are plain, that having spoken of the rest,
into which by Faith we enter, Verse 3. he confirms this rest, by a place out
of the Psalms, As I have sworn in my wrath, if they shall enter into my rest.
The day on which this rest was proclaimed, was instituted long before; for the
works from which God rested, and for which he ordained that Day of rest, were
finished from the foundations of the world. This is in the next Verse confirmed
by another Scripture proof thus: For he spoke in a certain place, of the
Seventh Day, on this wise: And God did rest the Seventh Day from all his work,
Genesis 2. 1, 2. And in this place, says he again, If they shall enter into my
rest. Whereupon the Apostle infers, Seeing therefore it remains, that some
must enter therein, and they to whom it was first preached, entered not in
because of unbelief: Again, he limiteth a certain Day, saying in DAVID, To
day, after so long time, as it is said, To day if you will hear his voice,
harden not your hearts. And by the way mentioning also Canaans rest, which yet
was not this rest, he upon all this concludes for a Sabbath days observation
thus; There remains therefore a keeping of a Sabbath to the people of God,
Heb. 4. 9. As if he should have said, in other words thus: Seeing it
remains, that a rest is still for Gods people to enter, and that the old
Sabbaths rest was not it, nor yet Canaans Land: but that at this day, the same
rest typed by both is offered to believers: there is therefore also left a
Sabbath Day to Gods people, that so this rest may be preached unto them, as it
was to the Jews in Moses, and David's times. And this will be clear, if the
propriety of those words be but duly weighed: Relinquitur itaque Sabbatismus:
There remains therefore (not (...) but (...)) a keeping of a Sabbath, (as in
the margin of our last Translation it is truly rendered) to the people of God.
Not a rest only, but a Sabbatisme also to hear of that rest, have Gods people
left them at this day. The reason follows that it cannot be meant of the
seventh before mentioned, Verse 4. 5. where mention is made of Gods peculiar
rest; but of another day noted by another kind of rest, thus; For he that is
entered, ((...)) into his rest, has ceased from his own Works, as God did
((...)) from his. So that the Apostles reason, Verse 10. stands on these
words. As God rested from the works of Creation, and instituted a Sabbath for
his own people, at that time, on the very day of his rest: so also Christ
having rested from his own works, has ordained a keeping of a Sabbath, on
the day of his rest for all Gods people. Christ Jesus who passed into the
Heavens had a day, wherein he gave over his works, as God a day whereon he
ceased from his: If this day of Christ's rest, differ from that of Gods, why
should we not keep a different Sabbath? Christ's peculiar Day of rest from his
own proper works, notes a peculiar Sabbath Day: The days differing, the
Sabbath may not be the same: so that two several Sabbath Days have been
instituted by GOD and Christ: one now abolished with the old Covenant, the
old Letter, the old Man: the other established by the new Covenant, for the
new service to the new Man: so that old things are passed away, and all things
are become new, 2. Cor. 5. Two several Sabbath days, days of meeting,
certain known days, offering to the Jews then: and to us now, one and the
same rest, the rest of Faith, the true and undoubted entrance into that
everlasting rest, which we shall enjoy in Gods presence for euer-more. So that
to shut up all of this place, I do frame this argument. The first Sabbath is
ended, and a new Sabbath ordained by Christ: But no new Sabbath can be
understood to be ordained by Christ besides his glorious Resurrection Day:
Therefore the old Sabbath is now ended, and the Lords Resurrection Day
succeeded in place thereof. And the very Day of Christ's rest was that
Resurrection Day; then he entered into his Glory, Luke 24. 7. 26. that was the
day of his exaltation: Ephesians. 1. 20. Then became he the head stone of the
corner, Psalm. 118. 22. The head of the Church, Ephesians 1. 22. and 5. 23. Gave
gifts to men, Ephesians. 4. 8. as on a chief Festival Day, Nehem. 8. 12. Esth. 9.
22. proved his Resurrection, Luke 24. 39. preached his ascension, John 20. 17.
Gave the Holy Ghost, John 20. 22* and authority to the Apostles, to bind and
to loose, to remit and retain sins: Verse 23. Opened their understandings,
to understand the holy Scriptures, Luke 24. 45. Powered out more abundantly the
gifts of the Holy Ghost, Act. 2. 1, 2* 3, 4. Gave Peter power to convert so
many thousands, Verse 37. 41. All were on that Day baptized, Verse 41. The
Church established and manifestly distinguished, Ver. 44. The Disciples met on
this day at breaking of Bread, Act. 20. 7. This Days Festiuitie was instituted
in the Churches of Corinth and Galatia, as appears by the Alms appropriate
thereto, 1. Cor. 16. 1, 2. The Revelation opened to John in Patmos, Revel. 1.
10. It was known to the seven Churches of Asia by its own name, as a peculiar
Day. Thus to the Law all days are now alike: yet to the Lord a Day, yea, a
Sabbath Day, one of the seven is to be observed: alike to the Law, for that to
the Law we are all dead, and a dead man keeps all days alike: yet we who are
raised again from the dead, Ephesians. 5. 14. we that live no more the life of
the flesh, but by the power of the Spirit, not according to the flesh, but to
the Spirit; do set apart weekly one day of seven for the Lords Service: which
very day, as is proved, Paul writing to the Hebrews, (according to his wont,
endeavoring to speak to their understanding) calls a Sabbatisme, Heb. 4. 9.
And to the Gentiles, a day to the Lord, Romans 14. 5, 6. And John, expressly the
Lords Day, Revel. 1. 10. This is then the Day which the Lord has made: and if
any be contentious for that other day with the Jews, or deny any Sabbath Day,
and so would leave it as a bare Ordinance of man, with the Libertines; or have
both days observed with the Ebionites: we answer them all, We have no such
custom, nor the Churches of God, 1. Cor. 11. 16.

Object. As for that Law of difference of things for food, Leuit. 11. Deuteronomy. 14.
if any say such a Law has been ever, and precisely observed by Isreal's
Commonwealth, while that Jewish Polity stood, and that all sorts of
transgressors are terribly threatened, and for it the Israelites were (chiefly)
rejected.

Ans. The answer is: It is true that a difference was put even in Paradise;
between things for food: and after man's expulsion therefrom, a difference held
between things for Sacrifice: and say for food: yet was that difference taken
away, when Noah had free liberty to eat of every moving, living thing; as of
the green herb before he had eaten, Genesis 9. 3. And albeit, after that again,
another limitation was made to one peculiar people, when God began to
distinguish between the Nations, and chose to himself one peculiar Nation, to
be his own people, Leuit. 20. 24, 25. yet was that difference of wholesome
Creatures no longer continued, then all Mankind remained severed by that
partition wall, Ephesians. 2. 14. Acts 10. 28. But when once the fullness of time
was come, and by the blood of Jesus all things were reconciled, to God, Col. 1.
20. which were before in bondage, and severed for man's transgression, Romans 8
20. 21. then God also declared to Peter by a Vision, that such observations put
no longer difference between men and men. But as he himself had mixed all
sorts of Creatures in one Sheet, and none of them might any more be termed
unclean: seeing out of Heaven they came, and into Heaven were again received,
so Peter by that learned, to esteem no man from thenceforth unclean, for any
want of legal clensing, or by reason of the practice of that Laws
transgression, Act. 10. 11, 16, 28. And has now taken out this Lesson, That it
is Faith in Christ Jesus, that is, required of every man, for his acceptance
with God, Heb. 11. 6. For so Peter after confesses, in the face of a Council,
that God put no difference between himself and the Gentiles, after their
hearts were purified by faith, Act. 15. 9. And by this it may appear, that
this Law ceased, and had its period, by that Cornelius a Gentile, and not
observing the Law, but only exercised in those powerful Duties of Fasting,
Prayer, and Almsdeeds; was by Faith accepted, as well as Peter, who till that
time not only believed as now Cornelius did, but also was able with boldness
to protest before God, that no common or unclean thing had ever entered into
his mouth: so the Churches of Judea, were all zealous of the Law, Act. 21. The
Churches of the Gentiles, observed no such things, Gal. 2. And these accepted,
and as famous Churches as any of those: and Paul speaking expressly of days,
and meats legal, concludes thus, I know and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus,
that there is nothing common or unclean of it self, Romans 14. 14. That is, if
men's hearts be purified by Faith, Titus 1. 15, 16. Then all things are pure to
them. That is, all such things as that Law made unclean for food: Those things
which some through weakness (giving heed to Jewish Fables) esteemed unclean.
As for that threat to the Gentiles, which seems so terrible, to such as
understand it not aright, it is nothing else but a powerful application of the
Prophets speech, to the present hypocritical Jews, who stood so much on their
Prerogatives and Privileges, and their segregation from other Nations, and yet
by their secret abominable practices, did break down that partition wall with
which for the present, they were severed from others, by doing the same things,
or as vile, which they so much abhorred in the Gentiles practice. To them the
Prophet says in effect, that when the Gentiles Church shall be come in, and
all promises accomplished, even to that nation, and people of the Jews, that
then shall follow a day of vengeance: wherein God shall come with fire, and
sword, in terrible indignation, against all that have abused his long suffering
and patience, whether Jews or Gentiles; and at that day those present
hypocrites to whom he then spoke, shall share in torments with the whole world
of damned men, Isa. 66. 12, 13, 16, 17. Neither is it any prophecy at all of
any caters of Swines flesh, at this day, but at that time; for so speaks the
Text in the present tense Sanctifican^^s, or Qui sanctificant, They that do
sanctify themselves: and not in the future tense, they that shall.

And if any say, we are commanded to touch no unclean thing at this day: Let
the occasion of that precept be but duly considered, and it is clear that
there is only meant the pollutions of Idols, and the uncleanness of
unbelief, 2. Cor. 6. 17. Tit. 1. 15, 16. And whereas some may urge the words
following, where the filthiness of flesh and spirit is mentioned, 2. Cor. 7.
1. Let them withal consider the reason of such cleansing: Namely, the
spiritual perfecting of holiness in the fear of the Lord; and by that this
will appear to be no legal uncleanness, especially of things for food: for
then a legal cleansing should be enjoined, but such as read that chapter
thorowout, shall find it to be the filthiness of the whole old man; from which
we are to be purged by true repentance, as appears plainly in the same
place: for as our perfection is wrought by degrees, and not all at once, so are
we purged and cleansed by degrees, and not all at once, as the flesh may be by
any legal cleansing: so that such as have learned to put a difference between
the old, and new man, they also know the diversity of feeding them: the
outward man, by the mouth, Math. 15. the inward man, by the ear, Isai, 55. 2,
3, 4. And such do as well know, that whatsoever goes in at the mouth for
food, defiles not the man, Mar. 7. For that it comes forth from the heart,
which defiles a man. And lest any should say, that the heart lusting after
unlawful things, the man is defiled, though they be never eaten, or touched:
Let it be granted, and as long as the Law was of force, it must needs be so;
but now all things sold, or used for food, are become lawful, as the Apostle
witnesses, where having spoken expressly of eating, and of things offered to
Idols, he also immediately concludes, that all things, and so even those
things were lawful for him, and advises the Corinthians, and us in them* not
to make scruple to buy, whatsoever was sold in the Shambles, and to eat
whatsoever thing was set before them, at an unbelievers Table; without asking
any question for conscience sake, 1. Cor. 10. So that all things being now
lawful, the heart cannot lust after an unlawful meat: And the heart must be
established with grace, and not with meats, Heb. 13. And let it be granted,
that for this principally the Jews were cast off, and scattered amongst other
people, was it not just with God to cast them off who brake down the wall of
partition, by which God had severed them for that present time, if they would
pull up the hedge themselves, with which they were environed, and were plagued
for it? what is that to us, that were never, nor are not now paled in at all in
that manner? Leuit. 20. 24, 25. nor limited by any such fleshly bounds?

Let us not then admit any such impossible burden, which though we of this
Nation might be able to bear, yet far be it, that such neighbour-Countries
should be excluded, who abound not in such plenty as we do, nor can possibly
observe it, at any time. And by this Doctrine, we shall call in question all
Churches these many hundred years, all Histories will prove maimed, and many
false, yea the Apostle Paul, cannot escape our censure, nor his Epistles be
esteemed sound: The History of the Apostles acts, altogether defective, seeing
it mentions so many famous Churches, and not a word of any stir or tumult for
such a legal reformation, nor any mention of such Jewish cleansing. And it is
no wonder, that the Arch-enemie of our souls has laid about him to have this
Doctrine broached, 1. Tim. 4. 3. and had somewhat prevailed; seeing it is the
only ready way to set Gods people at odds and continual iarres, to comber
them with daily and needless scruples wherein he delights. But we have
learned better things, blessed be our great and good God: and we are able to
conclude, that, If that Law of unclean meats be still of force: then some
man, or some thing were now to be held unclean by that Law: But no man, Act.
10. 28: nor any thing, Romans 14. 14. is now to be held unclean by that Law.
Therefore that Law of unclean meats is not now of force: And we say further,
that Such as are buried and risen with Christ, are no longer subject to the
handwriting of ordinances, Col. 2. 14. But all believers are buried and risen
again with Christ. Therefore not subject to the handwriting of ordinances, of
which, difference of meats and days is a part, Col. 2. 16. Or, such as are free
from the handwriting of ordinances, may not be censured for eating things
forbidden by that Law, Col. 2. 14, 15, 16. But all that truly believe, are
free from that handwriting. Therefore they are not to be censured for eating
things forbidden by Moses law. And as for choice, we know that if of necessity
we must at first trust tradition, be guided by our parents and elders, to know
what books to make choice of, who be our own parents and Princes? and which
is the best translation, and that it is nearest to the original languages?
whether we be baptized or no? Then may we be also directed by them in the
choice of our food, till we our selves are able to discern what is most
agreeable, yields best nourishment, and is most expedient for our own bodies.
Our Lord Christ has so said even of evil parents, that they know to give
their children good things, Matthew. 7. Luke 11. And holy Paul has taught us to
receive meat of unbelievers; and we know, that nothing which men usually eat,
is to be refused for conscience sake. So that Infidels be not hardened, nor
such as are truly weak and not obstinate, offended thereby. If then our
hearts be clean, all is clean: If that be impure, there is nothing clean,
nor will any legal purity be ought available. Let us all then, be sure to
cleanse the inside first, let that be truly purified, and then are we safe,
and shall so remain. If our hearts accuse us not, we shall have increased
boldness before God: and if he be for us, who can hurt us? But if our hearts
accuse us, God is greater then our hearts, and knows all things: and Blessed
is the man that condemns not himself in that which he allows, Romans 14. 22.

The Doctrine now being clear: if any have stumbled by my word or example, let
me persuade them especially to embrace the same, and not any longer to be
yoaked with that heavy yoke. And let me entreat them, for their own souls
sake, that though erred they have with me and others, yet heretics they shun
to be. Seeing an heretic is in a desperate condition, if truly an heretic,
in the most strickt sense: for that such an one is he, who having chosen an
opinion to himself, and is so clearly convicted by the holy Scriptures, that
he is damned of his own conscience, yet through pride of heart, chooses rather
to be rejected, and to forsake the fellowship of the Church, then to forsake
that Error which he has defended, Tit. 3. 9, 10.

If then thy state be not yet so desperate but that thou can plead ignorance
before God of any such due conviction; beware now of self-love and desire of
singularity, lean not over much to thine own judgment, show thy true
humility, by esteeming others better then thy self: Withstand not Gods grace,
oppose him not any longer: be not like the deaf Adder, which stops her
ears, and will not be charmed: Despise not thy mother the holy Church, in
which thou have received all the good thou have, if any at all. Consider, how
she gave thee entertainment, at first by Baptism: has since that called thee
by the voice of her Teachers, and powerful ministers of the Word, and
Sacraments; does daily stretch out her hand to afford the bread of life, and
water of life; offers thee the holy Scriptures, with their true interpretation,
and does now wait for thy return to her unity, with many a grievous groan,
and salt tear: being ready every moment to receive thee in the lap of her
mercy, and to dandle thee on the knees of her love: Be not then the Author of
thine own woe: plunge thee not wilfully into needless misery. Blame not thy
Mistress for giving thee some correction for thy pride: Hear the Angel
speaking to thee in Hagars person, Whence came thou? And whither will thou
go? Return to thy Mistress, and humble thy self under her hands, Genesis 16.
8, 9. How long, I say, will thou love simplicity, take thy pleasure in
scorning, and hate sound knowledge? And unless thou can prove, that thy
calling is extraordinary, and that by the ceasing of all ordinary sending and
calling; and can clear it, either to be of God himself, or of some
extraordinary person; or by extraordinary motion of Gods holy Spirit, as
Moses, Aaron, and Phineas: and can confirm it, by that thou teaches no
other doctrine, then what has been taught by former holy men: by that thy
life is beyond all other men's, in the glory of an humble, meek, bold,
patient, quiet, and discreet conversation: by the furniture of admirable
gifts, beyond all of that time without any exception; and by the manifest
attendance of Gods immediate power, in thy protection and aid; as Jeremy,
John Baptist, Paul; and all extraordinary men. If not, I do testify unto
thee, that thou shall rue thy obstinacy, and bewail thy stubbornness, here,
to Gods glory, in thy blessed change; or else be ruined by thy folly, and
howl for evermore, without any remedy. Then shall thou say, in the anguish of
thy soul, and bitterness of thy Spirit, How have I hated instruction, and my
heart despised reproof, and have not obeyed the voice of my teachers, nor
inclined mine ear to them that instructed me! Suspect thy self then in time,
while it is yet called to day, and fear thine estate, in respect of thy being
alone. Thou know the Proverb, Woe to him that is alone when he falls, for
he has not another to help him up. First, thou separatest, and then thou
sallest, and who shall thenceforth lend thee his hand? Consider that the holy
Scriptures, are not left to every private man's interpretation, 2. Pet. 1. But
when the same holy Spirit interprets them, by whose holy motion they were first
spoken, and penned; men endued with the same holy Spirit, shall not oppose that
interpretation. Do thou think, that thou only, and such as thou art, have
the Spirit of God? I hope thou art not so absurd; and if others have the same
Spirit of God, why do they not assent at all unto you? And let me mind thee
of that Evangelical proclamation of the Church her peace, through the true
knowledge of God: so that the Wolf, the Lamb, the Leopard, the Kid, the
Calfe, the young Lion and the fatling shall dwell and lie down together, and a
little child shall lead them, Isa. 11. And the Church Officers shall be Peace,
and her exactors Righteousness, Isa. 60. yea, and Peace shall be extended to
her like a River, Isa. 66. The perfect work of Righteousness shall be Peace,
Isa. 32. and Righteousness and Peace are inseparable companions.

And let me wish Mercy and Peace to all the Israel of God: and advise you all
to live in peace, and if it be possible as much as in you lies, live peaceably
with all men, Romans 12. that the God of love and peace may be with us and abide
with us for evermore. And let me say to all that live yet in the bosom of Gods
Church: We are Brethren, why should there be any strife amongst us? What is the
reason we are so divided in affection? why do we bite and devour one another?
why are there any inclinations to Sects and Schisms, Divisions and Tumults,
and so great Wrath? Is not Ignorance the cause of all? Whence is Contention but
from Pride? and where rests Pride but in the bosom of Fools? As then we
desire to approve our selves wise and well instructed in the ways of peace,
Let us submit one to another in the fear of God, according to that decent
order and comeliness in which we are set. Let us in giving honor prefer
one another; let us first make sure at home, cast the beams out of our own
eyes, prove our selves to be in the Faith. This being done, we shall soon take
notice where it is effected, and so come to the true knowledge, and due
acknowledgement of the Church whose work we are. No member would then exalt it
self against the body, but rather show it self to be of God, who is not the
author of confusion but peace.

And for my part I have resolved, for time to come, to leave Kingdoms to the
guidance of Kings themselves, and Churches to the government of Chief
Churchmen: And I know that in indifferent things, there is such a thing, as
Mos populi Dei, to be regarded. The Church her custom was of some credit in
Paul's time, 1. Cor. 11. 16. And I acknowledge that in doubtful things,
controuerted in the Church; totum est part maius: Universality may bear it,
when only bare Consequences are urged, that may be paralleld with like
Consequences by the greater part. And I say, that Turpis pars omnis toti non
congrua: That part is deformed which agrees not with the whole: and in all
things not to be decided by evident Scriptures.

I do also say (with those Fathers of the first Nicene Council, (...), Mos
antiquus obtineat) Let old Customs carry it. And if any say I do hereby
vilify my self: I answer, I will be yet more vile, if humble submission to my
holy Mothers Authority, be to be esteemed baseness. And I do heartily desire
all that bear good will to Sion, to pray fervently for me: that as I am now
happily returned to the unity of Gods Church: so I may continue steadfastly, in
the valiant, and constant defense of the peace thereof, that so my last fruits
may be more then the first, and my last works better then the first; that if
ever I suffer again, (as I am most ready) it may be for the Church, and not
in the least show against it; and for no trifles, but for the Truth and power
of Godliness. And that as I have been stout for Moses, and Christ together:
so I may be as resolute for Christ alone. That I may never separate what God
has joined, nor join what he has severed. And the same do I wish to all my
Countrymen, that all quarrels may be ended, for such outward things, as are
not of the essence of true Religion; and that all our strife may be to
outstrip one another, in the power of sound Love: that being already fellows
of one Family, sons of one Father, children of one Mother, lively stones of
one buildings, branches of one Vine, Sheep of one Fold, members of one body,
yea, one body and one spirit; so we may discover the truth of this by
remaining of one mind, and the same judgment: and the rather because we live
in the last times wherein the day hasteneth, and is even at hand, wherein we
shall be all tried: whether we be Gold or Dross? Wheat or Chafe? precious
Stones or Stubble? Now never did God rise earlier to send his Servants unto us,
then he does at this day: Let us all strive to make a right use of this
precious time, while it is yet called to day.

Let all cleanse themselves from all manner of troublesome and contentious
thoughts, that we may declare our selves to be at true peace with God, with
all his people, and to keep a true Sabbath within us. That the God of peace
may dwell in our Tabernacles, and the Graces of his Spirit not be quenched in
us: which God grant unto us all, even for Jesus CHRIST'S sake: To whom with the
blessed Spirit, be ascribed all Glory, Honor, Dominion, Power, Majesty, and
hearty Thansgiuing, now and for evermore. Amen.

Non est grave cadere luctantem, sed iacere deiectum: Non est perniciosum in
praelio vulnerari: sed post vulnus acceptum desperatione curandi medelam
vulneri denegare. Saepe etiam athletas videmus post frequentes lapsus and
deiectiones plurimas coronatos; militem scimus post multas fugas virum fortem
fuisse, and vicisse victores.


Gloriae cedant cuncta diuinae.
FINIS.

