AN ANSWER TO A SVPPLICAtorie Epistle, of G. T. for the pretended Catholics:
written to the right Honorable Lords of her Majesty's privy Council.

By WATER TRAVERS, Minister of the word of God.

Romans 13.4. If thou do evil, fear: for he bears not the sword for naught:
for he is the Minister of God to take vengeance on him that does evil.

Apoc. 19.20.21. But the Beast was taken, and with him the false Prophet that
wrought miracles before him. Whereby he deceived them that received the Beasts
mark, and them that worshipped his image. These were alive cast into a lake of
fire, burning with brimstone.

And the remnant were slain with the sword of him that sits upon the
horse, which comes out of his mouth, and all the fowls were filled full with
their flesh.

AT LONDON; Printed for Tobie Smith, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the
sign of the Crane.

An Answer to a Popish Treatise, touching the persecution of Catholics in
England, written to the R. H. LL. of her Majesty's privy Council, The Preface
to the R. H. LL. of the Counsel.
Whereas (Right Honorable) the reformation of those which refuse to serve God
with us in such holy exercises of religion as for this purpose are established
amongst us, has been carefully sought by some punishment of their obstinacy
according to the good laws provided in this behalf: there are which complain
of this moderate severity, and both unfitly and vnduetifully term it by the
hateful and odious name of persecution. Of which sort one has written a whole
treatise of this matter by way of an Epistle to his friend which he intitleth
of the persecution of Catholics in England. In which discourse the Author is
not afraid to offer most shameful wrong to many faithful officers of her
Majesty's justice, charging them with rigorous and cruel dealing who have
soberly and temperatly carried themselves, in the execution of such laws upon
them, as their ill merit had worthily made them subject unto. By which bold
slanders, he gives himself occasion, so to complain and cry out of the
persecution of Catholics in England: as if God had not set over us and them,
a gracious Lady, of famous renoume for mildenes and clemency, who seeks
only by a reasonable correction to win them to obedience: first to almighty
God, and then to her lawful authority: but rather some cruel Nero or
persecuting Diocletian that desired nothing but their destruction and their
blood. Which notwithstanding it can not be unknown to any that live in this
state to be a complaint most unjust, and untrue: yet has there stepped up an
other (as he would seem to be) an abetter and a voucher of that most
slanderous libel: yea a translator a printer and a publisher of it unto
others: who herein has worse provided for the credit of their untruth then his
author had done before him. For he first had cunningly put his large speech
into the bosom of his fellow, as ready, as it seems to be abused as he was
willing to deceive him, having ye credulity of his friend and the secrecy of
his writing to conceal some part of his offense. But this translator by
printing and publishing of it, and namely in our English tongue has laid them
both open to the just reproof and condemnation of all the land: For what
English man will not now condemn them both for false witnesses against the
church of God and their own country, when they shall read or hear them in so
many things to be so fowly defamed contrary to the knowledge of all the land:
but especially I marvel with what face he could once offer to present it, to
ye reverend senate of your most honorable chamber. For howsoever he might
flatter himself to be able to make some of the people affected to his cause,
and dwelling far from these parts, to believe some piece of his slanders: yet
could he never be in any hope, so to abuse your H. who of your own knoledge
and understanding are able to convict him of so many untruths. Which
notwithstanding this Author fearing no rebuke nor shame for it (as speking out
of a vaut or from under a mask by concealing of his name) has imboldned him
self to offer it even unto your Honors, with an other discourse of his own,
which he entituleth an Epistle to the Council. The substance of which his
treatise is, that the cause of our pretended Catholics is such, as it
deserves not the extremities which (upon the credit by like of his Author) he
complains to be used against the^, but rather is worthy to be well entreated,
if for the time it may not have all the honor he esteems to belong unto it.
Of which two epistles, the one being written in latin to a friend, concerning
this pretended persecution of Catholics in England, has been already
sufficiently answered by that reverend Father Master Doctor Humfrey in his
late book of Iesuitisme, or of the practices of the church of Room. The other
remaining yet unanswered, I was moved by some of my Friends to the cause to
take pains to make answer to it. Which at the first I confess I was loath to
take upon me, notwithstanding I saw the great advantage I should have of mine
adversary in the maintenance of a most holy and honorable quarrel. For
considering so many excellent wits, and so well able to deal in these
causes, to sit quyetly at their books, or peaceably to edify the Church by
preaching of the gospel, whether it be that they fear the diverse events of
writing, by reason of the exquisite judgments of the learned, and the bitter
malice of the enemy: or that they esteem it unprofitable for the Church to
leave or slack their other worthy labors, to strive with a contentious
adversary that will never be satisfied: me thought their example was a good
president for him to follow, that comes so far behind so many of them in all sufficiency for this purpose. But especially I was willing to have wtdrawen
my self, for the reverence I most worthily have of the grave sentences of your
H. which I saw I could not escape, dealing in a matter wherewith your H. table
is seized already. For knowing mine own weakness, I justly feared to begin
my simple practice of this kind of pleadinge in so high and honorable a
Court, and before such Judges, whose wisdoms can so easily discover any want
of those which come before them. But when on the other side I set before me the
price of the cause which we strive for, the quality of my vocation and
calling, the most unworthy slanders wherewt the enemy charge ye sacred truth
of God, and the lawful authority of this land: I could not see yt any of ye
former reasons ought so far to prevail with me as to withdraw me from a
service so holy, so duetifull, and so necessary as I judged this to be. For,
as for the examples of such as like not to deal in these public causes, I
saw there were also many contrary presidents, and that of many worthy men,
who in like times had stood in the gap and in the breach against the enemy.
Moreover, Neh. 4.16.17
I considered this our time to be like that, whereof we read in the book of
Neemie, wherein because of the often and hot charges of these Samaritanes,
envying the raising up again of the new Jerusalem, out of the ruins wherein
they had joy to see it, we are constrained so to build it as we may stand also
ready armed to make head against the enemy, and to beat him back when he shall
assail us. Which because the learned will see to be no matter of game and
striving for the golden pen, but a necessary service of God and his church, I
hope they will be satisfied better with that which may be sure for defense
then fair for show. But chieflye this is my hope of all your H. both for the
grave wisdom God has endued you with, and for the accustomed favor you are
wont to show to all such as to their power do endeavor faithfully to serve
the Lord. As for the enemy, I know in deed his malice is bitter, and his pen
foul and shameful. For so both others of them, and especially the defendant of
the late censure has notoriously testified in his wicked slanders of as
worthy men as the sun has seen any in this age of their profession. But
seeing it lies not in us to make them modest and that we are called in good and
il report: yea in life and death to serve God and his church: I willingly
commit any injury that may be done me by them for his cause, to him to whom
the punishment thereof appertains, Jude Epist.
and who (as Enoch prophesied long ago) comes with thousands of his Saints
to do justice upon them all, and to reprove those which are wicked amongst
them, of all the deeds which they have wickedly committed, and all the hard
speeches which wicked sinners have spoken against him. Wherefore being
satisfied for these doubts, and knowing no other sufficient cause to the
contrary, I have thought this defense to be my most bounden duty to almighty
God, to her most excellent M. to your H. and to this whole state and church.
Therefore I have resolved by your LL. good favor (seeing no man else so long
time had undertaken to deal with this Plaintiff) to maintain against him to
my small power, the glory of God in the just defense of his truth, and the
honor of ye authority I have named, in their most lawful proceedings against
such as untruly are called Catholics. Thus having before your H. most humbly
rendered some reason of this my doing, I come now to join with mine adversary.

The effect of this Authors purpose, is (as he himself declares in the
beginning of his book, The answer.
and has been touched before) in presenting your LL. with the Epistle
entitled of the persecution in England: and with this treatise of his own, is
to complain of intolerable extremities used against the pretended
Catholics, for their only conscience sake as he affirms: and also to become
suter to your Honors in behalf of their cause, that if for the time it may not
be received as he thinks it worthy: yet at the least it may not be so hardly
entreated, as he would make the world believe it has been hitherto. Which
their cause being not of the things of this life wherein reason and discourse
may try and discern, but of religion: he ought to have taken his reasons to
persuade the religion he would maintain to be good, out of the holy and
sacred books of the canonical scriptures. 2. Tim. 3.17.
For of these we read that they are able to make us wise unto salvation through
the faith that is in Christ Jesus: and as the Apostle adds in the same place
they are given by inspiration from God to furnish us, and to make us fully
able, to instruct in that which is truth, and to convict whatsoever agrees not
with it. Therefore as in question of metal the touch stone is called, for to
show the good, and to discover the badde: so should he have touched with this
true and only touch, both our metal and his, that that which is base or fine
in either religion, might have been discerned. In doubtful controversies in the
law, they were commanded to repair unto the hie priest, into whose breast the
Lord had put Vrim and Thummim, Exodus 28.30.
whereby he was able to give answer in all causes. Christ is our hie Priest,
and the holy scriptures as being that wisdom of God to be revealed to us, the
Vrim and Thummim whereby we are answered as by Oracle from God in all our
controversies. Therefore in this most weighty cause, counsel ought to have
been sought for there, where the breast of Christ is open unto us, and where a
perfecter light then that of Vrim and Thummim shines to our most safe
direction. Esaias. 8.9.10.
But this Author that we may know by the testimony of the Prophet Esaias, that
there is no spark of true light in him, leaves the law and the testimony,
and seeks to humane reason, as to a cunning enchantres: and as Saul to seek
answer, he goes from the living unto the dead: Heb. 4.12. Ephe. 2.1.
for the word of God is living, and the sons of men are borne dead in their
sins. But let us see his reasons such as they are, and howsoever he would fly
ye saymasters furnace and the subtle weight, yet because we know there is no
other certain way to try what goodness it may be of that he brings, we must
make a say of it by the fire of the Lords altar, and weigh every thing by the
weightes of his sanctuary.

The reasons he brings are principally two, Reasons used to persuade favor
toward the Roman catholics
whereof the one is of the punishment laid upon them, and the other of the
cause wherein they stand. He touches briefly two other reasons which are of
less moment and rather of compleme^t and circumstance, the^ of any great
weighte or substance in this question, which are of the person and of the end.
For if it fall out (as by Gods grace I undertake to show) that the punishment
and the cause is such as that these falsely named Catholics are dealt with in
justice, and that mitigated with great moderation and clemency: then do these
with all receive their answer. Yet something I will answer perticularly to
these reasons, and first to that which is taken of the persons of those who are
punished. In this he alleges that they are of our own blood and Nation,
The first reason answered.
and borne subjects of the land. Wherein what does he plead for them that
may not be with as good reason brought for all malefactors which the law does
punish. And to whom else does the law extend but to the borne subjects of
this land, and such as are naturalized and enfranchised amongst us. Therefore
if this proof were good why they ought not to be dealt with according to law,
the^ may all the prysons be discharged, and every malefactor has by his birth a
sealed pardon for all crimes that he may commit. But he adds they are not
only Subjects but also duetifull and honest. This depends upon the trial of
their cause, which the law according to all righteous justice having condemned
as worthy such punishment as it lays upon them: His private and unjust
clearinge of them for good and obedient, yea (ready to die at her Majesty's
feet, and for your H.) can not be sufficient. Which testimony, would to God
it might be truly given to them all. Then surely there would be more hope to
reclaim them to obedience unto God, and to her Highness. But notwithstanding
it be true, that there are a number of those which are mis led in their
ignorance to the lyking of superstition, otherwise duetifull, at the least in
outward show hitherto: yet the unsound and traiterous hearts of a number also,
have been discovered in the rebellions in the North and in Ireland: yea further
also by manifold practices both against the whole state, and the Royal person
of her M. and of sundry of your H. Whereof certain proof has been made both
heretofore and of late, as well in the K. Bench, by the just conviction and
condemnation of the traitors there arraigned, al pretended Catholics,
Jesuits and Priests: as also at Chensforde in Essex by like sentence against
ye priest. Who should have been (as Judas was to the Roman bands) a Captain
and a leader to a Company of Romans altogether both in superstitious Faith and
Infidel like disloyalty, to so horrible an act as any true Subjects heart
cannot but abhor even to remember. Whereunto adding the doubtful answers and
obstinate silence that commonly are made and used by such as have had this
interrogatory ministered unto them: Whether in case of the Popes commandment,
and the threatening of his excommunication to the contrary, they would take
arms with him, or any sent by him against her M. or with her H. against the
Pope: we may worthily fear what affection of loyal duty and obedience may be
in many of the rest which have not yet been demanded that question. And in
deeede it can not be that such of them as have the Roman faith not in ignorance
but in some knowledge of the treasonnable grounds it rests upon, without
denial of the Pope to be Gods vicar, and of all their holies, should be
faithful Subjects to her H. and this state, abiding as it does by the grace of
God, in the true profession of the Gospel. Therefore it is not enough to say, it
is only their conscience in religion they stand in, to prove them good and
loyal subjects. For though every profession of religion do not overthrow the
state they are under, maintayning another Religion, yet there are also some
professions which can in no sort be permitted by authority, without the
certain overthrow and ruin of the state where it is allowed. The profession
of the gospel may be tolerated by any prince or state in the world without
any danger to them. For our doctrine holds nothing that may impugn their
lawful right and authority, but contrariwise teaches all due honor and
obedience to be given to them, and that for conscience sake. Wherefore both they
may suffer the excercyse of it without danger, yea to the great establishing
of their states and thrones in assurance, and consequently also such professors
may be faithful and loyal subjects, yea even to heathen princes: as the
Apostles and the fathers of the Primitive Church were. But an Anabaptist that
holds there ought to be no magistrate, though he allege a thousand times he
stands but for his conscience and religion: yet because his conscience and
religion is such, as the principles and grounds of it are contrary to all
States and authority, the magistrate cannot endure such a conscience and
religion without the certain danger of having the mace and scepter wroong out
of his hands. Much like to this is the cause of our pretended catholics. For
notwitstanding they allow of Magistrates and of authority in general, yet I
say they hold a faith and doctrine the maximaes and rules whereof are as
opposite to the present state of this land in particular, as are the
principles of the Anabaptists against all estate and dignity. The proof
whereof is manifest in these two points. The first is that the state now
established within this realm, professes by the gracious goodness of almighty
God the service of him according to the truth of the gospel, and agreeably
hereunto, that the lawful heirs of the crown of this noble land are
sovereign in their estate and dignity, to see all causes and persons within
their kingdom and dominion both ecclesiastical and civil ordered and governed
according to the commandementes of God without subjection to any foreign power
of prince or priest whatsoever. The second is that every one of the pretended
catholic and Roman faith upon pain of damnation is to believe the B. of
Room (who is a forreyne prince and Prelate to us) to have supreme authority
over all the church of Christ as his general vicar upon earth, and
consequently to believe, that the K. and Q. of this noble land are to be
subject unto him, to receive that religion which he will deliver them, to obey
his censures and yt so far as that in case of his excommunicating and depriving
of them, they are to leave their crown to an other. Yea further, that (as
absolved from their oath and allegiance) at his commandment the natural and
sworn subjects ought to put such his sentence of deprivation in execution
against their liege and natural prince. Which two points being so contrary
the one to the other, how is it possible that any of these Roman Catholics
knowing and believing particularlye this point of their doctrine, can be a true
and a faithful Subject to our Sovereign Lady ELIZABETH, against whom such
most unlawful and wicked sentence has been already by two of their Popes
pronounced and sought by all means to be put in execution. Which things well
considered, I doubt not but your LL. see it to be great wisdom not to prove
their fidelity in a kingdom, and so rare a jewel as her majesty's person is,
for all their flattering speches of being ready to spend their life and their
goods in her quarrel: but rather to keep a vigilant and ielous eye open over
them night and day, that they may not be able (how willing soever they would
be) to do any thing to the annoyance of her royal person, and of this noble
state and kingdom. Wherefore as touching their persons though they be the
natural subjects of this state, yet if they offend the godly laws thereof
in refusing to serve God with us, and so much more if they shall also declare
themselves unnatural and Roman both in allegiance and religion, there is no
cause by the word of God why in respect thereof they should not be dealt with
by the lawful Magistrate ordained of God for the punishment of all offenders,
according to the law provided in this behalf. And thus much for the persons.

Now for the end. He denies your LL. shall ever attain to that you pretend,
2 Reasons answered.
by this punishment, (that is to bring such Catholics to conformity in
matters of religion) but rather be further off. The reason whereof he adds,
that such constrainte to do against their conscience and judgment (whereby he
says they must be tried at the latter day) is the loss of their souls, the
memory of which injury can not but breed a deep grief and detestation of
the thing they may have been so forced unto. But his reason shall be after
considered. First let us weigh, that he determines no good will to be done
upon them by any punishment. Experience in deed has declared it to be too
true in some, yet no man can justly say therefore, that there is no use of
punishment. For both many others hereby are kept in duty, that they do not in
like sort fall away, and who can tell what it may please God to work even in
them hereafter by this means, which have not yet profited by it. Sure I am it
has done good to many in times past, who by this means have been recovered
from their vnduetiful disobedience, unto a godly reformation. And the
authority amongst us, doing like duty upon the same commandment of God, to
punish the obstinat Heritike and Idolater: what reason is there, why we should
not hope of like effect and fruit of it now, that has come of it at other
times. To let former times pass under the K. of Judah and Israel, Austen
acknowledges often and plainly, that the Discipline of the Magistrate, had
been profitable to many of ye Donatistes. And if says he, it have not profited
some, Ep. 48.
is the medicine to be neglected, because the pestilent contagion of certain
is incurable? So likewise some amongst us, through the goodness of God, have
received profit by this means. But if other some for the obstinat hardness of
their heart that can not repent, will never be reclaimed, is the means
therefore to be neglected which may be profitable to many? As for the reason he
adds, that to be constrained to do against their conscience, does make them
further off, and more detest that which they have so committed, can not hold in
such as receive profit by the correction of their offense. For they will think
themselves most bound to your H. all the days of their life, whose means
herein God has used, to bring the^ out of the horrible darkness and shadow of
death, wherein they sat before, into the Gospels most glorious and marvelous
light. To the rest if it be not profitable, yet have your H. done the worthy
duty of Christian Magistrates, wherein you may quyetly rest, and with great
comfort. For the Lord requires nothing but obedience of us, and reserueth the
blessing of all good means to him self, to bestow in such measure as seems
best to his heavenly will. Thus I would leave this reason, but that there is a
word yet to be added to a speech of conscience, which this Author has boldly
set down here, that is, that at the latter day a man shall be tried by his
conscience and judgment, which he refers to this end, to obstinat such as
have apprehended a liking of ye pretended catholic faith, and a dislike of
ours, as if they offended not by this recusance, having their conscience so
persuaded (the very ground of all libertinisme) and that authority should not
compel them to do yt which is against their conscience, for fear of
conde^ning their souls, abusing to this end the places of the Apost. in the 2.
and 14. to the Romans for the 2. the Apostle there does not affirm yt a man
shall be judged in ye day by an erroneous conscience and judgment, but by a
conscience witnessing either to clearing or conde^ning agreeably to the law of
God. Which appears both by his word in yt he calls it the law of God
written in their heart, and by the whole purpose of yt place, which is, to show
al both Jews and Gentiles to stand condemned by the Law of God, the Jews by
the law written in tables of stone: the Gentiles even without that, by ye same
law written in their hearts. Wherefore it is utterly untrue to affirm yt any man
shall be judged by his conscience or judgment whatsoever it be True it is that
whatsoever a man does, he ought to do it of an undoubted faith grounded upon
the word of God, that such his doing is pleasing and acceptable to God in
Christ: and whatsoever he does otherwise is sin, because it is not of faith,
nor this true persuasion of doing well, which is the plain meaning of the other
place in the 14. But hereof follows not, that he that is misled by an
erroneous conscience shall be judged and cleared according to it: or that the
Christian Magistrate ought not to require any lawful duty of the subject
what conscience soever he have of it, that the doing of such a thing is good or
evil. For it is not the erroneous or good conscience whereby we shall be
judged otherwise then by all our deeds both good and evil, but it is the law
of God, against which if any man transgres, either ignorantly or wilfully, he
is made guilty of sin and subject to the sentence of condemnation by the law.
Which law our recusantes are convicted grievously to offend, because they
break it, in not giving to God the honor which belongs unto him, in
refusing his holy word and Sacraments, and with them Christ Jesus and his
redemption offered thereby unto them, not keeping the Lords Sabaothes, and
disobeyinge the good commandment of authority, requyring the performance of
so many holy duties of the^. Which sins though they ignorantly commit, as not
knowing that they sin in such recusance, but rather being persuaded that
their so doing, is a high service of God and acceptable unto him, yet shall not
their ignorance excuse them. for the Lord will surely beat every servant that
does not his Masters will, Luke 12.18.
yea though he know it not: because his ignorance is not of the creation of
God, but of his own corruption originally drawn from Adam. Neither shall this
good intent excuse them any more then the Jew, which ignorantly crucifying
Christ, and persecuting the Apostles, were persuaded they did God great
service. For it is obedience that the Lord requires, which who soever yealdeth
not, upon what cause or pretense soever, is guilty by the Law. On the other
part, if retayninge still that wicked persuasion, that to join with us in ye
service of God (as it is now established amongst us) is a wicked and a sinful
act, yet notwithstanding for fear of punishment, they conform themselves,
they offend, and are guilty (though not of sin against ye holy ghost, Howlet.
as some late Puritan Seminarist does affirm) yet of sin great and grievous,
not in doing the thing which is lawful and good, but because they do it not
well and Christianly, that is in faith and true persuasion, that such their
doing is pleasing to God, but contrariwise condemning it in their heart as
unlawful, and them selves of hypocrisy: so that while they dwell in that
persuasion, they can do nothing that may be acceptable unto God. Therefore such
as are desirous to please him, are with prayer to examine this their persuasion
by the holy scriptures: whereby finding (as undoubtedly they shall in due time,
whom the Lord will save) that it is not according to god, they ought to change
their minds by true repentance, and then doing the duties required of them in
faith, and certain knowledge of pleasing God in them, their doings shall be
godly and acceptable in Christ Jesus. But if they co^tinew obstinat still, yet
is not authority to be blamed for compelling them, as ye noble Kings Asa and
Iosia did command and compel the people by severity of their laws and
punishments to serve the Lord: what ignorant and ungodly persuasion so ever
they have to the contrary. For this duty God requires at ye Magistrates hand
to whom he has not committed his sword in vain and in it self it is so
necessary, that if this pretense were sufficient cause why men should be
respected: not only the Magistrate, should become gilty of not doing the
duty which God requires of them: but also no Christian estate or policy
could stand. For this would soon be every man's answer in case of being
enjoined any thing concerning God or men, how holy or just so ever it were
that did dislike him, that his conscience is against it. Therefore it can be no
cause by the word of God, after ye procuring of such means for their
instruction by ye Gospel sincerely and duly preached unto the^, as our
Savior Christ has appointed for the calling of men from their errors to the
knowledge of the truth, why your H. should forbear either to require so godly
a duty of them, or to punish the disobedient as their offense may deserve. At
their own peril be it if through ignorance or wilfulnes they take darkness for
light, and light for darkness. Such commandment, and punishment for
disobedience is not of it self hurtful unto them, but rather greatly
profitable: both by telling them what they ought to do, and by threatening and
punishing the obstinat: whereby some may be wakened more seriously to examine
their conscience, and so come to yeald obedience unto God and to the law. And
thus far have I dealt with his circumstances. Now remayn his two other reasons,
which are of substance and weight in deed in this matter, if he were able to
make them good. For the one is a justification of their cause, the other a
challenge of the punishment laid upon them. But first he blames her M. justice
as extreme, and keeping no proportion with the offense, wherewith they are
charged, and secondarily, mayntayneth their cause not only to deserve no such
punishment, but to be worthy of all favor. First therefore, I am to examine
what he says against her M. justice: You persecute heauely (says he unto
your H.) and that in such measure, as the like has scarce been mentioned in
Christianity before, albeit in some points more covertly then some other did.
This persecution he sets out after by comparyson of the discipline (as he
writes) of the Catholic church, and namely in the time of Queen Mary,
affirming this persecution in all respects, far to surmount and ouerreach that,
and to be both greater and inco^parably more grievous. To the same effect he
adds many other like speeches in the end of his epistle which there shall
receive their answer. By which complaint a man would think that might
worthily be thought so, if it exceed so far as he affyrmeth that most cruel
and bloody persecution of the true Catholics, and constant Martirs of God in
Queen Mary's time. But of this he gives occasion to speak more fully
hereafter. Now to answer his most unjust and slanderous accusation of the
justice done upon them, I deny this to be true, wherwt he would charge the
present State. which I deny, not only because they are no Catholics, and
therefore no punishment of them can be properly called persecution, but a just
execution of obstinate heretics: but also, because yt for mere conscience,
and matter of Religion, no such thing is done, or has been done to any man
since her M. most peaceable and happy Reign. He complayneth of the rackinges,
and stretching of their joints, the renting and dispersing of their bowels,
the dismembring of the parts of their bodies, and makes many such like
grievous complaints. What may be done to such of them as are wilful and
obstinate seducers I leave to your wisdoms to consider. This being true that
such are Heretics. seducing and deceiving in as dangerous matters for men to
be abused in, as ever did any Heretics before them: which both has been
often heretofore, and may at any time b^ sufficient arguments, and
unanswerable of their part, be proved against the^. But yet I say further,
that notwithstanding that it is so far of that these tragical complaints
should be true, that no one of all their Catholics, for cause of his
conscience and religion only, being no otherwise an offe^der against the laws
has lost either life or limme, since the happy day of her M. coronation,
until this time. All which gracious time there has not been for recusance,
nor for being at mass, nor yet for saying mass, how often soever they so
offend, neither by former Statutes nor those of the last Parliament, which they
most complain off, any further punishment appointed, then of los of liberty
and goods. True it is, that her Majesty by the Sage advise of your Honors,
and of her whole Nobility and Commons, has provided by law for the punishment
of such pretended Catholics as shall be found gilty of any treasonnable
practice against her H. estate, and person: being forced by most urgent causes,
and many dangerous attempts of theirs, daily pressing her thereunto. For
considering first the bloody resolution of the Council of Trent and the daily
attempts to put it in execution: there was great and most worthy cause why your
H. should seek by all godly provision to prevent their intended mischief. The
secret and detestable decree of that Tridentine conspiracy against God, and
against his anointed, was to make a League amongst all the Princes whom they
had made drunck with the golden cup of their fornication, Buch. rerum Scot.
lib. 17.
to confer their means and join all their forces together, to root out the
true profession of the Gospel, if it were possible, out of the earth. The
execution whereof has not been forgotten from time to time in all places
professing the truth, nor is not neglected even to this day, as means and
occasions may serve them to bring their most ungodly and bloody purpose to
pass. To which their end they have hitherto run with so vyolent a course, as
it appears neither the fear of God, nor any respect of men, which worthily
holds others from such extremities, could restrain them from most desperate
acts, and full of all tragical immanitie. Christian and Catholic Kings and
States in Style and Title have been stirred up against their natural Subjects,
to persecute them with fire and sword, to the hazard of their own Estates.
Such has been the furye and vyolence wherewith this cause has been carried.
Civil wars have been kindled in all parts where the Gospel has been by
any number professed, through their false accusations of most duetifull
Subjects, as enemies to the State of their Rulers, to alienate their favor
from them: so as there is none of these parts of Europe, which are next about
us, which has not been afire, and some are yet wasting and consuming in this
flame. By means whereof have been infinite confusions, and most barbarous
crueltyes committed: the Brother not sparinge his natural Brother, nor the
Father the blood of his own Son. Calamity and destruction have been in
their ways, as it is in the Prophet, Esaias. 59.7.
and the way of peace they have not known. The base by their occasion has
despised the Noble: and the vile him that was honorable: yea the refuse and
sweep of the world, have been set up by their practyses to procure in most
traiterous manner the death of the worthies of the earth. Many a noble Prince
by these Catholic practisers, and Executioners of the Counsel of Trent, have
been shot with dagges, pistoles, and other shot, and most cruelly slain. Thus
they dealt with the religious and courteous Earl of Morray, Buch. rerum Scot.
lib. 19.
Regent of Scotland, whose death was persuaded and counseled by the Pope and
the Cardinal of Lorrayne, and who after was traitorously slain by the
Archbishop of S. Andrews Neuew, by whom he was shot out of a window as he
took his horse, over against the place where he lodged. Thus also dealt they
with the godly and wise Admyrall of France, who in like manner ryding in the
street, was shot out of a window, and after in time of peace, nay of a Royal
marriage of a K. most cruelly slain, and so shamefully outraged: after he was
murdered, as seldom or never was any enemy in time of most deadly war. I
might add here the destroying of a noble Prince of great hope, by consent of
his own father, and poisoning of the virtuous Q. of Nauarra with many practices
against the K. her son, and other Princes. Here also I might worthily mention
the most horrible and barbarous slaughters which they have committed in the
pursuing of their wicked and devilish resolution against the gospel. But to
leave at this time the tragedies which they have played in other parts by the
treasonnable assaults, and deaths of many famous Princes, and the cruel
massacrees and butcheries of many thousands of the people: I will remember the
reader chiefly of such things as have been done by them here at home, and are
best known unto us. Wherein, to let pass the imprisonment and hard usage which
sometime they used her most excellent M. with in the time of her sister, (and
now repent them of nothing more then that it was no worse) and the fires they
made in those days with the flesh and bones of their own Countrymen for the
truethes sake, (whereof I shall speak by occasion more fully hereafter) and
sundry other matters not so commonly known, of plats and attempts against the
Royal person of her M. and also of some of your H: I will only mention
certain euydent and notorious acts, whereby, the deposition of her H. from
her estate and dignity (which from God by her just right and title, and to the
great joy of al her good Subjects, her Grace does most lawfully enjoy, has
been attempted to be put in execution against her. Whereof was a solemn
instrument and writing called the Popes Bull, which was first certified by his
messenger, being an English priest, and after set up here in London by an
English Catholic traitor. By which Bull her M. is declared excommunicated,
Sand. l. 7. de ris. Mo.
and deposed by him from her Royal state, Crown and dignity: her Subjects
are absolved from their oath and allegiance unto her: the land interdited and
left to him that could put this sentence in execution, and seize upon it. Which
when the neighbor Princes either occupied at home, or considering ye
consequence of making war with so mighty a Princes, have not advanced
themselves to put in execution, the Pope has from time to time labored to
stir up some of her M. own Subjects against her, to execute this wicked
sentence upon her. Hereof arose the rebellion in the North, which by the grace
of God, and by the means of your H. wisdom was disappoynted, and just
execution done upon some of the Rebels. After this another Pope succeeding in
impiety his predecessor, raised of late a new rebellion in Ireland, bearing
name of his falsely named Holiness, having leaders and companies at the Popes
wages, and Peter's keys for their ensign and upon their forte, against which
also the sword of the Lord and of Gedeon prevailed. For a third to be raised
even in the bowels and heart of this noble land sundry English fugitues have
been entertained of the pope: Whereof some have justified these insurections,
Sand. L. 7. de v. sib. Monar. Bristow.
and accounted all the Rebels executed for Martires in their printed books,
yea themselves as it is said, have been in Camp against her Majesty with
them as trumpets of sedition. Others are bestowed in Seminaries, some to teach
and some to learn to serve the Pope against God, against our Souerraigne, and
against their own Country. For which purpose, so soon as they are ready,
they are sent over hither to withdraw her Majesty's subjects from the duty
they owe to their natural Prince, and to confess and reconcile them as they
term it, to the obedience of a foreign power. Which practice of confessing
and reconciling to the Pope in secret, your HH. for the excellent wisdom God
has endued you with, for the preservation of her highness and our whole Church
from the mouth of the Lion that would devour us, do evidently see to be as
dangerous a practice for the laying of a new plat of rebellion as may be
devised. Therefore lately upon these and such like great and necessary causes
enforcing, it was enacted that such Priests and Catholics or any other,
pretending whatsoever they may pretend, as shall be convicted so to withdraw ye
subjects from our natural Prince, to any foreign subjection, should be held
guilty of hye treason against her Ma. state and dignity, and executed
accordingly. Whereupon you HH. keeping a vigilant and a careful eye over those
men, and finding some of them guilty of treason, both by that and other
ancient laws of this land, have in deed caused justice notwithstanding
their pretense, of holy conscience and religion, according to all law and
equity to be done upon them. For as other malefactors escape not the severity
of the law, whatsoever they may be, or pretended to be, whether Catholics or
of our own profession, if they be justly convicted to be fellons or
murderers: so likewise who soever by due trial of the law, has been found to
be guilty of treason, notwithstanding they have been pretended Catholics, and
some of them anointed Priests, and father Jesuits which they have boasted
could not be touched, yet have they been condemned and executed according to
their demerites. This then being the estate of the pretended Catholics this
day amongst us, what hot persecution is this that he complains of, and what
numbers are these that are persecuted except all the Catholic Rebels and
Traitors, (as Saunders does make his reakoning) and other malefactors be
comprehended in this number? And so in deed I grant, some of these Catholics
after the quality and condition of their offense have been dealt with,
according to the ancient laws and customs of this land. But this is an
accounte void of all reason, to esteem that which is the punishment of
treason, of murder, of felony, and other such like offenses to be laid upon
them, for their religion and conscience only. Which has been hitherto so
spared, as some of them being found guilty of treason and condemned for it,
upon declaring the^ selves to stand so affected toward her highness touching
their obeeience, as they would neither with the Pope, nor any other take arms
against her, notwithstanding they remain still such as they were for their
conscience and religion, yet through her Majesty's exceeding clemency have
obtained pardon after their conviction of high treason. Wherefore seeing for
conscience of popery only, no man has been touched in life nor member, but
only punished by fine and imprisonment, and that the just execution of
Traitors, Rebels, Murderers, Fellons, be they pretended Catholics or
whatsoever they be, can in no reason be termed persecution: I worthily conclude
that the complaint of this accuser is without all cause and reason, and his
charge and accusation of the state most undutiful, slanderous, and unjust.

Now because he will needs call to the remembrance of God and men the bloody
sins of their fathers, sins as red as crimsin and scarlet, that is the
fearful and horrible persecution of the professors of the Gospel, and
compare the proceeding of their Catholics against us, with ours against them,
both generally in other places, and at other times, and perticularly in
England, in Q. Mary's days and takes upon him to justify that our dealinges
against them do far surmount their persecuting of us, and is incomperable
more grievous: I must needs here stand a little to compare them, though it be
in deed a thing in it self as shall appear, void of all reason once to
enter into the comparison of them together. What has been done in England
against them since the time of her Majesty's reign, I have already declared,
namely that no one has yet been touched in his body for matter of his
conscience only, being neither Rebel nor Traitor nor Murderer, nor otherwise
guilty of crimes capital and worthy of death by all good Laws. The same is
justly to be affirmed of the days of that most noble Prince of famous memory,
for his rare piety in so tender years King Edward the sixth: her Majesty's
worthy Brother, that in the few years of his happy reign there was not one
of these Roman Catholics for only matter of religion, put to death or any
torment of body. Nor before him in the days of their renoumed Father, King
Henry the eight, were any of their Catholics put to death, except a few,
which were executed for the supremacy, being a matter of State and not of
religion, as having no manner of ground for it, in the word of God, and giving
a dangerous interest for the Kings and Queens of this Land, to a foreign
power. As for other Kingdoms and States professing the Gospel, this Author
him self does acknowledge their proceedinges against them, not to have been
unto blood. Now then let us in the other part consider the general and
particular proceeding of these pretended Catholics against our brethren, not
for any crime of just desert of death, but only for their most holy faith.
Which though I can not here lay out at large, being the argument of so many
great books and volumes as are written of them, yet I may give the gentle
Reader a general view of their bloody acts, of perpetual infamy to their
pretended Catholic profession. The towns of Merindall and Cabrieres with 22.
other Towns and Villages, were most tiranously destroyed, without respect of
men, women, or children. In Cabrieres, a thousand persons were slain, whereby
some estimat may be made of the number which might be murdered in the rest. Of
which so horrible waste, and so much innocent blood most cruelly shed, there
was utterly no other cause, but that the godly people of that Country had
separated themselves from the abominations of the Church of Room, and sought
to serve the Lord according to his word. Likewise ye people of ye valleys of
Lucerne Angrogne, S. Mart. Perous and others, were pursued with hot
persecution and cruel wars by the instigation of the Pope, for many years.
Both these being faithful and duetifull to their Princes, only for the godly
faith which they professed, were in most savage and unnatural manner
persecuted, and destroyed by them. Besides those who were slain in the bloody
wars which they made for the maintenance of their Roman superstitions in
Germany and in Scotland, the Stories of those countries report sundry cruel
executions, to have been done upon many faithful servants of God, only for
the testimony of the truth. In our own country, since the beginning of ye
restoring of the knowledge of ye Gospel amongst us, and especially in Q. M.
days: what has been the state of our Church, and what has ye enemy laid to
our charge? surely we were never charged with any treason, but ye only cause of
our persecution was ye refusing al co^fide^ce in our selves, or any other
creature, we believed to be saved only by ye precious death of our Savior
Christ and that we refused to bow down before their Idols and to worship
them. These and such like matters merely concerning religion, and the true
faith of the Gospel were the things which were laid to our charge, and no
other. And for these causes how cruelly they have used us, all the world can
testify. For what part of the world has not hard of our Sufferings, and the
furious and fiery wrath wherewith the enemy persecuted us for no other cause
then for the Gospels sake. Some in deed fled as Jacob from the wrath of his
brother Esau, and through the goodness of God escaped their bloody hands. But
they which remained were slain for Gods sake, as says the Prophet, all the
day long, and counted as sheep appointed for the slaughter. Psalm. 44.22.
In Spain and Italy the chief seats of ye bloody inquisition, besides many
which were openly murdered: poisons, strangling in prisons, drowning in rivers,
and sondrie other secret executions which came not to so open knowledge of the
world (according to the depth and most subtle practices of Satan), are
reasonably thought to have destroyed many more then have been consumed by the
light fires of England. France, and Flaunders, have had also as hot a Furnace
amongst them, as that of Nebucad-nezers was, whereinto they have cast a great
multitude of those which would not fall down before their golden Image. But
besides those which they have burned, who can number the thousands and ten
thousands which their bloody sword, in their so long and cruel wars, have
devoured. The slaughters of France especially and their cruel masacrees, (for
of whom we have so strange a thing, we must have also the name whereby they
term it) have been so barbarous and so many, that I know not how to express
the savage cruelties, and tragical immanities committed in them: except I
should here leave my paper all in blood, as the Paynters and workers of
tapestry do their table and their Tapistry, when they come to paynte and work
so strange and horrible cruelties as no art nor Instrument, no pencill nor
needle is able to expres. Thus being provoked by mine adversary, I have briefly
touched and in general, the tyrannous and bloody acts of this cruel
generation. For the more full declaration whereof, I must refer the gentle
Reader to the stories of the several Countries, where these horrible
persecutions have been exercised, and especially to the worthy work of the
Acts and Monumentes of Martyrs, written by the reverend and learned M. Fox, in
our own language for the purpose I have now in hand, it may suffice thus
generally to have poynted, as it were to the opening of the fifth Seal, and to
have showed some view of the infinite number of the souls which lie behind the
Altar, and cry night and day unto God, with the voice of the blood of Abel,
that the Lord would require all this blood which they have so cruelly and
unnaturally shed at the hands of this posterity of Cain. Whereby seeing it
appears that for the only cause of Religion they have murdered so many,
that they have made all Europe to run with the blood of the Prophets, as
Manasses did the streets of Jerusalem: and that of the other part, there has
been hitherto no proceeding against them for like cause, to the shedding of
one drop of their blood, all indifferent Judges may see the bold vanity of this
Plaintiff in affirming our dealings toward them to ouerreach any their
persecution of us, and to be incomparably more grievous. And yet this
notwithstanding, the adversary having received all good for all evil done to
us, cannot be ignorant off: yet their Advocate is bold to make comparison not
only generally, but also perticulerly concerning the persons, in the number and
quallitie of such as have suffered, and the manner of their usage both in their
imprisonment and in the execution. Wherein first he alleges that many were
tolerated by them. This was not any charity in them, but it was the gracious
goodness of God our most merciful father who would not suffer the^ so to shake
our Olive tree but that there should remain some still upon the tree: nor so
to vintage and gather the grapes of his vineyard, but that there should still
be hidden here a cluster and there an other, some few grapes under the leaves
that should not be gathered. But what tolleration upon hope of their
repentance has been extended and is daily toward them, I report me to the
conscience of every one who understands how many there are that need this
favor, and has compared the number of the^ with the number of such as have
been called to question for these matters. The second point of his comparyson
of the persons, is of men with men, whereby he means the condition and estate
of such as have suffered: wherein he may remember the imprisonment of her Ma.
under whose shadow through the goodness of God, we are now refreshed from the
burning heates wherwt they consumed us. In which estate her highness had so many
lyo^s mouths opened against her, as except the Lord had shut them in time, we
had never seen these happy days. He may remember also the departure out of
the land, both of some other of the Nobility, and of the Duches Grace of
Suffolk. Likewise, the right reverend Cranmer, and his companions, which were
not so used in prison, that they could boast as some of theirs have done, that
they never fared better, nor lived more at their ease: but after a hard
imprysonment, were burned in the fire for the testimony of the Gospel. We
boast not of any but of the Lord, ^. Cor. 1.
as knowing what our calling is, yet do we rejoice and glorify God with
special thankesgeuing, when he gives so rare a blessing to those which are of
great power and authority, that they not only do believe, but also suffer for
his names sake. In which respect I have thought good to answer thus much to
this second point of his comparyson.

Further, touching the usage of such as came in troble for religion in their
time, he affirms it to have been civil, for the prisons they were committed
unto, the confere^ces used with the^, the relieuing and not tormenting of them
in time of their imprisonment, and last of all in their execution, with all
favor. But if such usage as we have had at their hands, in all these respects
be their civility, how great need had we to pray, and to provide that we have
not experience of their cruelty. The prysons whereinto they cast those whom
they had bond as Paul with chains for the Gospel, Lollordes Tower, Colehouse,
etc.
were the common Gaoyles, and prysons of all malefactors: nay some of them,
such as for the horror and annoyance of them, they were not wont to send the
most guilty offenders into. But now they (I speak of such as are called to
question for religion) have convenient and wholesome rooms, yea large houses
and fair gardens for their pleasure, and as they use it, for their pastyme.
Their conferences were either threatenings, or snares of death: whereby they
sought to extort a denial of the truth by terror, or by deceitful words to
draw out some free speech against some of their abominations, for which after
they might condemn them to the fire. But we confer with them, as desirous to
deliver their souls from the wrath to come, and their present estate from such
punishment as the law does lay upon them. Releeuing of the prisoners of Christ
was through their extreme dealing an occasion to sundry of great troubles. But
who has heard of any, Act. and Mo.
who for this only cause has fallen into any trouble amongst us. They killed
five prisoners for the Gospel at Canterbury with famine, and miserably
relieved the rest for any torment. As in time of imprysonment, not one of
theirs has been offered any for religions sake. In deed, if under color of
conscience, they have intermedled so far in matters of State, as yt they have
been to be tainted of treason, it may be such have been examined upon the
Rack, according to the ancient order, both of this and other States in like
cases: that thereby they might be constrained to confess that to the safety of
many, which otherwise they would obstinately conceal to the overthrow of
their Country. Whereof not having us in suspicion at any time, but persecuting
us only for the Gospels sake, yet some with Joseph, have had the iron enter
into their soul, and other with Paul and Silas, have been laid in the
dungeons and there also had their feet put into the stocks, Act. 16.25.
singing to God as if they had been in heaven. Act. 5.
I might name also a great number, who with Peter and John, were whipped and
scourged, and rejoiced that they were vouchsafed to suffer for the word of the
Lord Jesus: whereof as there were many, so a young child amongst the rest, was
so sore beaten, that he dyed of it, who before his death was sent to his
father, whom they had put in the stocks in Lollards Tower, Acts and Mo.
setting a dish of water by him with a stone in it (not much unlike that of the
Jews, which as they read) said of Jeremy, let us put wood into his bread) to
torment the poor man with the pitiful sight of his child so shamefully
beaten: and many other such foul extremities I could remember them off. How
they dealt with Hun, and as it is like with some other which dyed in prison, is
partly understood to their just reproach, and will be plainly discovered in the
day when all secrets shall be revealed. It were to long to examine their like
dealings in other countries: therefore I refer the Reader to their stories,
and namely to the 6. and 9. Chapters of the Spanish Inquisition, where he shall
see what close prysons, what spare and loathsome diet, what strange and
barbarous extremities are used by them. The last point of the comparyson of
usage, is in the execution of death, which he says has been done of their
part in all favor: for just reproof whereof, let the gentle Reader look over
the Story of D. Tailor, who being cruelly used all the way he went to
execution, there being ready for it, was stricken a great stroke upon the head
with a waster, and hurt again with a faggot cast at him, which light upon his
head, and brake his face that the blood ran down, after stricken upon the
lips, and last of all so smitten with a Halbard, that his brains fell out.

But of all other, horrible was the execution of the Garnesey woman Perotine,
both in her own person, in yt she was executed being great with child, and also
in her child which being taken up out of ye fire, and viewed by the officers,
was to the perpetual reproach of their most barbarous cruelty, cast again to
his mother into ye fire, In elder time also terible was ye execution and death
of Sir John Oldcastle ye worthy L. Cobham, is a witness to all ages, of their
barbarous executions. It were to long to rehearse the stories of their most
cruel executions in other Countries, in all ages. Therefore I refer the
reader to the books themselves, namely to the 12. chap. of the Spanish
Inquisition. Only two examples I will set down for a show, one of more
ancient time and the other of very late. In the low Countries at Tourney,
Bertram a zealous professor of the Gospel, found such favor, as this man
speaks in his execution: that after many rackings and torments before, he
had his right hand and foot pressed and misshapen with hot irons, his tongue
cut of, his mouth stopped with a ball of iron, his body let up and down to the
fire till it was burned to ashes, which were cast into the river. Of late in
the year 1581. at Room, Atkines an English man, a zealous professor of the
Gospel for a like matter as Bertrames was before, (which was the taking of
their mass Idol from their altar and throwing it upon the ground) had this
favor showed him in his execution, that all the way he went to it (as it is
reported by such as saw it) there were four did nothing but thrust at his
naked body with burning Torches, and by a devise for the purpose was burned, so
as his legs were burned first that the Tyrants might feed their eyes with a
horrible spectacle of so strange torments of the constant Martyr and witness
of Christ, this has been their execution with al favor. Thus we see the
chastisement laid upon them, is the rod of a tender and most loving mother,
correcting her obstinate sons to bring the^ to her obedience and duty: but
they have beaten the true church of God with Scorpions, and as the Sirians did
to ye Israelites in Galaad, they have threshed it with flayles of iron. Their
greatest restraint is such (I speak of those which are restrained for matter of
religion) yt they have convenient rooms and houses with garde^s to walk in, but
they thrust our poor brethren into their darkest dungeo^s, into ye caves and
holes of the earth, as into the dens of Dragons. Their diet is liberal and
such as pleases them selves to have, but they so fed the true Church of God
in their time, and yet do where their authority may serve that she might, and
yet may, in such places renew the complaint of the old church of Israel, and
of her chief head and captain Christ Jesus. I have eaten ashes as bread,
and mingled my drink with weeping. They gave me gall and wormewoode to eat,
Psalm. 22.
and vinegar for to drink, they opened their mouths upon me as roaring Lions,
they made me so spare that I might tell my bones, my heart melted in me like
wax, my tongue did cleave to the roof of my mouth for drought, and I sat me
down upon the earth, Psalm. 2^.
and in the dust. But the Lord whose right hand works such changes and
alterations has had compassion of our estate in this land, his name be praised
for it, and has opened the prison doors, he has delivered those which were
vowed to death, when his appointed time was come he has showed mercy to his
Sion, he has raised her out of the dust, he has anointed her with oil, and
furnished her table, even in the fight of all her enemies. And now that the
Lord has given her enemies into her power, to require at their hand, al ye
blood of her dear children which they have shed so many years, and to
recompense them double for all that she has received of them, yet hitherto she
has patiently waited if the Lord may give them repentance, and forborne to use
any like extremity toward them. Therefore all these former points well
considered, whether he compare ye persons or usage, it will be found in deed
there is no comparison but for this reason, because the numbers of such of ours
as have suffered, have been a thousand to one of theirs, the persons of greater
state both for birth and calling, the usage, so far diverse, both in the time
of imprisonment, and in the execution, that we in our most just and lawful
punishment of the^, have contained our selves within the bonds of Christian
lenity and mekenes, nay I may truly say, that in some obstinate and buysie
seducers we have been short of duty. But they in their most wrong full and
tyrannical persecution of us, have matched if not exceeded the most savage
cruelties, that ever were heard off amongst the Barbarians and the Heathen. And
thus much for answer to the comparison, wherein I doubt not but it easily
appears to all indifferent readers, how far unlike their doings are to
ours.

It follows now to examine whether of us can render better reason of such our
proceedinge. This Advocate justifies theirs by two special arguments, whereof
the first is the authority whereby they proceeded against us, which he says,
was an ancient general law, meaning thereby the law of putting Heretics to
death, whereas we have only new national statuts as he says, to punish them
by. For the law of putting heretics to death, I grant it to have been a
general and ancient law amongst Gods people, when the Magistrates have been
of the faith of the Church. And as it is ancient and general, so has it good
warrant of the word of God. For the Magistrate bears not the sword in vain,
but is the Minister of Gods justice and vengeance upon all offenders according
to the quality of their offense. Further also heretics above all other
offenders, most grievously transgress, both against God, whose holy service
and honor they profane, and also against men, whom they by poisoning of the
heavenly doctrine do destroy with death everlasting. Both which being so
clear as they need no further proof: it must needs follow that the
Magistrate ought to put an Heritike to death. And thus was it expressly
commanded in the law of Moses, Deuteronomy. 13.5. 2. reg. 23.20. 2. Chro. 15.13
and executed by Asa and Iosia the noble and zealous Kings of Judah. Against
which iudgme^nt in vain do some allege the parable of Tares to be suffered to
grow till the latter day. For the tares there, are not only Heretics, but as
our Savior there does expound it, all the wicked who are called children of
the devil, the servants not Magistrates but Angels: the pulling up, not the
execution of particular evil doers by temporal death, but the destruction of
all the wicked children of the devil unto death everlasting. Which points are
so plain to any yt will consider the parable with judgment, as they can not be
denied. No stronger are ye rest of the proofs yt are by the favorers of this
cause brought in out of Celsus a principal writer for the maintenance of it,
Mat. 13.40.4^
nor which this new advocate for heretics would insinuate for this purpose,
though for the authority of the cannon law to ye contrary he dare not plainly
discover this to be his opinion, saying faith is the gift of god. For this
concludes not that no man by compulsion and correction may so profit, that he
may be occasioned to use such means whereby after he may believe. Nor that
such as are obstinate heretics ought not to be executed by death. For by like
reason no malefactors should die for fear of destroying them everlastingly:
repentance being the gift of God as well as faith. Of this therefore we are
agreed, but who is to be judged an heretic is all the question between us.
They by their Cannon law judge al heretics that hold not the faith which at
this day is professed in the church of Room. But we deny their Cannon law to
be any competent judge of heresy, a great part of which law is the sink of
all error and abomination, or any other cannons, decrees, and authorities of
men whatsoever: and affirm the only word of God left written in the books
of the holy and canonical scriptures, to be able to judge of these matters,
as partly was declared in the beginning of this answer. Further we affirm and
that agreeably to the same holy scripture (whereunto we refer our selves for
trial) that the faith now taught and received by ye Church of Room in such
points as it differs from us, to be nothing but a new and late superstition
and heresy. The cause then falling out thus between us, that their doctrine
differing from ours, is error and heresy, and ours wherein it differs from
them, as in all ye other parts thereof, is the pure word of god, Psalm. 1^
sweet as the sweet bread of the Passover without any leaven, and fine as the
silver tried and refyned seven times in the furnace: we are certainly
assured by the same word, (whereby we shall be judged in that day when the
truth shall shine as the Sun, and they shall see it, which do not repent of
this their contradiction of Core,) to their everlasting confusion) that ye
ancient general law whereof he speaks, can make nothing at all with them,
or against us. Of the other part whereas he would show us to have small or no
authority to proceed against them as we do, as having in his opinion only,
certain national statuts whereby our proceedings are warranted, he is to
understand that upon such reasons as has been showed of their doctrine and
ours, the same ancient and general law, which charge Magistrates with the
keeping of al things written in the law, and with the civil punishment of al
offenders, Deuteronomy. 17.19. Romans 13.
is a most sufficient warrant for the authority which God has now set over us,
to compel all the subjects within this Dominion to serve the Lord our God,
according to that right order of his service which he himself has appointed,
and to correct their errors and obstinacy which shall be disobedient, as the
quality of their offense shall deserve. Upon the warrant of this ancient
law, Iosia in his time constrained all Israel to serve the Lord their God,
which can not otherwise be understood then of compelling them thereunto by new
national statutes, the severity whereof enforced an obedience to God and to
the King. Deuteronomy. 13.^. etc Deuteronomy. 17.5.
Likewise the authority of the law of Moses commanding to put to death the
false Prophet and the Idolater, Asa made a statute in his time, that whosoever
did not seek the Lord (understanding thereby a renouncing of Idolatry, and a
worshipping of the only true God according to his law) should die the death.
Which as it was lawful then and in them, yea duetifull and necessary, even so
upon like ground, is it as lawful and duetifull for all Christian Princes now
to make like statuts upon ye same warrant, for the government of the Nation
and people committed to them. There is no cause then why he should make so
light of our national statuts, being the true and lively use of the law of
God, by this means renewed, and recovering his force again by such
proceedinges. It appears therefore by these reasons, that the authority is
sufficient and strong whereby they are punished, yea and such as may well
warrant a further proceeding against so many of the^ as may be justly condemned
for heretics, that part of the Cannon law, standing now as well in force, as
it did in the time of their tirannie and giving us that power against them
which they never could have of it lawfully against us, whom they could never
convict of any error. And thus much for answer to the authority whereupon
both our proceedings are grounded being ye first of the two reasons he
alleges. Now come we to the other argument, which is of the difference of the
cause between them and us, the principal point of all this treatise.

Four Reasons of the adversary for their cause.
The difference he notes is in four points, whereof two, which are the
antiquity and vniuersallitie of their faith, he does but lightly touch by the
way, the other two of unity and policy, he discourses off more at larg.
Whose steps because I have bound my self to follow, somewhat I must answer to
the former, before I proceed to the other two wherein he seems to have more
confidence. Our faith (says he) is the only Religion of our forefathers,
Answer to the 1. which is Antiquity
in England. To this I answer: First it is not true, and then if it were, yet
it can be no suffycient reason for the^, nor against our cause. For the first,
it appears by the resista^ce which the ancient Britons made to Austen the
Monk, the Pope of Romes Messenger or Nuntio hither, and the whole discourse of
that Story. Which shows yt they which were before the Conquest, received
neither his Supremacy nor his faith: that from the beginning of Christianity in
the land, to that time the religion had been free from most of their
corruptions. Their tra^substantiatio^ ye Saxons which after prevailed believed
not, as appears by a sermon found written in the Saxon tongue, appointed in
their time to be vttred unto the people at Easter before the Communion: and
published now in print by authority to all the world for proof thereof. But I
put the case our Forefathers had never had other Religion in England, were this
a suffycient reason to prove it good? If it be, then many supersticious
abominations of the Heathen may be justified and acknowledged good Religion.
The cursed false worship of Mahomet in Asia, has continued as long as the
Idolatrous superstition of the Church of Room: yet were it utterly impertinent
for the posterity living this day in those parts to allege this reason,
that it is the only religion of their forefathers in Asia. When the Apostles
came preaching the Gospel to the Gentiles, they had been a people in the ages
and generations before that time in respect of ye true knowledge of religion
neglected and not regarded of God, Act. 17.30.
having in a manner from ye beginning of the world, which was 4000. years
continued in their Idolatry. Yet was this no sufficient cause to continue in
it still, and despise the Gospel as a new faith. Which though it had not
been vouchsafed the^ before, yet was more ancient then their wicked
superstitions. Contrariwise it was fit for them, the longer they had lain in
darkness and in the vale of the shadow of death, with so much more joy to
see and behold the Sun, when it began to rise in their countries. Even so
notwithstanding it were true that darkness had covered this land in all the
time of our forefathers, yet now that we their children have the favor to see
this glorious Sun to rise in our horizon, and to see his coming forth like
the coming forth of a Bridegroom out of his chamber, Psa. 19.5.
or of some worthy knight and Champion setting out to run his course. Should
we love darkness more the^ light, and refuse the riches of gods mercy most
freely and bountifully bestowed upon us. Nay we ought rather to celebrate ye
goodness of god toward us with everlasting praises, for that he has revealed
to us the mystery hidden from so many ages, and unknown so long to the world,
as it is now revealed: and our own happiness, whose eyes do see the light
of the Gentiles, the glory of Israel, and whose ears do hear the wisdom yt
is greater then Salamons. Things which in deed many of our forefathers
especially in some late hundred years, have not seen nor heard, and we now
by the grace of God, do see and hear them.

The same may be said of their generallitie, namely that first it is not true,
Answer to the 2. generallitie.
that this their faith was left us by the general consent of all Christendom,
and then that generality in it self suffices not to prove religion good. For
the first it is manifest by the holy scriptures, that the Apostles who as it
appears by their writings, preached the doctrine which we profess, never
taught their superstition, having left us no one point of all that which is
properly their faith, and wherein they differ from us. The ancient fathers
testify (I speak of the most ancient of them) such parts of Christendom as
they lived and taught in, to have believed no such faith. The Stories of the
Church make mention of Christian Churches in Asia, and in Afrike, and some
parts of Europe also, which never received the faith of the Church of Room
that is, that which is properly the Romish faith and wherein it dissenteth from
us: as neither their supremacy nor Idolatry, nor sundry such other points
which are the beauty and crown of popery. Therefore it is untrue that they
have it left them by a general consent. Further all generality in it self, is
not sufficient to justify a matter of faith. What has been, and yet is more
general in the world, then Mahometisme and Paganism which yet Christian men
for all ye generality of it, do worthily according to Gods word detest and
abhor. The general consent of ye whole Church, I mean of all the holy
assemblies which at the same time in all the world profess by public
ministry Christian religion, as a most grave and reverent testimony, ought
worthily to be regarded by all her modest and humble children: Yet because it
may be subject to error in some point, yea most substantial and material
points (as the experience of the apostasy which the Apostle prophesied off
does sufficiently declare) even yt can be no sufficient warrant of the truth.
Only ye written word of God, is sufficient, which alone has this prerogative
above all creatures, to certify and assure our consciences in matters of
religion. Whereby we being taught the faith which we have believed (as we are
ready through the grace of God to make good at all times before all men,) our
faith can not be any new or particular opinion, as he wrongfully charge it,
but is the ancient and general faith of the Church, which has testimony
given unto it by the law, and by all the Prophets which spoke from Moses to
Samuel, Romans 3.22. Act. 3.24.
and those which followed after. These are ancient Fathers in deed, whose
heads are all white as woll. In comparison of whom the fathers they boast off
have never a one of them a graye hair upon his head, they may seem to have
been borne but yesterdaye. In which respect according to the Law, Leuit. 19.32
they are to rise up and give place and do their duty to these who are aged
Fathers in deed. For where as simply there is nothing ancient but that which
is everlasting, and all other things are ancient in respect and in comparison
of that which is younger: We most truly affirm our faith to be so far more
ancient then theirs, as that for every hundredth years their doctrine is old,
which at this day the Church of Room teaches, that which our Churches
profess is ancient, 1000. as being the faith of the righteousness of God
witnessed unto by the law and by the Prophets. Therefore if it had never been
heard of in England before, and though it have been condemned by that ungodly
Pius Quintus and his successor of like impiety, Romans 3.21
and their folowers, as Christ was by Caiphas, and the Apostles by Annas and
his whole consistory, yet remains it still, and shall remain for ever, no
new nor particular opinion, but the ancient and general faith of the Church,
the Apostolical and prophetical doctrine whereby in all parts of the world
have been and shall be saved whosoever were appointed to everlasting life. For
which cause godly has it been procured by your HH. and established by her
highness authority amongst us, as was the obedience of the law by Josias,
when it was found after that it had been lost by negligence of the priests
for certain years. In like sort the true Gospel being found again which had
been lost by the negligence of their Priests, (if not also by their malice
and for the furtherance of their pomp and riches which it served not for) has
been in deed advised by the right Reverend Synod of the ministry of this our
whole Nation, and restored to his former and ancient authority, by the high
Court of Parliament, enacting and ordeyning by statute the approbation and
allowance of it. Which if it have been done as here he co^playneth without
trial or disputation, and confuting of the adversary openly, the blame is to
be laid upon none but themselves. For who can make a coward to fight: he may
be challenged, he may have his day appointed, and by some means be brought
into the field: but if his heart shall fail him when he sees his enemy in
the face, and that the evil quarrel he comes in, does take away his
courage, so that he yield himself to the pleasure of his adversary without
striking of any stroke: has he after any reason to complain that he was not
fought withal? Even so it is not unknown to your HH. and to this whole state,
that our adversaries were called to disputation, and the day appointed, at
which also they came, as if they would have disputed: but belike considering
there is no wisdom against the Lord, nor power that can prevail against his
truth, they began to pick quarrels to avoid the brunt of the battle and
forsook the field refusing to dispute. Our reverend Fathers of worthy memory
Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer etc. dealt not so with them in Q. Mary's days, but
encountered with them, both in ye convocation house, and also at Oxford to their
shameful foil, and just reproach, howsoever after they having the law in
their own hands, did most unjust and cruel execution upon them, by burning
them in the fire. An argument void of all reason and full of vyolence and
wrong, which yet by the grace of God, they fully answered, receiving virtue
from above, and being fortified with an heroical magnanimity and a most
christian and noble spirit, whereby they endured the cruel torment of the
flaming fire with great patience and comfort rejoicing, they were vouchsafed
not only to believe, but also to suffer and that unto death, and so cruel a
death for the testimony of the Lord Jesus, and the witness of his truth. And
yet these men (according to the Proverb that he yt flies may fight again)
not being ashamed that men should remember the foil of yt day, when they were
not able to stand with those who were appointed to dispute with them: now as if
they had gotten new heart of grace and some good armor of proof, which even the
very word of God, the spiritual sword, whereby we fight against these men, were
not able to pearce; have nothing in their mouths nor in their pens, but
disputation, whereof if they came to it again as their late cha^plan did, I
doubt not but they would have soon enough. But of this I have ocasion to speak
more herafter. Now let us proceed to his other reasons.

The other two reasons which are debated by him more at large, are of unity and
policy, both which he affirms to be in their religion, and denies to be
in ours. For unity I say, as in the other, that neither if they had yt unity
and agreement amongst themselves, whereof they boast, yt they were thereby
sufficiently warranted, and then yt they have it not. Of the other part, that
in ours, is the true unity which is in verity. For the first, yt al agreement
is no sufficient proof, of the goodness of ye matter wherein they agree, it
may easily appear, for that al malefactors have a kind of agreement. So
likewise have the enemies of the Gospel of Christ, as the Apostles out of the
2. Psalm. declare yt the Jews and the Romans ye ancient enemies of Christ,
that ye Gentiles and the people of Israel ye state civil and ecclesiastical
did al agree and conspire together against God and against his anointed.
Therefore except he can prove that faith wherein they agree, to be ye true and
ancient faith of Gods Church, his unity is nothing but a conspiracy, and their
hye consistory as ye co^sistory of the hie priests, co^federat together against
Christ, and against his Apostles, or as ye agreement between Core, Dathan and
Abiram with their rebellious companies, against Moses and Aaron. Further I say,
their Church is so far off from that unity and agreement which he boasts
off, that contrariwise it has been, and is full of contentions and
controversies. Which if we consider, in the public state of their Church, is
most manifest in the infinite variety and difference of Saints, and means of
salvation chosen to worship and to trust unto, by sundry Nations, Towns,
companies, and persons, as it liked them best. Likewise by the diverse Missales,
Breuiaries, and Ceremonies used amongst them. Further also by their sundry
sects of Monks and Nuns, which they have so multiplied of late, whereas not
many hundred years ago, they had only the order of Bennet. But especially in
the Popes counsels, universities, and brotherhoodes of Monks and Freers, it
appears that the Lord burst their Church as a vessel of claye, and an
earthen pot stricken with a bar of iron into so many pieces and fitters, that
there scarce remains whole any one potsheard so big as might serve to fetch
fire withal. The agreement of the Popes was such about Formosus, yt for some
years every Pope disanulled his predecessors acts: they condemned one
another, yea they followed their cause with such bitter malice ( Platina their
own writer reporting it) that Formosus was taken up after his death, and
burned, and his ashes cast into the river. The scisme of two or three Popes at
once, which continued so many years and occupied all Christian Princes, to the
perpetual infamy of their malicious discordes, does witness to all
posterity, how far their Church is from this unity they would boast off.
Further their book of decrees though Gratia^ would force them to agree,
declares what contrary and repugnant sentences have been pronounced by them
in sundry causes and points of great importance. And this has been the unity
of the Popes amongst themselves: with others they have agreed thus. They have
moved and mainteyned wars both with Kings and Kesars, and those both Greek,
French, and Germans. Many counsels have been excomunicated by them, and they
again by the counsels. Most famous and noble Churches have likewise had
experience, what bitter spirit of contention and discord has possessed them.
They have alienated and clean cut off, the renoumed Churches of Asia, whereof
a great many were planted, with the Apostles own hands. In like manner have
they contended and striuen with the Churches of Africa. And in Europe the seat
of their impiety, neither the Churches of Germanye, France, England,
Denmark, nor sondrie other, but have been divided and rent a sunder with
their quarrels, and in a manner brought to waste, by means of the
controversies they have had with them, and others raised and nourished by them.
But especially their own Italy, as other monumentes, and the pertialities and
factions of the Guelphes, and Gibellines and their present estate does witness.

Moreover Clement the fifth maintained a great contention with the famous
university of Paris about his indulgences. And other of them had a great
quarrel with the begging Friars concerning the order of Monkery. And this has
been the unity which the Popes have had amongst themselves, and with others.
Their Councels also, as being the unquiet body, of so restless and
contentious a head, have been at variance one with annother: as those of
Basile and Constance, and sondrie others. Their Monks and Friars have had
great wars, both amongst themselves and with others, both with the Popes
themselves, with the universities, and with their chief Prelates, as that
which they had with Gad, with Clement the fifth, with the university of Paris,
and the Archb. of Arnach: with whom they agreed little better then the Popes
Nuntie at Paris this last year agreed with the Dominicans, to the most
shameful reproach of their whole Church.

The Canonistes and the Scholemen, byte one another, according to the Apostle,
till they be consumed one of another. The Scholemen, they are also divided
amongst themselves into Reales and Nominals and acording to their captains,
under whose ancient and ba^ner they fight: some are Thomists, some Scotists,
some hold of Occam. This is not according to him yt said, Ioh. 14.27
My peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you. Is Christ divided.
According to these public examples, 1. Cor. 1.13.
their private Doctors and writers have behaved themselves eue^ of late years
in writing one against another, as Catharinus an Archb. and one of the Popes
Minions, Dominicus de Soto, confessor to Charles the fifth: Caietanus, Tapperus,
Pighius, with sundry other, and the Fathers of the Council of Trent, all
which so agreed, that according as it is said of Ismaell, their hands were
every one against all others, and all others against them. Their agreement was
like yt which was amongst the Babilonians after the Lord had stricken them with
the confusion of their tongues, that one understood not another: and like the
discord of the Madianites, who thrust every man his sword into the side of
his own Countryman. Which their contentions and debates were of no small
matters, but of original sin, of justification by faith, of the certayntie
of hope, of the virtue of ye death of Christ, of the virtue of Baptism, of the
supremacy, of the higher authority, of the Pope, or of the Counsels, of the
Church, or of the Scripture, of the residence of Bishops, and such like. I
might here also show how their doctrine disagreeth with it self, one point
overthrowing another, but this may suffice to rebuke the vanity of the boast
of their agreement, and to lay out some part of the evidences which I am to
show against them, to prove that their Church is not that friend, that Dove,
that Spouse of Christ, which is but one, whereof they so often vaunt: but a
contentious and quarrellous company at continual wars with others and amonst
themselves, as the posterity of Ismael, and as the host and tents of Madian.
Now let us see with what dissension he can charge our Church in England.
Wherein if he would have proceeded soundly to the just charging of us, he ought
if he had been able, to have brought out the public confession and articles of
faith agreed unto in King Edwardes time, and have showed any in England that
professing the Gospel dissenteth from them. Or if he would have us to answer
for all that profess our faith in all the world, yet ought he to have sought
out the ancient records and authentike confessions of faith, which the
professors in the several Countries where they are, have exhibited by common
consent and agreement unto their Princes: But being not able so to do, as
shall appear after in the particulers that he alleges, he seeks some
few places out of the infinite works and books, written by some of our
profession, which may seem to have a show of repugnance between themselves.

If a man should deal thus, not only with their wrangling writers, which are
full of quarrels and controversies: but even with the ancient and learned
fathers, it were an easy matter to note, a multitude of differences and
contrarieties in them, in matters of greater importance, then any he charge
us withal. He has made choice especially of three, in whose works he will
show a difference in some points. These three are the famous and worthy
Clerks of blessed memory in the Church of God, M. Luther, P. Melancthon, ^.
Sam. 23.8.9.10.11.
and John Calvin. Three such worthies in the Camp and Tents of the Lord God
of Hosts, as Ioshab, Eleazer, and Shammah, are reported to have been in the
Host of David. For though many have done worthily, and therefore may justly
be accounted in the honorable places of the thirty of David's worthy
Soldiers, and some of them of ye second three, yet hardly have they attained to
these three. Of which three Luther and Melancton, were the burning Lamps and
the shining lights of Germany. Luther clear as the light, shined first as in a
dark place, and as the appearing of the day, to those which sat in ye shadow
of death. He was endued of God with a spirit of power, as Elias: so as he
stood not only against 400. false Prophets of Baal: but against almost
400000. The Lord had made him as he had done Jeremy, a defensed City, and as
a pillar of iron, and wall of brass to all the Kings, Princes, Priests, and
people of Europe. He was a chosen instrument in the Lords hand, an elect
vessel, even a vessel of gold, made of God, to bear his name before Princes
and rulers, and to present the truth of the Gospel to Kings and Kesars, as he
did at Worms in the imperial assembly, to Charles the fifth, to the Princes
Electors, and other the great States and Princes of Germany. If he were rude
in speech as he truly wrote to Erasmus, yet was he not so in knowledge. Nay
both his skill in divinity was profound, and his tongue was eloquent to utter
it. Notwithstanding as the elect vessel so first called, ^ Cor. 12.7.
and the Doctor of the Gentiles, least he should be lifted up with the
Revelations which had been showed unto him in Paradise, being rapt into the
third heavens, received some blows and buffets of the Angel of Satan: so no
marvel if the Lord suffered Luther likewise some other way to take a blow of
Satan, and in some respect to be foiled, that he might humble him, and teach
us to trust in God and not in men. Jacob having seen the face of God in
Peniell, Genesis 32.24.
and wrastled with him all the night, yea prevailed against him (by which
victory he got that new and honorable name of Israel, whereby to this day he
is more renoumed in the Church, then all the Affricani and Germanici which had
their praise of men) yet carried not away such a victory and so great glory
without such a blow that he halted of after all the days of his life. In like
manner this worthy Israelite so saw God, and so wrastled to his everlasting
praise before God and man, as yet he halted and was blemished in some part all the days of his life. Which was for the humbling of him, that the sight which
he had seen, as in Peniel, that the Revelations which he had, as if he had
been taken to the third Heaven and Paradise of God, should not lift him up
above measure: and that the Church hereby should be instructed, to depend upon
no mortal creature, but only upon the Lord. Therefore if he failed in a
point or two, this is not so much to be objected against him, much less
against us: as his name is to be esteemed, for the favor he was vouchsafed of
God, to be his chosen instrument unto us, to discover so far as he did, the
truth which our adversaries had drowned in the bottom of the sea. His spirit
indeed was vehement and hot as fire, his style and pen as a sharp two edged
sword in his hand, and cut like a Rasor, which was given him of God to cut in
sunder the Troops and companies of the enemies of the Gospel. Which if he
were not always able so to wealde and handle, but that sometime also the
sword fell upon those, whom he ought not only not to have hurt, but to have
defended, it was his weakness and infirmity: yet such as ought not to
prejudice his other honorable service, done to God and to his Church, against
their enemies. And so much the less ought it to be prejudicial, because
sometimes he found his vehemence that way, not very well bestowed, and sought
to heal again the wounds, which he had made. Which he did both at other
times, subscribing to the same points he had oppugned: as appears by sundry
letters of diverse men, and by the sollemne agreement, made with the Churches of
Helu^tia and Suenia, and by his own confession to Melancton, as it is
sufficiently testified at his last farewell from him before his death.

Melancton the second light of Germany, was given of God as a great blessing,
and help to Luther in all his battles, who was faithful to him, as was
Jonathan to David. He was excellently learned, not only in Divinity, but also
in the tongues and sciences, and generally in all good learning, as appears
by his worthy labors in them unto this day.

For what art or science was not polished with his learned hand. He fyled the
tongue with his precepts of rhetorike. He made reason more reasonable, by his
skillful rules of logike. He lift up our heads to behold the Stars, and
taught us to look back into the times that are past. Finally, all good
learning received help of his excellent wit.

God gave him a soffter and a milder spirit, a nature more easy to be dealt
with, lovely and amiable, gracious and courteous to all men. Whereby the Lord,
joining those two excellent wits, of contrary nature together, so tempered
them both, as they might be fittest for his service.

Luthers fiery nature needful for him, being to stand in the Front of all
the battle, least it should have been too hot, was mittigated with a gracious
aspect of this sweet nature of the other, and a fit cast of his temperat
beams, for the purpose: Whereby he so increased the light, and aswaged the
heat of Luther, that the Church of God received great benefit by their happy
conjunction. 2. Re. 3.19.
For when Luthers vehement spirit was moved, as was the spirit of Elizeus, when
Iehoram came to ask counsel of him, then Melanctons company and conversation
mittigated his extreme heats and hye displeasures, even as the music which
pacifyed Elizeus, and quyeted his mind that was sore offended. So of the other
part, whereas Melanctons meekness was in danger to be turned into coldness
of zeal, Psalm. 6
and fear to profess the truth which God had made known unto him: Luther was
to him as the Aungel was to the Prophet Esaias, Es. 6.
which by the burning coals of the Lords Altar kindled and inflamed his
zeal. For by his noble spirit of magnanimity, he strengthened and fortifyed
the other against the fear of flesh and blood. Such was the comfort and
benefit which they received of their mutual gifts, to the great edification
of the Church. And this is the golden pair, of two of the worthiest Ministers
of ye Gospel that Germany has brought forth in any age. Out of whose large
volumes the pretended differences objected unto us, are taken and gathered. The
third is John Calvin one of the soundest Divines and of deepest judgment in
matters of religion, both of doctrine and of discipline, that God gave to his
Church this thousand years: whose good name is in deed as ye wise man says, a
most sweet and excellent ointment. Eccle. 7.3.
For howsoever Bolsec and the slanderous defender of the late Censure, have
rayled in ye spirit of Semei against him, and sought to their power to spoil
and mar this precious ointment: yet all that are of the Church in these
parts of Europe smell the savor of it as the Apostles did the narde of Marie,
John. 2.3.
which she powered upon the head of our Savior Christ: and as they that were
in ye Temple did the sweet and fragrant odor of the holy ointment when it was
powered out upon Aarons head, Ex. 30.23.24 25.30. Psalm. 133.2.
and trickled down to the hemme of his garment. This worthy man of God, like
a goodly Star rising first in France, and after ascending to Geneua (where
also it went down) so shined in his time in the mids of the Church, as if
all the Firmament thereof, had been but one Star, and as if in all the Cope
of Heaven, there had shined none other. And these three worthies of all the
Lords host, at once this weak Author has specially chosen to encounter and
to deface with contrariety to themselves, and one with another, putting his
trust as it seems in this: that his surmysed contrarieties should never come
to be examined.

The points wherein he charge them with contrariety, are of the
Sacraments, and first in general, of the number of them: whereof he
affirms that Luther acknowledged but one, Calvin two, Melancton three or
four. For Calvin I confess, he says there are but two, and in deed there
are neither more nor less. For a Sacrament being a seal of our Communion with
Christ, Romans 4.11.
it can not be showed that our Savior Christ appointed any more or less
Seals of the righteousness that is by faith, and our conjunction with him,
then only two, namely Baptism and the Supper of the Lord. Which without any
manner of question or difference, is manifestly declared to be the general
judgment of the Churches professing the Gospel by the book of the harmony of
the confessions of their faith. Which having been long ago exhibited to the
several Princes of the Countries, states, and kingdoms where these Churches
are, are now of late very profitably published, to the just conviction of all
such as slander the reformed Churches to be variably distracted and rent in
sonder, with infinite differences of faith. For it appears by that most
profitable labor that the Lord has knit and united them together, with a holy
unity both sweet as the ointment of Aaron and also profitable and rich as the
due of Sion, Psalm. 133.
and of Hermon. By which pleasant hermony of the confessions both of this
Church and many others, it appears that the general judgment and faith of
our Churches, acknowledges only two Sacraments. Wherein the Churches of God
agreeing so well together, the diverse opinion of a particular man or two, if it
were so, culd not prejudice their holy unity in ye faith. But how untrue it
is, yt is here objected to Luther and Melancton, will plainly be discovered.
For Luther that he ever held or taught that there should be but one
Sacrament as the Author charge. I say is an unjust and slanderous
accusation. In the places he alleges for his proof in the beginning of his
book, of the Babilonicall captivity, after the denying of the seven
Sacraments, and granting of three, which he there expressly names, Baptism,
the Lords Supper, and Penance. His words are these. Although says he, if I
would speak after the use of the scripture, I should have but one Sacrament,
and three Sacramental signs, whereof more largely in his time. By which
words it is evident that Luther meant nothing less, then to teach but one
Sacrament in that sense we here speak of a Sacrament, which conteyneth in it,
both the sign of the Sacrament, or holy thing signified by it, and also the
Sacrament or holy thing it self: for such he plainly confesses three:
Baptism, the Lords Supper, and Penance. But by one Sacracrament, understands
the matter and substance of the sacramental signs, which is in deed but one,
namely our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Which manifestly discovers the
simplicity of this Author, if not having read nor eonsidered the place
himself, he vouched it upon confidence of the collection of some other, or his
very evil conscience: if knowing this to be Luthers meaning, he have so
wrongfully and unjustly slaundered him. Thus for one Sacrament, he has his
answer.

Now to that he obiecteth of three or four. For four he cyteth Melanctons
common places, where Melancton having named three, Baptism, the Lords Supper,
and Penance. he adds after these words. It likes me most, that ordinacion
also be added, whereunto he annexeth this reason: that it is commanded of
God, and that great promise is made to the ministry and preaching of the word.
For answer whereunto it is to be noted, that first in the place alleged, he
names only three, then after adioyneth this, that he could like also the
ordinance of the ministeries (for the commandment of God, to ordain
Ministers, and the promise of God to assist and bless the Ministry of such as
are lawfully called) were also named a Sacrament. Which imports as if he had
said, that in some sense, ordination also may be called a Sacrament. Further
the confession of Ausb. and the Apology of it, as he truly alleges, both
endyted by Melancton, makes mention only of three. Whereby it appears, that
Melancton taught not simply four, but only three, and that the name of a
Sacrament in some sense, might be attributed to the fourth: and for teaching
sake, as he speaks in his Apology, in the title of the number, and use of
Sacraments. Where handling this matter, expressly he uses these words, we do
not think it any great matter although some for teaching do otherwise number,
so that they duly keep the things which are delivered in the Scriptures,
neither did the ancient Fathers number always the same. By which place it
appears, that Melancton (so that the holy things, which are left by the
scripture to be used by us, be observed,) esteemed it not greatly material,
for the name of a Sacrament, to how many or how few of these things it were
attributed, wherein he leans upon the judgment of the ancient Fathers, who
all agreed not of the certain number of those things, which should be called
by this name.

It appears then that Melancton, in this place did not properly call,
Ordination of the Ministers a Sacrament, but in this freedom and liberty
whereof he speaks, not binding himself straightly to the sense of the
word, but using it as he thought good, for more plainness of teaching that
which he would have understood. But yet he will say it remains, that there
are three, by Luther and Melancton.

To this I answer, that it is true that this is the ordinary speech of them
both, when they speak of the number of sacraments to reakon three, namely
Baptism, Luth. de cap. Boh.
the Lords Supper, and Penance: but in such sense, as being well considered, it
shall appear they swerue nothing at all from the general judgment, of the
faith of all our Churches. This I show by a place of Luther, in the end of
his book of the Captivity. Where having said before of Babylon, that in some
sense, there are many things which may be called Sacraments, he adds these
words, yet properly it has been thought good, to call those only Sacraments
which have promises, with signs annexed unto them. The rest because they are
not tied unto signs, are naked promises. Whereby it comes to pass, that if
we will speak exactly, there are only two Sacraments in the Church of God.
Baptism, and the Bread: Seeing that in these only, we see both the Signs
ordained of God, and the promise of forgiveness of sins, for the Sacrament
of Penance, which I have reakoned with these two, wants a Sign visible and
instituted of God, and so goes forward, to prove against the Scoolemen by
their own difinition of a Sacrament, which requires such a visible sign,
that Penance can be no Sacrament. Whereby it appears, that when Luther and
Melancton name any more then two, they speak it in a more general and
improper signification of the word. But when they teach exactly, and attribute
the name to no more then the true difinition of a Sacrament does agree unto,
that then they hold and teach only two, that is Baptism, and the Lords Supper
as Calvin does, and as all the reformed Churches do hold and believe. Which
may suffice for an answer to his cauell of difference in our Churches, and
amongst these learned writers concerning the number of the Sacraments. The
second objection of difference, is of certain Sacraments in particular, and
that of two, of Penance, and of orders. Concerning which two, that Luther and
Melancton sometime call the^ Sacraments, and sometimes not, he has his
answer already, that it is in such sense as they differ not from the
universal judgment and faith of the Church, or one of them from another,
which may be his sufficient answer to all the places which to his purpose he
alleges out of them. As for Calvin, 4.14.18.19.20.
that he should call orders, an vnordinarie Sacrament, it is so far off to
prove that he pretends, that it confirms my answer. For Calvin speaking of
Sacraments, shows that in a general signification, this name may comprehend
all manner of Signs, given of God for better assurance of his promise, of
which sort he names the Rainebowe, the Fleece of Gedeon and such like, but
(says he) I speak here only of those which are the ordinary Sacraments of
ye whole church. And a little after, the Sacraments of the Jews being
abolished, two Sacraments are instituted in the Church, namely Baptism and the
Lords Supper, I speak (says he) of those which are appointed for the use of
ye whole Church. For as for laying on of hands, whereby the Ministers are
ordained, as I do not unwillingly suffer it to be called a Sacrament, so do
I not number it among the ordinary Sacraments. Wherein it is manifest, that
Melancton and Calvin agree between themselves, and both of them with the faith
of the Church. Thus all men may see that we are not as sheep broken out of the
fold, scattered upon the Mountains, and wandering every one a several way in
our opinions, nor giddy as it likes this writer slanderously to term us: but
we are in the Fold kept carefully under one sheepeheard, united in one God,
one Lord, one faith, one Baptism, and the same hope of life everlasting: For
further proof whereof, I beseech the learned reader, yt would be satisfied to
read ye Hermony, of the Confessions of all the Churches which this day make
profession of the Gospel in Europe. And thus much for the unity amongst us,
and their bitter, yea and bloody dissension, contrary to that he boasts of
themselves, and slaundereth us.

Now remains the second argument of this sort, and the last of all his
proofs of the good policy that is in Popery. Which though it be so much more
largely laid out then any of the other, as it seems to be the principal,
and the rest to have served but to make the way before it, and to help him to
utter this his falsely named wisdom and policy, yet he will fondly seem to
fall into it, by occasion of having named policy once a little before. But in
deed his true reason is, that if it were possible he may deceive your HH. with
a name of policy and wisdom: because your HH. being wise, have a special
eye, and as he speaks particular regard unto policy. But the grave and
deep judgment that God has given your HH. will easily discover his pretended
policy, to be but a vain fancy, and cause your wisdoms to abide still
immouable in ye love of ye true, lawful, and holy wisdom, which your HH.
most worthily regard. For who can better prise and esteem so exceeding gifts
more then your LL. who by the use thereof, all this happy time of her Ma.
reign, have found it to be a most necessary and profitable gift, for the
maintenance of a Christian Commonwealth. Which as this Author and his friends,
have found to their small rejoicing, so ye duetiful subjects acknowledge it to
ye glory of God, to ye worthy praise of your HH. to al posterity, and to our
singular comfort. For except the Lord had saved us and made your HH. careful
and wise to prevent and disapoynt their wicked and malicious practices against
us, this State and Church may justly say with the Church of Israel, that now
long ago they had devoured and swallowed us up quick. Therefore as we have
tasted the sweet fruit of this principal spirit of government, wherewith the
Lord has furnished you from above: so our daily prayers to God for all your
HH. are that he may daily more and more enrich your Noble hearts, with the true
and holy fear of him, with the zealous love of his Gospel, with magnanimity
and courage, and all other princely and heroical virtues, fit for Christian
Counselors, to so Christian a Queen professing the Gospel, and namely with
that true wisdom which is from above, which as the Apostle James teaches, is
first pure, Iam. 3.17.
then peaceable, moderat, easy to be persuaded, full of mercy, and of good
fruits, without disputing and without hypocrisy. For as the Prophet Jeremy
said to the false Prophets and lying Priests of his time, so may it be truly
said unto this whole Church of theirs. Ier. 8.9.
How do ye say we are wise, and the Law of the Lord is with us, for certainly
the pen works falsehood, the expert in the Law, work for falsehood. Have
their wise men caused them to blush, have they been cast down and taken.
Behold they despise the word of the Lord. Can any manner of wisdom then be
in them? Surely there can be no true wisdom in them, which is as S. James
says from above, spiritual and of god, but that which is falsely so named, and
is carnal as the Apostle says. Which true wisdom howsoever this Author
boasts to be in their Roman religion (by a sweet enchantment of great
policy to entice whom he may to a liking of it) yet being well considered,
it will be found to be to those that taste it, nothing but as the fruit of the
Tree of knowledge of good and evil, wherewith Satan in ye beginning deceived
Eve, and as S. Ia. says, earthly, natural, and devilish. Earthly because it is
not from Heaven. Natural because it is not spiritual, but only the vain and
foolish discourse of flesh and blood, and of a natural man, who can not
conceive the things which are of God. Deuilish (which follows next to carnal
wisdom, and shows that they which are led by their natural and human
understanding are straight abused by the subtilties of Satan) because it is
not of God, but of the diuill that old and sutle serpent.

It is not pure as S. James declares the heavenly wisdom to be, which is
pure as the gold that is seven times refyned, but base and vile, because it is
allaied and imbased with all earthly and vile respects of their own gain and
ambition whereunto they pretend in their Hierarchy, pilgrimages, pardons,
purgatory, and all other cunning inventions and politic deuyses of their
religion. No more can it be said to be as true wisdom is by the same
Apostle peaceable, moderate, tractable, full of mercy, and of good fruits,
because it is full of Emulation, of bitterness, of contentions, quarrels,
reuenges not to be pacifyed, and hates never to be reconciled, full of bloody
cruelty, and of every evil work. It is not humble and void of dispute and
contradiction, as is the wisdom which is from above, but is full of
oppositions, and replies, encountering the wisdom of God, with vain
discourses of flesh and blood. Where our Savior Christ has appointed the
word of his Cross to be set forth in a sort like it self, and the State of
his Ministers to be agreeable thereunto: their wisdom controlling this for
great simplicity have devised as they suppose, a wiser and a more politic way
whereby it might obtain more favor and credit, which is to make it sweet to
the outward senses, gorgeous for rich apparel, sumpteous for all costly
furniture, statly and princely for pomp, as representing in it, the image of a
kingdom, last of all it is not sincere, but rather full of hypocrisy, because
under an outward appearance of humbleness, and not sparing of the body:
Widows and Orphans houses were devoured, Idleness, Pride, Superstition,
Idolatry, and all impiety, was hidden and covered.

Thus a fair coulor was cast upon a foul Sepulcher of dead and stinking
bones, and in a cup of gold, the Kings and Princes of the earth were presented
with a poisoned wine of all fornication. Which the stories of their
filthiness, of their wars, of their pursuing one another to the death, yea
and after death abundantly testify. Therefore it came never (howsoever he
vaunteth) from our Savior Christ the wisdom of God, nor from his Apostles
(which true wisdom only makes Commonweales to flourish) but from vnpure,
carnal, profane, and devilish wits. Neither has it at any time, or can by any
means soundly uphold and establish a Christian Commonwealth, but always has
been, and both through the justice of God, and by the very nature of it, must
needs be the certain ruin and destruction of all estates which do receive it.

But ere I enter any further into the debating of this matter with him, I will
first set down the state of the question between us in this point, as he
himself has done. That is (says he) that the practice of our doctrine as we
hold it, Page 27.
and of our adversaries as they teach it, whether it be true or false (which at
other times and places is to be discussed:) of ours (I say) do follow infinite
vtilities to a Christian Common wealth, which do not from the doctrine of our
adversaries, but rather the clean contrary hurts and damages, and this is the
state of our question in this place.

In which words it appears that he undertakes to prove that their Roman
faith be it true or false brings infinite commodities to a common weal, and
ours on the other part, be it true or false, the clean contrary
discommodities.

This is a strange point in divinity, and such as scarce one would have
looked to have heard, of a Jew or a Turk, acknowledging any God and truth
in religion, much less of one pretending to be a Christian and a Catholic
and a solliciter as he would seem for, persecuted Catholics, either yt a
false faith can make a wise and flourishing common weal, or that true religion
should be but folly, and the ruin of the state where it is embraced. For the
Prophets and Apostles teach us, that no kingdom, nor state can prosper, no
Prince, no pote^tate or people can be wise or blessed in their government, but
by honoring and obeying almighty God in such sort as he has appointed. Which
doctrine oftentimes is repeated in the law, wherein it is declared unto the
people of God, that this should be their wisdom with all nations which
should say surely, this only is a wise and a politic people, if they kept
without adding or diminishing all the precepts which God commanded. Likewise
that this obedience should be their blessing, that it should be well with
them if they keep his commandments yt the Lord would hate such as hated
them, and afflict such as afflicted them, that the angel of the Lord should
cut down the Cananites before them and bring them into ye promised land,
that they should abide in it and multiplye and be blessed in all that they
should put their hands unto, above all other people. Blessed in the fruit
of them selves, of the earth, and of their cattle, and that they should
enlarge their dominion from sea to sea, and from one flood to an other. Of the
other part, Deu. 28.
if they did not keep the law of the Lord their God, his judgments and his
statutes which he had commanded them, then the Lord threatened to bring upon
them the plagues of Egypt, to curse them in all that they should deal withal
to cast them out of the land, which he had caused their Fathers to possess,
and making wast their cities yea their sanctuaries and their country, to
bring upon them famine and hunger, nakedness, and poverty, dissolution and
captivity.

These and such like sayings of the law, so vehemently uttered unto al
Israel with taking heaven and earth to witness, Deu. 30.19,
that thus they should find it in the end: do plainly testify that such
religion must needs be good for the establishing and prospering a common
weal, which the Lord him self has left unto us, with promise of blessinge
to those that keep it. and contrariwise that no false service of him can be
good for any state, but that it continually provoke the curse and indignation
of God against it. Therefore was the K. commanded to take a copye of the law,
to have it by him, and to read in it all the days of his life, that he might
learn to fear the Lord his God to observe all his words and statutes by
doing of the^ that his mind might not be lift up above his brethren, nor he
depart from it to the right hand or to the left, that he might prolonge his
days in his kingdom, and his Sons in the midst of Israel. Deu. 17.18
19.20


Joshua, 1.8
To like effect was it said unto Joshua let not the book of this Law
depart out of thy mouth, but meditate in it night and day, that thou may
diligently observe as it is written in it. For then thou shalt prosper in thy
ways, and have success in thy affairs. Whereby likewise it is evident that
the blessyng of Kings and Princes depends hereupon, so that they only which
worship the Lord aryght according to his word, Psalm. 2.10 11.12,
have promise of blessing for it, both of this life and of the life to come.

For this cause the Prophet exhorts Kings to be wise, and Counselors to
be well aduysed, that they worship GOD and his anointed: denouncyng unto
the Ennemies the almightye power of Christ, to the confusion of all that set
themselves against him, whereby he should be able as easelye to break
them, as a Man with a bar of Iron does dashe in pieces a Pot of earth.

To this purpose notable is the speech of Asaria the Prophet, 2. Chro. 15
unto King Asa and to all Judah and Benjamin when the Lord had miraculouslye
foiled the innumerable multitude of their enemies.

The LORD (says he) has been with you while ye have been with him, 1 Samuel, 2, 30,
and if ye will yett seek him, he will be ready for you, but if ye
forsake him, he will forsake you. According to that which the Manne of God
had said hereof before. 1. Sam. 15, 23, 26.28. Psalm ^8. 2. Sam. 22
I will honor those which honor me, and despise those which despise me.

This was sealed in the castinge away of Saul, and the choosing and prosperous
success of David as he often acknowledges. Likewise in Solomon the most wise
and Politic Prince that ever sat in the seat of David. 1. Reg. 10
or ruled any people in the woorlde, who because he fullye established the
service of GOD according to all that had been commanded by the Prophets.
The Lord also established his seat and increased his glory above all the
kings of the earth, till he began to decline from the Lord his God, and
brought the abominable Idols of the strange women whom he looued into his
own kingdom and houses and worshipped the^, for then the Lord raised up
his servant against him, who also in the days of his Son so rent away
ten Tribes of Israel from the house of David, 2. Chr. 12, 5,
that they never returned unto it again.

This was the speech of the Prophet Shemaiah, to Roboam and his counselors
and the people of Judah: thus says the Lord, you have forsaken me,
therefore will I also abandon you and give you into the hand of Senacherib.
which was performed, but in mercy upon their repentance.

2, Chr. 13,
Abiah objected against Jeroboam, that he could not prosper because he had
erected Idols in his kingdom and had made him Priests contrary to the law,
and assures him self of Gods assistaunce against him for this reason,
because they had the Lord for their God, who was their Captain, and his
lawful Priests the sons of Aaron sounding the Lords Trumpettes in the
field before them.

Therefore says he, ye children of Israel, fight not against the Lord
the God of your Fathers, for ye can not prosper.

And accordinglye it is added, that the Isralites were overthrown having
50000. chosen men of war slain, and the Jews were strengthened, because as
says the storye they rested upon the Lord God of their Fathers. Diverse was
the estate of the affairs of Asa, according as he walked with God:
prosperinge when he trusted in God, and decayinge when he followed the vain
dyscourse of flesh and blood, and sought to the Asserians for help.

The same is always dylygentlye noted, in the lives of the rest of the
Kings. Amazia, Azaria, Ioas, Ezechia, Iehosophat. Manasses and the rest, even
to the deportation and caryinge away into captivity of both the houses of
Israel and Judah with their Kings for false worship, 2. Reg. 17 2. Chr. 36
and dysobedyence unto the word of the Lord their GOD, as it is notablye
declared in many places of the holy storye and of the Prophets.

These and infinite such like examples which are in the Books of Kings: (For
which would to God all Chrystian Princes and their Counselors did
dyligentlye read them, and cause them to be read and expounded unto them) do
declare true pyetye to be the very base and foundatyon of all sound Wisdom
and Pollicye, and Impyetye, what show soever it have of outward profitte and
commoditye for a season, yett indeed and in the end to be the very cause of
ruin and overthrow to all estates and kingdoms.

The reason whereof is manifest because all Kings and Princes hold their
Crowns and Scepters at the will and pleasure of GOD, who is King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords, as it is written by me Kings do reign, Pro. 8 15. Dan.
4.32
and as Nebuchadnezer by proof and the just chastisement of his pride, in
beeinge cast out seven years from his kingdom, to live with the Beasts of
the field, confesses that GOD dysposeth of the Crowns and Kingdoms of the
world gyuynge and taking them to and from when it pleases him.

As therefore the Tennaunte at will, has no better pollicye then to please his
Lord of whom he holds, so the greateste pollicye and soundest wisdom
that may be used by Kings and Princes, is to please the Lord our GOD, in
all obedience, and namelye in the zealous aduauncemente of his true religyon
and service.

Therefore wicked and deuilyshe is this rule, and not to be patyentlye heard
of Christyan Princes, that false Relygyon, or any dysobedyence unto GOD,
Idolatry, Hypocrisy, Tyranny or any such like, can establyshe the seat of
any King or bring security, wealth, and honor to any state or people, or
that true religion and godliness, that justice and equity should diminishe any
of these and make the state weaker or less assured.

To long has this most false and wicked doctrine abused Princes of weak
judgment, to the turninge of their gold into dross, and their honor into
dishonor. for, what can be more unwise, vnhonorable, and unprofitable in the
end then Idolatry, dissimulation, Injustice and tyranny. Or what can be more
unwise and vnhonorable then a state whose wisdom is nothing but deep
hypocrisy, perjury, and license of all impiety

On the other part what can be more wise, or honorable, then a P: and
state by whom true relygion is zealouslye and sincerelye advanced, justice
vprightlye admynistred, the royal oath, word, and promise of a P:
inviolablye observed, virtue rewarded, vice punished, good laws wiselye made,
ryghtly construed, and duelye executed, and so good a course of government with
all christian and noble magnanimity maintained and auoued.

For surely these two (which conteyne all the rest) religion and justice,
piety and equity, are the most precious Pearls that may annorne the crowns
of Princes: they are Pillars, strong as Iacin and Boos, which were erected in
the Temple, and are named of their stabilitye and strength, whereby their state
is vpholden.

Solomon, the royal Patron of all true state and honor, by wisdom and
understanding, by counsel and magnanimitye, by knowledge and the fear of the
Lord, as by the six steps of his regal throne which were made for that
purpose, ascended into that glorious seat, (as it was noted by the Lions at
his feet on either side) above all Kings of the earth, and satte him down
as a King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Whose glory so sittynge was such, as
he seemed to be a new Adam, reentred into the Paradyse of God, or as the
son of God whose glory in a sort was represented in him.

In which example, the Lord has sealed unto us the assurance of the promise
he has made to honor Princes which honor him, and to cause the states to
prosper and to flourishe which build up the Temple of the Lord, and neglecte
not any thing which he has commanded, for the furtheraunce and
advancement of it.

And as in old time these promises were confirmed in the glorious and happy
kingdom of Solomon: So may we truly acknowledge to the great glory of GOD,
a notable testimony of the fulfillynge of them in the blessed kyngedome of our
most noble Queen. whom the Lord has so wonderfully blessed to have as it
seems some notable example also in these days to seal again unto all the
world the certain truth of this doctrine: That happy is the King and Prince
whose God is the Lord

For how richlye has the Lord blessed her highness and her people in
comparison of all the Kings and nations round about us, with peace and
abundance according to the prayer of the Psalm for Jerusalem are in all the
walls and Palaces of England. Psalm. 122


Such a peace, and such a plentye, as our Fathers never knew, nor our
Chronicles report to have been in the days of any of her Majesty's most
noble Ancestors before her. Our own Country yields us abundance of all
things that grow at home: and foreign Nations serve us with plentye of all
commodities abroad. So that what soever is in the East, or West, what soever
in a manner is under the Poles or between them, we have it brought unto us.
Which continuinge so many years in so calm a peace must needs have
exceedingly enriched the land with wealth and treasure.

The peace of it is miraculous, in so great and long troubles of all our
neighbors about us, and in so many Plots and practices, laid and vndertake^
by the Church of Room, and the rebellious Children thereof, for the
disturbaunce of our peace.

Further also the Lord has given her highness that honor and glory that
never any of her noble progenitors attained unto: which is in her own so
happy estate, to sit as judge and honorable arbitratoure of the causes and
controversies of the greatest Kings of Europe, and of all her neighbors,
weyinge the Ballaunce as it pleases her.

And what is the cause of all these, so calm a peace, so rich a treasure and
so exceedinge great honor. Surely the cause is the same for which the noble
King Ezechias was blessed likewise with riches and honor.

Ezechias opened the door of the temple of the Lord which Ahaz his Father,
had shut up: He cast out the Sirian Aulters, and set up again the
Altar of the Lord in his place, he purged the Temple from the Idols and
abominations wherewith it had been polluted, he caused the presence Bread
to be set upon the presence Table before the Lord, the Lamps of the golden
Candlestick to shine and give light in the Temple of the Lord: he called
home again the Priests and Levites which were scattered abroad, and
appointed liberal provision and mayntenance for them. 2. Chr. 31, 21
Finallye in all the work which he began for the service of the house of
GOD, in seeking his God, both in the Law and in the commandments, he
exercised him self with all his soul and was prospered.

In like manner it has pleased God, that her highness should cast out of his
Temple amongste us, their Roomishe Aulters, their Idols of Gold and Silver,
of Wood and of Stone, Legendes and lyinge Fables, the abominations of the
Mass, and all the wicked and heriticall doctrine of the Church of Room,
service in strange and unknown tongue, with a thousand superstitions used in
it.

In steed whereof, her Majesty has brought in, prayers in our own tongue,
the holy word of God to be read, and truly expounded unto us. The
Sacraments, which are the seals of the Gospel duly administered, the pure,
clean and undefiled Water of Baptism, the Lords Table furnished as the
royal Table of a King, at the marryage of his Son, with the sweet bread
of the finest of the Wheat, and with Wine of a Grape of most noble kind,
that is, with the precious body and blood of our Savior Christ Jesus.

Her highness has calde back again the Ministers of the Gospel, sled as
Elias sometime did into the Wilderness, so to sundry places where they might
find the Lord, as he saw him in the Rock, in Mount Horeb.

Further also her Majesty (which is her special Honor) has as the true
daughter of Sara received under her protection, such as were forced to travail
from place to place, and that for the true profession of the Gospel, and given
succoure and comfort to the persecuted members of Christ Jesus. And for these
it has pleased GOD to prosper her Majesty and to give her a people hollye by
profession in Religion, peaceable in tra^quilitie, rich in Treasure, strong
in forces, faithful and loving to her Highness and her friends: but
fearful and terrible to her enemies. And now, to exalte her Throne, even as
high as Salomons was exalted, what remains to be done, but that as Solomon
furnished the Lords Temple, and established all the order of the house of GOD
in every point, as the Lord had commanded by the Law of Moses and by the
Prophets: So likewise, that her Ma. would finish this far advanced most holy
and honorable work of ye service of God amongst us. for ye furthera^ce whereof,
her highness renowned father, of famous memory, made a statute, whereby it was
enacted, that the Canon law, being ye Law of the Popes, the ancient enemies of
this Land, and the corrupt spring of infinite enormyties in the Church, should
be reuisited by a number of chosen men for the purpose, and such an order set
down, for the good direction and regiment of the Church, as might be most
agreeable, to the Commandments of almyghtie God, and our Savior Christ
Jesus. This godly and honorable purpose, was continued by his noble Son, the
Josiah of our time, and no doubt but had bin performed, to the great service
of God, and edification of the Church, if the Lord had continued his happy
reign amongste us. This so necessary act, for the honor of God, and comfort of
his people, being after repealed, has bin revived again by her highness.
Which being don so long agoo, and nothing remayninge but to appoint fit men
for the purpose: the most humble suit of all Israel of God in the land is,
that a service so holy, so profitable, and so necessary, may no longer be
delayed.

For incourrageme^t whereof, I would to God the speech of Azariah, worthy to be
written in tables of Gold, were engraven in the hearts of all, that ought and
might further this holy cause that he spoke unto King Asa and unto all Judah
and Benjamin: yt is, while ye have been with the Lord, the Lord has been with
you, and if ye will yet seek him, he will be ready for you, but if ye forsake
him, he will forsake you, as he has done the Isralites, who of long time
have been without the true God, without a teaching Priest, and without the Law,
and the Lord has vexed them with all calamities accompaniyng civil wars and
dissentions, be ye therefore of good courage to procure the further
advancement of GODS service, and let not your hands be feeble, for there is
a reward for your work: So Likewise it may be truly and fytlye said, to our
most noble Queen Elizabeth which was said to Asa, and to all her highness
nobilitye, as to the royal seed of Judah, and to all the people, as to
Benjamin, that surely the Lord has been with you, while you have been with
him. And no doubt but if ye shall yet go forwards to do every thing which
the Lord has commanded, and seek him with all your heart, no doubt I say but
he will yet more and more enlarge him self toward you, and increase all your
good estate exceedinglye, so yt all the world shall say, what an honoarble and
happy Nation is this which the Lord tendereth so dearlye, and aduaunceth
above all the Kingdoms of the World. So shall this Doctrine that I am now
debating with the enemy, be made clear and manifest, that true relygion, can
never be dangerous to a Common Wealth, but does always cause it to prosper
and to flourish, which the Lord our gracious God grant may be confirmed more
and more by our happy experience. But the other part, the Lord turn from her
Majesty, from all the Nobles and People of the Land, and teach it them, by the
woeful experience of their enemies: wc is yt if you forsake ye Lord you shall
also be abandoned of him, If Isarell be suffered to be without a teachinge
Ministry, as it is yet in a great part of the dominion, and without the
ordinary preaching of the Gospel, then the Lord will punish with like or
greater punishment then Israel was punished withal. Therefore the Lord
strengthen your hands, that they be not feeble, but that they may be strong to
build up that which remains, for undoubtedly there is a reward for the
work. Thus returnyng to mine Adversaries most wicked and ungodly Paradoxe
again, I conclude, that this Azaria and Shemaiah, this Moses and Samuel, this
David and Solomon, with the rest of the Kings of Israel and Judah. this also,
all the Prophets and Apostles teach us: that godliness and true Religion
establishes the seats of Princes, and prospers the estate of all people
which receive it with that obedience they ought to do: and contrariwise,
impiety, and false worship is the certain ruin and curse of the Nation which
does embrace it. And except it were in Rome, the School of error (as one of
their own Poets does truly witness against them) and the Temple of heresy,
and of such as have been nufled and brought up in her Seminaries of tares, I
think it was never hard of, which our pretended Catho. here would presume:
that Catholicisme and Popery tho it be false religion, yet should be fit to
make a common wealth to florishe, or that the Gospel, tho it be true (as it
is) yet should be cause of infinite hurts and discommodities to the state where
it is received.

But because this is so boldly avouched let us examine the reasons of this his
confident and erroneous speech. His proofs are first general, and of this
sort he has two arguments. Whereof the first is the experience both of other
Kingdoms and of our own, which have believed and received, this his Roman
Catholic Faith, and have flourished by it. whereunto I answer if it were true
that he affirms that they had so prospered, yet he faulteth much in affirming
that to be the cause of their prosperity which was no cause. For that being
true which I have already sufficiently confirmed, that a false worship and
heresy can never be profitable to any common wealth and people: it being no
less true ( Moses, and Christ himself being witnesses) yt this Romain faith is
a false worship full of superstition and Idolatry and full of error and
heresy. the^ notwithstanding it were so that Kingdoms entertaning this heresy
had prospered for a time, yet should it never follow thereof that their
Idolatry had been the cause of their prosperity.

No more then the wicked abominations of the heathen were cause why some of
them have prospered for a season, and that more for honor of a large dominion
then ever the King of Judah did. The Assirians the first Monarchy of the
world ruled in a manner all Nations for many years, many Kings succeedinge
one an other in the royal seat of Assiria. After them arose the Persians who
subduing the Assirians, obtained the Monarchy, and reigned likewise a space
succeeding one an other. Then came ye Grecians who preuayling against the
Persians, made themselves masters of the^, and almost of ye world. Last of all
the Roman Empire abolishing the former, succeeded in the souerantie, and
possessed it, first in Room and after in Constantinople and again in the West
to that decayed estate which now remains of it, when ye great Turk had
seized upon Constantinople, and all the East part of the Empire. So Tamerlan
the Tartarian had a time, as also many other horrible Tirantes wherein they
prospered.

That these prospered for a season, he cannot deny, as he accounts
prosperity, but I think he will not say, that the detestable profession of
Mahomet, or the Pagan and Heathen abominations of the Monarchs unto
Constantine in the Roman Empire, were the cause of their prosperity. It is
manifest they were not, but rather the cause of their final ruin and
overthrow, as not ceasing to call for vengeance to God, until he with his
Thunderbolt from Heaven had stricken the^. What was ye cause then? Surely this,
the goodness of God who does good even to the unthankful and ungodly, who
lets his Rain to fall-vppon the Feeld of the just and unjust, and causes
his Son to shine upon the Christian and upon ye Heathen. An other may be,
that the Lord purposing to execute his just Judgments upon the Kings of the
earth, for their Idolatries, oppressions, violences, murders, adulteries, and
all such like their impieties, raised up from time to time (as he does also
even unto this day) some to serve him in the execution of his high Justice
upon the^. For which cause the Lord does make some Nation to grow strong and
mighty as the Oaks of the Forest, that he may use it for a Staff in his
hand to chastise the Nations, Which when it has performed, he casts it
into the fire and rayseth up another for the consuming of them. These are the
true reasons, the Lords mercy and Justice, which caused them for a time to
flourish as the Ceder in Libanus, which after he cut down, and so grubbed by
the Roots, that the place of many of them is no more to be known: and not
their wicked Idolatries which the Lord always abhorred. even so do I say of
all the Kings that have received Popery, and have prospered for a season,
that not their Idolatry and Heresy, but that the goodness of God, doing
well unto his enemies, that his Justice to punish those that love not the
truth, was the cause of any prosperity that ever they enjoyed. Again (I
say) that if the Books be well looked it will easily be found, that their
pretended Catholic Faith and Roman Religion has been pernicious to most
noble states, and in the very nature of the doctrine, and the practice of it
is contrary to the wealth liberty, honor, and authority, of any state or
kingdom. The Roman Empire may sufficiently bear witness of it. For the
Empire having pity to see that Church creepinge, as it did in the beginning
upon the ground, suffered it to grow up by it and to embrace it: (as the Yuie
does upon the Oak. as some have well compared it) whereof the Empire being
amighty tree indede, felt not at first any annoyance, but now has declared yt
it has sucked it in such sort, as it has drawn out all the juice and vygure
of it, and brought it now to a withered stock, scarce able to bear the
barren branches that are upon it. For by means of exco^municating and cursing
the Emporors, by gyuing the Empire to whom it pleased them, by forcing wars
between the house of France and the Empire, and other the noble houses of
Europe, the Pope has brought to pass that now there is no Emperor at all at
Room but him self.

As for other kingdoms in Europe, that have prospered, and now seem most to
flourish: I say thereto, it rose, and ryseth from other causes* for it is
manifest by all stories, that the Popes have been the very firebrands to set
them afyre, sowing causes of wars between the^, They have been the very
insatiable leaches of their treasure, which could never be satisfied. Tyrants
that have oppressed not only the lawful liberty of the people, but also the
royal power and aucthority of their Princes, yea of Kings and Emperors.
Wherefore neither Asia, Greece, Egypt, Africa, Hungary nor any other have
been overthrown for abandoning that superstition, neither is it to be feared
of any Country that in these days have altered and reformed themselves herein,
but the admitting and receiving of this superstition with other wicked
Heresies, or the changing it not for better, but for the worse, the contempt
of the word of God and of his holy doctrine of the Gospel which every where
impugneth this (as it appears by S. John) has indeed removed the
Candlestick and the true light from amongst them, and will do likewise from
every nation yt shall not bring forth the worthy fruits thereof.

And thus as many other Nations heertofore, so it may well be that both the
Countries near unto us, for refusing to have Christ to reign over them, yea,
and all the world for the like contempt may be plagued with horrible
calamyties. These may iustlye bring wrath upon any Nations, not the reforming
of Popish superstitions, according to the truth and sincerity of the
Gospel. And thus much for his experiences of this imagyned prosperity of
Popish States, his first proof in this Question. Now let us examine his
second reason.

This Argument, is from the cause which may make any State to florishe which
he aleadgeth to be unity, and affirms the Church of Rome to have the
means to keep it, and the professors of the Gospel to want both it and the
means thereof.

Whereunto I answer, as to the same Argument alleged before, that not every
agreement and consent is pleasing to God, or profitable to men: For there are
agreements in Idolatry, in adultery, in robbery, in conspiracy, in murders,
and in all iniquity, which are all odious to God and hateful to men. and of
this sort is the unity that is amongst them which is no better then a
conspyracie against GOD and his Poeple to mayntaine Heresy and all iniquity.
but let him show us a unity amongst them of Brethren not of Freres so falselye
called, but of Brethren that are the Sons of one heavenly Father, the heirs
annexed with Christ, yea and by him alone of that same faith and church
pertakers of the same Holy word, doctrine, and Sacraments, and then I will
confess that unity to be both pleasant and profitable, as it is in 133.
Psalm:

And that the Lord has commanded his blessinge to be amongst them even life
for ever.

But the means of this unity, he affirms their Roman Church to have, and
denies to be in the Churches that profess the Gospel. The means and causes
of unity he appoints to be these 2. understanding scriptures according to
the expossitions of their forefathers, and obeying the determination of one
supreme Pastor, with the general councels of Christan Prelates which keeps
their Church in unity: and the contrary causes to be amongst us and to rend
us into infinite varitie of oppinions. How it is with us I will after show, but
first how it is with them. The two means which he names in effect are but
one. For if there arise question of any exposition of the fathers who shall
deciude the matter, shall not this supreme Pastor of theirs with his general
council determine as well of the sense of the fathers as they refer to them
th'exposition of the scriptures. No doubt he means (as their scholemen write
of the Pope) to put all things under the feet of him that is supreme, that he
might be little less, then the Angels crowned with glory and honor. Nay
they make Angels also subject unto him that at his commandment they should
come down from heaven to fet souls out of Purgatory and to carry them up
with them to heaven again: as if this supreme Pastor stood at the top of
Jacobs ladder, (one of the special honors and regalities of our Savior
Christ:) and had the Angels of God discendinge down and ascendinge up unto him
and at his commandment. For the exposition of the fathers understanding by
this name such as lived before ye Apostasy, we receive them as far as either
the authority of the holy scriptures or of the fathers themselves will suffer
us. And further, neither we nor any other ought to receive them. To admit
every exposition made by any father for good and sound, or every point of
doctrine delivered by them for Christian and Orthodoxe I think, the adversary
himself will be ashamed to do it. For there are not a few matters in them even
the very best of them contrary to the express word of God, even the Church
of Room giving sentence. And the fathers themselves retractinge in their
latter years that they wrote before, and such as succeeded correcting, (and yt
many times iustlye) that had been written by those which were before them.
What unity may this be, that should rest upon authors not agreeing neither
with them selves, nor one of them with an other.

It were needels here to repeat the sentences of the Fathers so often alleged
on our part, wherein they testifye that they profit writing, and write still
profiting, that they would have every man to read their works as they read
other men's, where they agree with the holy Canonical Scriptures to receive
them, where they disagree to leave them. The reason whereof is such as neither
the fathers could take more neither we give more unto them. For ye holy
scripture as it is not of private inspiration, but of the inspiration of ye
holy Ghost, and delivered by holy personages, qualified with lawful calling
from God, to be his authentical witnesses of his truth unto us: so likewise as
S. Peter declares, it is not of private exposition. 2. Pet. 1.20.21
This place I know is depraved by the^ against us, as if our expositio^s were
al private and theirs only public, which are made by the Pope and his counsel.
But ye Apostles meaning there, is plain to oppose private, to ye inspiration
of ye holy ghost and to ye persons of such as were qualified by a calling
immediately from God, to be the publik instruments and Ministers of it unto us.
Which as it is plain to be ye sense of private, in ye mention yt is made
there, of delivering ye scriptures, so likewise is it to be understood in ye
exposition of them. Whereby appears that ye exposition and no other, is of
public authority and to be received, which proceeds from the holy Ghost,
and is given by the Prophets and Apostles, tho it be so auowed to be but by
one man: and contrariwise, the sense that is repugnant or not agreeing to this,
is a mere private sense, tho made by as great Godly and learned a general
council as ever was, which appears by the memorable story of Paphuntius and
ye most famous council of Nice, altering their determination, concerning the
forbidding of the marriage of ministers at his speech discovering their error
and leaving it free, according to the true sense of the scriptures, whereof
Paphuntius did admonish them. Therefore I affirm ye sense of the scriptures
only to be received, which may be showed to be of the spirit of God, and is
grounded upon ye writings of ye holy cannonical scriptures. Now ye way to
attain to this sense, is by earnest prayer to God, and diligent study,
especially of the text it self, and then also of al other helps which may
further to the attaining of the true understanding of it. Of which sort are the
tongs and the arts. Grammar, whereby the Etimoligie and propriety of every
several word may be known, and ye Syntaxis, yt is the conjunction and
disposition of one with an other: whereby the natural sense as far as ye art may
help, may be understood. Rhetoric to discern the tropes, of several words
which with great grace besides their first signification are applied to note
some other thing, and the figures wherewith the sentences are many times made
sharp to rebuke, power full to persuade, and fitly applied to bend and bow the
mind to yt which is entreated: without the knowledge whereof many times the full
meaning of ye sentence cannot be understood. Logic to know how every thing is
affected to an other in a several regard: or in the disposition of the^
together, to discern of the^ acording to their placing, as if in a sentence,
of truth or untruth of it, if in proof of a thing, whether it be forcible and
strong to prove or no, or if in a longer discourse of ye confusion or the good
order and suit of ye treatise. Thus all these arts are great helps to him yt
will labor hapely and with any great fruit of knowledge, either in this or any
other study. Further also al other good sciences whatsoever bring a furthera^ce
hereunto. For as when ye scripture speaks of ye creatures, he that has skill
in natural philosophy, shall be better able to understand yt which is spoken
then another, and the discriptio^ of sundry places shall be better conceived by
him yt has sight in Cosmogrophie, so is it of al other good sciences and skils
in ye world, ye knowledge whereof does bring his gift unto us, to further us in
this study, so furnished ought he to be that should be an interpreter of the
scriptures. And as he is to use those helps of tongues and humane sciences, so
especially to labor the learned works of such good writers as have
profitably travailed in that study. Amongst whom the ancient fathers are
worthily accounted, who no doubt by their earnest prayer to God, by help of the
tongs and many arts and sciences, and especially study and exercise in the
word of God, have left us great help and furtheraunce in many things. Which
age was surely a happy and golden age, in respect of many excellent wits,
which the Lord gave to his church in those days much about one time in an age
or two together. For both their mutual examples greatly furthered their
diligence, and the dangers of many subtle and cunning heretics, with whom
they were to deal, for the maintenance of the truth. By which and such like
means it pleased God singularly to bless the most of them, with great skill
and judgment in the scriptures, especially in such points as their wits were
most exercised in by occasion of adversaries. For which as they shyned in their
time, like burning lamps in the golden candlestick, and as fair and bright
stars in the firmament of the Church, so we both reverence their worthy memory,
and read diligently their learned writings. Wherein if we find that by all the
means God gave unto the^, they show us by conference of the scriptures, the
true meaning of them, and help to teach us where an Apostle plainly expounds
a Prophet, or where a Prophet gives light to understand that which is obscure
in an Apostle: We receive it with their just commendation and praise, and with
thanksgiving to God, and use it to ye edification of the church. But if at any
time for want of leisure and diligence, or for some humane affection, or
because it pleased God they should be contented with such a measure of his
gifts, who bestows his spirit as pleases him, we find any thing mistaken
in some place of scripture, not understood or wrested from his sense, some
point of faith not agreeable to ye body of doctrine delivered unto us by ye
prophets and Apostles: the^ without their reproach and with acknowledgement of
ye infirmity yt is in man, we leave them and rest upon the authority of those
who are fathers both to them and us. More then this, what he can give to the
fathers I do not see, if he will bind us always to their exposition, the^
let him show us to what fathers, and to what points of the^, seeing want has
bin found in the best of the^. If to the consent, then let him show who^ and
how many he will consort, and sufficient ground why the doctrine of religion
should be ruled by the^. For our savior Christ and his Apostles never left us
any such rule. And yet if it were lawful for us to leave ye trial of the word,
and to argue it by their authority, we are never a whit the nerer for any end
of our controversies. For if ye writings of ye holy scriptures endited
thorowout by the spirit of truth, and every where co^sorant to it self, be
subject to this to be diversely expounded: how much more shall the writings of
me^ not only by possibility subject to err, and to dissent from them selves,
but which indeed have erred and forgotten them selves, so far as in one place
to contrary yt which they have set down in another, how much more I say shall
such writings be diversely drawn into sundry expositions. And the^ who shall
determine of ye true meaning of ye fathers. If it might be iuged according to
truth, we doubt not but even by them to prove against our adversaries, most of
the things which are in question between us, he apointeth a way, which is ye
second cause he assigns of ye vnio^ of their churh, yt is ye determination of
ye suprem pastor, meaning yt B. of R. whereby he makes common ye roial style
and title of christ, with every Boniface and Gregory, every unlearned monk and
ungodly priest, which shall come to be B. of R. with ye general counsel of
christian prelates. But I put ye case yt prelates and their suprem pastor do not
agree Which is a possible case, for it has fallen out more tha^ once or twice,
the^ would I know whether ye pope should be above ye counsel, or ye council
above yt P. I see both by yt generally, our english papists ar more given to
hold with the P. by this authors setting this down, yt ye pope with the^ is to bear
the bell away. And so ye truth of God which is not to be over ruled by all me^,
shall be co^trolled by one many times an ignorant friar of little learning and an
ambitious prelate of great presumption and folly. But if they should agree, yet
is yt no sufficient warrant for us. For daily is it fulfilled in ye doctrine of
the gospel, yt which once was performed in the person of our sau. Christ yt the
Mr. builders of ye house of god reject ye chief corner stone The hie priests,
ye Scribes, Pharisees, Elders, and the hie consistory of ye whole visible church
the^ upon earth condemned ye holy one of god: Mat. 26.65.66. Es. 53.7.
they pulled and fleece from the lamb, and drove ye sheep before the^ to ye
slaughter who opened not his mouth. Likewise Annas and high priest and Chaiphas
(high priests) at ye co^demnatio^ of Christ with John and Alexander, and all ye
rest of ye house and stock of ye high priest, with and Scribes and Elders of
the people condemned the doctrine of the gospel, Acts. 4.5.6.17.18.
and forbad the Apostles with straight charge and comminations, to preach any
more in the name of Jesus. These (whatsoever our adversaries vainly apply to
this purpose, which is otherwise true of ye greter grace of ye gospel) had more
lawful calling, and larger promises the^ their B. of Rome can pretend any, and
yet they erred not only in a mattter of fact but of faith, not as private men,
but as hie priests, and yt in their judicial sentences, sitting in the midst
of the consistory. How much more then may he who has no such calling of
supreme jurisdiction in ye church, nor any more by the word of God, the^ any
minister of the gospel, tho he were lawful B. be deceived and err even in
matters of faith, and that in his judgments pronounced from his seat of pride.
And if then he be subject to error being ye head, it must needs follow yt the
inferior members must needs be in danger of the same. For which cause this can
by no means be sufficient to keep the church in the unity of one true and holy
faith. If it had been so fit and necessary for this purpose, surely our Savior
Christ would never have forgotten to have mentioned it, and exhorted us to
obedience unto it, Ioh 13.34.14.27.
who was so careful that his disciples should continue after him in the same
peace which he gave and left unto the^, and the same love wherewith he loved
the^. Now the Apostle so earnestly exhorting hereunto, and gathering to this
end, all the chief reasons which ought to join and unite ye faithful, one with
an other, as one God, one Lord Jesus, Ephesians. 4 4.5.6.
one faith, one baptism, one body, one spirit, one hope of their calling,
would never have forgotten this: whereupon it seems by the^ that all this unity
should depend of one supreme pastor, whom all ought to obey. As this reason of
unity is alleged for ye pope, so is it for all the rest of his hierarchy, the
very image of the beast, that is of the Roma^e empire some shadow of ye glory
whereof this Antichrist would have expressed in his Prelates after him, to whom
it has as much reason as in himself. Pity it is, that in so fair and clear a
light of the day, and in this fullness of the brightness of the sun, any
state should not see that as not being appointed of God to be any means of
the intertaining of good agreement in the Church: so contrariwise through his
wrath and just judgment, for the perverting of his lawful and holy ordinances
which only should rule ye church in these cases, that it has been and yet is
the most effectual instrument of Satan to hinder the prosperous and
flourishing estate of the gospel. For hereby in his supreme Vicar upon earth,
he sits as the strong man of whom we read in the Gospel, harnesed and
armed in the midst of his hall and Pallaice, possessing al his house in
peace, till his weapons wherein he trusts most, whereof this is chief, be
taken from him by our savior Christ, who is stronger then he, and so cast out
of his possession. The ambition of P. and of the people, has been one cause to
uphold it so long, who as the prophet co^plaineth, delight in it and take
pleasure to have it so, yt their priests should exercise authority, and by
their pomp increase the state and honor of the^ both. An other the weakness of
judgment even in those which were wise, who seeing worldly states thus
governed, and not knowing the ordinances of our savior Christ in this case,
thought it a thing conuen^ent. And it is to be feared, that the allowaunce of
this popish hierarchy springs in some: pretending to be Catholic from a
most bitter root, as seeing hereby that through the gifts they receive of
them, they shall always have them at commandment, to apply religion as may
be fittest to serve their turn. But when the Lord shall of his goodness
vouchsafe to we^de out this root of wormwood out of their hearts, and to
lighten their eyes with true knowledge, they shall see both that to be true,
which has been in this matter declared, and further yt this supremacy and
whole hierarchy, as it is no means of unity in truth, so is it the very cause
of keeping out the truth, in so many places and detaining the knowledge of God
unjustly and in captivity. For whereas ye fathers in their councils bind
themselves by a solemn oath to do nothing against the present state of the Pope
and his Church, and that the greatest part of the abuses which are to be
reformed in the Church of Rome, are such as their supreme pastor, and his
Hierarchy are guilty of, if they call never so many counsels for ye purpose,
Vrspergensis
yet if they be sworn and vowed one to another, to maintain al their
abhominatio^s still, and yet all men be to follow the determination of the pope
and his prelates: what hope is there yt ever they should condemn them selves and
their gainful errors, what loss soever it be to ye world. For as if things
were reformed according to the truth of the Gospel, his fatherhood should part
with his triple crown and leave his riding upon men's shoulders, so every member
of his body for his place in it must make less of more the^ they would be
willing to part withal. Wherefore their councils are but for the establishing
of their own kingdom in the world. And as are their general councels, such are
their national and lesser synodes of like men, and for like purposes. To
consult of the best way for the reformation of abuses, and of furthering ye
service of God, and of his people, not a word is amongst them. For the chief
abuses are in themselves It were to be wished therefore that all Christian P. or
if such as pretend to be catholic will not, yet at the least, they which
make holy profession of ye truth of the Gospel, as far as this advise may
be necessary for them, regarded the reformation of so great abuses, and
established the only lawful discipline in the Church, which is the mean that
Christ has appointed, for ye keeping of the unity of the spirit in the bond
of peace. Further where he blames us to receive no man's exposition, but our
own, and to despise councelles: he is to understand that we receive the
exposition of any man, be he never so simple, which is agreeable to the word
of God. We allow and desire, we hold expedient and necessary, lawful and holy
meetings, of conferences, of synodes and councels, and would most willingly yt
our cause might be debated in a free lawful and general Council. Which would
to God we might see, (if it be the Lords good pleasure) so assembled and
ordered by the mean of Christian Princes: as the word of God prevailing, and
all our controversies taken away, there might be but one flock and one sold,
as there is but one shepherd Christ Jesus. And if this cannot be obtained
without most unequal conditions, of appointing him to be judge of our cause, who^
we are to charge before God and his whole parliment of saints and ye reverend
assembly of such a general and free counsel, as we according to Gods word do
desire, to be ye very same Antichrist whom ye scriptures foretold should come
for just punishment of ye wicked, (by having power to seduce into errors and
apostasy, such as had not the love of ye truth) and the very head of yt
harlot whom S. John painteth out in her colors in the revelation, which has
made al kingdoms drunk with the cup of her fornicatio^s: we must for yt remit
ourselves to ye great day of trial, when Christ shall come with thousands of his
mighty angels, to judge the quick and the dead, and before men and angels,
before heaven and earth, al creatures bearing witness of his justice, give
sentence with us and against our adversaries. But if this so greatly to be
desired throw their unreasonable dema^ds, to be judges in their own cause,
being to stand arraigned and endited of high treason against God, and all the
states of christendom, the^ would to God yet it might be obtained of such
christian P. as profes the gospel, yt there might be a general and free council
of all the churches wtin their dominions. The benefit whereof, through ye blessing
of god must needs be inestimable, both to the present state of ye church, in
redressing whatsoever may be amiss in ye churches of the gospel, and by such
reformation, recovering thousands of our pore brethren, (who now sitting in ye
darkness of yt spiritual Egypt, as in the vale and shadow of death, by such
occasion might have their eyes opened to discern where ye body is, whereunto as
Egles they might resort: and also to all posterity, who having ye holy faith
of Christ, according to ye truth of ye gospel, as an enestimable treasure, left
and committed to their trust to be delivered over from age to age, to ye end of
the world: should have infinite cause to glorify and praise God for so
unspeakable a benefit, and reverently to keep with all honor ye famous names of
their so christian and noble P. and predecessors in everlasting memory. Which
so honorable an enterprise for the service of God, and ye infinite commodity of
ye church, tho I be not worthy upon my knees to make any such motion unto your
H. yet apprehe^ding ye service to be as I have declared, with your Ll favors, as
kneeling before your most noble court in all humility and reverence, I most
humbly beseech your H. for the zeal you bear to God and to his only Son Christ
Jesus, for ye love to ye faith of the Gospel, whereby in a blessed hope you wait
and atte^d for ye salvation of your souls, for ye pity you must needs have, to
see the renting of Christendom into so many sundry sects, and partial opinions,
to the certain peril of the everlasting destruction of many: and finally for
the happy direction not only of your own noble children and childrens
children, and of your own country, but of all the posterity of Christendom, yea
of all the world, to whom the knowledge hereof may come: yt it may please your
good Lordships to become the honorable means and mediators, to her most
excellent majesty, to undertake this so christian and famous an enterprise, and
to see it performed to the great glory of almightye God, and the salvation of
all such as he has appointed to everlasting life. It has pleased God to give
her majesty a royal K. with the treasure and peace yt never any of her noble
progenitors in such sort enioied before her: whereby of all ye princes
professing the gospel, her majesty is most able to undertake and perfourm so
worthy an enterprise. Besides her highness honor for her most worthy deserts,
is such with them all, as no doubt but the rather if her Majesty enter into
this action, they will also most gladly and willingly imbarke them selves into
it, and send the chief of the ministry within their dominions for excellent
gifts of God, requisite for so great a business into her noble Realm, to
further that holy fruitful and famous work, with all the means which God
has given the^. This shall make her grace of all Princes next unto Solomon in
honor, for the buildyng of the Lords house, and unto Constantine surnamed the
Great: not only for the glory of his great victories, but also for his great
zeal to advance the Gospel. When the Church was grievously molested with the
most wicked Sect of Arrians, this Constantine the great, one of her Majesty's
most noble Ancestors, called a General Counsel of all Christian Kings and
Provinces, even that most ancient, famous, and reverend Counsel of Nice:
whereby the detestable heresy of Arrius was condemned: that most true and holy
doctrine of our savior Christ to be God, was notably confirmed, and the
dangerous troubles of the church were in time happily appeased. This holy
and memorable example of so mighty a prince, and one of her Majesty's most
noble Progenitors, may be a worthy president for her Highness to follow,
being a thing which GOD has implanted in all noble Natures, if a House,
Nation or Kingdom, have been honorable for any special virtue which has
shined in them, to be careful to maintain that honor won unto it. But
there was never any more noble act, virtue, nor honor: neither in this nor in
any other Kingdom or Prince whatsoever, that may be more glorious to the
posterity that shall maintain it. And no way so fitly can it be maintained,
as it may if it would please her Majesty to use her treasure, her honor and
creditt, with all good Princes, professyng the Gospel (which GOD no doubt
has given her, for such use as he did to Solomon, for the buildyng of his
spiritual house, which is his Church) to so hie a service of immortal fame
with all posterity. Wherefore, being a matter so full of true honor to
perform, and so worthy for your HH. to procure: I hope and wish with all my
heart, even for your HH. sake, that it may please GOD to move and dispose your
noble minds, to take in hand the solicitation of so great a service to God
and his Church, and that the Lord would vouchsafe your HH. so great favor,
as to be his Speakers in such a cause. I would gladly dwell still in this my
most humble suit, or the suit rather of the whole Church of Christ, offered to
your Lorshippes by my unworthy hand: and particulerly calling upon you, by
the names of the honorable places, which under her highness you most worthily
occupy: most humbly beseech such of you my good Lords, which have favor
with her Maiestis in suites, to imploye that favor which GOD has given you
with her highness, in this as worthy a suite as ever was undertaken, and
such as diffray her royal charges for the Common service of the public
state of the Church and Kingdom, or write and seal her highness royal
Letters and Pattentes, cheerfully to encourage her Majesty to the imploiyng
of some part of her rich treasure in so holy and noble an act, and to offer
cherefully your own service to the furtheraunce of it. Which may be
accoumpted to you of GOD, as the noble gifts bestowed by the Princes of the
Tribes, at the setting up of the Tabernacle: and again at the buildyng of the
Temple in the time of David. But because I rather wish your Lordshippes gifts
should be free cheerful and voluntary, as being given to the Tabernacle and
Temple of God, then strained by importunacie of suite. Therefore, most humbly
and earnestly praiyng God to direct your HH. I leave and conclude this cause,
whereunto by occasion I have a little disgressed with this only word, that
if you shall become the lords spokesmen in this, the Lord Jesus shall
abundantly reward you for it, by being your Mediator for the forgiveness of
your sins, and the salvation of your souls with God his Father. Thus leauyng
this most humble suite: not of one, nor of a few but of the whole Church of
Christ unto your Lordshipps godly wisdoms: I now return again to make
answer to mine adversary. To his former reasons, without any sufficient
reason, that there must needs be infinite varieties of sondrie Sects and
opinions amongst us: He adds this, that we make the Temporal Prince head
of all, which is oftentimes a child, and may easily be driven as the winds
shall blow him. Wherein he does us as great wrong as in the former. For as
he unjustly charged us there, with not obeiyng any Pastor, not receiuyng the
expositions of the Fathers, nor determinations of Councels, who teach
obedience to all lawful Pastors, and both receive and use all other good
means to the understanding of the holy Scriptures, as far as they may so
help us, and especially of the lawful Councelles and learned Fathers, though
we give no Pastor the place of Christ, nor any Council or Father, that which
is due only to the word of God. So likewise he does in this place, chargyng
us to give to Caesar that which is due to GOD. True it is, we acknowledge the
lawful Kings and Queens of this land, in respect of any earthly power, to be
next and immediately under God, and our Savior Christ over all persons, and in all causes as well Ecclesiastical as civil supreme heads and governors: that
by their authority all the will and commandments of GOD may be executed
and obeyed. Wherein nothing less is meant then to derogate from our Savior
Christ any part of the hye honor and prerogative that appertains to the
King of Heaven: which is, to subdue our spiritual enemies under our feet, to
animate and quicken the whole body with his most holy Spirit, giuyng life and
strength to every part and member of the body, to do that work for which it
is placed in it, or to rule it otherwise then he has appointed. But the
meaning is to acknowledge in them that just and lawful authority, which the
Church of Room takes from them, and which GOD has given unto them: and all
the noble Kings of Israel and Judah did with good right and interest exercise
and inioye. We are far from perswadyng our Princes to take the holy Censures
into their hands, a presumption for which Vzza the King was stricken with
Leaprosie by the hand of God. But yet we acknowledge as we ought,
notwithstanding, they do not exercise, nor may not exercise the office of the
Ministry in their own persons, yet are they the Lieutenauntes of God to see
him worshipped and obeyed by all persons, as they ought to obey him, and by
punishment to force the Transgressors to the doing of such duttie as
belongs unto their places and calling. And thus we read that David and
Sulomon Ezekia, Iosius, and other worthy Kings did. Who reformyng the state
of Religion, which had been polluted and defiled before with shameful
Idolatries, appoincted the Priests and Levites every one to do his office,
according to his function and charge. Agreeably whereunto the Apostle teaches,
that every soul ought to be subject to the hyer powers. Whereby it is
manifest, that he comprehends the Ministers, of what name soever they be as
well as others. And our Savior Christ submittyng himself unto them, what
professor is it that should not obey them: but such a Servant as will be
better then his Lord, and such a Scholar as will be above his Master.
Herein therefore we give nothing unto them but theirs, which God the Lord of
all has bestowed upon them. And therefore, if a Child as Josias was be King,
we acknowledge and reverence the authority in him, as well as in David or
Solomon. Wherein we yielding our obedience to God, and to that authority
which GOD has set over us, can give hereby no cause of innouations, as he
blames us, or dangerous hazardes to a Commonwealth, nor hinder any good
means of keepyng the Church in a holy unity. But monsterous in deed is the
head, which they make, appoinctyng one man sometimes (who often were unfit
for any little charge) to be head and governor of all the world, and that
in all causes, both Temporal and Spiritual. A thing without all comparison,
more unfit and absurd then if a Sculler should be taken from the Thames, to
be made Admiral of all the Ocean Sea. Nay, a thing utterly impossible, for the
infinite variety of tongues and of causes, and the great distaunce of places:
And what power do they attribute to this monstrous head of the world: surely,
that which they can not give without being guilty of blasphemy and high
Treason against our Savior Christ, in making common his regalities and honors
of giuyng Laws to the Church, ruling the conscience, and sittyng in the
midst of the Temple of God, with the Vicar of Rome, which may not be
attributed neither to any man, of what gifts soever, nor to any Angel, or
creature in the world. Moreover, they offend also against the state of
worldly Princes, withdrawyng their alleagiaunce from the^, as a number of them
do now from her Majesty to give it to this head, and raising for it many
Insurrections, Rebellions, and Treasons in the state, and many quarrelles,
contentions, and Scismes in the Church. Wherefore, seeing that the true causes
of all holy unity and agreement are with us, and not with them: that is, the
obedience to God and his holy word, and a desire of free Christian and lawful
co^ferences, Sinodes and Councelles, and that the promises of blessyng are
given to the precious faith we hold, and not to their wicked false worship:
I conclude, that these his general reasons are utterly insufficient, to prove
that benefit by means of unity to be in their Romish faith for a
Commonwealth, which he pretends, or to disprove it to be in the Gospel of
our Savior Christ, which through his grace we profess.

Now, he proceeds to particular commodities of a Chistian state, Particular
commondities alleged to grow to a Common wealth by Popery.
which he says their Religion brings unto it, and ours the contrary
inconveniences, making the comparison in our own Country. Which if I granted
all, yet were not his general position true, that their Religion does make a
Commonwealth to prosper, and ours does hinder it, sufficiently proved. For
Idolatry and Paganism may in some respect bring a commodity, which true
Religion will not yield. Shall we then esteem Religion by that, which in
some one regard is best for our ease, profit and peace. Jeroboam persuaded
the ten Tribes by such a like reason, to leave the true Religion which GOD
had delivered unto them by Moses and the Prophets, and to receive the
worship of the Idolles which he had errected, because his Idolatrous
Religion brought them this particular commodity, that they might tarry at home
in their houses, and avoid great charge, cost, and expenses, in going from
Dan or Bethel, the uttermost parts of the land of Israel, to worship in
Jerusalem: whereas the other required of them at certain times in the year,
to leave all they had with great perrill and danger of being spoiled of all
in their absence, as he would have had them to think, and to take a great and
costly journey to their so great expenses and travail. Yet was not Ieroboams
Religion therefore the true Religion and the other false, no, nor more
profitable for them. For whether was it more profit to enjoy only for a
short time, the ease in tariyng at home, and to save the travail and cost of
going to Jerusalem, then by obeiyng the Commandment of God, in yeeldyng to
him the service which he required to depend upon him, and thereby to be
assured to have safely kept, that which for the present they enjoyed, and to
dwell in the land, according to the promise, both they and their posterity
for ever. Or whether brought them greater hurt in the end, true Religion,
which required their travel and cost to worship at Jerusalem, or Ieroboa^s
Idol, which in the end did cast them out of the land, and their children
for ever, leadyng them captives into Assiria, and making them subject to the
just punishment of everlasting death. To have tarried still in Egypt, seemed
to some to stand better with the wealth and prosperity of the people of
Israel, to enjoy that they had gotten there, the space of four hundred years
they had dwelte in it, then with so many troubles, carriages of their household
stuff, and cattle into so huge a deserte to worship there. But the service of
GOD required it, and in the end it was far more proffitable for them. For,
in steed of being slaves to the Egyptians, who putt them into their Brick
houses of Claie, and into their Furnace of Iron, they obtained a goodly land
of their own, where they dwelte as a free people, every one sitting under his
own Vine, and drinkyng the water of his own Well.

Abraham might have thought it better, to have tarried still in Vr of the
Chaldeans, then to go thence he knew not whether. Yet the obedience of GOD
required him to leave his own Country, which the Idolatry of his Country
did not exact of him. And in the end not only in regard of the life to come,
but even of this life it fell out to his far greater benefit, then if he had
not borne that hard condition as it seemed at the first, and tarried still.
For, after and by this means, GOD made Abraham a Father of many Nations, his
Seed as the Sand of the Sea, and the Stars of heaven in multitude, naie he
gave him a son, in whom both he and all Nations should be blessed. So the
Apostles were commanded to leave all and follow Christ, as in some sort many
other oftentimes are likewise to do. A hard Religion would this man say, and
stands nether with any reason or policy, but is against their commodity
and best estate: yet is not Christ's Religion therefore to be impugned. For
whatsoever it requires, yet is it the only true Religion, and therefore that
which only has the promise of the blessyng of God annexed unto it, as the
Apostles finally proved, and all shall likewise prove which follow him.

It seemed good policy to some of the kings of Judah, to be in league with the
mighty king of Assiria, and to confederate them selves with the people of the
nations, which true Religion did not suffer, nor allow: yet was it not the
less the only true Religion, no, nor had not been in the end less
profitable for their state. For if they had obeyed God, and depended upon him,
then had they continewed the Kingdom in their land, whereas even by their
policy they were cast out of it, and despersed abroad. They had been better
to have contented them selves, Esa. 8.
with the soft runnyng and shallowe water of Silo, which they so much
despised: for then they had not been carried away to Babell. But Euphrates was
a goodly deep water, a swifte flood, a noble stream therefore they desired
to drink of it, and to wash them selves in it, but to their own
destruction: For this strong stream took their feet from them, and carried
them away into captivity. There are many which by such wicked policies
forslow, yea, neglect the reformation of Superstition, of Idolatry, of Popish
abuses, and enormities of the Church within their Dominion. They are afraied
innouations should breed danger to their estate, and therefore they choose
rather with the indignation of God, to let al alone, and suffer a state once
established so to continue, then to alter abuses and disorders, though GOD and
true Religion require it. Yet shall such policies in the end, be found to
have no sound wisdom in them, when GOD according to his word, shall visit
such a Nation, and be avenged of them for all their impieties. By like reason
a man that likes not of christianity because they must suffer persecution,
which will live godly in Christ Jesus, and because the way is straight and
narrow, may with as good color pretend to have just matter to refuse it.
But christian faith and the narrow way in all holy and sound wisdom, are
notwithstanding to be chosen, and the broad way wherein a man seems to
walk at his ease for a season, to be refused. For in the end he shall prove
it true which Solomon says, that there is a way which seems good unto a
man, the end whereof is destruction, as there are lips that still Honey, but
the feet of the same body lead into hell. It is therefore mere profaunesse
and Atheism, to measure religion by every commodity, and so far to receive
it, and so often to change it, as in the vain discourse of flesh and blood it
seems to stand, or not to stand with our profit. For this is the profane
spirit of Esau, to make but a policy of Religion, and a servant to our
selves. But true Religion is to be received for it self, because God has
commanded it, and so far and in such sort, as he has prescribed, what
dangers or discommodities soever profane infidelity, and the foolish
discourse of the natural man, which as the Apostle Peter says, is poor
blind and can not se far of in these matters, shall fancy and imagine.
Naie, though in deed for trial of our faith (more precious then gold) and
for the honor of his name in our patience, the Lord should see it good, to
exercise his people with sundry afflictions, for how soever for such
secret, and yet always just causes the Lord shall see good to deal with
any Nation, yet in the end if they serve the Lord, they shall find it to be
most for their comfort, both in this life, and in the life to come. And
therefore this remains always firm, that whatsoever the natural man, and
carnal policy shall judge, yet true Religion in the grounds of the
doctrine, and in the exercise and practice of it, is not contrary to the
florishyng estate of a commonwealth, but both in the nature of it, and by
means of the promise of blessyng annexed unto it, is the Religion, by which
alone Kingdoms and Commonwealthes may truly prosper and florishe. Thus
wishyng to be understood of all men, that Religion is to be embraced for
Religions sake, and not for policy, and that therefore, how soever it please
GOD to deal with those, which shall receive it in this life, they are
notwithstanding to abide by that truth, whereby only their souls may be
saved to everlasting life, and also that the doctrine and practice of true
Religion, both by the nature thereof, and by reason of the promise of blessyng
annexed to it above, is the only religion which may prosper a K. or common
wealth, and therefore no false worship, what show so ever it may have of some
particular commodity for a season, can in truth and in the end prove
commodious to it. I proceed further to answer that he obiecteth of certain
particular commodities and discommodities of our holy faith and their
Idolatrous superstition.

The first point he deals with is of restitution of goods wrongfully gotten,
An answer to the first point of the adversaries profitable doctrine for a
common weal.
which their Church he says, teaches so precisely, as neither by absolution
nor dispensation of any Prelate, he may be pardoned without will of
restitution: but dying so, is esteemed a reprobate and not prayed for in their
Church. And this faith he is their doctrine, the commodities whereof he
adioyneth, but first let us examyne both our doctrines. That their doctrine and
practice is such as he here affirms, I deny, for they have sundry ways to
hinder the actual restitution of goods wrongfully gotten. Whereof, that is
chief and principal which he here denies of the dispensations of the
chief Prelate, for if his Fatherhoode may dispense with the sins to be
committed in time to come, and give a sealed pardon before the offense (as it is
notoriously known to all the world, he takes upon him to do, and if need
be the bulls the^ selves may be showed, and other most sufficient and strong
proofs of it are to be made) then in case of any wrong extortion, theft,
usury, brybery, Symony, or such like after committed, he has his pardon before
hand, and is dispensed with for it many years before he have done the deed.
Further, he that may dispense with the greater, may surely pardon the less:
but his Fatherhoode takes upon him to dispense with greater sins then these.
for proof whereof all the world is witness of his dispensation with marriage
of the niece, and that he gave leave to the brother to marry with his brothers
wife. can not he then dispense wiih a petilarcin or a bribe? What power they
affirm, he has herein, appears by their shameless Flatterers, that
attribute unto him power to dispense with all things, and that what soever GOD
may give pardon of, that may he. As for his own profane holiness, it is,
as the Canons say, a Sacrilege to dispute of his doings, whose offenses
says the Canon, are to be excused as the theft of the Hebrews, the murders
of Sampson, and the incest of Lot. If the Pope be a Thief or an Extortioner,
and yet to be excused as the Israelites: then if he dispense with all he may
not be accused. And if his murder and incest be not to be judged, who shall
judge him for giving pardon for extortion? Their Canons teach that he has
full power of God to dispense above right and law, and make justice of
injustice, in changing and correcting of rightes. He alone has the right to
take from one, and give to another, all the world is his Dioces, he is the
ordinary of all, having full and entyre power in things spiritual and
temporal. For he is L. of L. and K. of K. having the right of K. over his
Subjects. He is all, and above all, and it is necessary to Salvation to be
Subject to the Pope of Rome, seeing yt God and the Pope have but one
consistory. I am loath to turn up this dunghill, and such like, the odyous and
noisome stink whereof may infect the world, but that as the Prophet says,
their own dung is to be cast in their faces. What a shameful and Diuelishe
presumption is this, to take upon him these things, and yet this man would
make us believe that no Prelate can dispense for goods unjustly gotten. True
it is, that they cannot indeed, but that he takes upon him to be able to do
it, is too too manifest. For besides that has been alleged out of the
Canons, if we regard either his dealing in this age or in former times, we
shall find he has not only given pardon for the doing of it, but expressly
commanded and committed such violent and wrongful oppressio^s. what part of
Europe has not the Pope oppressed with as grievous exactions, as ever Roboam
did Israel? His little finger has been heavier to the people which admitted
his tyranny then ye whole body of any other tyrant. For they have beaten
their people with rods, but he has scourged them with whippes of wyre.
Oftentimes both this noble Island and other great states and kingdoms of the
West have groned under these his burde^s as the Israelites did under the
exactions of Pharao and ye Egyptians, and grievously complained of the^.
besides many unjust paime^ts which he has imposed upon the people, he has not
spared to do wrong to Princes themselves, and yt in their regal crowns and
dignities, taking the^ from whom he liked to spoil, and bestowing them upon
who^ it pleased him: as sundry examples of the K. of England and of France,
yea, and of ye Emperors do abundantly testify. yet he will seem an enemy to
theft, and himself commit spoils and robberies, like those which ye pirate
objected to Alexander. The war for recovery of the holy land, the Pope has
bin Author and incourager of with giving for yt purpose pardons of sins to al
yt would fight in ye quarrel, of what an infinity of wars and unjust
oppressions have they been causes both in other places and in the West Indies
whereby their own story, since the inuasio^ of such as he has sent thither,
has bin partly by wars, and partly by cunning, and crafty dealing, toyling
the people with extreme labor to the death, wasted and consumed of that poor
and harmles people 1500000. But these wars they will say were lawful,
te^ding to the enlarging of ye faith of Christ: which is clean contrary. For
besides that if they receive that faith he brings, they shall be little ye
better, if it were indeed ye true faith of Christ, which they would plant
there, yet for that reason it were not lawful to invade a people, with whom
there is no cause of any other just quarrel.

For God has as well determined the dominions of Princes: as he has the
possessions of private me^, without which park wherein they are impaled by him,
they may not walk without just cause of their necessary defense. Wherefore
this was very bold that he durst affirm no Prelate to have power to forgive
it. Nay not only the Pope takes this upon him, but every hedge Priest will
usurp a power to do greater matters then this.

As for example, the wicked Priest that confessing that infamous Iauregui, As
the Abbot here in Eng. did the Monk that poisoned K. John.
absolved him aforehande for the murder he should have committed in kylling
the most Noble and wise Prince of Orange. And if they do this, and the life
be more worth then the goods, surely they will not doubt to take upon them
to do the other. Whereby it appears not only yt their doctrine hyndereth
by this means the restitution of goods unlawfully gotten, but also how
pernicious it is in general to al states and common wealths, and what an enemy
it is to all holiness and virtue. For what greater encouragement may there be to
sin the^ impunity, and what more vnassurance to a state the^ yt al mischief
eue^ to the murders and execrable attempts against K. and P. and may be not
only forgiven, but also encouraged with enriching and ennobling of the
executioners of such desperate and dyuelish acts in this life, and promise of
the kingdom of heaven for the^ and all their fathers house in the world to
come. Whereof I doubt not but your HH. will have especial regard, seeing not
only this and such like horrible acts have been attempted and done by the^
upon many worthy princes round about us, and near unto us, but also by that
late discovery of like most mischiuous and detestable purpose against her most
excellent majesty, (whom God always preserve from their blooddy hands) by a
priest of theyrs for that cause arraigned, endyghted, adjudged, and executed
according to the law in that behalf. Besides all these, what are their
cloisters and sa^ctuaries, but even dens of thieves whereunto whosoever flies
though he be a bankrupt or felon, a murderer, a traitor, or any malefactor
whatsoever, yet are they protected there so as no justice may proceed against
them.

The alter of the Lord could not protect Ioab, for wise K. Salomo^ well
understood yt god protecteth not offenders from justice, and the sword of the
magistrate: Yet they arrogate this unto the abominable alter of their Idol of
bread, yea and to their Cloisters and other such priuileged places. But this
may suffice to show the doctrine or practice of the church of Rome, touching
goods wrongfully gotten and the restitution of the^.

If I should speak of their simonie, their pluralities, and non residences,
and all other their practices of spoiling the people unjustly of their goods:
It might easily be showed, that from the Pope to the pardoner, from the B. of
Rome, to the begging Friar, and the soul Priest, not one but is guilty of the
crime which he would make us here to believe they so earnestly detest.

One the other part our doctrine is that true repentance (without which no
offender is saved) does require a hatred of the wickedness committed, which
can never be in him who deteineth still the unjust Mammon. For if he hated it,
he would as the Prophet exhorts the Idolaters repenting, to say to the
garments of their Idols, Get thee hence: If they have the repentance of David
in acknowledging their sin, and having it always as a heavy spectacle
before them: If they heard the noise and cry which the beams of the houses
builte with oppression and blood, do make one to another, and both of them in
the ears of the Lord, they must needs be careful to amend themselves, and to
take out such a beam as may pull down all the building. And if Zachee restore
again fourefold according to ye law, surely the same must needs be restored, if
it be possible, or at the least there must be a will of restitution. As for
not praying for the^ when they are dead, which he makes a great note and boast
of, we esteem, and agreeably to ye Scripture, yt to pray for the dead, is an
abuse of ye name of god, and a profanatio^ of ye sacred part of his holy
service and therefore do not this only for no thieves, but not for the Saints of
God being departed out of this life, as having neither precept, promise, nor
example of it. The commodities he pretends that they reap of their practice
in this behalf, are 2. whereof the first is the staying of these people from al
injustice
Our practice moreover is such as yt we have no dispensatio^s, nor multitude of
sanctuaries to protect the wrong doer. Now, therefore concerning this first
point, this being our doctrine and practice wc has bin declared, be ye
commodities of it never so many, those states are to hope in ye goodness of god,
they shall enjoy the^ which receive the gospel, and contrariwise the K. and
common W. which receives the R. superstition, and with it ye dispensations,
absolutions and santuaries authorized by it, ca^ have no cause to expect yt the
like blessing should be bestowed upon them. For whereas it is due punishmente
yt makes men slower to offend, It appears that this not being with them they
cannot reap the fruit whereof he speaks: that is, to have their people
stayed from extortion, theft, brybery, usury, simony, and such like. And indeed
what stay there is amongst the^ is manifest unto al yt either consider out of
ye story their deeds in former ages or take heed to their doings in this
present time. For where was there ever greater extortio^ then was used by the
pope and his Dataries, Nuncios, Legates, and other ministers of his extortions.
And what else does all this hierachie, but extort without all reason and order
both of ye people and one upon another the inferior always contributing to
the maintenance of the pomp and pride of the superior, and the greater of them
according to the life of fishes, as the prophet speaks, feeding themselves
with the little ones against who^ they may prevail. For brybery where was ever
the like corruption, and to this day who have fouler hands in all callings then
such as receive their R. faith.

As for their usury, and symony the Jews are not so great usurers as they that
profess their Idolatry, and the chiefest amongst them. Their Symony is
notoryously known to be such, as scarce one of an thousand of them enters
into his Benefice according to the Canons, but by bargening with the patron or
some appointed for him to make the match between them: which their wicked
example has so poisoned the world, as hardly will it be possible through out
to recover the world from this detestable corruption.

The second commodity that many by this means have received their own again
is that which rises from our doctrine and practice (whereof I have known some
memorable examples) and not from theirs. though possibly sometimes even their
most ignorant people may have some conscience to be no thieves. Which in
vain does he labor to prove to be otherwise, because we want auriculer
confession. For it is not that can effectually move the conscience but ye
living word of God which is amongst us, which pearceth as a two edged sword to
the division of the soul and of the spirit, of the joints, and of the marrowe,
of the thoughts and cogitations of the heart.

For there is no creature hidden in his sight, but all things naked and as cut
up in anatomy before him with who^ we have to deal. His confirmation is a fond
and lewd tale of a priest yt was committed not for any such matter as he
pretends, but for being discovered to be suspicious of being a dealer in the
popish practices against ye state. And thus much for his first point. The
second point of vows.
The second is, their doctrine of the observation of vows made to god, which
they teach being made of thingss lawful honest and possible, ought to be kept,
If this were their doctrine, the^ should our doctrine in this point agree, and
consequently ye benefit of it to be reaped as well by us as by the^. but their
doctrine accounts the vows of pilgrimages, of offering to Idols which they
call saints, and a thousand such like abominations, honest and lawful vows,
being in deed wicked prophanations of the name and service of God in this
behalf. Likewise they hold yt a vow of perpetual single life, is an honest,
lawful, and possible vow. but in all such as in their single life cannot
co^tein it is neither honest nor lawful. The comma^deme^t of god by the apstole
is contrary to it, if they contain not let them mary, speaking in ye form
where in commandments are uttered.

But he will say it is possible by spiritual exercise so to prevail against
the lust of the flesh, as the single life may be both honest and lawful. I
grant in some, to whom God shall vouchsafe it, it may beso, but God has made
no promise to give any man that gift, what exercise soever he use to obtain
it.

Therefore such vows as having been ungodly and undiscreetly made of
perpetual sole life by any, not having the gift of contine^ce, and if for a
time not having it al his life and bynding him to continue in restless burning
and unquietness, distracting him from all his business, and disabling him
from doing any acceptable service to God or men, but flaming in his lusts, and
defyling continually his soul and his body with dishonorable thoughts and
deeds: We affirm in deed that such vows having been rashly unadvisedly and
ungodly made, ought discreetly and godly to be broken, that the lawefull remedy
appointed of God being used, he may possess his soul and body in cleanness
and honor, in the honorable and undefiled estate of marriage, who in his
single life was not able to do it.

And all this we teach most agreeably to the scriptures: Contrariwise they
teach that such a vow is never for any cause to be broken, casting a snare upon
the conscience, which the Apostle would not do, and forcing a state of life
contrary to Gods commandment. The consequence whereof what it has been,
heaven and earth can witness against them: whether the spiritual fornications
of this whore of Babilo^: as s. John speaks in his Revelation, or the
fornications of her body committed by this occasion of vows of single life
were more, may well be doubted: but in both she has justified her two elder
Sisters, Egypt, for Idolatry, and Sodom for the vile and shameful abuses of
the body. I am loath to discover ye filthy nakedness and shame of this harlot,
La polygamie le cabinet du Roy.

Balesvotaries


in such sort as she deserves: and therefore refer the Reader to such
Writers as have not spared to stripppe her, and lay open her just confusion to
all the world: As the Authors of the polygamie of the Popish Churches, and of
the Cabinete, and Bale our countreimanne in his votaries have done. For which
causes worthilye said a Bishop of their own, that there was greater reason to
allow them again to marye, then ever there was to forbid them. For which, and
the like causes we also say, that such vows as bind men to live in a wicked
and unclean life, not only lawfully may, but in duty ought no less to be
broken, then the wicked vows of Herod, and of the 40. men which had vowed the
killing of Paul the Apostle. As for other vows yt are lawefully made, and may
be kept in the fear of god, we teach they ought inuiolably to be observed,
denouncing to those which shall not keep them, that the Lord will not hold
him guiltless that takes his name in vain.

And this, touching vows is the doctrine of both our Churches. The commodities
of their doctrine says he is just and true dealing with men, who will reason
thus with them selves, that if a vow to GOD be to be kept, then also a promise
(which is a kind of vow that byndeth more then any obligation) to a man is
to be observed. The benefit of not their, but of our doctrine, I grant by an
exercise of the fear of God in keeping lawefull vows, may be a means to
work faithful and just dealinges amongst men, Which, if the professors of
the Gospel should not use, their blame and offense should be exceeding great
to lie in darkness after the day be broken, and the Sun be up: But yet
the doctrine remains still without reproof, which teaches faithfulness
both to God and man.

But this kind of reasoning (affirmatively from the greater to the less) that
if they will keep promise to God, they will keep also to men, is such as
cannot deserve the logic Lecture in either of their Seminary Colleges. And
that a word, and as we commonly speak, a bare word and promise should bind
more then a solemned instrument and obligation, as he writes, is neither good
divinity, nor humanity. And this is my answer to the second point.

The third and fourth he pretends to be great commonwealth points, as he
terms them, but let us see what they are.

The 3. is of abstinence, whereof they teach, that 106. days in the year
flesh is to be abstayned from, and the use thereof forborne, for punishing the
body, for the more fervent serving of God, beesids the religious obseruances
and particular devotions, the commodity whereof, he says is inestimable to
a common wealth. For answer to this I say, yt let the commodity of it be
what it may be, we have as many: besides every Wedensday through out the year,
(wherein a certain rate is appointed to be observed of fish) which we have
more then they to counterpease their obseruaunces and devotions.

But whereas he says they abstain from flesh, to punish the body for more
fervent serving of God.

This is a new device of this old learning, that when men will more seuerelye
serve God at certain times then other, they should then abstain from flesh.
For that purpose, of fasting we read to have bin comanded at such times, but
of abstinence from flesh in no place. This neither our Savior Christ, nor his
Apostles, nor any other of the holy Priests or Prophets before them, did
comaund.

The Nazarites in deed for the time of their vow, abstayned from wine and
strong drink, by the express commandment of God: But yet their profession
being to serve God more exactlye at such times were not commanded to abstain
from flesh: Neither was this generally commanded at any time to all the Jews,
but a rule for such particulars as should take this vow of ye Narite upon
them, these contrariwise, when they will give them selves the more to punish
their bodies, and to serve God, abstain from flesh, and leave free the use of
wine and of all fish (whereof many are more deintie then any flesh for which
cause the Grecians called their dayntiest and finest feeding men eaters of
fish) and all other iunkettes of infinite variety.

And as they left them free, so they forgate not for the most part to use their
liberty, no not their obseruaunces: whereas a temperate and sober diet of
Beef and Mutton bread at home, would never have cost half so much as the
foreign commodities of wines and delicates of al sort, nor pamper the body,
or make it so unfit for any good service. Which abstinence how it punished
their bodies appeared well in them: for their Abbotes and Monks, and other
such like, were commonly not the worst fead, nor in worst lyking.

By which kind of punishing the body, and abstayning from flesh, many times
they grew so proud, as that they could not abstain from other flesh, which
God in deed had forbidden them. This was but a mere hypocrisy, under color
of a strait life, to use a diet, that the Epicure and Philoxenus culd not have
wshied a better, nor daintier for their own mouth. The excess and daintiness
of which diet being taken out of that he reckons the saving of flesh would
come to: I suppose that which would remain over and above that, would prove
but a small matter of benefit to a common Wealth. As for their observing of
this and other pollitike and Ecclesiastical laws, for conscience sake, is
after in the eight article upon more express and full occasion to be answered.

His vnreuerent speeches of the Nobles and Judges of the Land, and of
Ecclesiastical persons is not any theirs, but his own just reproach, to
touch all degrees and States of the Land, without any cause. For in the
myddenyght of Poperye, and the very deepest blindness, it was lawefull to
have a lycense upon such days to eat flesh: which being had, it was no
offense. What reason then, why they that have lycense, and take heed of
offense, should now be thought for to transgress? for to God in it self,
and without contempt of the authority of the Magistrate it is no sin, as
after is more fully to be declared. Concerning fasting, which is the 4. article
it is to bed understood, that the Church of God always kept it by abstaining
from all manner of meat and drink unto the evening. which was in deed a fast,
when as theirs is only the forbearing of their Supper, when they have well
dined, or rather the eating at one glutton meal, the sober diet of 2. ordinary
meals. By which account nothing is gained to ye common Wealth: but sin and
the punishment due unto it. But if it were not so, yet for so little a gain,
nay, for no gain the right order of true fasting, were to be altered into a
superstitious fast of certain days and times, which of necessity, and upon
pain of everlasting death should be observed. And of this there is utterly
no need in the common Wealth, GOD having so abundauntlye blessed the Land
with all store of all victual necessary for the use of our life.

This were an necessary pollycie in time of famyne, good counsel for a shipp
that had spent her victualles, or a besieged City, to wey every man his meat,
and to share him at his pittaunce, for one meal a day. But to lay this upon a
free people, whom GOD has blessed with a land of Ryuers of Milk and Honny, to
eat but one meal a day, for almost half the year is no necessary
pollicye for this land and people. Nay, neither necessary nor fit, but in
cause of distress, as I said before, neither for this nor for any other. For
with what reason or conscience, should the laboring man, that has held the
plough by the end all the day, or traueiled faithfullye in any other good
calling, for the service of the Common Wealth, and to provide for his own
necessities, and those which depend upon him, coming weary and trauayled
home at night, so great a part of the year be sent fainte and feeble to his
rest, and not according to the blessing of GOD eat the fruit of his labor?

Why should he not strengthen his heart with a sober relyefe, and give the
due portion to his household, to his wife, the most precious part of his
possession, and as the vine of his house, and his children standing like Olive
planttes round about his Table, and his servants, after they have waited on
him, and after he have eaten and dronk yt they also eat for the refreshing of
their faint and weary bodies, and so comfort him self after his weary trauail
with his household.

This saving is no husbandry at al, where there is meat enough, to withdraw
from the people that, which in all law of God, of nature, and of nations is due
unto them, and necessary for the intertainment of their bodies in health and
strength, to be able for the service of such calling, as they are called to in
the Common Wealth.

This was never thought any needful pollycie in Israel, as populous as it
should seem by the Stories, and more then England, and having infinite more
cause, without comparison of spendinge the provision of the Land by so many
Sacrifices and oblations, as they were bound to offer, then we have, which are
bound to none of those things: whereof if an estimate were made, I think it
would fall out, yt such sacrifices and offerings spent more of their victual the^
their 160. dais of abstinence saved all the year. And besides this, that there
is no necessary nor lawefull pollycie in it: expereince has taught us, that
it has been cause of damnable superstition, houldinge men in that captivity,
that they thought it a greater offense to eat flesh in any of those days, or
to eat any thing at night, then either to commit adultery, or murder, or to
break any of Gods commandments.

Wherefore the superstitious fast, which this good husband, for a Common W.
would persuade, is utterly needelesse in regard of the great store of the
Land, through the blessing of GOD, and unlawful, as being contrary to al
law, and example of any well pollycied state and government that ever was in
the world, to take from him that labors, without any cause so ordinarylye
his necessary food. It is also ungodly for the snare it casts upon men's
consciences, and for the effect which followed it, of not esteeming of the
commandments of GOD, in comparyson of this most vile and beggarlye
tradition, whereby it was again fulfilled in that ye transgress the
commandments of God, to keep your own traditions. Last of all for the
damnable opinion of meryting by it the forgiveness of their sin, I conclude
it to be neither godliness, pollycye, nor good reason to allow it. As for the
true and right fasting commanded by precepte, and commended by examples in ye
sciptures unto us, it were to be wished, that as at sometimes, namely in the
great plague in London, and at the earthquake, there was a godly entrance made
by authority to the restoring of it unto us, so it might be fullye
reestablished amongst us. The use whereof in ye ancient and primitive Chur. was
either for supplication to turn away some present or imminent danger of war,
pestilence, famine or any other great calamity: or for suite to obtain some
great and particular blessing, as gracious direction in the calling of such as
should serve the church, and specially in the ministry and preaching of the
word, or any such weighty and extraordinarye requests greatly concerning the
good estate of the Church. Which occasions to seek to GOD in this most humble
and earnest manner, we see by experience do remain still and shall continue to the
end of the world. For both other great graces may upon sundry occasions fall out
to be so necessary for the state of the Church, that this way were to be
taken to obtain them, and oftentimes in respect of ye ministry this would be
requisite. And for ye other cause seeing we oftentimes so multiply our
prouocations against God, that in justice he threatens to pour out his
plagues even upon his own people, so offending against him: it were most
necessary that the church had the right use of this holy order restored to it
again, that hereby the hot wrath, and high displeasure of GOD against us,
might be pacified. Wherefore, it were to be wished, by all good means of all
men to be sought for, that by the authority of the magistrate, and advise of
the preachers of Gods word: upon any such reasons either generally in the
whole Land, if the cause be general, or particularly in the place where the
occasion may be, that the people were advised and commanded upon some day
fit for the purpose, to surcease their worldly affairs, as they do upon a
Sabbath or holy day, to fast unto the evening: to the end that they may
assemble them selves at the hours accustomed upon such days to the Church,
to hear the word of God fitly for the time, and zealously preached: and also
to make their earnest prayers to God for the favor they would obtain, and
their most humble supplication with rent and contrite hearts in tears and
strong crying in the spirit, to turn away such his heavy indignation from us,
as we may lie under or fear to fall upon us. To take one example of many in
the scriptures, Io. 2.
we read in the prophecy of Joel, yt the L. threatening a famine, exhorts ye
people hereunto upon hope, that if they sought him earnestly, they should
find him gracious and merciful, long suffering, and of great goodness. In the
same place declaring yt he being angry, no flesh could be able to bear it, he
gives the^ commandment thereof in these words. Wherefore eue^ now says ye L.
be ye turned unto me with all your heart in fasting, weaping, and lamentatio^:
and a little after, sound ye trumpet in Sion, appoint a fast, proclaim a
holiday, gather ye people, ordain an asse^bly, call together ye aged and the
little ones, even those which such ye breasts, let ye bridegroom come out of his
chamber, and the bride out of her chamber. Let the pristes the ministers of the
Lord weep between the altar and the porch, and say, O Lord spare thy people,
and give not over thy possession to reproach, that the Gentiles should rule
over the^, why should they say amongst the nations, where is their God? Thus
far ye prophet in ye name of God, which I have thought good to set down here
yt in consideration thereof, it may be understood to be a co^ma^deme^t of God,
given to ye magistrates and preachers of Gods word, yt both of the^ according
to the duties of their several calling, should upon like occasion advise and
appoint such a day of fast, wherein ye people should humble themselves in true
repentance, and seek with mighty prayers deliverance from the punishment
threatened, or lying upon them. Which is so much ye more necessary at this time
to be known, for yt we see that the wrath of God has broken out upon us of
late as a flaming fire, in visiting us with the grievous visitatio^ of yt
pestilence both in this city of London, and sundry other places of this land.
Which visitation since the great plague has continued in this City, wasting
the Inhabitants as a small fire now the space of 15. years continually, and
sometimes raging more fiercely as it did of late. And surely there are many
just causes to fear, least the L. may command this furnace to be heated yet
seven times more, and that the Angel of GOD which has stood over this City,
with his drawn swoorde, to strike it not only a few days as he did in the
time of David over Jerusalem, but so many years may still pursue his
execution, if all holy and lawful means be not used to mittigate the Lords
displeasure toward us. wherefore most humbly I beseech your Honors as one who
by your LL. Honorable favor have a part and lotte in the ministry within
this City, that by your Godly means such order may be taken, that both at
all times hereafter upon like occasion signified before unto your HH. and
namely at this present upon so urgent and necessary cause as we are now pressed
withal, such days of fast and holy assemblies may be appointed. Wherein the
people through the blessing of God upon the word zealously preached unto
them, humbling their souls in true repentance, as in sackloth and ashes before
ye Lord, and the Lords servants in the midst of them praying for the^ as it is
in Joel: O Lord spare thy people etc. It is to be hoped yt such repentance and
prayers may stand, as Aaron with his holy censors did in like case of plague in
the gap and in the breach between the living and the dead, that the Angel of
the Lord strike no more of us down with this fearful hand and sword
wherewith we have seen already so many slain and fall down on every side
round about us. A wise K. says our Savior in the gospel, seeing a mightier
King then himself coming against him with so many thousands, as he is not
able in any sort to meet him in the filde, while he is yet a far off,
sends an embassage unto him for peace. Therefore seeing the Lord of Hosts
is already come out against us with his armies, which we are in no sort able to
encounter, it were wisdom for us while it is yet time to se^d out an
embassage of prayers, of tears, and of true repentance, to make our peace and
reconciliation with him, and to restore us to his gracious and accustomed
favor again. Why should we carry till the first begotten in every house be
slain, as it came to pass in the day of the unrepentance of Egypt, or til the
Angel of Zennacharib be sent amongst us, and that thousands fall down besides
us at our right hand and at our left? Thus I am bold as in ye duty of my
calling to god and to his church, But yet with all humility, an reverence as
speaking to the^ of who^ it is written, You are Gods, to stir up your godly
wisdoms to the remembrance of the duty which at this time the Lord God
requires of us.

Now I return to my answer again, wherein I have already showed the R. fast
not only to want commandment, promise, or example in the word of God to
approve it, but also to be full of damnable and pharysaicall hypocrisy and
pride: and further briefly proved (referring the good Reader that is desirous
to be more fully instructed herein, to a godly and learned treatise written
expressly of this matter in our own language) both commandment, promise, and
example, for the true and right order of fast. Whereby it is evident, that the
one provoke vengeance against a superstitious people, and the other mercy and
ye blessing of God (whereupon depends the good estate of every common wealth)
to those which are truly humbled. Therefore I will proceed now forward to the
fifth article of his comparison. The fifth point of sole life.
The fifth is, that their doctrine commands sole life to all clergy men, and
religious people as he speaks, meaning priests cloisterers, and such of ye
Laity as were officers amongst them, whereof he notes a double commodity. But
first for their doctrine, I say it is expressly contrary to the word of God,
which does declare the gift of continency to be given but to a few, and
therefore not to so very great a number as he speaks of, and accou^teth of
Priests, Monks, Friars, Nuns, and other officers attendant upon the^. Whereupon
I conclude this doctrine to be flat contrary to the rule of the apostle, who
says for avoiding of fornication, let every man have his own wife, and every
woman her own husband. And again, If they do not contein let the^ marry.

Now let him tell me what may come of disobeying the commandment of God,
despising his holy ordenance graciously provided for remedy of incontine^cie.
Surely eue^ yt which experience has declared with was such as it is marvel ye L.
has not judged that filthy and whorishe Church, with the judgment of an
adultres many years ago. But he supposing the^ all to have lived chaste contrary
to the doctrine of our Savior Christ, as has been daclared, shows a great
commodity of it, in yt the multitude of the people by such means was greatly
diminished. But Sal. commended by ye holy ghost for a wise and pollitike
prince, says, the honor of a king is in the multitude of his subjects: And
common reason does sufficientlye teach it, that the strength and power of a
prince is in the great number of his people: as the experience of al ages and
stories of al times does plainly testify. Therefore being so very great a
number as he says, and as they were in deed, what high point of policy this
may be I think few can understand. Now of the other part our doctrine is such
as we leave it free to all men according as they shall find them selves to be
called of God, and best able to serve him and his people in that place they are
appointed unto, either to marry or to abstain. If any man have that rare gift
of continency, while the Lord continues that favor toward him he may use
his blessing.

Again, they that find themselves to need the help of marryiage that they
may live in holiness and in honor as the Lord has commanded: we teach
according to the doctrine of the Apostle, that it is a diuelishe doctrine to
forbid them marriage, and affirm it to be honorable amongst al men, without
any exception of degree, or calling.

And surely if this commandment, thou shall not commit adultrie, be given unto
all men: If all be to possess by the commandment of God their vessels in
honor, then they which without marriage cannot live chaste and holy, not only
lawfully may but of necessary duty ought to marry. In which estate to fear
the increase of the L. people, is to fear the blessing of the Lord. For as a
blessing was it promised to Abraham, that his seed should be as the sand of
the Sea in multitude, and as the Stars of heaven, which is oftentimes also
noted as a great favor bestowed upon the people of Israel, both by Moses and
by the Prophets. Which being as it is a blessing to the land in any of the
people, so is it especially to the ministers of the word, 1. Tim. 3.
if according to their duty and the exhortation of the Apostle, they bring up
their children in awe and fear of God, free from any just charge of riot and
intemperance, with all grace, comeliness and decent honesty, who otherwise
are unworthy to have charge of the Church and house of God.

For then the common wealth shall be happy not only for that the people
thereof are mnny, but that they are both many, and those both wise and godly.
And what greater strength can any state or P. enjoy then then such a people.

As for his fear, that there should want provision for them all, if it were
so, no godliness nor wisdom, could cast this inconvenience upon them rather
then others. But this fear as it is void of all reason, so is it full of
infidelity, and convicted by the present experience. For through the blessing
of God, the abundance of all store is here so exceeding great, notwithstanding
both this increase of people now so many years, against which he disputes,
and a great multitude of godly strangers, that our neighbors also taste of
the comfort of it. Whereas in the late time of their fastes and sole life,
notwithstanding al their policies of saving the provision by their days of
abstinence and fasting, and forbidding the marriage of so great a number of the
people: yet ye land was sore visited with famine. And this for answer to his
first commodity.

The second commodity he presumes to rise to the common Wealth of the single
life of their clergy, is, yt they are able to keep hospitality to spare the
offalles of their livings, as leases, copy holds, and such like, and to
build Colleges, Churches and other Monumentes of piety, the contrary
inconvenience he says the married life of our ministers brings, who have
enough to do to provide for themselves and their children, as many times for
all their care, they are so little able to do, as they leave a number of poor
orphans behynd the^ at the charge of the parish. Touching the^ I grant it in
part to be true, yt he says of their hospitality, offals, and buyldings, but I
deny their single life to have bin the only cause or any great cause of it.
For if they had contented themselves with such convenient maintenance, as had
been fit for their calling, notwithstanding their single life they should
never have bin able to have kept ye houses he speaks of, and have builded
churches with ye surplussage of their livings. But this it was yt made the^ rich,
they woorshipped him yt promised our savior Christ upon like condition, to
give him all the K. and glory of the world. They were never satisfied like the
grave, but heaped living upon living, office upon office, and that with the
injury and wrong of all the world. They impropriated benefices and annexed
them to their Abbeyes, monasteries, and other places, and to their prelacies
and dignities, a thing utterly unlawful. For how should it be lawful when the
poor parish (as he says) gives ye tithe of al they have to the end they may
have a man of God amongst them, who may teach them the right way to serve and
honor God, and to save their souls, that this tithe should be taken from
them, and given to an idle cloister of Friars, or other that do no duty for
it, and leave the poor people spoiled of their goods, and unfurnished of one
that should be their guide to everlasting life. By which profane covetousness
they made them selves guilty, not only of their robbery of the goods of the
people which they enjoyed without any just title, but also of the destruction
of their souls, in taking from them the means whereby they might be taught
unto salvation. And shall we then esteem it a great liberality, that if any
of the poor parish had occasion to travel by them that way to make him
drink or to give him a meals meat? Even as one that had robbed a man should
give him a penny when he met him in the high way: These are the cups and
dishes, for which our Savior Christ thundereth in the Gospel.

Ye Scribes, Pharisees, and Hypocrites, you make clean the outside of the
cups and dishes, but within they are full of robbery and wrong, for indeed
those their cups and dishes so filled, were full of spoil, nay of blood, and
that of the souls of men which is one of the commodities they occupy, as
it is in the Revelation. Apoc. 18.3.
with like impiety they annexed benefices unto their Abbeyes and other houses,
and dignities by Popish dispensations, of commendamus non residences,
Pluralities, tot quots, and other more the like abominations. And not content
herewith they had a thousand other cunning shifts how to draw ye riches of
the people, yea the wealth of all the land into their hands, as it well
appeared at the putting of them down in the late reign of the renowned K.
Henry the eight. It was signified to the King, in a supplication, how those
jolly idle beggars as they are called there had robbed all the poor of the
land, all the hospitalles and other alms houses, and that they had drawn more
then the third part of the whole land into their possession. With this many
times the common Wealth found it self agreeued, and provided diverse and
sundry good laws, as of mortmayne, mortuaries, and sundry others against
their covetousness, because they gathered all to them as if they would have
dwelt alone in the land, and yet exempted themselves from the burde^s and
charges of the Common W. Therefore, in this excess, covetousness and
insatiable spoil, if for policy to keep the more quietly the possession of
so great riches in their hands, they spared some meals and offalles to the
poor people or builded Colleges and Abbayes, they cannot be esteemed to have
increased the wealth and riches of the people, whom so diversely they spoiled
and impouerished. It had been as it is now without comparison more profitable
for the common wealth: that every man had enjoyed his propriety in such a
portion, as the Lord by any good title shall bless him with, by tylling and
manuring whereof he might have been able to maynteyne the estate GOD has
called him unto, and not to stand waiting for offalles. But this was indeed a
politic point for their own gain. For hereby they assured their estate by
such benefits and pleasures, and bound men the more to depend upon them, and
to favor their wicked superstition for the gain sake.

Now if married ministers do not the like, what hinderance is this to the
common wealth: which has in a great part recovered again into her own
hands the lands and liuinges, whereby that Hospitality was kept, and these
houses builded, which in all good reason must needs be both more profitable
and more honorable for the common wealth. For, that every man sits at home
in his own house, and eats the fruit of his own ground, and drinks his
own water: is it not a thousand times more profitable, and more to his just
contentation, yea, and more honorable then to seek it else where, and to have
it at an other ma^s door? Further, if of that living they lawfully enjoy, the
ministers provide competently for their house and children: Does not the law
of God, and of all nations allow them so to do? Yea, bind them to it. For he
that provides not for his house (says the Apostle) has denied the faith,
and is worse then an Infidel. As for ye poverty of our ministry whereby he
obiecteth that many times they leave a number of poor orphans at the Parishes
charges, notwithstanding in the ministry a number be sufficiently provided.
Yet is it indeed to be acknowledge yt our ministry in many places is greatly
unprovided, contrary to ye commandment of God, and to the just cause of fear
of his indignation against us for it, if it be not some way in time relieved.
But this especially arises of the spoil, which they made by impropriating the
living of so many particular churches, to the maintenance of their cloisters,
and nests of their superstitious corruptions. for remedy whereof, we are most
hu^mble and continual suitors to god and the authority he has set over us, as
indeed it must be acknowledged yt in all christian duty ye minister ought to
be maintained. For ye Lord has expressly comanded both in ye law, and in the
gospel, yt the Preachers of the Gospel should to live of their holy labors.
To which duty oftentimes the people are exhorted and encouraged with promise
of increase of blessing, if they be careful yt the Leuite wc is amongst the^
be not forsaken. And surely seeing they leave as they ought all other trades
wherein occupying themselves they might through the blessing of God be
sufficiently provided to attend their studies for the service of the people in
the ministry of the gospel, it is a most necessary duty which the people
owe to them again, to see that they and such as depend upon them, may
sufficiently and honestly live in their service, as may be seemly for the good
credit of the worthy calling which God has called them unto. The contrary
whereof as I have said, we have from the^ who by impropriating the livings of
the Ministers from the places where unto they appertein, have left the
ministry so marvelously unprovided, as that in some places there are to be
found many parishes together, whereof all the livings yt now remain to the^
for such use, are not sufficient for ye compitent maintenance of one man and
his family. which lamentable estate of our ministry must needs be an infinite
hinderance to the Gospel, both in the justice of GOD who will punish so great
a contempt of his word, and so careless a negligence of the salvation of the
people, and also in the nature of the thing it self: For by this occasion.
such as are in some acceptable measure able to do good service in the
ministry, withdraw themselves from it. For perceyuyng it to be such a
calling, as besides the manifold burdens lying upon all faithful ministers
doing their duties, is subject to beggerie also, and the discredit and other
inconveniences that follow it, they bestow them selves in some other lawefull
calling, wherein doing their duties, they may be able to live both in wealth
and credit, by which means this insufficient, and unlearned ministry which
now so pestereth the land, is entered into the possession of the Church, to
the infinite hinderance of the Gospel, and the loss of thousands of the
souls, which Christ Jesus has redeemed with his precious blood.

Which spoil of the Church notwithstanding it to be so sore a wound, as yet
since the beginning of the restoring of the gospel amongst us could not be
healed, yet our hope and most humble prayer to God is, that her majesty by
your HH. mediation unto her highness, may so relieve it with her precious balm,
and so bind it up with her gracious hands, as in time it may be cured and
healed again. I am bold to speak of your H H. mediation in this cause (as in
other places of such like) because the duty I owe to Almighty God, and to the
Lord Jesus his only begotten son whom I am called to serve, does necessarily
enforce me to it. But it does greatly comfort and encourage me in the
performance of so necessary a duetye, that I doubt not but your godly wisdoms
do consider the service of GOD, to be the right end and use of the high and
honorable seats, wherein his own right hand has placed you. Which the Lord
ingrauing in your noble and Christian minds, surely having of God this
honorable favor to be so near her highness, your HH. will godly and
faithfully advise her grace both of the necessary cause of the redress of
such other matters, and namely of this, that all the people under her H.
Dominions may have the means by a godly, sufficient learned ministry planted
amongst them, to come to the knowledge and faith whereby they may the better
obey God and her Ma. and save their souls for ever to everlasting life. Which
so necessary service of Almighty GOD, of her Excellent Majesty, and of the
Church of Christ amongst us, as it is now attended and looked for of your
HH. into whose hands not next under her Highness, God has committed the
managing and guiding of this noble state and kingdom: so no doubt but in that
day it will be required, when the Lord shall come to judge both the quick and
the dead. Wherefore my good LL. as before in ye behalf of the whole Church
professing ye Gospel, so now again for the Church within her Ma. most noble
dominions of Eng. and Irel. I most humbly upon my knees beseech your HH. to
take so to heart this estate of the Church and ministry amongst us, that all
abuses being removed, and good order established, all duetifull subjects may
besides all other blessings, which now they enjoy by your LL. means, have
this so worthy a cause also to praise GOD for having set so Godly and H.
Governors over them. It has a promise to break the Bread unto the hungrye,
and to make the thrysty drink, and not to turn away the ear from him yt
cries for relief in his necessity. Now so it is that this Church in many
of her children cries for bread, even for the bread of life, and there is no
man that breaks it unto the^, the tongues of many cleave to their roof for
thirst, which they are in danger to perish in, and no man gives them the
pure water of life, to quicken their souls.

And as our Church heretofore by other means has cried oftentimes, even till
she have almost lost her voice: so now again she cries by this most humble
supplication to your Honors, to regard her necessity. if wealth, peace,
wisdom, authority, or any other thing be needeful for this work, the Lord
has bountifully furnished the la^d with all that needs. Some reasonable way
without the injury of any might by your wisdoms be found, whereby every
parish might recover again their own, to ye maintenance of a worthy
ministry amongste them. Alas that for any cause so many souls of the
people committed to your charge, should perish. Wherefore, my good Lords, turn
your ears, I beseech you, to hear the humble suite of this Church, that the
Lord your redeemer may turn his ears unto you in the day when you shall call
upon him. So shall the saved souls of thousands praise God for you, so shall
the Lord bless you, and your noble posterity: and so both all this and such
other slanderous mouths shall be stopped, which are now so wide open against
us. To the aunswering to whom I return again, for my most humble request,
relying upon the godly zeal and wisdoms of your Honors.

6. of raising of rents.
The sixth Article is of raising rentes, which he says their religion
prohibiteth (except upon some great cause, and with great moderation) even to
the solemn cursing of them, and would insinuate that ours allows it. The
commodity of which not raising of rentes above measure, and to the extreme
using of the Tenauntes, he says is manifest to be great in a common wealth.
For the commodity that comes of it I grant, but for the doctrine. I affirm
that ours does in no sort more favor any extreme raising of rents then
theirs. A moderate rising of them in the raising of the pryces of all other
things, we allow, as they do, when it is necessary and moderate: for
otherwise it should be better with the Tenante, then with the Lord. And them
selves, when they let their farms of the old rent, were wont to bind their
Tenants also, to deliver their corn and victualles at an old price: But any
oppression, injustice, extremity, extortion, we never allowed, but as often as
good occasion serves, not only once a year, as he says, they do declare
such offenders accursed, according to ye scripturs, to more just cause of fear
and terror then their bull can strike into them, by denouncing unto them,
that ye greedy rauenours and unjust persons shall not inherit the kingdom of
heaven. Therefore, whatsoever the commodity of it may be to a common W. it
reapeth no less from our doctrine and pracise then theirs, nay so much more
from us then them, as there is more preaching against all injury with us, then
eeuer was with them.

Seauenthly, The 7. of diuorcement.
he compares us for diuorcements, concerning which, their Church holds,
that after lawefull marryage, there may be cause of separation from coming
together: yet says he, there can be none granted to the breaking of the
marriage, and giving leave to marrye again.

The benefit whereof is a restraint, says he, of many mischiefs. Of the
other part, he affyrmeth our Church to practice the contrary: whereof ye
contrary inconveniences of unjust divorces and adulteries follow. I answer,
that our Church, yet has herein no other practcie in our courts, the^ they
left us in their cannon law, being after such divorce married again, except
the provision of a statute of Henry the 8. may help the innocent, which is of
not making void any marriage, but for the causes allowed by ye word of god,
which I take to be so equal and godly, as I think they them selves nor any
other can justly blame it, otherwise our law and practice in this matter
differs not from theirs.

And therefore if there be any commodity of it, our Church may enjoy it.

In deed I grant, that we teach agreeably to the Scriptures, that in case of
adultery committed, the party innocent is at liberty (as touching his
conscience) to be deuorced and married to another: but to the guilty we give
no such liberty, but leave the party to the justice of the Magistrate:
whereof no manner of inconvenience can arise. The 8. of obedience to
magistrates.
Now follows a point in the eight place about obedience to Magistrates: where
unto their doctrine he says is very profitable, and ours very hurtefull. How
their doctrine and practice deals with Magistrates, is of long time by the
light of the Gospel so discovered, as they shall be hardly able to make the
world believe now that Magistrates are beholding unto them. even as the
Corinthes were to the false Apostles, of whom the Apostle says: ye suffer
even if a man bring you into bondage, if a man deceive you, if a man take your
goods, if a man exalt him self above you, if a man smite your upon the face.
For as for taking, they not only took whatsoever Princes offered, but
extorted of them and their subjects withal importunacie and extremity. And
for bryngyng into bondage, they esteemed all kings to be but their vassalles,
and the Pope to be King of Kings and Lord of lords, as much greater then
the Emperor, as the Son exceeds the Moon. Therefore the Pope has used
them thereafter as Pages and footmen, to wait and attend upon him, for
meanest services while he rode in his Pontificalibus.

He has made them kiss his feet and an Emperor to stand three days
barefoote at his gates before he could be admitted, and then trod upon his
neck when he humbled himself unto him, abusing that Scripture to his pride:
thou shall tread upon the Basiliscke, and stamp the Dragon under thy feet.
He has played at Tennis with their Crounes, tossing them from one to an other
as it pleased him: according as it appears in our Stories and the Cronicles
of France. And in like manner with the sacred imperial Croune, taking it from
the Grecians and giuyng it to the Lumbards, then taking it from them and giving
it to the French, and from them again to the Germans, and from one house of
the Lords of Germany to an other. He has used them in all respects as
pleased him, and as if they had held their Crounes of his kayes: he has made
them fight his wars at their own cost and charges.

Wherefore, having thus abused the sacred and supreme authority of sovereign
Magistrates: how should this Solicitor of the Pope persuade that their
Religion is profitable for Princes: or how can he think to make them believe,
the Gospel to be contrary unto them, whereby they are Princes in deed subject
to no foreign power within their own Dominion, but the immediate Liutenaunts
of almighty God. Which having in deed set their Crounes with great honor
upon their head, assured their Sceptors in their hands, and established their
royal Seats underneath them: It can not be but godly Magistrates must needs
acknowledge thankfully to GOD and to his truth the benefit received. And
therefore not only not admit any Popish enchantment to the contrary, but to
glorify almighty God in the zealous advancement of the Gospel, whereby they
are advanced again to the hye Seats from which they were deposed by the
Romish faith, to be the footestoole of a Priest. But let us hear what
cunnnyng charm he has prepared for this purpose. We teach says he that al
Laws of Magistrates which are of things good or indifferent, yea, or not
expressly contrary to Gods commandment, are to be obeyed with that conscience
that a man, that willyngly breaks them openly or secretly, should think he
sins against God because he is Gods Minister. I acknowledge their doctrine,
but I require their ground. But he will say: whether the doctrine be true or
false, yet is it profitable for Princes and States. I answer him as before,
that it is an infallible rule, and to be constantly and inuiolably observed by
all that are not Atheistes, that there is no doctrine profitable to a Common
wealth that is not godly and sound, what show of profit soever it may seem
to have for a season. Therefore, both in this and in the rest, if he would have
persuaded their doctrine to be for a Common wealth, he should first have
proved it true, otherwise he might offer us under this pretense the wicked
doctrine of Mahomet. If he have no other rule but this, it is for the obedience
of Kings and Princes, whether the doctrine be true or false: I say that there
is no obedience good nor profitable for Magistrates to be given unto them. (If
we will judge of goodness and profit by the word of God, as we ought to
do) but only that which God has appoincted that subjects should give to
their Princes. Therefore, before it can be judged whither of our doctrines be
more profitable, we must bebate the matter whither of them is better warranted
by the word of God.

Our doctrine concerning the duty and obedience of subjects unto their
lawful Magistrates, as it appears by the Harmony of our confessions is
this. That subjects are bound, to be subject unto all lawful Magistrates,
hye or low, good or evil, and that not only for anger, that is for fear of
the punishment, which the Magistrate may punish the Rebellious with, but
also for conscience sake. Which words of the Apostle, for conscience sake we
thus understand. Magistrates are ministers of God, appoincted and ordained by
him, for defense and praise of the good, and for just punishment and
execution of the wicked: Therefore, he that shall resist the Magistrate,
shall be guilty in conscience of making resistance against God. Further also,
God in his most holy Law of the ten Commandments, under the precept of
honoryng our Parents, does commau^de us as to do to other all such duties,
which for any particular respect we owe unto the^ (as the Apostle expounds
it in the same place) so chiefly to yield unto Magistrates all duties
belo^gyng unto them: amongst which, subjection and obedience is the
principal. By which commaundment (as by all the precepts of the Moral Law
of God) our conscience stands bound before him, to give to Magistrates,
(which are the Ministers of his Justice in punishments, or rewarders properly
concerning this life) such duty as by the right of their place, ministry
and service, under him, does appertain unto them: Of which sort are
subjection, obedience, love, honor, paimentes, service, prayers, and such like
declared by the word of God, to belong to their hye and honorable calling.
And all such we affirm, Subjects ought not against their wills and for
fear, but heartily and cheerfully to give unto them for conscience sake, as
knowing them to be appoincted of GOD, and for conscience of Gods
Commandment, which binds us unto it. For, God because he is our creator
and reedemer, both of our souls and bodies, has just authority to give
laws which should bind them both, and as he has right to command our
souls and bodies, so is he able to punish both for the breach and
transgression of his law.

Therefore, worthily Saint James says, that there is one Lawgiuer, who ca^
save and destroy that is euerlastyngly and that but one only. For this
conscience of the Commandment of God all the Prophets and Apostles, yea, our
Savior him self was subject unto Magistrates, and so taught al men to give to
Caesar that which is his. By whose doctrine and example we must willyngly, even
for conscience of the ordinance and commandment of God, of what calling
soever we be yt profess the Gospel, submit our selves in all humility and
reverence unto them and their laws, whatsoever not repugnaunte to the
Commandments of almighty GOD. We seek not by any manner of pretense, to
exe^pt our selves from their Courts and authority, nor from bearing the
burden and charges, which they lawfully lay upon all their Subjects, for the
necessary service of the Commonwealthe. We hold Princes notwithstanding any
censure of the Church, to remain our lawful Princes still, in the possession
and right of their Croune, state, and dignities, as before: and the subjects
bound in conscience of the ordenance and commandment of God, to obeie them
as their lawful Princes, yea, though they be Heathen men, and to perform all the good duties of Subjects unto them, both in their goods and bodies. And
this by the grace of GOD is both our doctrine and practice, well and soundly
grounded upon the holy word of God: contrary to which no church professing
the Gospel, no good writer, neither Calvin whom he notes, nor any other have
taught, or maintained any doctrine. Now let us compare the doctrine and
practice of the pretended Catholics, with ours. Their Clergy howsoever (as
this man goes about) they would bind heavy burdens (like the Pharisees,)
upon other men's shoulders, yet would they not touch them with one of their
fingers. They would in deed have other men believe, they ought to have a
conscience, not only of the Law of God, but of human Laws, which must
hold only till the Pope do discharge them: for then they teach, they may
depose even the highest from their places and that by force of Arms. But their
Clergy that bind other men thus, exempte them selves from the Courts of
civil Magistrates, from paiementes and other services due unto them: and give
all such duties to a foreign Ecclesiastical Court, and to the Popes chamber.
They content not them selves with such Privileges as their lawful Prince
and Country, shall see cause to bestow upon them, but challenge of right and
duty freedom from all Civil burdens, by virtue of their Clergy. They
compound with the Popes Chamber, for such things as they pay, and in all
respects carry them selves as subjects to the Pope, and to none other. And
thus they use the Civil Magistrate, even when they deal best with them, and
whiles they are ministers of their superstition and cruelty. But if they once
displease them a little, and that the Pope begin to Thunder and Excommunicate,
then they depose kings, and Emperors from their Regal seats, and Imperial
thrones, they hold them no more for lawful Princes, they absolve and set
free all their Subjects from their oath and obedience due unto them: they
Excomunicate and curse all such as shall obey any their laws, or by any act
yield the duty of a subject unto them. Finally, they command the subjects
to take Arms against such their Princes, and by force and violence to take
their Crounes from their heddes, and set them upon some other. And thus as
other heretofore have dealte with the two Henry's and Frederickes Emperors,
with Philip le Bell and other the French kings, and with sondrie kings of
this noble land: So also he that of late did sit, and he that now sits in
the chair of Pestilence, have dealte with our Sovereign Lady and Queen
Elizabeth.

This then being their doctrine and practice, and ours so contrary to it:
whereby according to the right due unto Princes from God, we honor and obey
them: and they to the hye offense of God and men dishonor and depose even at
their pleasure? How can any man touch us in any respect as wantyng duty in
this behalf, or excuse these Catholic Traitors and Heritickes from being
guilty of hye Treason against the Croune and dignity of all lawful Princes, as
they are also against the honor of God and his son Christ Jesus. But this
Author charge us that Calvin says: No law of man can bind the conscience.
Whereof (says he) it must needs follow that the obedience we yield, is
only for policy and fear. For answer whereunto I deny the consequent,
and affirm the first, not to prove or infer the second. For the first, if
both Calvin and we say that there is but one Lawgiuer: Saint James has
taught it before us, and gives an evident reason of it: which is, that there
is but one who (euerlastyngly) is able to save and to destroy. For his law
only can bind the soul, who has authority to punish the soul for
breakyng of his law. But God only is able to do this, as Saint James here
teaches, and our Savior Christ in the Gospel: Therefore the soul and
conscience can have no other Lawgiuer but God alone. Likewise his laws only
can bind the conscience, who can not err in making Laws, which being the
peculier honor of God, his Laws only can bind us in that respect. Which if
it were otherwise, we should be as deeply bound to keep, study, understand,
and teach the Canons of the church, the Statutes and Laws of the land, as we
are the Law of God. Which if they did in deed believe, it is a marvel how
ever these men that break so ordinarily the the laws of God and of man, both
of the Church and commonwealth, should hope to be saved by their works, and
dream of works of superogation, for the relief of others. But though we
acknowledge no other bond of conscience, to observe any human Laws
whatsoever, then the Law of the ten Commandments does lay upon us: yet
does it not hereof follow, that our conscience is free from keepyng any Law
of man. For we are bound by the Law of God to yield unto all men, such
duty as belongs to them, and namely to such as are in authority, either
in the Commonwealth, or in the Church, honor, love, duty, obedience,
subjection, and such like. Therefore, though the law of man do not bind our
conscience to be subject to princes and their laws: yet do we acknowledge
the law of God does bind us to all obedience, which he has commanded to
be given unto them. For further clearyng of this matter, it is to be
understood, that all laws are either simply good or evil, or they are such
in respect. The laws which are simply good, are only the ten
commandments of the moral law of God, which bind the soul and
conscience simply to obedience, and so straightly without al exception, that no
circumstance or occasion may make that lawful, which is there forbidden, or
unlawful which is there commanded. Now, human laws and ordinances of
men, which command or forbid the same, which are commanded or forbidden
by the law of God: As thou shall not murder, commit whoredom, steal, or
such like are also simply good, and bind the conscience: yet not in any
regard of the commandment of men, for such reason as is before alleged, but
only because they are the same, which were before commanded by the living
God. Of the other part, such are simply evil Laws, as in commaundyng or
forbiddyng, are opposite and contrary to the Law of the ten commandments.
And these, as touching the keepyng of them, it is so far of that they should
bind us, that contrariwise we stand bound by the law of God, to do the
contrary. There remains the second kind of human Laws, which are not
good simply always, and to all men, but in a generality for a time, and some
good respect: beyond which bounds, the weakness of man can not reach. For
that which is now good for the Commonwealthe, may fall out at an other time,
and in an other respect (which peradventure was not thought of) to be
hurtful, not only to some particular man, but even to the Commonwealthe it
self. Further, though they be never so good for the time, and never so wisely
made, yet even for that time that they appear to be best, are they not of
the same sort with the Laws of GOD and such as are simply good in them
selves that they should bind the conscience. For though men have sought to
make such Laws, most agreeable to the general equity of the word of GOD,
yet have they no assurance to have attained unto it, neither in deed can have
any warraunte, that they have erred in no circumstaunce belongyng thereunto,
because of the weakness of man, both in judgment and in affection: but that
which may bind the conscience, is such as proceadeth from an other, that
cannot err in commaundyng.

I add further hereunto, that the Civil and Ceremonial Law of the Jews,
though they were both expressly commanded of GOD, who could not fail in any
poincte, yet did they not simply bind the conscience. For in case of
antinomie and repugnaunce with the Moral Law, (as our Savior argues by the
example of David, in eating of the presence bread, which otherwise it had not
been lawful for him to have eaten, but in case of necessity for saving his
life, commanded in the Moral Law) a man was not guilty of having sinned, by
such breakyng of the policy of the Church. And if these laws
notwithstanding GOD were aucthour of them who could not err, yet did not
simply bind the conscience: much less can those which are of men, either
in the Church or Commonwealthe. Whereby it appears, we are bound to the
keepyng of those kind of Laws, that is, to obey them with a Civil
obedience, without conscience of sin for any breach of them, which is
proper to the Law of GOD, except we break them in such sort as we make
our selves thereby also guilty of transgressyng the Law of God, doing it with
hatred resistaunce, contempt, or other offense against authority, which GOD
him self has forbidden. Which plainly shows our Adversaries argument, that
is, Except we believe the Laws of men to bind our conscience, we have
nothing to hinder us from rebellion, to be rather a slanderous surmise of his
own, then any good consequent of reason. For by the grace of GOD we are
stayed from such wicked and unlawful attemptes (which are proper to our
pretensed Catholics, whose mouths are full of obedience, and who utter
words as it is in the Psalm, soft as Butter, and smothe as Oil, but their
hearts are sharp as two edged swords, and their deeds most full of
Rebellion and disobedience) by conscience of the Commandment of GOD, who has
expressly forbidden them. But their perpetual Rebellious practices against
Princes, do plainly show that this doctrine was devised.

But all stories make mention, that they have allowed them selves any thing to
the dishonor of pinces, kings and Emperors have been abused by them, as their
vassalls and servants, and that to as base services, as to lead the Popes
horse, and to hold his Stirruppe: they have not vouchsaufed for a long time to
admit them to their presence, but kept them at their gates. They have
trodden in their necks, and taken of and put on their Crounes with their foot.
Further, they have taken upon them to depose them from their Regal seats
and Imperial Thrones, and place in them, whom it liked them. The soonne has
been stirred up by them against his Father, and the subject and servant
against his Lord and master, to take the Empire from him. They have made the^
after a sort, to sue out their Liuerie, as if they had been his Wards, and
forced them to pay full dearly for it, ere they could obtain it.

Finally, they have freed the Subject, from their oath and obedience to their
lawful Prince, and filled their Countries with insurrection and rebellions
against them. I need not to vouche many authors for their so notorious acts,
which cannot be forgotten, whiles the famous memory of the Henry's and
Frederickes Emperors, and also sundry Kings, both in France, and in this
noble land so dishonored and iniuried by them, shall continue. But if all
monumentes of times past were forgotten, this present age does furnishe so
many examples of their unfaithful disobedience to Princes both in other parts,
and here at home: as I can want no evidence against him in this matter. For
their continual practices of rebellion, their procuryng of Bulls from Room
against her Majesty: their writing of Libells and infamous books, to the
dishonor of her highness renowned Father, and many other such dealings of
theirs, may sufficiently bear witness hereof. Therefore, it is to late now
for them to play the Hypocrites, and pretend to advance the honor and state
of Princes: whereas their Religion has so entreated other Princes abroad, as
has been declared: and so offended their own natural Prince at home as her
Majesty has been constrained to make straight laws for her most necessary
and just defense against them. They should now cu^ningly persuade they sought
to advance the civil authority of Princes, whereas Kings and Emperors have
had almost continual wars with the^ to keep thetr own. For through their
ambition, they never contented themselves with their own place, but would
affect both the swords, seeking and bearyng the honorable charges of the
civil estate, and their Consistories vsurpyng the lawful jurisdiction of
Princes, so as the Kings of this land have been constrained to provide for
their authority by laws of Praemunire, and such like to bridle their
intolerable and ambicious usurpation. Therefore, of all other he might best
have left out this Article. For it is manifest, they were never longer friends
to Princes, the^ they might abuse them as their vassalles, to be the Ministers
of their wickedness. And so much for answer to this point.

Of sins venial and mortal and of concupiscence.
The nineth Article is the differences of sin, and of concupiscences, which
he says is of no small importance to a Christian commonwealth: whose end
says he, is to keep men within the limits of virtue and honesty. All this I
grant with this addition, that the duty of the Magistrate, is not only to
regard that the life of his subjects be civil and honest, but also that it
be religious and godly. Therefore we are taught to pray for them, that we
may live under them a peaceable life, not only in all honesty, but also in
all godliness, or true worship of GOD, as the word used by the Apostle
does signify. And to the Roma. the Magistrate is declared to be the Minister
of God, for the praise and punishment of those that do well and ill, without
restraint. Whereby the Apostle shows it to be the duty of the Magistrate,
to protecte and encourage, not only quiet and civil men, but also and that
chiefly, those, which most endeavor to live in the fear of God, in his true
worshipp and obedience. Which duty what Magistrate soever shall not
perform, but most dislike with, and discourage the godly, which shine as
lights before a wicked generation, stands guilty and aunswerable before God,
for the abuse of the authority he has received of GOD, especially for this
purpose, to be a comfort to such as most zealously and sincerely, seek to
serve him. On the other part for ye punishment of evil, the Magistrate is bound
to punish transgressors, according to the quality of their offense, not only
Thieves and Murderers, and disturbers of the Common peace: but also profane
Atheistes, and contemners of all that is holy, al Heretics, and obstinate
recusantes to serve him in the holy and public excercises of true religion
and stubborn Idolaters: which what Magistrate soever shall not do, is guilty
of absoluyng the wicked, which the Lord will require at their hands.
Therefore the king was commanded to take a copy of the whole law, and not of
the second Table only, that he should look to the execution as well of the
first Table, yea, and that in the first place, as to the second. Which we
see in the holy Story to have been executed by the zealous and noble Kings
of Israel and Judah, commanding by their authority, the purging of the land
of Idolatry, the setting up and restoryng Gods true Religion and service, and
the just execution of the Priests of Baall. And of Asa it is written, that he
made a law after he had restored the state of Religion, that whosoever should
not seek the Lord God of their fathers: that is, worship him in such order
as by the law of Moises was commanded, that he should dye for it.

Thus much I have thought necessary by the way, to set down touching this
matter, upon occasion of the Magistrates office under God restrained by this
author, to the procuryng of a Civil life only amongst their Subjects,
referryng all abuses of the Church, and of the service of God to their supreme
Pastor, as they call him. Now let us see the diverse doctrine of them, and
us, touching both these poinctes. Of sin he says, they teach some are
mortal and some venial: and we teach yt al are mortal. I grant this to be
their and our doctrine, but the exposition of it, and the conclusion he
infers would be well observed. If by mortal and venial sins, they
understood only that there is great difference of sins, and that some are
more grievous, and therefore with greater severity to be punished then others,
some again are less, and not to be punished with like horrible torments as
the other, we were well agreed. For this appears to be our doctrine, by the
confession of our Churches, and all our good writers, and that agreably to the
holy scriptures. For so our savior teaches us, that the first Table which
is of duties, immediately respectyng God, is the greatest and cheifest
commandment, and that the ignorant servant, is to be beaten but with few
stripes, but he that knows, and yet does not his masters will, is to be
beaten with many stripes. Likewise of such people and Cities as shall contemn
and refuse the holy doctrine of the Gospel, our savior says, it shall be
easier in that day for Tire and Sidon, for Sodom and Gomorrha, then for that
City. Whereby it appears, that there is a great difference of sins. Which
we so acknowledge, as that we grant every pretept to be greater then other,
according to the place it has in the two Tables, and consequently the
transgression of it to be greater, then the breach of any that follow it. Yet
if the comparison be made of sins in like degree and proportion offendyng
against both, as of thought with thought, act with act, and these in their
diverse kinds, as the greatest transgression of the one, with the greatest
breach of the other, and so likewise in the rest, keepyng a due rate and
equality of sins, that are matched together. Therefore notwithstanding, we
esteem not sin light, but all in their natures mortal and deadly, yet we
make a great difference of sins. Wherefore, if they understood by this
distinction, no other matter, but to make a difference that some should be
greater then others, they have no cause to strive with us. And for this, what
commodity it may bring to a common weal, we are in the blessing of God to
look for it, this being our doctrine. But they understand it far otherwise,
as appears by the Counsel of Trent, and by this aucthour. For, both
determine mortal to be such, as by their natures and in justice deserve
everlasting death, wherein we also agree. But the poinct of variaunce is in
this that they say, all sins are not mortal, but that there are sins,
which in justice are not to be punished with everlasting death, which kind
of sin they call venial. Not understanding that God for Christ's sake, does
forgive it those which believe, for so we grant that al are venial. For to
the believer all shall be forgiven, and there shall be no imputation of any
sin: but taking it in this sense which I have declared, in which I deny any
sin to be venial, and affirm all to be mortal: which our doctrine is
grounded upon the word of God. For, this is general of all sin, which the
Apostle without exception of any says, that the pain of sin is death,
meaning everlasting, as it appears there by the mention of life everlasting
life in the same place. And thus the Apostle taught according to the law,
wherein it is said expressly, cursed be he that abides not in all that is
commanded in this Law. But says he, though your doctrine be true, yet
does it not stand with good pollcie, which is to keep men in virtue and
honesty, as ours does: Because if al be mortal, who will strive against
sin: whereas admittyng all not to be mortal, though a man be carried into a
venial sin, yet would he strive to refrain from mortal, considering it
brings damnation. And though this Roman doctrine be false, yet does it more
encourage men to strive against sin. But I say, this is to reason like an
Atheiste. For as I have often said before, there can be no doctrine fit to
procure the blessing of God to any state, (whereupon depends the wealth peace,
and honor of every people and common wealth) but only that which is of God.
And therefore whatsoever he may suppose in our or their doctrine, to be for or
against a state, the truth must needs be, that all things reckened, and in
the end, it can never prove a good doctrine for any state that God has not
taught, nor that unprofitable, which he has delivered us. But I say
further, that our doctrine in the Nature of the doctrine it self, is more to
restrainyng from vice, then that of theirs. For, what greater encouragement can
there be in all good reason and policy to sin then impiety, and what
stronger restraint then grievous punishment. Therefore, their doctrine which
teaches so many sins, negligences, and ignoraunces, not to be in the
justice of the Law of God guilty of death, must needs hereby give
encouragement to continue in ignorance, in negligences, and other such like
offenses. But ours which truly teaches the wrath of God, and everlasting
death to depend upon it, must needs be more forceble to stir up all men,
to be careful to avoid to the vttermoste of the grace they have received, all
manner of sin, and if the less, much more the greater, which have more
grievous condemnation. But he and the rest of these Romanists, in faith and in
allegiaunce, suppose by making all sins, to be punished with death, that all
are taught to be equal, which is nothing so. For that death is not like unto
this, which is of the natural soul and body, and of the life of the
natural man: but it is a deadly castyng out of the presence and favor of God,
with whom only is life (that which in deed and truth may be so called for
the comfort that is in it) whereas the other is such a life, as some which
live in it, wish rather for death and would dig for it: As Job speaks, if
they might find it, and desire that the Mountains might cover them, and the
Hills hide them from the wrath of God liyng upon them. Therefore if it be
possible for men in the natural death of the body, to devise great
difference of torments, so as notwithstanding all suffer death, yet one may
endure (without comparison) greater torments in it then an other: How much
more in this case both by ye nature of ye death which they suffer, and by the
almighty power of God, is it possible that notwithstanding all sins be
punished with death, yet there should be sundry kinds of that death, and the
torments of the one to be in comparison (in them selves always horrible)
more easy and tolerable then an other. Which our Savior Christ expressly
teaches, speaking of the punishment of Sodom, and such as should with
contempt refuse the Gospel. Wherefore, that being an offense of their
ignorance, and not of our doctrine it is not to be imputed unto it. And so
notwithstanding any thing is said by him, or can be said by any to the
contrary, our doctrine in this point is most fit and strong for the restraint
of sin, and their impunitie most dangerous by encouragement to smaller
offenses, to draw men also in time to the easier committyng of the greater.
Besides in this their doctrine it is to be noted, that they teach the
sprincklyng with a little Holly water to be sufficient to take away those
sins: whereby the precious death of our Savior Christ is in this behalf
made of none effect. For if they be not mortal sins, the punishment whereof
in the justice of God is death: then Christ dyed not for them: and if he did,
then it follows both that they are mortal, and death the reward and
stipende of them, and also that the guilt of them can not be otherwise washed
out, but with the true Yssope sprincklyng us with the most precious blood of
the son of God, which purges all our sins. The second poinct in this
nineth Article, is of the doctrine of concupiscence which he says that we
affirm to be truly sin, even in the regenerate: and they say in the
regenerate, that is, as this man affirms it in Christians after Baptism (as
if all that are washed with the water of Baptism, are also borne again, which
is no more true, then that all receiuyng the Lords Supper, should receive also
the Spirit of Christ, which the Apostle denies) to be no sin, except that
concupiscence be consented unto. I acknowledge this to be our doctrine, which
to be agreeable to the Scriptures it appears by this, that whatsoever the
law forbids is sin, for of the law is the knowledge of sin, but this
concupiscence is forbidden by the law. This the Adversary will not grant,
but I prove it thus. There are but two co^cupiscences forbidden, one with
consent, and an other with out, whereof that which is with consent is
forbidden in the former commandments. Which appears by the exposition of
the seventh Commandment by our Savior Christ in the sixth of Matthewe, who
shows the lustyng after a Woman in heart: that is with consent, to be
Adultery and the breach of the seventh Commandment. Therefore it follows,
the other is forbidden in the last. And in deed if the same concupiscence were
forbidden in the former, and no other in this, then should there not be ten
Precepts and Commandments but only nine. This also the Apostle teaches,
who declares how hard it was for him to find the height and depth, the
length and breadth of the corruption that is in the nature of man, till he
rightly understood this Commandment. For thereby he plainly shows the
most secret poison of our nature to be discovered by this. Which can be no
other then the very continual springyng and wellyng up of unlawful lusts,
even before the heart resolutely agree unto them. Otherwise there might be in
us a motion and a power not standing with the love of GOD nor of our Neighbor
without offense to GOD. Which can not be, the Law requiryng of us that
perfect holiness of nature wherein we were created. And surely if the Apostle
had not esteemed this rebellion in his nature to be sin and mortal sin,
he would never have complained so grievously of his estate in respect of it,
both in other places as he does, and especially in the seventh Chapter of the
Epistle to the Romans in a great part of it, and in the end criyng:
Miserable man that I am who shall deliver me from this body of death.

Their doctrine being contrary, has no manner of ground in the Scripture. For
as for the first of James, it is plain he speaks of such a sin as shows
it self in an open and outward act to be sin. As for S. Austine, though his
authority, nor any other Fathers may be sufficient to warrant any doctrine to
be of God: yet taking him, alleged not for any such purpose, but as a
witness of the doctrine taught and received in the Church at his time: I
grant he so writes of concupiscence, as except his writings be well examined
and conferred together, a man would think he were of the opinion of our
Adversary. But being examined, it will be found that his judgment is with us:
namely, that this concupiscence is truly sin, and yt he so taught the church
in his time, as it appears in sondrie places. What discommoditte then can it
be to a Commonwealth, to have the people truly taught to know the great
corruption of our nature, or what benefitt can it be that they should not
understand their wretched estate. Surely none, but this, that for want of this
they should be puffed up in a pride of their own free will and good works,
and so not to regard the inestimable benefitt and comfort of the death of
Christ. The Adversary alleges in deed, that if it be so that a man sin
even without consent, that then a man is discouraged to make resistaunce: for
that no man says he will strive against that which he can not avoid: that is,
about the resistaunce of mortal sin which he can not avoid, if
concupiscence be sin, and every sin be mortal. I answer not withstandyng
both these be true, as they are most true, that yet the courage of resistaunce
is not hereby taken away. For the Apostle that confessed and taught both,
though he found it a tedious combat, and sweat in a manner water and blood
under his Harness, so as he complained sometimes, that he saw a law in his
members leading in captivity the law of his mind, and in this regard cried,
O miserable man that I am who shall deliver me from this body of death:
desiryng hereby as it were the end of his warfare: Yet did he not therefore
give over the field, and yield him self to sin. Naie, rather the new or the
young man which God had begotten in him by his spirit, valiauntly behaved
himself in the battle, oftentimes puttyng his adversary to the flight, and by
faith assuryng himself of the victory in Christ Jesus. And even as a worthy
knight and Champio^ is not discouraged with the valor of his enemy, but
rather rejoices in it, knowing his victory shall be the greater: So they that
are not cowardes in this spiritual war but valiant in Christ, their noble
courage is so much the more stirred up as they see their enemy to be great and
mighty, that the honor of their victory and triumph in Christ may be the
greater. Whereby it appears that our doctrine can in no sort be any
hinderaunce to virtue, or incourageme^t to vice. But theirs must needs be a
great breeder of vice and extinguisher of virtue, which persuades men that
that is no sin which is in deed sin. For hereby they neglect the first
motions and open the first door and entrance freely unto sin, which it were
the best spiritual policy to resist in the beginning: whereof they must
needs be careful which know it to be sin, and the other secure and
careless which take it to be no sin. Therefore, not ours but their
doctrine opens a wide gate to sin: which is yet greatly enlarged by that
he adds in the end of this Article, that no man will strive against that
which he can not avoid. For if this be so, and that it is most evident, that
while we live we can not amend this rebellion of our corrupt nature to the law
of God: then his council is, yt all me^ give over striving any more against
sin, seeing they cannot with all their stryuing avoid it. But we are
otherwise taught, that tho we can not avoid that sin dwell in our mortal
bodies, yet to strive that it do not reign nor exercise Dominion over us, but
that we strive against it even to blood, as the Apostle says, and even unto
death.

In the tenth place, 10 Of reward of good and evil works in this life, and in
the world to come.
comparison is made between our doctrine and theirs in the punishment of sin
in this life, and in the world to come: and the reward of holiness in heaven.
For the first he affirms, that we say only faith in Christ, is necessary for
the obtaining of the forgiveness of sin, and this he says is an easy
point. How easy it is, may appear in the example of Abraham, who was to
believe, that of his dead body there should spring children like ye stars of
heaven for multitude, and that he should have a seed in whom both he and al
nations should be blessed. What discourses would a natural man here make to
hinder with himself the credit of this promise. How many strong bulwarks
and fortresses of flesh and blood, and how many hie and mighty conceits of
the natural man: as the Apostle says, were to be overthrown and beaten
down to the ground, that Abram should believe this. And how much more that by
the death of Christ Jesus, we should have life everlasting, so many as believe
in him, by his shame and dishonor glory and praise, by his woundse, the cure
and healing of ours, by his wars and agonies, quietness and everlasting
peace. Of all the things that God has commanded, this most needs the mighty
hand of God to work it and maintain it, as in deed of all other it does
give most glory unto him. But faith being so easy a matter with them, they well
show how little they understand it. For our doctrine yt by faith only in
Christ, al our sins are forgiven, I acknowledge it to be true, and glorify
God, who has wrought in us by the powerful work of his grace so to believe.
For this is our peace with him. That this doctrine is holy and true, it
appears in that the Apostle having confirmed that Abraham was justified by
faith, infers upon it that by the same, David pronounces men to be happy:
namely because true happiness is in having our sins forgiven, which we attain
unto by faith in Christ. Thus says the Apostle Peter to him all the prophets
bear witness, that forgiveness of sins is given to every one that
believes in him. Therefore the doctrine is sound and holy, which when we teach
we declare also, in case of repentance, what the fruits are of this faith,
whereby in deed we repent, namely, a sorrow for having sinned against God,
which strikes and wounds the heart with a grief, and detestation of the
wickedness committed and kindles in it a love and desire to do those things
which God has commanded. Finally such are the effects of this faith in
repentance, which the Apostle notes to have been in those of Corinth. 2.
Cor. 10.
As for auriculer confession, which enforces men of necessity to confess
their sins one by one in the Priests ear, we teach it in deed, for no
part of repentance, because we have no commandment, promise, nor example
for it. In deed, we bind not men to this rehearsal and discovery of their
sin unto the minister, which we esteem to be but a very tyranny over the
conscience, and exhort them only according to the example of David, to make
their wickedness known unto God which suffiseth. Yet if any be so tempted as
he stands in need of council and of comfort, and shall open his heart to the
godly and faithful minister they are not denied the comfort that may be given
them in this respect, but upon discerning of their true repentance. The
minister is to assure his conscience in his word of the forgiveness of their
sins, declaring the promise of the Gospel, which is of grace and pardon to
all that do repent. And this is the use of that, which Christ our Savior
left unto us in the power of the keys, in regard of particular comfort. A
degenerate imitation whereof, only is in their absolution, which he calls a
Sacrament, without al reason. For a sacrament being a seal of the Gospel has
an outward creture applied to assure ye promise unto us, which should have
some resemblaunce to the promise which is sealed by it, as we see to be in the
water of baptism and in the bread and wine in the Lords supper. Another part
of repentance they make to be satisfaction. concerning which we teach that if
it have regard to ye party inquired, be it either any private man, or the
whole congregation offended by so notorious offense: then we teach I say that
the discipline left us by our Savior Christ does require it. For in such case
binds that of our Savior, tell the Church, and, leave thy gift at the alter,
and be first reconciled to thy brother: much more therefore to the
brotherhood, which is the church and the fellowship of all the brethren. As for
such a satisfaction as he mencioneth here of some temporal punishment in this
life, to satisfy the justice of God for sin, we affirm and that most
truly according to the scripture, that whatsoever is imagined of such
satisfaction is highly derrogatory to the precious death of our Savior
Christ, who only is the satisfaction for our sins. which one point of their
doctrine declares, they little understand what the justice of God and what
sin is, that think it may so easily be satisfied for. He names three
satisfactory works, of prayer, alms, and affliction of the body, whereby he
says they satsfy for their sins, which are even ye depths of satan in this
Romans says. For what may be more derogatory to ye cross of our savior Christ
and his sacrifice once offered upon it for all, whereby he has fully satisfied
for the sins of all that shall be saved, and paid the uttermost farthing of
their debt: then that a man should take that upon him, which neither man nor
Angel were able to bear, that is to satisfy for his sins. To whom it may
be truly said which the prophet Jeremy said to the hipocrite people of his
time, That is, color thy sins never so well, yet how should thou say, I
have not defiled me, I have not followed strange Gods, behold thy way in that
valley, know what thou have done: Wash thy self with Snow water, and make
thee clean with soap, or the fullers scouring Herb, yea gylt thy self over
with Goulde. And as Job when he had another manner of feeling of sin, and of
the gilt of man in the sight of God, then they seem to have when they have done
all their satisfactory, works, and have sought to wash them selves clean with all as with snow water, the Lord shall take and plunge the^ into the ditch, he
will tumble them in the mire and filth of the streets, that is discover them
to be most foul and unclean Let S. John teach such men, Apoc. 3.
that tho they think they are rich, yet that indeed they are naked and
beggarly, that they may seek to him, for fine gold, which shall indeed be able
to enrich him with true riches yt possesses it, and for a suit of apparel yt
shall indeed cover their shame, and give them a comely presence in the sight of
God. Prayer is a holy part of ye service of God, whereby we call upon God
according to his commandment, in certain assurance to be heard of him: but
that this should be any work which God in justice should receive for
satisfaction, is a wicked fancy of the church of R. and from the beginning
unknown in the Church of God. Alms is a duty which God has commanded in
thankfulness of the love and favor we have received of him, to be merciful
to such as st^nd in need of our help, but by satisfiyng by them the justice of
God, is a thing which the prophets of God and the Apostles of Christ never
knew of. The affliction of the body is a bodily exercise, whereof the Apostle
says it profits little: yet being discreetly used, may bring some help and
furtheraunce to the making of men fitter for ye service of God Not that the
greater the affliction of the body is, there the mind does alwais most serve
him. For the priests of Baal and the priests in the West Indies, (as the holy
storye of the Kings, and the stories of these Indies declare) exceed in the
affliction of the body, yet both profane and heathenishe Idolaters. So
likewise the Jesuits and some other Popish orders of Friars (notwithstanding
they be but al counterfeits to the priests of Baal and to the Indians in
afflicting the^ selves) make some hipocriticall show hereof, and especially
in the streets where they may be seen of all men, and yet are supersticious
idolaters. Therefore the service of God is nothing at al to be esteemed to
stand in these things. But there may be some exercise of the body, as fasting
and watching at prayers and study, and such like exercises, which being used,
with judgment, not to hurt offense, or disabling of the body to serve God:
in the calling he has called us unto may be some help to the subduing of
the flesh and the quickening of the spirit. Thus I say, the exercise and
affliction of the body, may be as the Apostle says, a little profitable for
the subduing of our corruptions, and the stirring of us up the better, to the
service of God. But to say that any such affliction, can release our sins,
or satisfy the justice of God, or prevent any pains of the world to come,
by having borne a part of them in this life, as this pretended Catholic does
teach, is blasphemy against the son of God, degatory to the satisfaction made
by him upon the cross, and full of pride, vanity, and hypocrisy. Therefore
concerning these three works, as al others like unto them. I grant they are
in Christ acceptable deeds, which the true and lively faith works in those
which do believe: but which in no sort ca^ satisfy God for our least offense.
But when we have done them, we pray the L. with the Prophet, O Lord enter not
into judgment with thy servant, Psalm. 143.
for no flesh may be justified in thy sight. When we have al done, yet our
prayer, is that the most holy and earnest prayers which our Savior Christ
made unto his Father being upon the earth, may be accounted unto us for
ours, that his perfect love wherewith he loved both God and man, may be
accounted unto us, and that his wounds may be the healing of ours. Let them
trust to their own prayers, Alms deeds, and patience, our trust is that
the righteousness and obedience of Christ, that his most holy Passion and
suffering, which he suffered once for all upon the cross, shall be ours by
faith, and that by this faith, we shall be both just and live for ever, And
this is our hope, sealed up in our hearts, by the spirit of grace to the
day of our redemption: other confidence or means of satisfaction have we
not. As for purgatory we do not in deed acknowledge, as he obiecteth to us,
but hold it to be a mere fancy of their own, having no one title of the
scripture for ground thereof. But our authoure will say, notwithstanding this
doctrine be false, yet must it needs be greatly profitable, to the
restraining of men from sin, when they shall think that sin is not easily
released, but must be satisfied so hardly for, even in this life, and the rest
of the satisfaction (as if they would pay al their own debts to the uttermost
farthing) to be made in purgatory. Is not this at least a politic way to
withholde men from iniquity. I answer there can be no way or means fit for
the subduing of sin in deed, but only that which God has appointed. The
weapons of our warfare, are not carnal, says the apostle. We strive not
against sin with such weapons, as the vain discourse of a natural man would
think so to be fit for it. But we repair to the armory of the sanctuary, and
temple of the Lord and there what weapons we find the Lord has prepared to
furnish us with against it, with those we arm our selves, and strive against
sin and al our enemies. And easy it is for all those whose eyes God has
opened, to see the truth that this devise of theirs smally auailed. For with
this they had another also, that these satisfactory pains of sin, either in
this life, or in their feigned Purgatory, might by pardon from the Pope be
released, and likewise blasphemous to the cross and sufferings of Christ, who
taking upon him to command the angels of Paradise to go fet out of purgatory
such souls as he would appoint, and being a matter but of small cost, to obtain
in their courts, so much Lead and Wax as might safeguard them, and exempt them
from al these pains, What redier way might there be made for sin then this?
For if for money a man may satisfye for sin, which his own life, nor the
life of his only begotten son cannot redeem him from, as the Prophet says,
this could restrain none but beggars from sin. for the rich few of them were
so covetous, the popes pardons being so cheap as they were, yt for bestowing so
small a piece of money, they would be in danger of ye fire or water of purgatory.
For whether it be water or fire, or what kind of pains are in it their doctors
are not yet resolved. It appears then that for restraint of sin, it was no
way profitable, but rather a most subtle devise of ye devil to entice al men to
wickedness. According as ye experience has declared. For as it appears by
comparison of the stories of al ages since Christ, there was never any more
sinful, for ignorance of God for superstition and idolatrye, for ambicious and
reuengeful wars, for treasons, murders, adultries, and a thousand villainies
in this kind, and finally in all impiety, as ye age does best witness: wherein
this doctrine most reigned, of satisfactory works, and of purgatory. Which came
to pass both by the justice of God, revealing his wrath from heaven upon al
falls worship and ungodly devises of man in his service, giving these who had
not regard to keep his holy worship, pure in honor, and undefiled, to pollute
defile, and dishonor themselves, with al ungodly and dishonorable lusts, to
their just confusion: and also by the nature of the doctrine it self, which in
effect, making the holy morral law of God, but as it were some penal statute
made by man, opened the door wide to al wickedness and abomination. Whereby it
is evident how contrary this doctrine is to al christian states and common
wealths whatsoever, whose end ought to be chiefly, that their subjects live in all true religion and honesty. But how unfit soever it be for christian K. and
estates, I confess it was a very pollitique point of doctrine for the popes
kingdom. For hereby he received a double commodity. First that casting by this
means his fear upon the simple and ignorant, he enjoyed more quietly the
possession of his tyranny over the Church, al men standing in need of his
fatherhood, and fearing to provoke him that had such a power, to keep them in
purgatory still, or to release them. Another that by his pardons, and
indulgences delivering men from this prison which he had painted in their heds,
he filled his coffers with treasure. Where by he enjoyed the more easily, all the contentmentes that he desired, and was the better able to maintain his
proud Antichristian kingdom, against al power that should rise against it. And
thus in respect of the maintenance of their own kingdom, I think there was
never so politic a supersticion and false worship in the world as this of the
To. faith: which whosoever try fro point to point, shall easelie discern to be
most true. To the further consideration whereof, leaving the discreet Reader, I
will proceed to the other point which remains, which is of the reward of good
and evil in the world to come. Whereof our doctrine is says he, that all the
pains of hell are equal, and that the most wicked man that ever was, shall
endure no greater torment, then he that is the least offender, which his report
of our doctrine is utterly untrue. Wherefore let him either justify this to be
true out of the confession of the faith of our Church, which he ought to do if
he challenge us for doctrine, and not to charge us with every thing which has
been written by any yt profess the gospel, or by any writer of ours of
credit in the church: or let him fear with out repentance and satisfaction
for it, by confessing his ignorance or malice, in thus slaundering the church
of God, ye just condemnation of liars and false witnesses, whose portion is
with hypocrites. He says we teach further also that ye glory of all the
redeemed and elect of God, shall be equal, and that every one shall be in as great
glory as Peter and Paul, which is not the general doctrine of our Church. We
acknowledge that they which otherwise shall be beautiful as the firmament, and
they which justify many, shall shine is Daniel teaches, like the stars of
heaven. Our savior denied not that there should be a place at his right hand,
and at his left, in his kingdom in the world to come, but in this world
told his Disciples that the pomp of earthly states should not be seen in him
nor in his ministers. He promised unto the Apostles seats to sit upon, to
judge the 12. Tribes of Israel. And the Apostle rejoiced in the hope he had
that the Thesalonians should be his Crown in the day of the Lord. Whereby
it appears, that as all the members are partakers of the power of the soul,
and have their place and honor in the body, yet they receive not all power to
do the same work, nor are of like honor: so in the mystical body of
Christ, al shall be as members of him, partakers of his spirit, and be filled
with it, for the full work and honor of that part which they shall be in the
body: but not al enabled for the same work nor of like honor. But they will
say how can this be, except heaven be a reward due unto the work. I answer
that according to the same grace, that god gives a diverse measure of faith,
and according to the diverse measure of it, the fruits thereof, many or few in
this life: so also he disposes of the degrees of glory in ye life to come.
whereby it appears yt as we truly deny all men

(...) Therefore, look what profit a Christian Common wealth may receive of
the doctrine of the diffrence of glory and pain, in the world to come, it
receives it of the doctrine which we teach. Drawyng toward an end, our
aucthour begins confusedly to heap up many things together, by which
order one point might have served him as well as the whole dosen. For in this
tenth he has dealt with the doctrines of Repentance, Confession,
Satisfaction, Purgatory, of Heaven and Hell.

In the eleventh which follows, Of works, merit, freewill, and
predestination.
he entreats of Works, Merit, Frewill, and Predestination. Concerning the
doctrine of Predestination we teach says he, In the Church of Rome, that
all the Saints of God, are Predestinate before the foundations of the world
were laid. And I say, we teach the same. Therefore our doctrine herein being
the same, it must needs be no less profitable to any state then theirs, and
so no cause of this comparison. Of Freewill we teach says he, That a man
has liberty and freedom of his will, whereby being prevented and assisted
by Grace, he may at his pleasure do any good Works, or refuse to do them.
This doctrine in deed is neither ours, nor the doctrine of Christ and his
Apostles. For, according to the truth we have received of them, we teach
that the Nature of man through the sin of Adam is so wholly corrupted, that
there is no good thing in it, that of it self it cannot think a good thought,
that it is sold under sin, Phil. 3. Romans 7.8. Ephesians. 2.
and that it is enemy against God is not subject to the law of GOD, nor in
deed can be made subject: finally, that we are borne dead in our sins.
Whereupon it follows, that the will of man being a principal power of his
soul, it is subject to the corruption of the whole, and therefore has no will
to do that which is good, wills not of it self any good, is servant unto
sin, wills nothing but sin, and ennemitie with God: wills not that
which the Law commands, but is dead in sin. Whereof it must needs
follow, that we are not free in our will, to will that which is good, for
our will is servant to sin, and therefore can not do the work of
righteousness: Our will is dead in sin, and therefore can not be a live to
righteousness. For as a dead man can not do the actions of a man that
lives, no more can the man that is dead in sin, do any action of will, or
any other that he does that lives to God. I mean not that our will is dead
altogether, no more the^ that a man dead in his sins, should not live the
life of a natural man, and of this world: but that whatsoever natural power
it has, it is dead as touching the doing or willing of any thing that God has
commanded, in such sort as the law requires. There remains still,
notwithstanding the punishment of the sin of Adam, a will in man, whereby he
is freely and willyngly carried to that he does, but this will I say is of it
self, carried willyngly to no goodness, but only and always to evil.
Therefore being dead, in respect of any good, when after the will chooses
well, this work we teach not to be of Grace, preuentyng and assistyng, but
to be wholly the work of grace. For, as if the spirit of life should
reenter into a dead man, who after should rise and walk, and do other
things agreeyng to a living man, it can not be said these actions proceade
partly from the spirit, which is inspired into him, partly from the dead
body. For, what help or furtheraunce can death bring to an action of life. So
also the Spirit of God reenteryng into us, who are borne dead in our sins,
and we after living in some measure the life of GOD by the same spirit, it
cannot be said that our will choosyng to do that which is good, or any
other natural faculty, dooyng in any measure the will of God, that it does
it partly of it self, partly of the spirit inspired into us, but the honor of
such actions is wholly due to that spirit. That we will is of our nature, but
that our will does will that which is holy and good, is not partly of us, and
partly of the Grace assistyng, but it is wholly the work of Grace. Yet is it
the goodness of God to call it ours, that is wrought in him by us, because it
is not wrought without us, neither are we as an axe or dead instrument in the
Lords hand, but the powers of our natural soul tendyng of them selves,
wholly to that which is evil, are turned by the grace and power of God, to
that which is good. Which doctrine as it is most true, so does it give to
God the honor which belongs unto him. Neither is it a hinderaunce to good
works, that God be acknowledged the only aucthour and woorker of them. But
says he more like a Philosopher and natural man, then a Christian and a
Divine: except it be in a man's power to do well, it must needs utterly
discourage him from doing good works. The answer whereof is, that those which
believe, cannot but be fruitful in good works, notwithstanding they do
not to the dishonor of GOD, arrogate to themselves the praise of the^. For as
a man that is quickened with a living soul, can not but do the works and
actions of a living man, so also they which have received the spirit of
Christ, whereby they have believed, notwithstanding they be not incoraged by
this reason unto it, that of their former dead nature they are able to hear,
see, or understand, yet of the nature of that spirit, they cannot but do
the actions of that life, which that spirit does quicken and animate the^
withal. And as a branche of a wild Olive taken from his own stock and
implanted into a natural Olive, notwithstanding that of it self, it bring no
manner of help to bear a right Olive, but rather whatsoever power is in it, is
contrary thereunto: Yet of the nature of the right Olive, it cannot being a
lively branch of it, but bear right Olives. Even so it fares with us. Romans
11.
For, we are by nature wild Olives, and our Savior Christ is the true and
natural Olive Tree, into whom being grafted by faith, shall we say it will
never bear any fruit, except the former wild and savage nature it had
before in his own stock, may be furtheraunce to it? No, but that nature
being mortified and altered by the power of the true Olive, we cannot being
lively branches in this Olive of GOD, but we must bear right and kindly
fruits, according to the nature of the stock we are received into. Further,
as the nature of the spirit which we are vouchsafed does lead us to it, so
our endeavor is stirred up hereunto in tha^kfulnesse unto God for our
salvation, which he has assured unto us by the power of the spirit, given us
to the day of our rededemption. Therefore, because we owe our selves wholly
unto him that has so derely bought us, and so graciously saved us, we are to
apply our selves to all good works whereby God our redemer, may be glorified in
us. Whose glory if it be precious in our eyes, as it worthily ought to be more
then heaven and earth, we cannot want provocation to do those things, which
he has commanded.

Now for the last poinct of this Article of merit, and the reward of heaven:
we say in deed that the doctrine of Merit, and to teach that life everlasting
should be a reward deserved by our good works, is a doctrine that makes void
in effect ye death of Christ. The benefit whereof by this means shall be only
this, to procure us this favor with God, that upon condition that we do
such and such works, that then he will give us his Kingdom for our works
sake: which is a doctrine that of al other does most discover Antechrist as
it is most opposite to the doctrine and honor of Christ. For, we are taught
by him, that when we have done all we can do, we are to acknowledge that
we are but unprofitable servants: and they teach that their service is
worthy a reward, and what reward, of the kingdom of heaven, the glory of
God, and of joys everlasting and unspeakable. They teach these things to
be but a small purchase, a little money given to their Corban, the buildyng of
a Monastery or Abbey, for a sort of Idle and Supersticious Friars to abuse the
world, and things many times of the just desert of everlasting death, to be
the worthy price of Gods kingdom: that is in effect, that an Abbey, a
Seminary College, or such like, should be as much worth as the precious
blood of the Soonne of God. Thus in deed we teach not, nor whatsoever should
become of all the states of the world, ought not to teach it, being the
proud doctrine of that presumpteous Antechriste, guilty of hye treason
against the Imperial state croune and dignity of the king of heaven and
earth. Whose favor and grace, if we should say we had deserved, we should
account it little worth, and should take from him his most due and high
honor of our salvation, and be most unworthy his grace bestowed upon us. But
says he, who will be zealous of good works, if there be no reward of them in
heaven. I answer, if there were none, yet ought we in thankfulness to GOD
for our first Creation, diligently to apply our selves to do his will, and
obey his Commandments: As also all cteatures set forth his glory in their
kind, notwithstanding there be no reward promised them in heaven. But I say
further, that we do not teach that there is no reward for good works, but
contrariwise, that the reward of them is so exceedyng great in heaven, that no
good deed shall be lost, no not to the bestowyng of a Cupp of cold water, in
the name of a Disciple. For as the son and heir of ye father for all his
service, receives a most large recompense of his inheritance: so much more
the inheritance of GOD must needs be a most bountiful recompense of all
our service to him. Yet notwithstanding, the inheritance is not accounted due
to the natural child from his father, for any desert of his, but because he is
his son. So likewise the inheritance of Gods kingdom, yea (much less
without all comparison) never can be earned by us, or deserved by any works we
can do, but shall be given us because we are sons, and heirs to God by faith
in Christ Jesus. So the inheritance is both a gift and a reward: a gift
because it is in every respect undeserved, and a reward because he that has
dooen nothing in deed, but endeavored to do some small part of his duty,
and yet receives that which could not be due unto him: cannot say that he is
unrewarded. And thus our Savior teaches in the Gospel, that the penie was
the reward, and the penie was given him, that bare no heat and burden of the
day, but wrought only one hour. An hours work could not deserve the wages
and reward appointed for him, that should work the whole day: yet he
receiving it of mere gift, can not say but that his hours labor was most
bountifully rewarded. Everlasting life was promised to the doers of the Law,
this work we do not, yet it pleases God of his goodness, to give as well
to us that have not done it, as if we had done it, can we say then that any
thing we have dooen is left unrewarded? Thus it is plain, that giuyng to God
the honor, which is due unto him, we acknowledge also the reward to be great
in heaven. And therefore though we do not encourage any mercinarie duty, but
exhort to a thankful and cherefull obedience unto God, yet the benefit that
may arise to any Commonwealthe by this doctrine, that our labor shall not be
lost in the Lord, is to be reaped of the doctrine that we teach.

Now follows the twelueth and last Article, which is of Eareshrifte, or
Auricular Confession. 12. Of auriculer confession.
Concerning which they teach it to be necessary for every Christian manne,
once in the year at the least to Confess himself to a Priest, telling him
every fault in particular that he has committed: and this they teach to be
so necessary, as if a man conceal any he ca^ not receive absolution for it,
but that sin remains still upon him. And this he says is the very hedge
and wall of all virtuous and good life, which he pretends to prove by many
particularities, but first for their doctrine: the use and benefit of it shall
be after examined. And first I wish them to agree amongst them selves, that
it may be determined between them whether it be of the Commandment of God
or not: or rather howsoever they agree or disagree I affirm it has no manner
of ground in the word of God. Where we are only taught to confess our sins
unto GOD, and to poor out our hearts before him, that the Lord may be
merciful unto us. Further also in the public congregation both together
with the rest of the Church, and perticulerly upon repentance of some
notorious offense: and privately one unto another. And therein we receive and
find through the good blessyng of God great comfort and commodity in using
of them. But this confession that a man should rehearse in a Priests ear all
his sins once a year. Neither was it commanded of our Savior Christ, nor
universally used in the West Church till about 300. years ago. And if this be
the very lock of all honesty and virtue as he says, and the very hedge of well
doing, how could so many Churches and Christian States have wanted it so long?
Was there no virtue nor honesty for 1200. years after Christ in such places as
had not received it? It is not to be thought to come to his commodities, that
they wanted means for redress, both of private and public offenses all that
while. Neither does the Gospel which teaches no such matter as this is:
Leave the Church unfurnished of means, to redress all offenses that come to
knowledge: which is by the godly exercise of that lawful discipline, which
our Savior Christ appointed to be used in his Church: which in deed is both
the lock and keye of al good life next to the power of the word preached.
Whereas therefore we are taught by the Gospel to preach salvation to those
which believe and walk according to that faith: and contrariwise destruction
to come upon every soul that shall not believe nor walk according to the
commandment we have received: and to denounce this to all Estates and
Dignities, to those which are of private and public calling, who can not but
find them selves to be summoned by it to the tribunal seat of God, and have
their hearts often touched withal to true repentance. It can not be said then
(without this new found devise of auriculer Confession) we have no means of
good life amongst us. Heb. 4.
The living word of God that strikes deep to the partyng between the soul
and the spirit, shall it be esteemed nothing worth without this Confession.
Peter by this wrought through the grace of God, such a compunction in the
hearts of 3000. in one day, that they came and humbled them selves in true
repentance, acknowledged their sins in having crucified the Son of GOD,
and received the Faith and Baptism, in the name of Christ. Many such like
examples might be vouched out of the Scriptures of mighty and powerful
works and effects of the word preached. Whereby it appears, that the
Churches wherein it is truly taught, as by the grace of God it is amongst us,
are not without not only some, but not with out the cheifest and most
principal means to keep the people of God in due obedience of him. For
further means of discipline, as we acknowledge what the right order is which
God has commanded, and both see and are heartily grieved to see in so noble a
part of the Church as this is, and after so long continuance of the Gospel
preached amongst us, great abuses contrary unto it: So we cease not to be
most humble and continual suitors to God and to the authority he has set over
us, that we may enjoy it. Which being in the use thereof, and in the
ordinance of our Savior Christ, so necessary for the service of God, and the
salvation of men, we hope that the equity and necessity of that we sue for
being thoroughly understood, the Lord will dispose the hearts of so Christian
authority as we are subject unto, most willyngly to grant it. For want
whereof, as your HH. see how wide the enemies mouth is opened against us, so
the humble and daily suit of all that fear GOD and understand this matter
within this land is, that it may please God to touch your HH. hearts with
that zealous care of his glory and love of the salvation of the people, that
by your HH. means to her most excellent Majesty, order may be taken for
the establishyng hereof. In the mean season we have to answer our Adversary
in this case, that the preaching of the Gospel by the blessing of God, may be
of power to those in who^ God shall work by it, to keep them in his fear.
And for the regiment of the church, ye abuses being theirs, that they of all
other have not to charge us in this respect. As for their auriculer Confession,
the famous story of abolishing of it by that worthy and reverend Bishop of
Constantinople Nectarius, upon occasion of wicked company between a Matrone
of the City and one of the Church, does sufficiently show for how just
cause it is to be abolished in a Christian state and Commonwealth. So does
also the experience of these 300. years wherein it has been so universally
commanded and practiced, which has discovered it to have been one of the
fittest instruments of Satan, for nourishyng and maintainyng all the
abominations in these parts of the world, and the very seed of all private
contentions and public wars of open violences and secret treasons. So that
when I think of the consequence of it: I marvel how Christian states and
people could endure it so long. By this means they had the best intelligence
of the greatest secrets of the public states in Christendom, which they
traitorously used to the troublyng of the world and for their own advantage.
They searched and gaged by this means, both public states and private
houses, so as there was nothing in any Kingdom, City, or Town, no, nor in
any house or family but was known to them. Which was such a politic point
in deed for the^ to keep the world in awe of them, and to hold them still in
captivity, to set up and put down whom they listed, to make their friends
and to subdue their foes, as a stronger wall for ye maintenance of this
Antichristian tyranny could not be devised.

And this is his dosen of points which he thinks to be worth so many
millions to a Common wealth: which if he may sell at his own price we
shall buy them dear enough. But I hope I have sufficiently showed them to be
so little worth, as no man but himself and his fellows, that esteem their
grains, relic pouders, and such other pedlary as they bring in now into the
land for rich Marchaundrise, will make any great reckenyng of the^. Wherein I
have so dealt, as I think he can not justly complain that I have followed
impartiment matter, and left the state of his question, as he wrongfully
charge the reverend D. Fulke, whose learned writings all the sort of them will
never be able with truth to answer. Because he would be answered to his mind,
he is careful we should understand his full meaning: which is says he, not
whether doctrine be true or false, theirs or ours: but whither be more
politic or profitable to a common wealth: Wherein he is to be admonished, that
to prove his doctrine fitter for the establishing of a K. and state in peace
wealth and honor, to bring upon it all good promises and blessings of God:
his next and readiest way had been, to have proved the truth of it by the
scriptures. For this is a most certain ground, ye true religion has ye
promises of this life, and the life to come: which are so far in this life
bestowed upon us as God sees to be most expedient, and may be without the
greater loss and hinderaunce of the other. Therefore in leaving to prove
that, he left the way he should have followed, and has taken a clean
contrary course, which is, that it brings great commodities, which if it
were so, yet could not suffice to prove it true. For the Turk and other
heathen which apply their religion as may be fittest for the maintenance and
security of their state, they receive no doubt by their detestable false
worship, many benefits to the assuring of their estates for a season: yet is
it but an execrable false service of God, which is so commodious unto them. For
whether commodities be blessings from God or no, depends upon this, whether
the people be his people, and honor him as he has appointed. For to such we
are sure, having warrant of the truth of religion, that all benefits are the
effects of the gracious promise of God to those which fear him, and are in
deed blessings proceeding from the tender love of God unto his people, and
seals of the everlasting blessings, promised unto us in his kingdom. But
what blessing so ever is bestowed upon any other, is turned in the end into a
curse, it is but feeding of the Ox for the slaughter, a lifting of them up,
that when they are cast down they may fall with greater violence, and more
easily be dashed in pieces. Finally it makes them the more guilty, and brings
a heavier destruction upon them. For how should they be blessed that fear not
the Lord, upon whose favor or displeasure depends the prosperity or hard
estate of every K: and people. Therefore to persuade that he pretended, he has
taken a clean contrary way. For if a man grant him all that he affirms, yet
is it easy to answer that this benefit in the end, must needs turn to a
loss, and this show of security to all unquietness, this settled estate to
captivity and bondage. For how many examples have we of this from the
beginning, yt is, of K, and commonweals that have flourished for a season,
and in the end have been broken al too pieces. As the state of the K. of Tire,
which is described by the prophet, to have been so exceeding prosperous, yt in
respect thereof, the King of Tire for his glory is compared with the morning
Star: yea and said, to shine as a Cherub from amongst the stones of fire, yet
even he as the same prophet threatened him is now cast down from his high seat
and from all his glory. And Tire whose marchantes were as P. of the earth, and
her chapmen as the Nobles of the world, is now become more like a poor fisher
Town, then that old City, or greatly renoumed amongst the Ylands, and in all
the world. We see the To. empire, and the K. of Italy, how notwithstanding the
former honor, wealth, glory of it, yet now, and that by the means of their
Popedom, it is dashed in a manner all in pieces, and cut into so many little
seingnories Dukedoms, L, and free cities, that they are as ye potsherds of the
earthen vessel, which ye lord as he threatens in the Psalm, has burst in
fitters with his bar of iron. Whereby it appears to be ye right way to
prove any doctrine profitable for a christian state, to be received, to show
it to be of God. Other wise without consideration of the truth of it, to say
how false so ever it be, yet is it good for the state, or how good so ever it
be, yet is it ill for the state, and will bring innouations troubles and
poverty, this is to reason like one that has no God. And if he went to reason
thus like an Atheist, he were utterly unworthy any answer, and has offered
your Hh. the greatest wrong that a christian nobility could be offered, once to
think, that the show of his commodities to the state, should carry your H. to
the liking of that false worship and superstition, that is against God and his
holy truth. Therefore what soever he imagine to the contrary, the question
whether it be good for a Christian common wealth and kingdom, I have answered
pertinently in showing their doctrine first to be false and heretical. Which
ground being first laid, I have joined in that issue he desired, declaring
further, that as by the curse and wrath of God, which must needs shake and
ouerturne the seats of such mighty ones, as shall dare to have wars with the
almighty, in setting up a false and idolat. worship which he has forbidden: So
also that their doctrine it self and the practice of it in the very nature of
them both is against all good policy of any Christian state, and only fit
for the establshment and security of their Antechristian kingdom. For further
evidence whereof I have thought good here to gather together (with some
enlargement of like matters) that has bin touched in several places concerning
this matter already. That being to be vewed in one sight, it may the better be
judged and discerned. For better understanding whereof it is to be considered,
that the good estate of a Christian K. or commonwealth is to be holy in
religion, and al duties immediately respecting God, honest in all conversation
amongst men, free for liberty, strong for forces, quiet for peace, and rich
for treasure. All which points make a state honorable and happy. But the R.
doctrine and practice, brings in a false worship of God, al wickedness and
looseness of life, tyranny, bondage, wars, trouble, weakness and vnhabilitie
to resist the enemy, finally, need and poverty, all which must needs make any
state dishonorable and unhappy. That their faith is unholy, and therefore
makes their people such that does receive it, appears by the worship of
Idols, of bread, of wood, and of stone, by the ignorance of all sorts amongst
them, and the maintayning of it to be mother of devotion, by their
iustifications through their own works, and so many other bye means, besides
that only sweet sacrifice of Christ Jesus: and in a word by all their falls
worship, which is wholly nothing but a service devised by men, and not
prescribed by the word of God. And as in regard of God, it is an unholy and
profane worship, having no ground of his word, so is it the cause of al
dishonesty and wicked conversation amongst men. Which may appear not only in
the justice of God, with whom it is righteous, to give over to all shame of
iniquity and abomination, those which have not held his honor in any due
respect, but have made it common to Idols, and by experience which has made
proof of all ungodly and loose behavior, to be even in their holiest
Cloisters: but also by their very doctrine and practice of it. This may easily
be discerned by any that shall compare with that holy discipline which is
taught in the Gospel, their discipline, which is most loose and desolute,
except it be, in yt which may keep still the conscience in bondage and
captivity of ignorance superstition and Idolatry. For as the discipline of
Christ is the special means next to the true preaching of the word, of all
godliness and honesty, both to be preserved amongst men, and also to be
restored after a declination and decay, so that Antichristian disorder and
confusion, in all the chief parts thereof, is next to their false and
heretical doctrine, the greatest cause, that all impiety and wickedness both
first entered into the Church and yet can not be driven out, that the ancient
estate of the Church may be recovered and restored again. But I will leave
other points which were to long to enter into here, and note but one special
corruption of their discipline, Whereby judgment may be given of the rest. This
is that Antichristian supremacy whereby the man of sin in the deuilishe pride
of his seat, challenges unto himself fulness of power and soueraintie of
jurisdiction, to do what pleases him, and to dispense with what he list. For
what greater encouragement can there be to sin, then that a man may be sure
for a little money, and a very little in deed, to have a sealed pardon, not
only for any wickedness committed, but also for all he shall commit al his
life and many hundredth years after: so foolishly and absurdly wicked is their
doctrine and practice. If a man by going a pilgrimage, or saying so many times
over his beads, or fasting so many days, or giving so much to the priests
and seminary men: If I say by these and such like means a man may satisfy for
his sins, who will be restrained from any wickedness, or be careful of the
amending of his life. Thus one point of the supremacy is as a root of
wormwood and an original cause of an infinity of tra^sgressions and sins.
Which being through the justice of God and the very nature of sin, enemy to al
good pollices, whose end is to repress sin, what need we further proof,
that the practice of this Romish religion must needs be the poison of all
such states which do receive it. But no marvel tho so infinite a power of
the Pope be so great a cause of sin. For the very authority of absolucion
which every Priest has, is more fruitful this way to encouragement and
increase of wickedness, then that any good state or policy may bear it. I
speak not here of the danger of dishonestie and uncleanness, by reason of
their secreet confessions. For which that worthy Nectareus abolished the use
of it out of the Church of Constantinople, but of the power that they take
upon them to absolve malefactors from sin, whereby it must needs be greatly
encouraged. That desperate and Deuelishe Iaureguy the Spanyarde purposed to
have done upon the noble Prince of Oraunge. For if every Priest have such a
power to absolve from sin, any wicked limme of Satan, that shall dare in his
deuilish boldness to attempt the execution of mischiefs against most H.
personages, and most noble Princes: what wickedness is there that these
absoluers will not dispense with, and what security for any P. or state where
such priests and absoluters may be endured likewise their doctrine of
satisfactory works must needs be a great emboldning unto sin. For if sin
which the prophet said could not be satisfied for, tho a man should give rivers,
of Oil, and thousands of sheep, and Oxen, yea tho he should give his first
begotten son, or his own life for the redemption of it: may so easily be
redeemed, by giving some part of the wicked mammon to building of Abbeis, or
maintaining of Masses seminaries, and such like, which in deed greatly
encreseth their sin, by strengthening such abominatio^s: Men must needs be
hereby made more careless of their wickedness, and more encouraged to offend.
Whereunto also their sanctuaries and privileged places do greatly encourage.
For if any malefactor may have any such defense against all justice and
protection for his ill doing, how is it possible that all wickedness should not
be provoked by it. Whereby it being plain that impunitie is the cause of
encouragement to offenders, and that the practice of the R. religion is thus
discovered to be such, as it sets the transgressor free from all fear of
the wrath of God, and the judgment to come, by their dispensations,
indulgences absolutions, and satisfactory works: and from all ecclesiastical
punishment for a little money, by making markets of their said Bulls and pardons:
and from the justice of the civil magistrates, by sanctuaries, and in all their
clergy, by exemptio^s, imunitees, privileges, and appeals to ye seat of R It
must needs be hereby most manifest, that the practice of their religion is as
a breach that is made by the sea, whereby al manner of impiety and wickedness of
life, does so violently flow into the common wealth where it is received, that
it is not possible to make resistaunce against it. Whereupon I conclude, that
seeing by his own confession, this Romish faith, in the doctrine and
discipline of it, both through the justice of God, who cannot but from heaven
reveal his wrath upon so great ungodliness, and in the very nature and
practice of their religion must needs be the most certain ruin and overthrow
of all K. and states where it is established. I might allege here other
particular causes of the breaches of some certain commandment, as their
disordered orders of Monks and Friars, their unlawful vows and constrained
single life, to be causes of hypocrisies, adultries, fornications, and a 1000.
abominations of uncleanness. But I leave these and such like to the
consideration of the discreet reader, and proceed forward to other points.
Wherein I affirm the practice of their religion, not to stand with any good
policy. Next to the honor of God and a virtuous conversation, whereof have
been spoken already, nothing can or ought to be more regarded in a state,
the^ the souerainty of the state and freedom of the people. Which by the
doctrine of the Gospel is maintained and established, For so we teach,
according to the doctrine of the apostles, that every soul and person be
subject to the civil magistrates: both to the K. as most excellent and
souerain, and to those which are sent from him. Whereby both the souerainty of
ye state is maintained, in directing and commanding, with in the Dominion which
God has given them without controulment of any foreign power: and the lawful
liberty of ye people. For the people obeying the authority which God has made
them subject unto, they need not to be suitors for any causes in the court of
any strange P. they are not to be taxed by them, but in every their respect,
are free from the bondage of any foreign commandment whatsoever. But the
Romish religion, nether leaves P. sovereign in their estates, nor the people
free in their liberty. For by the doctrine and practice of their religion, K.
and princes are but vassals, and as feodataryes to the pope in their K. and
dominions, they are to receive the^ of him, and leave them at his pleasure. He
has authority to dispense of all their Crowns and Kingdoms, to set up and
put down as it seems best to him. And as this is set down for good law in
their Canons, so have they not failed to practice it, as has appeared. Further
also, they take from them ye dealing with all ecclesiastical causes, drawing
them all to ye Sea and court of R. even to ye bestowing of ecclesiastical
livings at his pleasure, by means whereof, both the emperors of ye R. empire,
and other P. and ye K. of this la^d, have bin fain to plead such causes as they
have had with their subjects without their own land. further also, they took
upon the^ to impose paime^ts upon their subjects (besides a thousand oppressions
of their souls, which they miserably tyrannised, with laws of abstinence for
conscience sake, from meats and from marriage, commandment of confessing
their sins in shrift, and the rest of ye ordinances of their will worship)
whereby the pore people were oppressed with great bondage and the P. were so
many and diverse ways impeached, in their crown and dignity. Further in a well
pollicied estate it is required, that it be maintained in peace, and yet so,
that in case of war they may be strong, both in men and treasure to defend
and repulse the violence of their enemies. This the Gospel teaches, being the
gospel of peace, whereby men are not only reconciled unto God, but also one to
another, according to the worthy testimonies, which both the Prophets and
Apostles bear unto it in this behalf. And as the Doctrine is peace, both with
God, and amongst men, so the practice of it can not in any sort disturb or
hazard the peace of the state where it is received, but with all security
establish it. Likewise has it nothing in all ye doctrine and practice of it,
contrary to the strength of a common weal. For it teaches marriage to be
honorable amongst all men, and the honor of a P. to be in the multitude of
his subjects, and exempteth none by any pretended authority of foreign power,
from the service of their country. Concerning riches and tresure, it does not
impouerish, requiring only a competent provision for the pastors and doctors of
the church. Which as it is necessary for their service, and most due by the
express commandment of God, so rises it to no great charges of a common
weal. But the R. religion, and practice of it, is against al these. For if the
stories even of their own wickedest writers may be credited, as they ought
most of al to be against themselves, yt B. of R. have bin ye cause of all the
wars yt have bin in Europe these 100 years. And indeed what estate ca^ be in
security or quietness, wherein a foreign P. shall have intelligence of all the
secrets of the land. But wheresoever the R. religion is, every Priest is an
intelligencer and a spy for the pope, who both by other means, and especially
by their auriculer confession come to understand the deepest secrets of every
state and K. of every City, and town, village, house, familye, and person
within the land. Which kind of intelligence, being ye most certain, as uttered
of conscience, and most privy, as put only into a priests ear, and so many
employed herein, brings to pass, yt no P. in ye world has ye understanding
by all the means he can possibly use, of the affairs of the state next to him,
or with whom he has most to do, which the pope has of al ye states and K.
where his religion is maintained. Which intelligence as every mean man may
easily understand being a matter of so great importance, in all causes public
and private, it is to be considered, how easy a matter it is for him, by means
hereof to disturb ye quiet estate of any nation or K. at his pleasure. For which
cause of late, he has sent in new Confessors, shriuers and absoluers, who
under pretense hereof, may both understand the secrets of the land, and deliver
Agnus deis grains, and medalls to his reconciled, as tokens of their
conspiracy. Whereby they may be prepared for a day to rise up against the
land, and disturb the quietness of it. Which is so evident a means to
disquiet a state, as I esteem that none which will receive their auriculer
confession can be longer quiet then it shall please the Pope. Hereunto if we
adioyne the consideration of the infinite power, which most ungodly and
injuriously to al states this R. church gives to their pope, it will easily
appear, how contrary their doctrine and practice is to the welfare of all K.
and commonweals. For their doctrine is (as I have partly touched before to
show the repugnance of popery, the hie authority and souerainetie of any
state, and here repeat because the same is also against the peace and quietness
of all commons) yt in certain cases, the pope may depose P. from their imperial
seats and thrones of justice, and give their crowns and K. unto others. Their
doctrine is, yt he may absolve al subjects of such P. from their allegiance
and oath made unto them, yea that he may excomminicate all such subjects as
shall obey the authority laws, and commandments of such a Prince. And their
practice agrees with their doctrine For thus they dealt both with diverse other P.
here to fore, and thus also of late the impiety of Pius the fifth, brake forth
to the excommunicating and depriving her Ma* in his proud bull much like the
blasphemous letters of Rabs. sent to king Ezechias, (yea and to the accursing
of all such her graces loyal subjects, as according to their most bounden duty
obey her wholesome laws and statutes, in these words. We charge and forbid all
and every the Nobles, and subjects) and people, and others before said, that
they be not so hardy as to obey her, or her will or commandementes, or Laws,
upon pain of like curse upon them. Which clause of that presumptuous and
wicked writ, is so important in the cause we are now in hand withal, yt I
desire all those that shall read this, to take good heed unto it. For how can
this author affirm that there should be cause to tolerate the rebellious
practisers of this wicked foreign P. Seeing it cannot be in any reason that
they can be faithful and dutiful subjects to her majesty, which obey this
execrable bull. For he can not be a liege man nor a dutiful subject of her
majesty, that will not obey her laws and statutes, and take her for his
natural and lawful P. and much less he that shall persuade others hereunto. But
none of those which are reconciled to this their R church may do so, and their
priests and seminary men persuade them there unto. Therefore no such
reconciled papists, much less they which reconcile them can be good and
obedient subjects of her Ma. That such as are reconciled to their church may
not be obedient to her H appears by the Popes bull curssing and
excommunicating out of their church, al such as do obey her H. laws, where upon
it follows that they which are reconciled are reconciled upon that condition.
For otherwise in case of their obedience they are accursed, but the reconciled
are not in case of excommunication, therefore they have denied their obedience.
How can it be then that this doctrine may be tolerated, that her majesty's
subjects by such means should be drawn from obedience of her laws, and
acknowledging her lawful power over them without the certain hazard of the
state. Christ and his Apostles never taught any such doctrine or practice as
this is. The primative Church never heard of it. Ambrose that worthy bishop of
Millayne, When he for a cruel murder and massacre of the Citizens of Thessal.
had excommunicated Theod. the Emperor, yet did he not take upon him to depose
him from his Imperial Crown and dignitye, but howsoever in the charge of his
ministry, he declared him to have no right to the Lords table, and such
other Spiritual diet and entertainment of Gods children: yet as touching the
things of this life, he reverenced his authority, and was obedient to him in
all things. But of this practice of the Romish Church, except it be of their
own doing, I suppose there is no president to be showed from Christ to this
day. Further as touching the strength of a Land to resist her enemies, the
practice of this Romish faith, does both weaken it for people, and impouerishe
it for treasure where it is received. This may appear if we call to mind that
which he boasts of in this example, that is the great number of Priests,
Professors, Votaries and other supersticious persons, whom he falsely calls
religious, which waited and attended upon them. The number whereof aryseth by
his own account to so many thousands, and all exempted from the service of
the P. wars. yea and from any contribution and payment to maintain them,
could not be but a great infeebling to the state. Further they al being
restrained from marriage, whereby either if they had no children, or not daring
to auow then most cruelly murdered them, the posterity could not multiply any
thing in such sort, as if it had been lawful for them to marry. But this wise
politic esteems it a high point of wisdom, to diminish the multitude of
Christ. people, and of the children of Abraham, which is promised as a blessing
to be multiplied as the Stars of heaven that cannot be numbered. Concerning the
treasure of the land, it is not his eating of whit meat that can recompense the
great and infinite sums of treasure, which their pretended catholic
religion by a thousand means drew from all the states and K. where it was
received. For the ordinary reuenews and profits of their religious men, as he
falsely calls them, rose here, to one third of all the land, and more in the
reign of ye noble K. Henry the eight. The furniture of their churches with so
many surplesses and Copes of all sorts of rich stuff, such as no King or
Prince could wear better then many of them were of. Their great and Massy
crosses of silver and gold, their Idols of finest metals, and most exquisite
workmanship, the rather to deceive the people, as if they had been alive. Their
other ordinary charges of wax, incense, Orgaines, ye plate and Jewels of
their Abbeys, Pryories, and other supersticious houses were of infinite valor
and price, as I think ye court of augmentation might sufficiently testify.
Beside al these, ye extraordinary charges of appeals and following suits at R.
the paimentes imposed by most tirannous oppression, both of ye king nobles, and
all the people of this land to their most just and grievous complaint, (as
appears by their letters) drawn out of this and other K. by names of Peter
pence, Palles collatio^s, first fruits, and a 1000 such crafty and subtle
titles and most extreme exactions, did so impouerishe the state, as both the
K. the Nobles, and all the people did often and grievously complain, as
finding in deed the Court of Rome to be the very leech that sucked the blood of
all the land, and could never be satisfied. Of this we have sundry statutes
testifying the popes proceedings here to have been to the defuming of the
Kings person, the derogatio^ and minishing of the Kings crown and regalities,
the destruction of the law and all his realm, ye appayring and confounding of
the ancient laws, customs, vsages, and franchises of the Realm. Further,
that by them the nobility and gentry were impeached in their Patronages and
other rightes, The commons and subjects travailed in body, and impouerished in
their goods, divine service, Hospitallity and Alms deeds hindered, the
benefices of holy Church wasted and destroyed, the riches and treasure of the
Realm carried away, as also the liege Persons of the Kings council with
out his assent, whereby the Realm was left destitute as well of council as of
substance, to the destruction of the same. Like complaint has been made in
France also at sundry times, and namely by Phillip le Bell, in that famous act
of his, which was called Pragmatica sanctio. Which paymentes are now greatly
increased. Where accounting the Churches of the French tongue in the low
Countries with them, Le cabinet du Roy Des Finances.
the ordinary revenue of the clergy, came to about a two hundred Millians of
French Crowns. Germany and the state of the Empire held at Norinberge, made
complaint of an hundred Greuaunces, and sent a note of them to the Pope, with a
request to be eased of such exactions and practices of impouershing the
people, as the Pope and his clergy did continually charge them with, and that
the people might be left in their ancient and lawful freedom and liberty by
his means, or else they would advise them selves how to help it: because
they could not nor would not any longer bear such their intolerable
burdens. Whereby it may appear how contrary this Romish doctrine and
practice is, to all good estates and policies. In deed in respect of their
own Antichristian kingdom, I must needs confess that for the establishment,
continuance, security, wealth, and honor of it, there could nothing have
been devised more politic or fit, by any Satan's means, (whose depthes,
their Popes and Prelates understood) then that which was devised by them. For
what could be fitter for them then this doctrine of the Popes supremacy over
all, of his fullness of power, of receiving both the scriptures, and their
exposition of the^, of obeying that he commanded, of not judging him tho he
carried ten thousand to hell, of devout ignorance, of judging heretics who so
ever spoke against them, of pursuing and persecuting them with fire and
swoorde, of purgatory, Auriculer confession, privileges of his Clergy, the
Pomp and idleness of his Hierarchy, and of all their most subtle and
Serpentlike contrived false worship. The practices of Egypt, toyling Israel
with all base service and villainy, and of killing their male children, or of
ye barbarouse tyranny, of wasting the West Indies: was not nor is not, more
subtlely and diuelishly devised to detain those free Nations in perpetual
bondage and slavery, then their Romish doctrine and practice was to have
established the kingdom of Antichrist, and to have detained the people of God
in everlasting servitude and slavery both of body and soul. Thus then we see
that for piety and true religion, the doctrine of the Church of Rome (that is
in effect of the Pope who is steare man of this ship). Concerning their power
to make any writings, Canonical scriptures, to make new Articles of Christian
faith, to appoint God to be served according to their own devises and
imagination of men, of ignorance to be the Mother of devotion, of worshipping
of Idols, and Saviors of so many sorts, Finally of all their false worship:
is a Pharisaicall leaven to be purged out of all Christian Churches, and
states, the Cup of spiritual fornications, that all Kings and Princes are to
take heed of, to be partakers of it, that they be not partakers of their
plagues. And for Christian honesty of life, and duetyes toward men, their
doctrine of absolutions, of dispensations, of satisfactions, and of Sanctuaries
are (for the impunitie or easy discharge of all malefactors) so great causes
of all abominations and wickedness, and particulerly, their sundry rules and
orders, of hypocrisy, contention and idleness, their constrained abstinencie
from marryage, of all enormityes of uncleanness and infinite murders, and
such like other causes of special offenses: that the waters of Noe did not so
high drown all the old world, as those floudes of wickedness which by such
occasions had risen, did over flow all such kingdoms and Nations, as this
doctrine of theirs, like a Sea of sin might break into. For other things
how much a do have our Pr. had to provide by all the wisdom that was
possible to be used, to make laws and statutes against the dangers, that this
their religion continually threatened against the state. They sought to
maintain their lawful and most just authority, by forbiding appeals from
their courts by praemunire and other such like severe and rigorous laws, yet
necessary for the garding of their authority from the breaking in of these
men, whom yet no defense could hold out. They sought to maintain ye wealth of
their people and subjects by laws of mortuaryes and other such like necessary
laws and statutes, least these men should draw all the riches of the land
unto them. And yet neither could the praemunire sufficiently repress their
proud ambition, nor the mortmaine their insatiable covetousness. So that their
wealth, intelligence, and power considered, it appears to be the same mighty
hand and stretched out arm of God, that has delivered us: which freed Israel
from the slavish subjection of Pharao and of the land of Egypt: which being so,
no maruail the Christian princes, whose eyes God has opened to see the light
of the Gospel, do not tolerate their Religion and the practice of it. For
besides the impiety of it: for which it is simply unlawful to tolerate their
abominable profanation of the service of God, as appears by the
commandment of the Sabbath, forbidding the breaking of the Sabbath day, in
every Son and Daughter, in every Servant and Maid in Israel, with out
exception of any, yea in every stranger within their gates: it can not in any
sound reason or judgment be borne with all, even for the very annoyaunces and
hurts, which it brings to the states which do admit it. Neither is his
marginal note of the example of ye great Turk, and of the Bishop of Bungo
sufficient to persuade the contrary. For first they esteem not the manifold
dishonor where with their Romish faith dishonoreth god and our Savior
Christ. Then also I deny that either of both, suffer that doctrine and
practice of their Religion, as they teach and exercise it in these parts. For
is it likely that they are suffered to teach that it is of the necessity of
Salvation, for every human creature to be Subject to the Pope, or that it
should be in the Popes power to depose them at his pleasure? Do they suffer
the Pope to challenge appeals to his Court from them, to deminishe such
multitudes of their people, and to draw out the Treasure of their Countries.
No, none of all this, nor many other such like points, which they easily see
to be prejudicial to their states. But being Heathen and profane Princes
not regarding wherein they profane the Honor of God, by their (...) worship.
It may be they permit such exercise of their superstitions to some few of
these pretended Catholics as are scattered amongst them, as does not in any
sort inda^ger or hurt their kingdom. But our cause being so far diverse as
has been declared, there is no reason why the Turk or the Pagane king of
Bungoes doing should be any president to a christian Princes, making profession
of the holy faith of Christ and the truth of the Gospel: or why their
tollerating with a few in some points nothing prejudicial to their estates,
should persuade a bearing of such points and practices, as in the nature of
the^ overthrow the state, peace, authority, strength, and wealth of the
kingdom that shall receive it. Therefore I conclude this point, that the doctrine
and practice of the Romish religion, such as it is at this day, and has been
some hundredth years past, being against the Lord God and his anointed Son
Christ Jesus, against his holy word, the doctrine of the Apostles and
Prophets, being against the good state of any nation, Kingdom and P. that
shall receive it, having infinite occasions of all wicked life, taking from
them their cheifest royalties and dignities, oppressing the consciences, souls
and bodies of their people, harkening out by thousands of intelligencers and
spies, the greatest secrets of their K. diminishing by cunning practices, the
number of their people, and drawing out the Treasure of the land to their
intolerable hindraunce, weakening and impouerishing of them, and their
Subjects, ought by the word of God and in all sound Wisdom, reason, or
pollicye to be esteemed, and judged contrary to the honor and glory of
almightye God, the holy and honest conversation of Christian men, contrary to
the safety, assurance, establishment, honor, peace, strength and riches of
every K. and common weal. The second part of the whole epistle, Thus far
this instrument of the pretended Catholics, has maintained their cause to be
worthy more favor then it finds, by the profit he would persuade us, that
the K. faith would bring to this K. Now drawing near to a conclusion, His
full heart breaks out into scornful and patheticall speeches. Wherein first
he requires a disputation, and after seeks to move some compassion with a
pitiful complainte of imagyned torments, suffered by his companions for
their Religion. The reason of this request is pretended to be the want of the
proceedinges that have been hitherto used toward them, which is noted both
in the ministers and in the state. To the ministers he obiecteth, that they are
always soliciting your honors against them, and that they dare admit no
lawful trial of the cause, they move question of unto us. For whom to
answer as I am bound in the Lord, I take it to be a very surmise of his own
head, that there should be any near your Honors, continuallye stirring you up
to draw out the sword upon them. But if any either publicly by preaching,
or privately being vouchsafed that favor to have speech with any of your
honors, do upon just cause put your Lordships in mind of the great and high
calling you are called unto, that you bear the sword of God, a sword of
protection for the godly, and of vengeance for all the wicked, if they declare
by the word of God, that heretics which seek to seduce the Ll. people to a
false worship, and to carry them from the service of the living God to the
adoration of Idolles, that traitors which practice a withdrawyng of her
Majesty's Subjects from her obedience, and reconcilyng of them to a foreign
power, are such wicked Malefactors, against whom this sword of just execution
is to be drawn. They do herein nothing unlawful, but discharge the duty of
good and faithful servants to God and loyal subjects to her Majesty. For
thus we read it to be written, if a false Prophet arise up amongst you:
saying, let us go and seek other Gods, that Prophet shall be slain, because
he has spoken to turn you away from the Lord your God, to thrust thee out
of the way wherein the Lord thy God commanded thee to walk, so shall you
take the evil away forth of the midst of you. Of which sort they are
convicted to be, who lead men to the worship of Images, which is all one
with other Gods and Idolles, how soever they labor in vain to distinguishe
them. For if it were allowed them that Idolles were the Images of Heathen men,
and Images the conterfaites only of Christian men (which is nothing so, for
the words are indifferent to both) yet is the matter one and the same in
effect. For whether a man give the honor of God to the counterfect and
resemblaunce of a Heathen or Christian, or to the creatures them selves what
soever, it is all one. The rule is general that he is gealous and will not
give his honor unto an other. Therefore, the exhortation to the just execution
of such false Prophets is a duty well becoming a servant of God. The
other the Apostle also teaches, affirmyng that those which resist the higher
powers procure condemnation to them selves. And do these men think that they
may compass Sea and Land to seduce men's souls into destruction, and
Subjects from their lawful obedience, and no man should take heed to their
doing, and oppose him self to their wicked proceedings? Yes the same God who
is the watchman of Israel and sleeps not, no nor slumbereth, I hope will
stir up the care of all men according to their callynges, to look to the
doings of these busy and sedicious Seminaristes, and to further such lawful
justice against them as they may by their unlawful deeds make them selves
subject unto: and that your HH. according to the noble care you have had
hitherto of the maintenance of Gods true Religion, of the sacred person of her
most excellent Majesty and of all the people (against al which they have
wickedly set them selves) will still hold your eyes open night and day over
them to discover the secret practices of their enemies, and to bring to
knowledge and justice their ungodly and cruel devises, which they conspire of
under pretense of their confession. Concerning trial of disputation he
charge us with two things, that we refuse all trial by writing, preaching,
or lawful disputation: and that we are ready only when we have the
advantage. What trial he could make of any cause by preaching I can not tell,
except he have a confidence in persuasible words of human learning, and
supposes that if it were as free for the^ to preach as it is for us, that then
they should work miracles. For to try ye truth of points of Religion by
preaching, I think was never taken for any way of trial since the Gospel was
first preached. Therefore, this part of their three ways he might well have
spared, except he hope of such their ability. If he have any such
confidence, he is to learn yt the Apostles prevailed not by preaching in such
order, but that their speech was such as carried with it an evidence read and
understood in the hearts of the hearers that they spoke by ye spirit of God.
For their doctrine, as also our savior Christ's before, was with power, and not
as that of the Scribes and Pharisees. And therefore, if he have hope in this,
his hope is a Spiders web and as a broken Reed that will deceive him.

There were many eloquent Orators, many profounde Philosophers, and many
wisemen according to human reason, when the Apostles were sent to preach.
And they came against them, neither with persuasible words of man's
teaching, nor with any deep Philosophical skill, nor with any great reachyng
wit, but with the word of the Cross, as far from any outward pomp of
speech, as the Cross of Christ was from any worldly honor. Yet by this word
bare and naked in show, by this breathe of the Lords mouth, they prevailed
against all the enemies of the Gospel, and subdued the wise and deep, the
flowyng and eloquent men, to the obedience of the faith of Christ. Therefore,
having not this word for him, but against him: if he had the tongues of
Angels, yet should he no more prevail to the subuertyng of the faith of the
elect of God, then either Tertullus the Orator, or the false Apostles in the
Church of Corinth did against Paul the true servant of Christ. If the
armor we fight with against the^, were but carnal as theirs is, wherewith
they strive against us, then might they hope in deed to match learning with
learning, skill with skill, knowledge with knowledge, Eloquence with Eloquence:
finally, any of these gifts common unto all men, with as great gifts to
maintain war against us. 2. Cor. 10.^.
But the weapons of our warfare are spiritual, and through the might of him
that works all things, of power to overthrow every high Tower, and every
strong Bulwark, that is exalted against it. To us it is, who profess by the
grace of God, and teach the Gospel, to whom is promised, Mat. 10.
(and to who^ it has often been performed) a mouth and wisdom, against
which all our enemies should not be able to stand. We are the weak ones, by
whom the Lord confounds the strong, the base by whom the noble, the things
of no account, by whom he overthrows those of greatest reckenyng in their
opinion, that the glory may be the lords. Besides he must needs think us
very loose and dissolute, in the administration and discipline of the Church,
that should think it a likely matter to persuade that they should be suffered
to come amongst us, to preach their wicked heresies of Idolatry, and all
abominations. Where did the Apostles ever suffer this in any church
established by the^? Where did ever christian prince having received the truth,
wittyngly and willyngly, admit false Apostles, and erroneous teachers
amongst their people? If the word of God had not made us thus wise, yet
might we have learned this of all the world, and of them selves. They
themselves, do they suffer the true Preachers of the Gospel, freely and
without restraint to preach amongst the^? Did they ever offer this at Rome,
or in any part where their Idolatry is established? If the children of
darcknesse have so much understanding, to maintain their Kingdom of
blindness: much more the children of light ought to be able to discern, of
that which appertains to the mainteinaunce of the kingdom of Christ.

This then never having been any way of trial, nor in deed being not of that
nature to try a truth, there remains to satisfy him for the rest. He
requires yet a trial by disputation, and that in two sorts, by writing or
speech. For trial by disputation it has been admitted always, and many
times offered by the professors of the Gospel unto them, and that in both
sorts of speaking, and writing. Martin Luther and Phililp Melancthon, Luthers
worthy companion, with sondrie others of the learned and famous men of
Germany, maintained the most holy and honorable cause of the Gospel by
disputation, before many of the great states of Germany, against as subtle
and cunnyng Instruments of Satan, as ever since have risen up, to oppugn the
truth of the Gospel. In France at Poyssie, Theodore Beze, and Peter Martyr,
men of rare excellency of knowledge and vtteraunce, with sondrie other worthy
learned men, so disputed this cause with the choice of Sorbone, and of all
the Papists of France, as ye Cardinal of Loraine him self wished that Beza yt
day had bin dombe, or some of his auditors (noting ye chiefest) had been
deaf: meaning thereby that God by him that day had so laid open the truth
and disciphered their errors, as he feared least those that were in
authority, should have received it. I leave to mention the disputation of
Zwinglius, Oecolampadius, and others at Bearne, Basile, Strausborough, and
other free Citees. In all which the Lord so assisted his servants, the
ministers of the Gospel, as upon such trial the truth was found to be with
them. And to speak here of the like at home in King Edwardes time, and also in
Queen Mary's, when they brought those worthy men, and constant Martyrs of
Christ, Cranmer Ridley, and Latimer, and others to dispute at Oxford, with the
most unreasonable inequality that might be, yet they so received and put out
all the fiery darts of the Devil and his instruments cast against the^, and
so foiled and wounded their enemies, that both all that were present, whose
eyes the Lord had vouchsafed to open to see the truth, and whosoever shall
yet read it to this day, may easily see that the sheilde of faith was their
defense, and that they fought valiauntly with the sword of the spirit, to the
confusion of those that strove against them. And though their bodies were
used afterward at the pleasure of their adversaries, having no regard of their
calling, no reverence of their learning, no respect of their age, yet after
the example of Samson, and the true Samson Christ Jesus, by death they obtained
victory against them.

In the beginning of the happy reign of her Majesty, now sittyng in the
Royal seat of her Fathers, their Bishops and greatest Clerks were
provoked, and appoincted by authority to dispute, if they were able to
maintain their doctrine, with such ministers of the Gospel as were called, to
deal with them in it. Which action as it appears by the story, and
testimony of many that were present at it, was so fo^dly and ridiculously
handled on the part of the greatest Pillars of their pretended Catholic
Church, that al men marvel that the memory of the confusion and shame of
that day, does not with hold them once to move the matter of disputation with
us. For after a little impertinent speech, they gave over their cause in the
plain field. But they say, he that runs away may fight again, and so
peradventure these men have now gotten more heart of grace, then they had
before, or else these Romistes and Remistes think peradventure their Bishops
were unlearned, but that they in so many years travel and study abroad, have
better furnished them selves for the battaill. But their weakness was
notably discovered, in their great Champion and Father Jesuit, who offering
defiaunce with Goliath to the host of Israel, as if the staff of his Spear
had been as a Weauers beam, he was bold to cast us his Glove, and throw us
his Gauntlet, to provoke us to fight with him, boastyng to maintain his cause
by Scripture, Counsels, Fathers, by all Laws, Common, Civil, and Canon, and
all Stories. A man would think such a Cha^pion had been able to have done
great matters, but when he was after encountered with, his glory was turned to
shame, and the Divinity he boasted of, was found to be but certain of the
boldest and most unreasonable asseuerations of the fondest and most absurd
distinctions that ever were heard of, whereby he supposed to have been well
armed against all objections. For a taste whereof I offer the gentle Reader
some few, which I heard being present at the disputation. In the matters of
justification of faith only, whereas he had falsely and slanderously charged
us of late to have brought into the Church this new doctrine of justification
by faith only, and that there were places cited out of the Fathers Greek and
Latin, who lived above 1000. years ago, expressly having these words, that
faith only justifies: He answered that it was to be understood of the
ungodly, wherein having confessed a truth (for so the Apostle says that God
justifies the ungodly by faith: that is, holds him godly in Christ in whom
he believes, who in himself is ungodly) by suggestio^ of his companion, he
fought again to overthrow that he had said by a fond distinction of two
iustifications, a thing merely devised in the brain of man. For who ever read
in the Scriptures that a man is justified before God any more then once: but
that they who^ GOD had once reputed for just he holds them so for ever.
Otherwise the reason of the Apostles justification by faith were nothing, if
the Jews might have answered thus, that when he was first converted from
Idolatry: Abraham was in deed justified by faith only, but after he was
circumcised and had offered up his son, he was justified again, and that was
by his works, but this was a fancy not once dreamed of by them. Therefore the
Apostle takes it for a ground, that being once justified by faith only he
was always justified before God by faith alone. An other folly of a such
like distinction was joined with this, that only in the Fathers alleged,
shatteth out only the works going before his faith, (whereby he forgot that
he ouerthrewe their works of congruitie, which they pretend to confirm out
of Cornelius example) but not the grace given together with faith, which is
hope and charity: which answer is as flat contrary to the doctrine of the
Apostle as darkness is to light. For if Abraham were justified by faith hope
and charity, then was he not justified without the works of the law, for
hope and charity are works of the law. It is contrary also to their own
doctrine: for if the first justification be by faith hope and charity, what
second justification can there be, or what other thing will they require
besides faith hope and charity, to justify with a second justification.
This second justification he would have confirmed by the help of their
vulgar Latin translation, which has, Qui iustus est iustificetur adhuc, but
very corruptly: for the Greek is, he that does justice let him do justice
still: as if he should say, he that does well let him do well still, and he
that does ill let him do ill still, which is as far from the question of
justification as the East is from the West. In the question of
transubstanciation to the place of Ireneus, that there is a spiritual thing in
the Sacrament and also a material, which he expressly speaks of the very
substance of bread: His answer was, that the material thing was the
accidents that appeared, the whiteness, lightness, roundnesse, etc. To
Oregen affirmyng that which is received at the mouth to go to the stomach
and to nourishe the body, and to be cast into the draught: His answer was
that the accidents do nourishe, and that the accidents are voyded. Contrary
to all law and order of nature which God has appointed. For it is no more
possible yt accidents being not in any substance should nourishe, as it is that
darkness should at the same time be both darkness and light. To Theodor
affirmyng the nature and substance of the bread to remain: He answered that
Theodor understood it of the substance of the accidents, and a general
substance, whereby an accident has a being, and not of the special
substance of bread, whereas it is as clear as the day at noone: that Theodor
meant plainly that the very substance of the bread remains still in the
special substance of bread, and is not altered otherwise then in the use
whereto it is applied: that is, that being naturally appoincted of GOD for the
feedyng of the body, it has hereby the institution of that Sacrament a
heavenly use, which is to feed our souls. A number of these fond and
unreasonable, absurd, and unlearned distinctio^s of his I could allege, but
they are now at large reported, and published to the world, and these may serve
for a taste of the ability of these men, who would make the world believe,
they come now so furninished to the battle, that if we would meet them but
once in the field, the victory were their own. Yet I remember when one of
them alleged a place out of the Ephesians, there was sent to this Champion a
Greek Testament, who ashamed to confess his ignorance, excused himself by the
smalnesse of the print. From whom being carried to the rest of them, and so from
one to an other, al their chief men being there, not a man amongst them could
be found, that durst take upon him, to render one poor sentence or two out
of the Greek Testament into English. Are not these bold Champions to boaste
so much of learning to enter into a Country to convert them to the faith,
to take upon them to control all our translations of the holy Scriptures as
erroneous and false, and not one of so many of them, to understand the
original tongues Hebrewe and Greek, wherein they were first written by the
holy men of God, by whom they were left unto us. How should they be able to
disprove our translations, who them selves can not tell what is rightly
translated, and what is not: as having no skill in the learned tongues out of
the which they are translated. Are not these famous Clearkes greatly to be
feared in disputation, that can not vouche their aucthors in the tongues
wherein they wrote. They have now found a help for this, Gregory Martine
has knowledge enough for them all, and the vulgar Latin is authentical, so
made by the Council of Trent, that is by ye power whereby they may do all
things. These helps I doubt not but they shall shortly se to be so poor
shifts, as they were best not let al lie upon Martins skill, least they mar
all, but bring up others in the knowledge of the tongues, who may begin to
learn them sooner then Martin did: and to find some better succor to shroud
themselves under, then the authentike authority of their vulgar Latin text,
for this will not serve them, as I doubt not but they shall understand ere it be
long.

But to return again to this renewer of the challenge of disputation, their
cause being so slender, as all the tongues of men and Aungelles are not able to
make good, and yet the Captains of this their new and late invasion, so
unfurnished of these means: what reason can he have thus to vaunt, that we
dare not admit any trial, or what cause has he thus to boaste, if he will
consider that which I have truly for this purpose before, reported of their
Champion, God being witness and of mine own knowledge. He would feign excuse
this shameful vanity of an ignorant and unskillful man, in the matter he
presumed to take upon him: by saying he had been racked, or il handled before,
he had no warnyng to forethinke him self, he was allowed no books, nor equal
Notaries, nor suffered to oppose, but assaulted with great words, stern
countenance, big voice, and uncivil reuilyng. For his Rackyng was such, as
he was able after it to come and go of himself without any help. For warnyng
me think he should not greatly need much warnyng, that made so proud a
challenge. Goliath yet was wiser then so, for he had about him and with him his
weapons wherein he trusted, and required not any warnyng, but was ready and
appoincted in all parts to maintain his challenge. Yet this I can say, that
he had sometimes as much warnyng as they which disputed with him, and this
equity used toward him, that he him self named one of the questions to be
disputed, as the opponentes did the other. He was offered to have what books
he would, and desiryng none but Canisius Catechism, had it provided for him.
When any writing was, there was no answer of his set down but allowed of him,
after that he had been demanded, whether that were his answer or no. To
oppose was not for him that had chosen his place to stand as at the barriers,
to answer all comers. For words he would take none at any man's hand, so
far was he unlike to him that said, I became as a dumb man: and again as
the lamb before ye shearer, so opened he not his mouth. And yet me think a
great word or stern countenance, should not have amassed him, if he had seen
him that is invisible. The Prophet Jeremy had a face given him like the
Adamant, that could not be daunted, he was as a Lion, whose countenance the
beasts of the Forests are not able to look upon. If he had come of the same
message, the Lord would have fortified his heart with a spirit of power, that
words and countenau^ces should not have daunted him. Therefore, how soever he
would excuse the matter, they which were witnesses of the dealyng with their
chief Champion, must needs in all indifference think, if these men upon
every challenge or offer be not disputed with, that there is some other reason
in it, then either the fear of any ability that is in them, or any weakness
that is in us. For it is the lord that strengthens the weak, that shows
his power in infirmity, and calls things that are not as if they were. On
the other part it is he that throws down ye mighty from their seats, that
makes war with the proud, that breaks the tallest Ships of the seas, and
felleth down the mightiest Cedre in Libane, and highest Oaks in the Forrestes.
It is he that saves by few as well as by many, by those whom his enemies
despise, as well as by means that might make them to tremble. And seeing as
Abia said to Jeroboam and all Israel, that it is they which have made them
Priests not of the tribe of Leui, or of the Soonnes of Aaron, but of the
basest of the people, that is not by any lawful calling, but contrary to the
word of God, and priests not to GOD but to Idolles, which have put out the
light of the golden Candlestick, in withholdyng the knowledge of the word,
that have taken away the sweet bread loaves from the presence table, and set
leauened bread on for it, taking away the sincerity and truth of incorrupt
doctrine and life, and bringyng in the leaven of the Phariseis, naie they that
have spoiled the Church of God, of the most precious Cupp of the blood of the
new Testament, that have made void the Cross of Christ by their merits,
and profaned all that was holy in the Sanctuary of the Lord: how should we
fear how weak soever we seem to the^, or be in deed to deal with them? For
seeing by the grace of God we have been vouchsafed the favor, to kindle again
the Lamp in the Temple of the Lord, to set the sweet bread upon his Table,
to restore the blessed Cup of the precious blood of Christ to the Church
again: Finally, to cast out the filthe and pollutions, wherewith they had
defiled the Lords Temple, and to reform it, so as the primitive and ancient
beauty and holiness of it, may shine and appear in it again: How should we
fall before them in the battle, or fear the day of encountryng with them in
disputation? The Lord goes out before our armies, his holy Arc dwells
amongst us, his silver Trumpets sound continually in our ears. Which are sure
and undoubted arguments, that as heretofore we have often prevailed against
them, so now much more that our enemy so oftentimes foiled be he never so
obstinate, yet can never be able to hurt us: or if he do, it shall be only
thus, according to the promise, he may bruise our heel, but we shall burst his
head in pieces. Thus much for his first way sf disputation, wherein I have
showed that oftentimes by conference in speech, they have fled before us.
Concerning disputation by writing, al ye world is full of the learned works of
our worthy fathers and brethren, wherein they have both taught the truth, and
worthily maintained it against the wicked flaunders and objection of the
adversary, and convicted them of as notorious and pernicious heresies, as
ever have been since the mystery of Iniquity began to work. What should I
reckon up here which are infinite, the names (which are written in the book
of life) of our most worthy fathers and brethren, who beyond the Seas have
answered all their Challengers, confuted their erroneous and heretical
writings, and confirmed the truth to abide for ever. Our own countriemen have
in like sort maintained ye Lords most just and honorable quarrel, against
all such as from amongst our selves have been raised up to blaspheme the
truth. Cranmer that most reverend and learned Father, answered Gardener in
the question of the Lords Supper, to the iustifiyng of the truth, and his
own everlasting praise with God and men, and the just confusion of his
adversary. For their bold Hardyng in whom they trusted for a time, we had a
precious Jewel rich in spiritual graces of infinite more valewe without
comparison. Their Marshalles, Rastalles, Dormans, and the rest of that old
rabble, and of this new charge: their Allens, Bristowes, and Campions have all
found men to answer them, through the grace of God, of such godly learning,
sufficiency, and blessyng upon their labors, as by the Lords mercy we may
say with the Prophett: They came about us like Bees, but are extinct as a fire
of thorns: they came in confidence of them selves, but in the name of the
Lord of Hosts we have prevailed against them. Wherefore, having thus been
fought with at all the weapons wherein they supposed they had any skill, and
their shieldes beaten to their heads so often and pierced through, what a
wrangling contencious and obstinate Adversary is this, that will yet renew
more chalenges, and boast that we dare: Neither abroad with never so much
security, nor at home upon our own ground show our selves in disputation
against them? Whether would they have us to go, to Room, or to Rhemes, to
dispute with them there? What indifferent Judges or witnesses may we have to
dispute of the goodness of the finest Wheat, and the naughtiness of weeds
in a Seminary of tares? What security can we look for at their hands, whose
Religion it is to deal unfaithfully with us, and to break any faith of a
holy Priest as they would be thought, or the royal word and faith of Kings
and Princes to feed their cruel eyes to see us burn in the midst of their
flaming fires. Their Cannons teach that faith is not to be kept with an
Heriticke, and such they judge us as Tertulles did the Apostle. And this is no
old forgotten Cannon and worn out of use, but revived by the wicked practice
of the faithless council of Constance, and the disloyal Emperor Sigismund,
constrained by them to yt dishonor contrary to his safe conduit, granted to
those constant Martirs of Christ faithful and plain Ihon Hus, and the learned
and eloque^t Jerome of Prage. If ever they would keep any faith with us, they
would surely have kept that being given in the word and solemn instrument of
an Emperor. And if that were not sufficient, what security will they give us,
or because we can not safely rest upon any warrant of theirs, who so
traitorously and disloyally have falsified their own deed, and therefore have
justly lost their creditte with us, and are banckeruptes as touching their
faith? Will they because we never brake with them come to such places as we
shall appoint them: If we shall wish the^ to come to Geneua in Sauoy, to
Newstade in Bauire, to Rochell in France, or such like places, will they not
complain that their audience can not be indifferent? what remains then but
to dispute in writing: which as we have done hitherto to the just defense of
the truth against them: so by the grace of God some of us will be always ready
to do hereafter. But if they would have their books to pas freely without
restraint, and all men to be allowed to read them: let the^ first assure us,
that they will leave it free for all such as are abused by them to read ours.
For we are not ignorant of their discipline, though most dissolute where it
should be straitest: yet herein applied to the keeping of the poor and ignorant
which depend upon them, in that captivity, that they may not once dare to
read our writings, least they should be converted and repent that the Lord
might save them. For except a few whom they esteem desperate of being turned
by any means to ye truth, they restrain al with whom their discipline may
prevail from reading of our works. If they so straightly provide to hinder the
truth, and to keep captive simple souls in their blind kyngdo^e of
darkness: Much more reason have our Magistrates to provide that the children
of light be not lead into darkness by them. But if this discipline remainyng
on both parties, they be yet disposed to dispute to inform them selves in
the truth: if they will leave this large manner of discoursing, bitter taunts,
and other impertinent speeches not so fit for trial of a truth, and come to
the sharp poinctes of naked arguments, we are willing to deal with them in
such order as may be most indifferent for both, and fittest for the
information in truth of all such as shall after examine what has past on
both parts. For which purpose, it would be fittest that in every question
the contradictorie being taken, the one part for that which he holds in the
question laid out his arguments, taken only out of the holy Scriptures
(which is the only competent Judge in this cause) concluded in good form of
Syllogism, without any further deduction of the matter, then should be
necessary for the better understanding of the terms which needs must be
used, and of the application of the places which shall be alleged. Hereunto
may be added, if there be cause, the testimonies of the Councelles, Fathers,
Stories, or other authorities of credit, not to argue or prove any truth, or
to convince or disprove any untruth, (for this appertains to God, and not to
man, to his infallible word, and not to the writings of men who are all
liars) but as witnesses to testify what the doctrine of the Church was in
such a question in the sondrie ages and times of the church. Which being done
by either party, then that either of them both answer the arguments of the
other, and strengthen again his own in such place as the adverse party shall
think to be weak. Which passing thus to and fro till both have said what
they are able for the^ selves, will leave such a means for those which are
willing to inform their consciences of the truth, as by gods grace it will be
easy to discern. His second reason, whereby it may appear, that their
standing in this cause is not without substanciall warrant, is noted to be the
uncertainty of temporal favor in matters of Religion: but that sectio^
whereupon it is noted, contains no such matter, but only this, that it is
not enough to persuade them, that we say we have the Gospel, because other
also condemn us, and say they have it: we are not ignoraunte that every one
makes claim to have the Gospel, and condemn those which join not with
them. Amongst whom that he reckeneth Luther, and a Scholar of his, I refer
him to my answer, where this is alleged of him before, which answer may
serve for his Scholar too. As for the Trinitaries and Anabaptists, it is but
his his malice and hatred against the Gospel, to reckon us with them, whom
we are as unlike in all their ungodly opinions, as they are unlike the true
Church of Christ, and her most holy faith. But this were an answer, if we
had nothing but the bare word and boastyng of the Gospel. We have made, God
be praised for it, sufficient proof to all equal Judges, that it is both in
word and in deed, the true Gospel and pure word of GOD, and the law of
the lord, which is now the Religion through the goodness, which has
visited us from above, established and preached emo^gst us.

The two next sections have some matter in them like this title: for in the
first of the^ he affirms the holy Religion, which is now established, to
have been brought in by an noble man after king Henry's days which he says
could do most, by bryngyng in two Caluinistes, as he terms them, to read
in the two Universities here. Which he so lays out, as if we had no other
stay for Religion, but that noble man's pleasure, who he says, if he would
have brought in two of any other sect, might as well have established it:
whereupon he concludes, that seeing that seculer magistrate nor temporal law is
no sufficient ground in religion, there is no cause but they should be excused,
to continue still in their opinion as they do. And thus he retourneth again to
his request of disputation. But first for this his second reason. He may
remember him self, that their Dagon was fallen to the ground, though not with
so great hurt as after, even in the time and reign of King Henry the eight
of noble memory. So that to speak in any reason, he cannot lay the
foundation of the Gospel now amongst us, upon the only means of the noble
manne, whom he notes. He might have remembered that worthy things were done in
K. H. time. For God had given that noble king, besides his own ability, to
discover the ambitious pride, and greedy covetousness of the Clergy, the
repugnance of the Popes supremacy, with the souerantie of his royal croune
and dignity, the abominations of the Dispensations of the Pope, and sondrie
such like weighty and material poinctes of true Religion. For, GOD gave unto
him by sides some other means, chief furtheraunce to the sight of these
things, by that most virtuous and excellent Princes Lady Anne Bulleyne, the
most honorable mother of our dread Sovereign Lady, now reigning over us:
whose eyes God having opened to see the truth, her religious and zealous
mind, loving the wisdom that is greater then Solomon, which the famous
Queen of Saba was so delighted with, and being careful for Gods people, as
Queen Hester, was a worthy means, to draw ye noble king to better judgment
and knowledge in Religion, then he had been of before: which was also Godly
continued by the good and gracious Lady Queen Katherine Par. Further also
besides many other he had two as wise and faithful cou^sailors as ever had
Christian king before him. The one that reverend and learned father Cra^mer,
and the other the wise lord Cromwell, counselors worthy of eternal memory,
for their Religious stout and wise dealyng against ye mystery of iniquity.
For having not to do only with the Popes Consistory and Vestrie, with his
Cannon law and beggarly wardrope, with his discipline and ceremonies: but with
his whole body, with his whole house and temple, and yt so rooted and
grounded, as if the fou^dations of it had been laid in ye center of the earth:
yet God poured such a Christian magnanimity into their noble hearts to
undertake, and such a sound judgment to devise the way, to perform the
overthrow of it, and to undermine those deep foundations, as if the lord had
given them a powder to rende up those stately houses, as Bulwerkes of Satan,
and Castles of superstition and Idolatry, which seemed to have been builded to
continue to the end of the world. Further the Gospel was taught both in
other places, and also here in England, and was received, believed, and
professed most constantly to the death, by sondrie true professors of it, and
constaunt martyrs of Christ, long before that time he speaks of. Wherefore,
there is no reason to make the entrance of those two readers, the beginning of
true religion with us. Moreover, also in ye beginning of the reign of that noble
and princely king Edward: Who knows not that the state of religion was
established within this land by act of Parliament, before the coming in of
those readers into the vniuersitees: so that this reason is utterly void of
all reason, to make the^ the beginning of religion emongst us, who came in two
years after it had been thoroughly and quietly established, as it is at this
present day. After in deed by the worthy means of the noble Duke of
Sommersett Lord Protector and the right reverend Cranmer, two famous clearkes
that then were of the most renoumed, for their virtue and learning in all
these parts of Europe, Martin Bucer and Peter Martyr were procured over, and
placed the one in Cambridge, the other in Oxford, to the great service of
almighty God, and of this his Church. For, they according to the Apostles
exhortation, delivered over a form of sound doctrine to many worthy scholars,
which received it of the^, and delivered it over again to others. In a happy
time came they over to our Universities, to turn them, which had been in time
past as heathes and dry grounds, void of the true knowledge of God, into
springs of water, whose brooks might issue forth to the refreshyng and comfort
of all the land, their desolatio^ and liyng wast as Sodom and Gomorrha, they
turned through the grace of GOD into a fruitful place, like mount Carmell and
the garden of Eden, full of good fruit and medicinable to the souls of men.
Therefore, blessed be their noble memory whosoever they were that brought
the^ over. But to say that Religion stood then in such terms here in
England, that if those two had been Anabaptists our religion this day in
England had been such, and they should as well have been punished for not
receiving it, as they are for refusing that is now established, is a malicious
slander of a hateful heart to the Gospel of Christ and the professors of
the same: seeing yt before their coming in as has been declared, religion was
fully settled and established here as it continues to this day. As for that he
calls them Caluinistes, to pass by that for age, Calvin might rather have
been named of them then they of him: He is to understand we have no such
custom, nor the Church of God to name our selves of any men. Christ is not
divided with us, we all content our selves with that honorable name of
Christians. To be a Franciscane, or a Dominicane, a Thomist, or a Scotist we
leave to them, who have divided and rent asunder both Christ's coat and body.
We know by the grace of God how to respect the gifts of God in his holy
Organes and Instruments of his glory, without derogatyng from God his honor
to give it to an other. Thus it appears that Religion with us had his
beginning of the word of God known to many, and professed to the death by
sondrie of this Nation before the law, whereby it was established. Whereby it is
manifest that Religion was not grounded upon the Temporal law and the
Magistrates authority, but that the godly Magistrates and the wise men of all
the land assembled together in the high Court of Parliament, having
understood before by the word of God, and many express testimonies both
here at home and else where abroad, whereby God gave witness unto it, that the
Religion which of ancient time had been taught in this land, (though for a
time it had been eclipsed and darckened, and then began every where through
the power of GOD to be renewed again,) that that I say was in deed the holy
word and service of God, and the true doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles,
they agreed withal obedience unto God so to acknowledge it, and as Asa and
Darius (though not with any thing like severity of punishment) commanded it
to be received and embraced by all the Subjects of this state and Kingdom.
We depend not therefore upon a Temporal law for matter of Religion, but both
the law and we upon the eternal law and word of God, but this injury must be
done to the hye state of this noble land, that these men may be admitted to
dispute. Therefore, here he falls in again to the mention of a disputation,
and renews the petition of his fellows, for it promisyng largely, that if
such indifferent trial may be granted between the learned of both sides,
as they demand for their instruction and due reformation in judgment, if
they err the matter perhaps may sone be ended. (...) they be convicted to
err he gives us hope that perhaps they will be reformed.
Would to God they desired it for their instruction, and reformation in
judgment, if they did, there is enough already written for their just cause
of satisfaction, or if not they may be satisfied by writing. But when they
have all granted that they desire, though they were convicted to err, is
there no more hope of their obedience to God and to her Majesty: but that Then
perhaps they will be reformed? If there were the fear of God in them, they
ought without all peradventure to yield them selves obedient to the voice of
God, to bewail with compunction of heart and remorse of conscience the
Superstition and Idolatry they have lived in hitherto and abused the world
withal, and bless the day wherein the Lord of glory may appear unto
them. But such is their wilful obstinacy, that notwithstanding they were as
mightily convicted and confounded as were the Jews by Apollos and by the
Apostle, Again of disputation
yet perhaps they would err still, and go on in their wilfulness to their
utter confusion and ruin. Acts. 18.28.
If they be denied disputation, then they remain for their belief as before,
yet good and dutiful Subjects. But this implies a manifest and necessary
contradiction. For if they remain still obedient to the Pope, who curses them
if they acknowledge the Queen to be the lawful Prince by obedience of her
laws, then is it not possible they should be good Subjects. For a good
Subject does willyngly obey her Majesty's godly laws, and acknowledge her
lawful authority over them. Which they deniyng to do (as they are bound
upon the Popes curse) it can in no sort stand together, that they can keep
their Romish faith, and their obedience to her Majesty: two such masters as
God and Mammon, the Lieutenaunt of Christ, and of Antechrist can no man serve,
but he must forsake the one, Mat. 6.
and follow the other, he must cleave to the one, and deny the other. There
follows proof for the equity of their former demand, which is that they
desire to be satisfied in one only point, An issue demanded.
that is when the articles of their difference from us, came into the church,
and by whom they were rebuked? Which issue that he would so feign join with
us, he confirms to be reasonable, by the antiquity of the true religion,
and the coming in of the false. Of the first he says, that which is
granted on both parts, that the religion taught by Christ and his Apostles
is the true religion. Herevpo^ he infers that the false is later and entered
in since, which I also grant. It remains therefore to be tried, whether
entered in since. This says he is to be showed by notyng the time of the
entrance, and the author of it, with the names of such as did co^trol it. And
this he would prove to be the only argument, and sufficient demonstration in
these causes, by two kinds of proof, and first by reason. Answer to his
arguments proved necessary by reason.
Wherein he esteems it strong, that there cannot rise a false Religion, the
church standing possessed of a true one, but that some company or particular
man should rebuke it. This reason I say is not strong to prove that he
brings it for, that is that no false doctrine can rise without co^tradiction
of some. I grant in open and apparaunte errors this may hold, but not in all,
namely in such as crepe into the Church by Hypocrisy, of which sort is
this heretical false worship of Popery. For thus the Apostle teaches,
forewarning that the mystery of iniquity began even then to work. Which is
therefore called a mystery of iniquity, because th'iniquity of it was not
manifest, but should be then discovered when Antechrist should exalt him self
to sit in the temple of God, and boast him self as God. Whereby it appears
that the Apostle shows, that as a buildyng is not seen, while the work is
under ground, but only when it shows above the ground, so likewise there was
a time when this Synagog of Satan was in building, but the stones of the
foundation of it being laid very deep, it was long ere it appeared or was to
be discerned upon the earth. Our savior Christ gives warnyng, that there
should come that falsely would challenge the name of Christ and his Apostles unto
them, who should be able by their liyng Signs and wonders, to deceive if it
were possible, even the elect. In the Parable of tares he says, that the
housebandman being a sleep, the enemy came and sowed Tares in the night.
Which notwithstanding that no man discerned in the night, nor could tell who
had done it, yet when the spring came forward, sure they were that was not of
the good seed that was sown in the field by their master but Tares: therefore
though they could not discern it, nor knew not any enemy yt had entered into
the field to sow Tares in it, yet when they were sprung up they knew the Tares
to be Tares, and because their Masters seed yt was sown was good, the
servants are assured yt the enemy which is satan had sown them, though they
knew not by what hand and instrument, nor at what hour of ye night he sowed
the^. Even so in this case, while men feared no such danger, the Enemy sowed
these Heresies in the church, which for a time after were not to be discerned,
till this evil seed was grown, and came to show it self upon the ground,
which being now sprung up, can we not be sure that Tares are Tares, and
heresies be heresies, except we be able to tell who and when did sow the^? It
is enough for us to know that our Masters seed is perfect and good,
whatsoever else comes up with it, that is not of the seed, we are sure it is
a stinkyng weed, or a vile grain, sitter for beasts the^ for men: and not
the fine wheat, the fruit of the precious seed of our Master. This doctrine
of our Savior Christ was this precious seed, as he expounds it. Whatsoever
therefore grows up with it, though for a season it can not be discovered,
yet if after it discovers it self not to be agreeable to the sound and
wholesome doctrine of Christ, but a wicked heresy, and the cursed fruit of a
naughty seed, though we can neither tell by whom, nor at what time the
Enemy did sow it, yet sure we are it is heretical, and has been sown
since the time that our Master sowed his field with good Seed. Therefore,
his reason can not prove the issue to be reasonable. Much less does his
experience. His second proof herein, which is to be understood as the reason
before of open errors, which show themselves at ye first, manifestly contrary
to the holy doctrine of ye church. As for his examples, by hudlyng up together
the Protestant, Puritan, and Family, as if they were all alike, it is but the
heat of his cholerike stomach. By experience.
For all the world knows how far the true professors of the Gospel, are
from yt execrable heresies of the Family, which spro^g up in the time of their
deteinyng of the world in captivity, and yet which of them ever once rebuked
or controlled it by word or writing: but now the light has discovered it, shall
ye light be said to have brought it forth, or shall it not now be rebuked,
because none of the pretended Catholics, have rebuked it, let them be their
Judges. Concerning the Puritan, if he mean such as think themselves pure
and free from sin, they are al one with the Family, and far more like the^,
who boast of their own justice, then they are to us who deny our own
righteousness, that we may have the righteousness of Christ, which is by
faith. If he mean such as desire to have the state of the church, yet freer
from their disorders and confusions, and more nerely reformed to the ordenance
of our savior Christ, and the example of the Apostles, and other Churches so
reformed in many other places, professyng the same Gospel with us: Then I
think every good Protestant and Professor is a Puritan, and few that are
otherwise minded, except it be such, to who^ the corruptions they have left
behind the^, and we have not yet cast out after them be glorious and gainful.
But for the purpose, they are here alleged, these examples make nothing for
him. If they reproved us, it was not because they were able justly to charge
us, but because we discovered their shame to ye world, because we detected
their heresies against God and their conspiracies against Princes and people.
If any professor of the Gospel have reproved the Familist, as they in deed
have been confuted by us, when these men neglected the matter, he might easily
do it, the Gospel clearly discoueryng the error, and his reward is with GOD.
And if any for seeking a further reformation by orderly means have been
reproved, the reprouer, and the reproved have both their judge, who will give
to every one according to his deeds. Thus then it appears to be no
reasonable issue which they offer, that except we can tell the times and
Authors of their sondrie heresies that we should acknowledge them of the
Apostles. It is enough for us that we know heresy to be heresy, and that by
the word of God. And if they will join a reasonable issue with us, we offer
them one far more reasonable the^ this: Let the^ show out of the authenticke
writings of Christ and his Apostles the poinctes they vary from us in (as we
undertake and by Gods grace are able to perform of ours) that they are
contained and left in them. These writings are perfect, exact and incorrupt?
What do they seek uncertain Hystories, and demand for records not to be
had or found, and refuse these the only sufficient and authentical. He
boasts a Goliahes boaste to show all the poinctes wherein we differ from
them, their Parents, their Cradle, the calculation of the time of their
Birthe. Which I marvel not at, for our Savior Christ and his Apostles are
Authors of them, they were laid with him in his Cradle, and published in his
time by him self, and then after by his Apostles. So that as of an noble child
borne of known and honorable Parents, it is no hard matter to poinct out
both the Parents and time of the nativity of it: But as of a base son of a
common Harlott no man can tell the father: So their Romish Superstition being
the base issue of the whore of Bablilon: no marvel though we can not tell who
it was that begot it. That Harlot has had so many lovers, as it is not easy
for her self to tell who was father of her sondrie Bastards: But though
neither their father nor time of birthe be known, is it therefore to be
concluded that they are right and noble borne? nothing less: But any other
Parents and Authors of our faith then our Savior Christ and his Apostles,
neither he nor all the sons of Romulus at Room, nor of Remus at Rhemes,
shall ever be able to show. They may easily show by whose blessed
ministry the Lord of late has restored unto us this Gospel again, as it
was easy in Josias time to say that the book of the law was found in
Josias time the 13. year of his reign by Hilcia the Priest: which was no
prejudice to the law. For if it had not been found till of late when the
Gospel (according to the truth of it) was found: yet had it been
nevertheless the law of God, and that most holy and ancient law which had
been given sometimes by the ministry of Moses. So likewise they may name in
what Kings days, what year of his reign Luther began to discover the
abomination of the Popes indulgences, and after both he and others restored to
us again after a long apostasy and time of darkness the knowledge of ye
truth: yet were they no Authors of it, no more then Helcia of the law, but
Moses of the law, and Christ of the Gospel which they preached, and other
Authors shall they never be able to show. But for their Romish faith we will
join this issue with them to show it is not of Christ nor of his Apostles.
Further also notwithstanding that they and others who have ruled the world
have wasted all the records of many ancient Writers, that we can not have the
writings of all that did controlle them: and that in some few 100. years in
the beginning, their faith crept in by little and little by soft and flow
paces, and that with great hypocrisy that it could not be well discovered,
and therefore not easily controlled for such time: yet will we show that when
the buildyng and seed appeared above the ground, the servants of God
discovered Antichrists Sinagoge and his Tares, and have freely complained to
the Lord against it. The reason why it is hard to discover the Authors and
times of the several points of this Popish heresy are these. First, it
entered not into the Church all at once, but in sundry ages declined from the
truth of the Gospel, till it came to this full apostasy, wherein it has
been now some hundred years. The degrees of which declination were so small at
the beginning that they were not easily to be spied. Reasons why this issue is
not to be joined.
For as the grass and wheat grow as we read in the Gospel, yet no man can
discern the growyng of it or see how much of it shoots up in a day: So
likewise do the Tares. A man may well discern them when they are grown, but
while they are growing it is not easy to discern. Secondly, the hypocritical
show that these beginnings of declination carried with them was a great
means to deceive the world. For if it be not easy to know the Wolf in a
Sheep skin, nor the Beast in his show of two horns like a Lamb, nor ye
Angel of darkness when he transformeth himself like to an Angel of light:
so most of all this has place in little and small beginninges of Superstition,
covered and clothed with a show of good devotion. For these and such like
causes, the ancient Fathers within ye first 4. or 500. years, took no great
heed to the little and small beginnings, that were then laid of this
mystery of iniquity. Further also, those times were exercised greatly in
striving with maine Heretics, seeking to ouerturne openly the grounds and
foundations of our faith, concerning the two natures and unity of the
person of Christ Jesus. They had to strive with Ebion Cerinthus, Arius, Eutiches,
Eunomius Nestorius, and after with the Donasties, Pelagians, and many other,
who evidently and manifestly sought the subversion of the chief grounds of
Christianity. Wherefore, having to deal with many open enemies, and of those
some of great ability to hurt the church, for special gifts of knoledge
and eloquence, they set them selves as there was great cause they should to
resist the forcible violence of those mighty enemies: whereby it was scarce
possible for those worthy and learned fathers to take heed to those degrees
of superstition, that by little and little so suttely and hypocritically crept
into the church. Besides this, if any of them did discern the soft slidyng
away from true religion and devotion into superstition, yet sure they never
feared the issue would have been such as experience has taught us. And if
they gave any token of their dislike hereof the wastes and confusions of the
world since that time have been such, as it may be well enough, that some of
them reproved more the^ can now be showed by any works that are extant. There
were many worthy and famous me^ which wrote infinite volumes, of who^ now
little remains, and some nothing but their names. Origin wrote exceedyng
much, yet there remains now little in comparison of that he wrote, and that
which remains is so corrupted, that it nothing answers the famous report
of learning, which Origin had in ye church in his time. To this may be added
that the B. of R. by means of the R. Emperors which were Monarchs of the
world, with whom they were in credit, had the means to deface and abolishe
all writings, rolls, and records, which might hinder the growyng of their
superstitions. And that this is no vain surmise of a thing that might be, it
appears that they were so diligent to do it as there was nothing so
authentike and reverend that for their purpose they were not ready to corrupt
and falsify. What was more reverend in Austens time then the famous council
of Nice, and the Cannons agreed of by the Fathers, assembled together in that
reverend Consistory and Senate: yet the B. of R. corrupted and falsified the 9.
Cannon of that Council, to lay the fou^dations of the Primacy, which they
pretended unto over all Churches. For so the Story reports that Faustine the
B. of R. Legate or Deputy alleged that Cannon for the Supremacy, which being
after diligently sought for by Austen and the rest of the Fathers, was found to
be corrupted, and so they wrote unto the B. which foul act to corrupt the
Canno^s of so reverend a Council, and to seek to abuse thereby the cheifest
and worthiest servants of God in those days and best able to discover his
falshoode, does evidently show that in other writings which should never come
to like examination and trial they would make small conscience of like
corruptions so they might serve their turns. Further, the creditte they
obtained in the Church by some good Bishops of Room in the beginning and
constant Martirs of Christ, was a great means whereby these which succeeded
in their places, but not in their piety and holy profession together with
the power and authority which they had gotten of the Emperors, could not so
easily and openly be discovered, as that the time of their beginning to fall
away, and their secret proceeding and growing forward should be openly
controlled. Which we may see in the declinations and conuersions of common
welths. For the lawful government of Kings or of a senate of Princes, or of
the states of a land, after an equal and just regiment of some years, either
of purpose, or through the weakness of man's nature, which is not able to
maintain things long in any perfect state, may decline in time to a tyranny
or confusion. But if the wheel of such a state be not turned with any sudden
violent motion, but softly and in many years, and almost without any noise,
then I say that in a certain periode of time the lawful and just government
will be changed in deed into an unlawful tyranny or confusion. But yet while
it is a turning, especially in the beginning when the motions are least, and
hardest to be discerned, no man almost can be able to say when this wheel
was first moved, or whose hand first began to turn it. And this shall yet be
harder if such as have finest senses to discern, even of the most still and
insensible motions, upon their discovering of them be charged and condemned as
traitors to the state. For by this means others which perceive no sensible
alteration are greatly hindered to discern of their exact and exquisite
judgment, and think rather that they were deceived, and worthily executed for
some Treason against the state. Whereas notwithstanding after when the motions
grow more forcible and violent, every mean wit will be able to discern it,
and in the end no man so blind nor dull, but must needs perceive it. And such
has been the conversion of the Church of Rome. In the time of the Apostle
Paul's preaching in it (for of Peter's being there we have no certain ground
in the scriptures), The state of that Church both for doctrine and discipline
was perfect, and such as the Lord Jesus him self had appointed. After his time
it continued in good state while it was under persecution even to Constantines
time, yet so that even then the wheel began to turn. And tho the motions were
so easy and still as all men perceived them not, yet some of exquisite
judgment, did discern in it a slyding forwards to this supersticion and
tyranny. Amongst whom Ireneus noted Victor in the Question of the day to
be kept for Easter day, to have been to peremptory, and to take to much
upon him to excommunicate the East churches for it, the matter being in it
self indifferent, and Victor having no authority over those Churches. After
when it had peace and rest from persecution, the motions grew faster and
swifter. For then it began to seek for wealth, and after wealth taking
occasion by the honor of the place being then the seat of the Empire, began to
affect some like preeminence in the church, and to draw as it were in the
church the image of the Empire. Whereof tho the rough draught was imperfect,
and a shadow of lives not easy to be discerned, yet after the cole came the
pensill, and then the colors, til at the last the whole image of the Empire
was to be seen in the state of the Church. In which time fell out the
falsification of the Canons of the counsel of Nice, reproved by Austen and
all the fathers of that counsel. Which liberty of theirs and the free estate
of other churches as counterwholes so checked his course, that it could not go
fast forward, til by the authority of Phocas he had obtained the name of
universal Bishop. Which being once obtained, with in a while after it, grew to
be such as all were declared Heretics, which should speak against it. And
then the wheel was violently carried to this apostasy from the truth of the
Gospel, and as the motions were more sensible so more there were which
perceived it and spoke against it. But notwithstanding all the difficulties
which might hinder this purpose, it appears for all the secrecy, subtletie,
hypocrisy, authority, force and cunning, whereby they sought to hide their
wickedness from the world, yet by the grace of God the beginners and authors
of certain of the degrees of this mystical iniquity are to be discovered.
Concerning the rest we undertake to prove that what time or by whom soever
they were brought in, that they were not taught by Christ nor his Apostles, nor
in their time, which is our immovable ground where on we build, that at what
time, or by whom so ever it began it is not to be allowed nor received. M.
Jewel of reverend memory, did undertake and perform against them that
twenty nine points, Wherein they differ from us and the primitive church,
Whenever after they were brought in, yet were not known, nor taught in the
church for six hundred years after Christ. Amongst which this is one which he
names of the real presence and consequently. Their mass, which is another,
for their Mass can not stand without a real presence. And if neither in the
time of Christ, nor six hundred years after, they can prove them to have
been received, to what purpose is it to ask when they began? let them rather
show us when they began, and prove that so many points as have been offered
them were received in so many sundry ages and times of the Church. Which if
they can not do, then let them acknowledge their just cause of satisfaction
and their wilful ostinacy against the truth. but to satisfy him further in ye
particulers he has set down, I say first, touching the question of ye real
presence, it began to be moved after the days of Charles the great in ye
reign of Charles his neuew. At what time Bertram an excellent clarke wrote a
large volume of it, and proved the words of the Supper, were to be understood
in a mystery and figure and not really. After whom Paschasius began to write
for the understanding of the words of a real presence. And after the^ both
Bertrams judgment was maintained by Berengarius, and ye French churches: and
the opinion of Pascasius by Lanfranc and others. Thus diversely was this
controversy handled, till the Laterane counsel defyned of it, which yet the
French churches, especially of Aniou and Yours, for a long time yielded not
unto. Of this error thus established (as it comes to pass, that one error
gives occasion of another) rose anew question and controversy of
transubstantiation, which was maruailously increased by the Canonists and
schoolmen, till at the last to make up their impiety, Innocencius the third,
made transubstatiatio^ the thirtenth article of the creed. As for ye authors of
the sundry pieces of their Mass, I refer him to Platina and their own
schoolmen, who name the authors of the Sanctus, Lutroitus, collects, and other
the several parts and pieces of it. By whom he may see yt their mass was not
brought to ye form it has now, till Gregory's time, who gave it in a manner
that fashion and form which it has at this present. He reckons here six
other points, and first these three, Purgatory, prayer for the dead, and
intercession of Saints. Whereof it is a marvel how the third can agree with
the two former. For if they be in purgatory and need our prayers, why should
we pray for them and seek for their intercession. But for the time of the
beginning of those opinions I deny that any of them were universally taught,
believed and practiced in the Church of any ancient time. I grant indeed,
some learned men following their own peculier opinion wrote of these questions
long ago. Yet not so long as the adversary would have us believe. But such
their particular judgment I deny to have been the general faith and practice
of the Church at such time. Of Prayer for the dead, we read not in the most
ancient fathers. For the prayers which are mentioned in the^, were over and not
for ye dead, and were prayers of thanksgiving for their faithful departure,
and not any request for helping of the^. Soon after in deed it crept in, but
Aerius and some other reproouing of it, tho the corruption of the time
prevailed against them. That the dead pray for us, before Origens time, no man
taught and yet he reports it, not as the public faith of the church, But as
an opinion of an ancient Master of his of whom he heard it, whose authority
drew some of the other fathers after into that opinion. But of invocation of
Saints there is no example in Origin, Chrysostom, Athanasius, Tertulianus,
Austen, nor Jerome. Nay four hundred and seventy years after that, a bishop of
Afric was condemned for an heretic amongst other points, for this that he
maintained the blessed Virgin was to be prayed unto, as Nic. reports
Therefore it appears that these opinions came not from Christ, nor so many
hundred years after, as has been declared, which is more then we need to
show: it being sufficient yt they ca^ not be proved to be of Christ. For
purgatory it appears to have come from the Egyptians and the old Greek poets,
of whom Plato received it, and after Virgill, and diverse of the heathen
Philosophers and Poets. Whereof some after receiving the faith of Christ, began
to move question of that which they had believed in Paganism. As Clement of
Alexandria did, which after Origin and Jerome sought by allegorical
expositions of the scriptures to confirm. But Austen examining ye several
points that Origin and his followers, had set down of Purgatory, did plainly
and truly confute sundry of the branches of that opinion, and so shakes the
credit of the other, as he shows they have no certain foundation in the
scripture. But this purgatory of Origin was statly condemned by the fifth
general counsel. Whereby it appears there were many yt controled this
hethenish fancy. For the rest of their doctrine of salvation by works and grace
inherent, it is the late divinity of their schoolmen, and unknown to all
antiquity, which in such sense spoke not of merit and of grace. For the
number of Sacraments, the ancients using the word not in so strait a sense
many times as we do now in this question diversely reckon them, but none that
keeps precisely their account to reckon all their seven for Sacraments, and
neither more nor less. Thus the^ he may understand for his satisfaction in
these points, (and the like might be showed in their worshipping of images,
the Communion in one kind, and of diverse of the rest) that which he
required, at what time and by whom they were brought into the church Wherein
also, he may see in sundry of them, who opposed themselves to the
proceedings of their Church. Whereof if he desire to see yet more, he may
read that Iltiricas has written expressly, and largely of this argument. Who
shows that sometimes, all the Churches of France, sometime the Churches of the
East, sometime the Churches of Asia, and in them diverse reverend Fathers and
famous Clearks, as Policarpus, Ireneus, Austen, and sundry others, opposed
themselves to this misterye of iniquity, then working in the Church of Rome.
To whose large discourse, leaving him for further satisfaction in this matter,
I proceed now to that which remains.

Now to the rest, which because in effect it is nothing, but a complaint of
extreme dealing with them, which I have answered before, and a request to your
Hh. for a mittigation of it (which your H wisdoms are to consider of) I have
not much to answer to it: yet briefly I have thought good to touch the
reasons. For which he would persuade their cause to be worthy more favor: which
I call God to witness, I do not here, nor in any part of this answer, of any
malice and hatred to them. For I acknowledge them for our Countrymen and
brethren in the flesh, and would be glad my life might be given for them, to
bring them to the true knowledge of God in Christ, and to the salvation of
their souls. But my purpose herein, is faithfullye to discharge some part of
my duty to Almighty God, and to her excellent Majesty, and your Hh. in
maintening to my small power this most holy and honorable quarrel of Gods
aganst his enemies, and thereby stre^gthning as much as lies in me the right
hand of a holy justice, armed of God with a punishing sword against all evil
doers, and especially such as even to the with drawing of their duetifull
obedience from their gracious and natural P. give it to a forrainer, and
obstinately refuse to worship God, and follow after Idols, and as drawn and
seek to seduce the simple with all their endeavor to fall into the same
destruction with them. He complayneth of great extremities with tragical
speeches, as the like rigor had never been heard of in the world, that they
suffer only as he says for their conscience sake. But I have showed a fore,
and am again to put the gentle Reader in mind that for their Romish faith, no
one in all the time of her highness happy reign has been touched at all in his
body. For Treason in deed, whereby they deny their obedience to her highness,
and acknowledge themselves subjects to the Bishop of Rome in many and most
weighty cases, and for seducing other to like disobedience: Some of them have
been executed according to the ancient laws of this land, without any
extraordinary extremity, nay rather with favor in case of high treason. And
yet of this sort the epistle of the persecution in England, Whereunto he
refers him self. For proof whereof he mentions only pretended
Catholics, that have been so executed. In deed since some more upon like
reason, their cause being first iudicially heard at the K. bench, and orderly
proceeded in according to the course of law and justice in such case, being
found guilty of hie treason, received like execution. And this is the greatest
extremety which they can complain of to this day. But he denies that any one
act word or thought was found in them of treason, wherein he is convicted of
manifest truth, both by so many as were officers of her majesty's justice upon
them, and by their own confessions, as well of other matter as also of
reconciling of diverse her highness subjects to the pope, as it appears by yt
has bin published hereof by authority. Whereby they acknowledge ye Popes most
unjust sentence against her H. as lawful and draw her Ma. subjects from her
obedience: which the law of this land has declared to be high treason
against her Highness royal crown and dignity. Nether is it here enough to
say that they do it in conscience of their religion, for in many good
consciences they can not do it, the B. of Rome by ye word of God having no
more to do in England: then any minister in England, has to do in Rome. And if
without the word of God they will be carried in such a course as cannot stand in
any truth of religion or sound policy, with the safety of the state, and
security of our most lawful Sovereign our whole common Wealth and
Country, should they cry out as if extreme cruelty were executed upon them,
if their excuse of a pretensed conscience be not taken for a sufficient
answer. These cries and complaints might worthily have been made by ye poor
faithful people of Merindall and of the valley of Anagrogne and ye rest when
the Popes executioners wasted and destroyed 7. towns of theirs. Also by our
brethren in Q. Mary's days, which were burnt by dosens together in a fire.
Likewise, by our brethren cruelly without any form or process of justice,
murdered and slain in ye late butcheries and massacres of France. Then was it
time to have showed compassion, but the bowels of Christ were not in them. Then
was a time to have showed pity, but their merciles hearts were void of grace and
mercy. They were filled with gal, and bitterness, no fire was hot enough for
them, no sword was sharp enough. The honorable and the common was all one to
them, the learned and unlearned, the reverend age and the comely youth the man
and the woman, the father and ye son, the mother and the babe borne out of
time, and murdered as soon as he was born by their savage and barbarous
cruelty. These cry yet behind the altar against them. O Lord, when will thou
revenge our blood, and the Lord will not refuse to hear them, and revenge their
cause upon their bloody enemies in the day of his wrath. Another reason is
alleged of the favor they find in the Indies, and under the Turk: which I
have answered before, and answer here again, that neither do they suffer that
doctrine and practice of their religion, which they hold in these parts,
neither if they did, are Christian P. to rule their Subjects by the examples
of Turks and heathen, but by the law of God. Who has given to them this
commandment to be observed in all their dominion, that neither any man, nor
his children, nor servant, that neither home borne, or strangers be suffered
to profane his Sabbath: and to pollute his holy service, leest ye rest of the
people of the land learn of them, and so the wrath of God come suddenly upon
us, for being accessaries to Idolatry. As for the tolleration of the Jews,
whosoever they be, that suffer the exercise of their religion, with the
blasphemies they commonly use against Christ, make themselves guilty of al
their wickedness, which the Lord keep this land from, as well as from the
abomination of the mass, But they may remember that their Holy Father can
tolerate the Blasphemye of the Jews, and the filthiness of all ye Curtesains
and Stews, and take a yearly rent of them for it, and for no respect will
allow the exercise of our most holy religion, either in his own dominions or
wheresoever he may prevail against us, but by all means seek to burn all
the professors of it to ashes, and to shed their blood as water to run down
the Streets. Further, if no protestant Prince elsewhere have executed any of
these Catholics for religion, as he confesses: no more has any for ye cause
bin put to death with us, as I have showed already. which being so yt never any
professyng the Gospel put any of them to death for mere matter of their
conscience, let the Lord judge the wicked servant by his own mouth. Now, for
the barbarous cruelty and most savage immanitie used by them against us: we
have showed again that patience toward the^ hitherto, as we have not touched
the life of any one of them. But if the Catholics had practiced Rebellions
and Treasons in the Dominions of other Princes professyng the Gospel as they
have done here with us, no doubt but they should have found the same reward of
their wickedness that they have done here. For our doctrine it is utterly
untrue, that any of the churches professyng the Gospel, or this of England
under persecution did ever think it unlawful to put to death a Rebel and a
Traitor. Naie, it has been always taught in all the reformed Churches, that
both they, and also obstinate Heretics (amongst whom they have always
accounted and do still account all obstinate and wilful spreadors of the
Romish faith, set down by the Council of Trent) are most worthy of
death: that as it is in the Law, the false Prophett and the seducyng Idolater,
may be taken from amongst us, that all Israel may here and fear and not
dare to committ the like. We acknowledge in deed faith to be the gift of
God, which comes by the preaching of the Gospel by Ministers sent by the
commandment of God: but we do not therefore think it unlawful for the
Magistrate to execute the Lords just vengeance upon the obstinate Heretics
and seducyng Idolaters. Repentance and holiness of life is also the gift of
GOD, and comes by the same means, and yet the Magistrate not only in a good
conscience may, but in duty to God ought as he will answer it to him that
shall judge the quick and the dead, draw out the Lords sword of execution of
justice and of vengeance against all ill doers, to wound and to kill
according to the qualities of the offense. So likewise ought he in this case.
And though conscience and Religion be not putt in by torments, yet may one
as Austen also confesses, having his obstinacy chastened by the authority
of the Magistrate, be stirred up to consider more seriously of the course he
held, and by such occasion growyng to a deeper exanimation of the cause,
through the grace of GOD attain to the true faith. And if they should not,
yet is not the punishment in vain. For by it many which otherwise by a
dissolute lenity would be encouraged with impunitie, and follow the same
wicked ways, are better advised and kept from destruction: else were it in
vain said which I have alleged before, take away the evil one from
amongst you, that al Israel may hear and fear and not dare to do the like.
But still he stands upon their cause, urging it to be unworthy such
extremity: and why so, because our fathers have been as guilty herein as
they, having professed the same ancient Religion that they do now. But what
is here in this reason that might not serve all Heathen men before the
preaching of the Apostles amongst them, and most of the^ yet to this day. If
there were now any kingdom amongst the^ reformed according to the Gospel, and
some should still maintain their ancient Idolatry, and plead for them
selves that they are no more guilty then their fathers and the fathers of their
Magistrates had been before them? were this a sufficient cause why they should
be exempted from punishment? If our fathers were deceived by them, it stands
us their children and posterity much the more in hand to take heed of their
damnable ways and doctrine. It is more then we can answer that our fathers
have sinned: It were wisdom therefore that we took heed we ad not sin to
sin. Those were the times which the Lord regarded not in respect of
vouchsauing them this exceedyng favor of the true knowledge of the Gospel,
but now he has visited us from above, and called all men to Repentance. Which
gracious goodness of God toward this time, it were fitter for them to
acknowledge, and receive with thanckesgiuing, then thus to obstinate
themselves, to fill up the measure of their Fathers iniquity: that all the
Idolatry that has been since the worshippyng of the golden Calfe at mount
Horeb, may be brought upon them. Have they forgotten that it is written, To
day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts as your fathers did in
the wilderness, who tempted and provoked God, till he swear they should not
enter into his rest? Again, he retourneth to the taking away of that
effect, which this Justice pretends to work, affirmyng upon the words
of Gamaliell, that those men which of mere zeal, as he says after the
Apostles manner, are come emongst us, to endaunger them selves to maintain the
faith, can not be made desiste if their counsel be of God. But I say their
counsel cannot be of God, because the Faith they seek to maintain is
against God, as giuyng to Idols the honor of him, of who^ it is said, thou
shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve: and against
his anointed, as setting up many Saviors, and many Mediators, whereas it is
said, there is salvation in no other: and if any man sin, we have an advocate
with God the Father, who is Jesus Christ the righteous, he is the propitiation
for our sins. Further I say they run, and are not sent of GOD, who sends
not any now adays after the Apostles manner to preach in all the world. Their
ministry was necessary for a time, that the voice of the Lord might be
heard in all coasts, and the sound of it to the end of the earth. But now
that the world has heard it, their Ministry is ceased, and the Lord calls
by their doctrine, and the ministry of Pastors and teachers of several
Congregations. Therefore, well might an unskillful Soldier be father to these
Jesuits, that knew not what he did. For, if he had understood any thing of
the word of God, he should have known that there is now no such calling,
which they may profess without more special warrant the^ they have any.
Therefore Gamaliell, that honorable Counselor and Senator being their
Judge, they must needs desist, and al their purposes come to naught, because
they are not of God. Your lordships honorable means, which has relieved
strangers gives him hope that they may also find some comfort of the same:
which I doubt not but if they were as near in faith, and the communion of
Saints, as these strangers are, but they should undoubtedly find at your
honors hands. But if they that are of David's counsel and sit at his table,
lift up their heels against him, a stranger that fears God, without all
comparison, is more deeply to taste of your Lorshipps honorable, succor and
comfort, then such a one though he were bred at home. Now again, what the
effects of these your Lordships proceadynges may be, which for a farewell is
diversely exaggerated: First in this life, and then in the life to come. In
this life they must needs he says to speak plainly, be subject to horror,
obloquie, grudge, hatred, diverse breaches and most dangerous wounds, as all
extremities are wont to do, and after that it can work no estimation, love,
or security, to your posterity. Is this a duetifull speech of a suppliant
upon his knees, as he pretends to be before your honorable assembly, or
agrees this well with his often protestations of reverence and duty? But the
lord that has hitherto blessed your honors, notwithstanding the curse of
their chief cursers: I doubt not but if your honors shall yet further
indeauor to serve the lord in the sincere aduau^cyng of his truth, and the
just punishment of his enemies, according to the great and honorable service
he has called you unto, but that the same: Lord whom you shall so serve, will
turn away all these threats of hatred and wou^des, in your own persons,
and your posterity, from your honors and your noble children, upon an
Idolatrous and bloody generation that know him not, nor fear his name.
Therefore, as our Savior Christ speaks in a like case, when it was told him,
that Herod threatened to kill him, this Fox is to remember that there are twelve
hours in the day, wherein who so walks can take no hurt. Your honors and
all that profess the truth, walk under the shadow and protection of the
highest, who has numbered the hears of your head, and without his will not one
of them shall fall unto the ground. They which receive the truth, are to
serve GOD in their sondrie callynges, to the mainteinaunce of it in honor and
dishonor, in wealth and woe, in life and death. If there fall out any
dishonor, it can not be like the shame of the cross of Christ: If any
wounds not like those precious wounds, which he offered his holy body unto
for your sakes. Such dishonor shall be exceedingly recompensed with a weighty
Croune of glory, such wounds are the wounds of Christ, which the Apostle
more boasts of (with a holy boaste) then ever did soldiour of the wounds he
had in the field, for the defense of his Prince and Country, and such wounds
shall be healed again: yea, such death shall be turned to a happy and
everlasting life. Therefore, my humble prayer to God for all your honorable
Lordships is, that it may please him to fortify, and strengthen your noble
hearts to continue, and proceade forward in this most holy course, to the
aduauncyng daiely of the truth of the Gospel, and the rootyng out of
Antichristianitie, despisyng all the threats, plattes and practices of the
adversary, with assurance that the watchman of Israll sleeps not. If his
eyes be open over all Israel night and day to turn away all dangers from
them, how careful and vigilant an eye does he keep over Jerusalem, and most
of all watchful and ielous is he over the house and friends of David. In the
life to come he supposes the Traitors worthily executed, and other recusantes
imprisoned, shall be made equal to these who have done this justice upon
them, and that then all their pains shall be assuaged, their tears wyped
away, their racked parts resetled, and they received to everlasting peace and
glory. This I grant shall in that day be performed to those which suffer in
Gods cause, and for bearyng witness to our Savior and the truth of his
Gospel. For so are we taught by our Savior himself, that he that leeseth his
life for him, shall find it, by receiuyng in the world to come life
everlasting. Therefore, I nothing doubt, but through the grace of God do
steadfastly believe, that in that day, all our worthy fathers and brethren the
noble host of Martirs and true Soldiers of Christ Jesus, which have suffered
both in former times and in these latter days else where, and here in England
in the time of their most cruel and bloody reign, both suffered for the
true profession of the Gospel of Christ, and shall be raised again in that
day to reign with him in glory. Then undoubtedly though they were burnt to
ashes or slain with the murdring sword, or howsoever openly or secretly
destroyed, the Lord will restore their bodies unto them again. Then the ashes
which the bones were burnt unto, and are carefully laid up by the Lord in
his treasury, by the power whereby he is able to do al things, shall be
restored to their former nature and be made bones again. Then according to the
vision of Ezechiell, every bone shall come and join it self again to the bone
wherewith it is to be joined, the sinews shall come upon the bones, the
flesh shall cover the sinews, and the breath of life shall be breathed into
them. So they whom they thought they had confounded for ever, shall stand
upon their feet again as a triumphant and victorious host over all their
enemies. With the least of which the saints of God, in whom the Lord will be
marvelous at his coming, not the proudest of the adversaries of the Gospel
shall be equal as he boasts: but in tremblyng and in fear shall stand
before them, who shall assist the great Judge in his hye Court, according as
it is said, you shall judge the Aungelles. Therefore, let them not boast them
selves of a vain hope, for certainly there is no peace for the wicked says
the lord. To travel and torment them as he obiecteth, there is no man takes
any pleasure in it. God forbidd we should feed our eyes with the miserable
spectacle of their execution or our hearts in any their sufferinges. We are so
far from it by the grace of God, that if we enjoy any thing that is good,
we wish as good part of it to them as to our selves. Especially being
vouchsafed that high favor of God to believe in Christ according to the truth
of the Gospel, and thereby to live through the same grace in the fear of his
name, seruyng him and our brethren with all our power in a happy assurance of
the forgiveness of our sins, and a blessed hope and expectation of the
glory of God to be made manifest in us, as in his sons at the glorious
coming of Christ, with thousands of his mighty Aungelles: We wish them the
like precious faith together with us, and the same undoubted and immovable
hope of the life to come. Wherein as through the same gracious promise of God
in Christ, we are assured by the Sacred truth of his Gospel, to have our
part of the hidden Manna, and of the Tree of life, which is in the midst of
the Paradise of God, so we desire with all our hearts, (if it be so good in
his eyes who is only wise, only merciful, and only holy) that they may
have their part of that Manna, that Tree of life and new wine of a heavenly
grape, reioysyng the heart of God and man, together with us (as the Lord
speaks in the Gospel,) eating and drinkyng at the heavenly table, and that
we may altogether reign with Christ in his kingdom for ever. As for the
benefits of this life, I would to God their offenses hindered them not, to
enjoy them as well as we. If the Lord have given us a good land, as he has
in deed, and plentiful of all good commodities of this life, we wish they were
partakers of the^ all together with us. We take no pleasure in their banishment
abroad, our country is their country, our peace is their peace, our liberty
theirs. We can well afforde the^ and that with joy room amongst us, yea,
prefermentes and places of any good and honorable service in the church or
commonwealth, according to their worthiness and ability to deal in them.
Therefore, as Judah sometimes exhorted Israel, so we exhort the^ return ye
children of Israel, Fight not against the Lord God of your Fathers, for you
can not prospere. When the Prodigal son had wasted his fathers goods, with
harlots in a strange country, and being in poverty and need, longed after
his fathers house again, he advised to return, to humble himself to his
father: and say, father I have sinned against heaven and against thee, and am
no more worthy to be called thy son, make me but as one of thy hired
servants: and his father received him with a great feast at his own table, with
noise of Music and with all joy. So we assure our selves upon the merciful
nature of our souerain Lady, who^ God has made to be a mother in Israel, yt
they should be graciously and louyngly received, if they would know their own
misery and did loathe their spiritual Fornications with the whore of Babylon,
upon who^ they spend and wast what gifts so ever God has bestowed upon the^.
Let them be ashamed of their feeding of ye draffe of men's inuentio^s, who may
feed with their brethren at home of the word of God, as of the finest of the
Wheat: let them at the last begin to long after the Lords house and Table
again, which they have so despised. Let them come and fall down before her
excellent Majesty, and say: We have sinned against God, and against your
highness, and are not worthy to be accounted as subjects, make us but as
servants in the land. Then no doubt but her gracious heart will melt over
them, and her highness will receive them again with joy. And whereas they lay
all the blame upon us, which are their brethren, (if they so return) we will be
so far from enuiyng it, that with the Aungelles of God we will most willyngly
and cheerfully rejoice at their conversion, returning home again to God our
heavenly father: when he which was lost shall be found, and the son which
was ded shall be restored to life again Lo the malice, that we who^ they call
their adversaries, and say, to be always at the Magistrates elbowes, to
stir them up against them, do bear unto them, God being witness to our
consciences, that we wish all this good unto them. But to conclude, if they
shall continue their wilful obstinate course to subuerte the Gospel of God,
and all the professors of it, as much as may lie in them, even to the
Nobility and to Princes, to Kings and Queens, without respect of any: If
they will needs bestow their wits, their riches, their favor with men, to
advance their execrable Idolatry and false worship: If there be no remedy,
but they will have their part in the sins of the Whore of Babylon, in her
Idolatry, and in the blood of the saints which she has shed, as if it had
been but water, in all the parts of the world: then are they to know, that
the Lord will confound all their devises against his truth, and his
servants that sincerely and zealously profess it: and make so many of the^
as will needs have their portion in the sins of Babylon, to be also
partakers of her plagues. Let the^ assure them selves, as S. Ihon has
Prophesied in his Revelation, ye Babylon shall fall and rise up no more, there
shall be no more light seen in her, the voice of joy shall be no more heard in
her. The Aples which her soul lusted after, shall be taken from her: all her
fatt things, and al her po^pous things shall be taken away, and found no more
in her. And because the cupp of inchantmentes, wherewith she has poisoned the
world, and made drunk the dwellers of it, and enchanted the kings of the
earth withal is in her hand, and beause the blood of the Prophets and
Saints of God is upon her: therefore shall her blood be shed again. The
Beast with his false Prophett, which wrought wonders before him shall be cast
into the lake of fire, and the rest shall be slain with the sword which
comes out of the Lords mouth, and all the fowls shall be filled full with
their flesh. Then shall they which have washed their garments in the blood of
the Lamb, have all tears wiped from their eyes, and be received to
everlasting glory. So Idolatry and all the wicked maintainers of it shall
perish, and the word of God with the true professors of it shall remain for
ever. The^ shall be fulfilled that which is written: the grass withers and
the flower fades away, but the word of the Lord abides for ever, which
word is this that is Preached unto you.

FINIS.
The good reader is to be prayed, for his own relief and the authors, first
to correct the errors of the print, and the^ to read and judge.
Read p. 2. l. 21. and an auoucher, p. 3. l. 6. of all the readers of it, and
l. 12. land. p. 4. l. 18. some friends. p. 5. l. 15. whereof. l. 16. seized. p.
9. l. 12. called for. p. 11. l. 13. for to whom does the law chiefly extend.
p. 12. l. 24. a priest. p. 18. l. 3. will be. p. 20. l. 1. heresy that. l. 3.
judgment which. p. 23. l. 15. repentance, and l. 22. did constrain and p.
25. against l. 3. answer to the 3. reason. p. 26. l. 2. that Nabucadnezers
Furnase were made hoate amongst us for Sh^drache and his companions. And it. l.
3. exceeded. p. 27. l. 21. and liuelyhood. pa. 32. li. 2. whereof the first, and
l. 17. Princess. p. 42. l. 5. language. For, and l. 29. yet notwithstanding.
p. 43. l. 3. of this. l. 7. and concerning. p. 46. l. 15. rest. As for any
torment. p. 47. l. 17. read, said. l. 22. as the rackinges of Anne Askew, and
Simson Stout, as Samson to the death, the burning of the hand of Rose Allen,
and some such other. p. 48. l. 8. favor. For. p. 49. l. 1. and is. p. 58.
against. l. 9. answer to the 4. reason of the cause. p. 67. against. l. 12.
Answer to the 3. of unity. p. 68. li. 29. Popes. p. 71. l. 2. An other. l. 4.
their. l. 17. had with Clement. l. 19. Armache. l. 22. Franciscans. p. 73. l.
25. now and before in. p. 87. l. 16. before that. p. 89. again. l. 6. Institut.
p. 90. against. l. 25. Answer to the 4. reason which is of policy. p. 104.
l. 4. desolation. p. 108. l. 12. 500000 p. 110 l. 10. whom. p. 112. l. 3.
removed. p. 113. l. 25. the Prince and people whose. p. 114. l. 2. us. Peace.
p. 118. l. 8. finished. l. 14. so far. p. 119. l. 14. all the. p. 120. l. 12.
work, for so. l. 27. honorable. p. 130. l. 20. the same. p. 133. l. 11. then.
l. 15. needelesse. p. 135. in K. li. 16. consonant. p. 135. K. l. 1. us. l. 5.
of R (l. 8. of R) l. 28. Pharisees. pa. 136. li. 3. the fleet. li. 9. the bye
Priest. li. 6. Caiphas hye Priest. line. 9. the Scribes. line. 17. any. page
137. K. line. 13. Nor K. line. 28. K. under him in whom p. 139. K. l. 8. some
pretending. p. 124. K. l. 7. if all. l. 16. loss. p. 141. K. l. 27. obtained
of them. p. 142. K. l. 20. desired. p. 143. K. l. 10. resort.) p. 144. K. li.
26. besides, p. 145. L. li. 19. Princes. p. 148. li. 27. for he. p. 149. L. li.
17. within their dominions. pa. 150. L. li. 1. body of his church. li. 4.
finally to rule it as he has appointed by his word. p. 151. L. li. 28. man
(who. p. 160. L. li. afflictions: yet in the end. p. 177. M. l. 1. it, is. l.
3. that no. l. 6 it: I. l. 18. says he, in the marge^t weal, which is of
restoryng il gotten goods, li. 27. their chief. M. p. 178. li. 20.
petilarcinie. l. 28. Prelate. For. p. 181. l. 11. quarrel of. l. 14. when by.
p. 183. M. l. 1. P. man. l. 17. endited, arrained; adjudged. p. 185. M. l. 18.
our practice in the common letter. p. 190. M. li. 8. for whether. li. 24. of
the K. p. 192. M. l. 9. the self to ye greater, against. l. 22 The 3. point of
abstinence answered. pa. 194. M. lin. 10. men. pa. 193. lin. 24. 160. P. 193.
N. li. 11. God: this is. l. 13. seriously. li. 15. then of necessity. p. 194.
lin. 3. Nazarite. lin. 14. obseruantes. li. 16. bred at. p. 195. N. li. 4.
could not be wished. p. 196. against. l. 4. Answer to the 4. article which
is of fasting. p. 197. N. l. 26. household. To. p. 199. N. l. 25. fulfilled
that was said, yea. pa. 209. O. lin. 15. in the. lin. 15. many. pa. 216. O.
lin. 2. provided: yet lin. 19. should line. p. 228. O. lin. 16. it be. 222. O.
lin. 1. of. l. 17. pray. li. 19. a reasonable. lin. 28. (not do) pa. 223. O.
Practice. pa. 224. O. lin. 1. Law, except the innocent, again, may have help
by thee. Pa. 225. P. li. 17, and for. p. 234. li. 2, depose the^. pa. 240. P.
li. 1. was smally regarded by them. For all stories p. 241. Q li. 28. them. It
is to impudent that they. pa. 243. Q li. 1. the subjects. pa. 246. Q. lin. 16.
Yet with this caution. li. 16. God and pa. 247. Q. li. 22. declared they take
it in. pa. 249. Q. lin. 6. impunitie. pa. 252. li. 28. all merit: so we
confess of grace a difference of glory in such as shall be saved, p. 240. R. l.
1. injured. p. 238. l. 12. wounds. p. 245. l. 16. derogatory. p. 242. R. l. 5.
faith. p. 278. S. l. 19. redemption. p. 283. li. 11. wherein first. li. 17. God.
pa. 285. S. lin. 3. it can not be but that they find. lin. 20. faith, and
baptism in. p. 287. li. 22. all abh p. 288. S. li. 26 merchandise. p. 269. T.
li. 2. impertinent. p. 273 T. li. 2, so greatly. li. 7. popedom, is. p. 275.
T. li. 17. dissolute, l. 18, be in, li. 26. decay: p. 277. T against. lin. 22.
read examples as in the text. lin. 27. And this year in the priests which
absolved before hand that. page 27. T. lin. 1. for the murder which he
purposed: lin. 11. absoluers. page 279. T. lin. 26. that this R. faith: page
280. T. lin 17. points, wherein. lin. 25. established. 281. T. lin. 22.
dispose. line. 24. down. whom and when it. li. 27. many times has. pa. 282.
T. li. 4. pleasure. l. 8. land and have had the benefices within their Country
bestowed upon strangers. pa. 283. T. li. 28. these many 100. pa. 285. V. li.
6. the land li. 19^. with the hye li. 23. common wealths. pa. 286. V. li. 9
(much: li. 12. Ezechias) li 17. subjects and. pa. 288. V. li. 28. epistle, p.
289. V l. 1. professed. li. 4. aising rising. l. 13. it, most. li. 19.
Christen. p 290. V. li. 7. was such. lin. 12. alive: li, 21. upon the k. the
line 25. the treasure drawn. lin. 26. as well as other K.) pa. 291. against.
lin. 4. le secret des finances de france. li. 9. at the diet held. pa. 394. V.
li. 8. ship concerning. li 22. her plagues. In the margent pa. 299. V. against
li. 18. The second part of the whole epistle. page 300. V. li. 27. li. page
321. lin. 7 drawn: p 323. X, lin. 7. the ungodly. li. 8. these reconcilers
conspire of. li. 19. would. pa. 325. X. lin. 6 carnal, pa. 328. X. lin. 8. so
was it also in the disputation in K. li. 9. time. And in Q. lin. 10.
notwithstanding the. lin. 12. Latimers to. lin 17. enemies: pa. 330. X. li. 6.
be and, was li. 23. matter. li 24. by faith. lin. 26, page 331. li. 6. ungodly.
lin. 22 Idolatry, pa, 332. X. li. 4. shuts. pa. 334, X. li. 7. here, by.
pa. 335. X. li. 3. it to their faith. pa. 336. X li. 16. well. pa. 337. X. li.
it was. pa. 338. X li. 15. indifferency. li. 28. Libanus and the. pa. 339 Y.
li. 3. despise. pa. 340, Y. lin. 23. of. pa. 343 Y. li. 9 Tertullius. l. 22. us
our or. l. 28 faith. p. 344. Y. li. 2 them? pa. 345. Y. li. 8, their shameful
slanders their bitter, pa, 346, Y, against li, 20, And thus much for answer
to his first reason, pa, 347, li, 1. it, pa, 348, Y, li, 26, by his, pa. 349,
Y, li, 5, further, li, 11, us, pa, 354, Z, li, 2, Apostles, li, 11, God, pa.
358, Z, li, 16, tares, li, 17, discern them at first, li, 19, up, pa, 359, Z,
li, 2, ground, li, 5, when and who li, 16, discerned, li, 20, seed: li, 27.
experience. li, 28, herein, pa, 360, li, 1, before of open errors which, li,
9, the, li, 10, family.

p. 363. l. 1. of it. l. 9. bastardes. Yet though. l. 12. less. p. 366. l. 12.
Donatistes. l. 17. and some. l. 21. of such mighty. li. 24. to the small
degrees. pa. 367. li. 11. of some. p. 363. Aa. l. 23. just regiment. l. 25.
unlawful government, but. pa. 367. l. 8. nine and twenty. l. 15. consequently
their. If. 16. an other. p. 367. li. 15. Paschasius. l. 23. transubstantiation.
p. 368. l. 16. to them. pa. 370. l. 18. nor Tertullia may. pa. 371. l. 22.
rest. p. 371. l. 2. question. l. 4. reckon. l. 21. Afric. p. 372. li. 2.
remains, which. li. 9. reasons for. pa. 375. l. 1. self for proof hereof
mentions only three. lin. 5. benche and other her by courts. lin. 13.
manifest untruth. li. 28. any conscience. pa. 375. l. 16. Angrogie. p. 376. l.
8. time, which they murdered. l. 28. nor. pa. 378. li. 1. Sabbath. l. 2.
service. Bb. p. 385. li. 15. doctrine untrue that. pa. 388. l. 10. calls. pa.
389. l. 12. and l. 14. Jesus. l. 22. earth. p. 391. l. 4. to be. li. 18. unto
same Lord. p. 396. l. 15. and that. p. 397. l. 12. goods with. l. 21. with a.
l. 27. and loathe. p. 398. li. 24. dead.

FINIS.

