TIMES LAMENTATION: or An exposition on the prophet JOEL, in sundry Sermons or
Meditations.

Ierem. 13. 17. But if you will not hear this, my soul shall weep in secret
for your pride, and my eyes shall weep and drop down tears, because the
Lords flock is carried away captive.

Bernard. sentent. The whole race of mankind may lament these three things;
their birth full of uncleanness, their life pressed with wickedness, and
their death in woeful danger.



AT LONDON, Printed by Edm. Bollifant, for George Potter. 1599

TO THE RIGHT Honorable Sir Charles Blunt, Lord Mountioy, Knight of the most
noble order of the Garter, etc. all earthly and heavenly felicity.
RIght Honorable Lord, Time is the measure of all things, and therefore to
show the misertes thereof is the fittest novelty for our days. To consider
the ancient or first time of the world, which God created and approved to be
good, Genesis 1. 4, 5. where of one speaks thus, Flumina iam lactis, iam flumina
nectaris ibant,
Flauaque de viridi stillabant illice mella;
And this was called the golden age of the world, wherein were rivers of milk
and nectar, and the rocks dropped down honey; where in was no destroying
sword, or pining sickness, or burning hatred, or wearisome labor to molest or
disquiet the life of man: would make us either to wonder like fools, or to
weep like wise men. But time is changed, it was golden, it was good; it is
wooden, it is evil: short was that time; for it continued not many (or as some
think) not any days, for sin followed the creation; therefore time may well
clad her self in mourning weed, and say with Jacob, Few and evil are her
days. Zimri was a king, yet it lasted but seven days, and then he burned
himself alive; so time was glorious but seven days, and then he burned
himself alive; so time was glorious but seven days, and then it fell into
flames of woe, that every child of time may weep with Jerusalem, Lament. 4.
16. and say, The crown of our head is fallen, woe now unto us that we have
sinned. If I may be so bold with your Lordship to stand a little on the
miseries of the world, and to pick out here and there a consideration or an
example from ancient history, whereunto your Lordship as unto all other good
learning have devoted your self; I know that you will easily say with that
princely-wisest- Solomon, that all is but vanity and vexation of spirit, and
much commend the sorrows and tears of Heraclitus, who never laughed; and of
Serapion, who ever weeped; the one for the world, the other for Cassianus.
his sins. If now your Honor ask me of the state of the world, or the whole
life of man living in the world, what opinion I ever hold concerning the same,
I must answer you, that it is the house of mourning, and not one comes
thither, but in all the parts of his life and profession he may truly say,
Quisquis non causas mill doloris habet;
that he was borne in sorrow, and lives in sorrow, and dies in grief, and is
buried in lamentation, though afterward he live in glory; for ante mortem nemo
beatus. The world consists of two sorts of men, of good men and evil: good
men do ever sorrow, for the world is their hell; and evil men should ever
sorrow, because God is their enemy: the one for the affliction which they
feel, the other for the judgment which they fear; yea verily weeping seems
so natural in our sinful state, that joy constrains men to weep. For so we
read of Joseph when he saw his brethren, and met with his father; and of
Ptolemaeus Philadelphus, when the Seventy interpreters had Joseph. de antiq.
lib. 12.
finished the Bible, and delivered it to him, he wept for joy abundantly. If we
turn our eyes to pity the estate of the distressed, although our selves have
not tasted of adversity; yet this pity if it be true pity, will enforce us
to grief. When Xerxes had his Herod. lib. 7.
infinite huge army in the field before him, and took a view thereof, he
could not refrain from weeping to see the misery of mankind. When Scipio had
set Carthage on fire, and saw the Sabel. Enn. lib. 9. Enn. 5.
flames there of soaring up to the clouds, although he was their enemy, yet
the tears trickled down his cheeks to behold their ruin. When Titus
besieged Jerusalem, and saw every Joseph. lib. 7. cap. 24.
day the infinite number of dead bodies thrown over the walls into the ditches,
which famished in the city, whereby he knew their surpassing calamity,
whereof himself was the cause; yet in compassion of their estate, he could not
behold them but with waterie eyes. To go yet farther in the affections, if men
be angry they will easily mourn, as Christ did over Jerusalem: and thus you
may behold, how joy, and love, and hatred, and pity, and anger, and desire
do call men to mourning. Mourning and lamentation are so needful, that God
has made every creature fit for the same. The heavens have their clouds, the
earth has his rivers and fountains, the beasts have their roarings and
howlings, and the hard marble stones send forth their fountain tears.
Again, if we look into the causes, as we have looked into the affections, we
shall perceive that the same causes have caused much mourning, which pretended
much rejoicing. Some will think that men having fine wits, and having attained
great knowledge being good Politicians, the world will never frown on them,
and time shall never lament them: but you know it is far otherwise; for one
says too truly, that the best clerks have the worst fortunes. For Socrates
died in prison; another by swallowing Stobaeus ser. 96
of a raw fish; Aeschilus was brained with a tile; Sophocles perished with a
bunch of grapes; the dogs tore Euripides in pieces; Homer was famished,
Aristotle drowned, and Glaucus an excellent Physician was put to death by
Alexander (and as Plutarch says) was crucified: would not this make a man to
mourn to see such rare wits have such hard haps, and may not Time well lament
her unworthiness, because she may not nurse such children? Surely the
Prophets have for the most part tasted of this cup, and violence has brought
them to their latter end. But peradventure although the world do frown upon
scholars, yet it laugheth upon other, for kings and soldiers live in the
world without all want. But they are much deceived; Saul was a king, yet he
slew himself; Caesar was a king, but he was slain in the Senate; Valens was
an Emperor, yet flying to a shepherds Fulg. lib. 1. 2.
cottage was burned therein; Vigellius lost his eyes; Claudius Herminianus was
eaten with woormes, as Herod was; Cypr. aduers. Demetr.
Seuerus for very grief did poison himself, as Annibal did: and one said
well; if the people knew but the least part of a Princes cares, they would
think the cloth of state worse then a russet coat. And for soldiers or men
most excellent in arms, they are destinated to labor while they conquer and
get fame, and to mourn being discountenaunced ready for death. Therefore
war, said Augustine, Malis videtur voluptas, bonis necessitas. Aug. de Ciuit.
lib. 7. cap. 11. Sab. lib. 4. Ennead. 6.
Pompey had three several triumphs into Rome, yet what was his end? Sylla
and Marius what notable things did they, and whom did they not overcome? yet
they became private, and came home by weeping cross. All the lives of Greeks
and Romans in Plutarch will testify the hard hap of martial men, and who is
he that can abstain from tears, to hear or read of that noble and Christian
Belisarius, who after thirty years service to his Lord and Emperor, had both
his eyes put out for his reward? Yet rich men if they be private, or have but a
little authority, may be thought to lead the best lives, and not to be
lamented: Surely most of all, for of them it is said most truly, Quaerere vt
absumant, absumpta requirere certant,
Atque ipsae vitijs sunt alimenta vices.
Crassus a rich Roman for his wealth was beheaded by Surenas. Plutarch. Boeth.
lib. 8.
Beda does often show and lament the riches, riot, expense, security, and ease
of the Britons, declaring that all these things did but fat the^ up against the
day of slaughter. He was not far amiss that said, that Princes must be used as
fire; for it is not safe to be near it, nor yet good to be too far from it.
And I would that all rich men would ever remember that fearful saying of our
Savior, How hardly shall a man that has riches enter into the kingdom of
heaven: It is easier for a gable to go thorough the eye of a needle, etc. The
reign of Solomon was a most peaceable time, and so happy as never was in
Israel; yet the people had many insufferable burdens, so that without
discontents none can live. Aristides was hated for his justice, Antonius
surnamed Philosophus an Emperor, because he would draw all things to the exact
rule of learning, was accused to execute tyranny under pretense of
Philosophy; and no marvel, for Christ was called a deceiuer though he wrought
miracles: thus are good endeavors crossed. To go yet farther and to look into
the life of man, the same thing which does make it commendable, does make it
lamentable: Beauty is a great grace to men or women; yet Absolon, Vasthi, King
Assuerus his Queen, Bethsabe, Lucrece, Cleopatra, and many other, as the wife
of Constantine whom he burned, have been undone by these things whereby God
advanced them. Children are like Oliue-plants, whose fruits make their parents
faces cheerful: yet it is too true Vide, patriproles luctus vsque quo creet:
foolish children are Eurip.
heaviness to their parents. Plutarch tells us that one Iphis saw at one time
buried his two sons and a daughter. Jacob was Plut. de amore
much troubled with his sons, and so was Samuel and David, and many other: so
that as their mothers weep in their birth; so their fathers weep in their
bringing up. But the sorrow that parents endure by their children is lamentably
set forth in this example. One Bochna a woman having two sons, leaving the
greater in her house, took the lesser in her hand to a river side Duditius de
cometis.
near her dwelling, and sitting by the water she heard her elder son to cry:
she hastened into her house leaving the young one behind her, and coming in,
she found that her son had thrust a knife into himself and lay on the earth
drawing his last breath: the tender mother seeing the bleeding child, pulled
out the knife and the child died, which she must needs behold with a heart
ready to break for sorrow: and having laid it forth, went to fetch in the
child which she had left by the river side to comfort herself in him; but
when she came, she found the waters had carried him away and drowned him: oh,
then she tare herself, never ceasing her violent outcries, til she had made
an end of her own life. These with a thousand other examples and
considerations to mitigate the love of life, and to increase repentance, I
could easily produce to show the ruins of time, as a reason of this my
labor: Which in most humble manner I offer unto your Lordship, as the
conscience of your former honorable favor toward me does bind me aeternally
to study by all means possible to signify my thankfulness unto your Honor,
the mean of my preferment; being desirous that all good men into whose hands
these my poor labors shall come, should account themselves beholding unto
your Lordship, for that your favor gave encouragement and means unto me for
the better penning and publishing hereof. Wherefore, my humble suite is, that
your Honor would vouchsafe the patronage hereof, being assured that more
learned then my self will accept my good will, and good men will help me with
their prayers to God; unto whose sweet aeternall favor I commend your Honor:
that you may live long, to the benefit of your country, the advancement of
your Honor, the comfort of learning, and above all, to his glory, who shall
glorify you in the heavens. And thus craving pardon for my boldness, I
humbly take my leave remaining

Your Lordships most bounden, EDW. TOPSELL.

Times Lamentation.
THis mournful Prophet Joel sent from The time of this prophecy
the Lord unto the Jews only, at that time when Hoseah prophesied unto the
ten tribes (as it is thought) gives that whole nation of the people, most
lamentable signs of sorrowful plagues, and imminent dangers hanging over
their heads. For the condition of this people began to be like the estate of a
desperate sick man, whose health being wasted by continual diseases, the
Physicians surcease to administer medicines, and leave him to be lamented by
his friends, that their waterie eyes and sorrowful souls, may either
speedily work the recovery of his health, or else religiously adorn his
carcass for the grave: Even so the prophet begins where nature fails, that
whereas the sins of this people could not be purged by plenty, nor the sores
of their souls be cured by mercy, he comes forth like a mourner with sad
gestures and doleful speeches, either to turn them from their evils, or else
to lament them to their funerals. His words be few because his tears be many,
and his Sermons short because they tell of sorrows.

This is therefore my purpose so far forth to expound The scope of this
labor.
this prophecy, as is requisite for the present times: for seeing there is too
pleasant an harmony in the sins of Judah and England, it shall not be amiss
to follow the example of the Spirit of God, either to mar the music by
these mournful ditties, or else to bring these instruments often evil out
oftune, that the strings of their sins may be untwisted by the tears of
their souls. The prophet by his own example teaches, and by his continual
Sermons exhorts the people to lament their dangers that now were hanging over
their country.

The Spirit of God delivers this message in these two parts. The first
concerns the nation of the Jews God The division of this prophecy.
his dear people, in the two first chapters: and the other part concerns
their deadly enemies, which is delivered in the third chapter. That part which
concerns the Jews, contains most fearful and forcible reasons to move
their rebellious hearts: as first a particular rehearsal of those judgments
that now were coming, which is in the first chapter and unto the eighteenth
verse of the second. Secondly, most sweet promises of large liberality, if
yet (though sentence of destruction were pronounced) they would receive the
pardon: before the judgments is set the style of the prophet, or the
inscription of the whole book contained in the three first verses; wherein he
describes the sum of the prophecy, by calling it the word of the Lord:
First by showing the ministering cause thereof, namely, The word of the Lord
which came to Joel the son of Pethuel; verse the first. Secondly, the subject
or persons whom it concerned in the two next verses, by most excellent
exhortatio^s first of hearing, where he notes the persons, namely, the elders
and all the inhabitants of the land; and then the thing it self, whether they
ever heard of the like, in the second verse: Hear ye this O elders, and harken
ye all inhabitants of the land, whether such a thing has been in your days,
or yet in the days of your fathers, etc. The other exhortation is to persuade
them not to silence the prophecy, but to tell and declare it first to their
children present. Secondly, that they show likewise the same to other ages
following, which the prophet expresses in these words, in the third verse,
saying, Tell you your children of it, and let your children show to their
children, and their children to another generation. Thus much for the division,
now to the words and exposition.

Joel. verse 1. The word of the Lord which came to Joel the Cap. 1. verse. 1.
son of Pethuel. These words of the prophet are thus much in effect, This
self same prophecy which hereafter follows is the very word of God, which
he himself sent to the people by the ministry of Joel the son of Pethuel,
where we observe these doctrines following. First, that the sermons The
prophets sermons are the Lords own words.
of the prophets are the sermons of the Lord himself: for so says this
scripture, that Ioels prophecy is the word of God. In Nehemiah the ninth
chapter, and the thirtieth verse, in that sweet confession which the Levites
made unto God in the behalf of that whole people, thus they say, Thou did
forbear them many years, and protestedst among them by thy spirit even by
the hands of their prophets, but they would not hear: Even thus they confess
their rebellion after they had been well whipped with seventy years
captivity, they had taken forth this lesson, that those despised sermons
which once they spurned with their shoes, and trod upon with their feet, were
now manifestly declared to be the very word of God. Wherein no doubt they show
and testify unto us, that the truth of scriptures in the mouths of Preachers,
will then be acknowledged, when men have been well nurtured in the school of
adversity, in so much that even these words which now are but like the
dreams of phrentick men, will then become as dear unto us as the oracles of
heaven. Oh how stubborn is the conceit of our hard hearts, which will not be
taught till they smart, nor yet be instructed till they be corrected. Shall the
servant say he has no master, except every day he punish his faults? or the
son deny his own father, because in lenity and fatherly pity he bears
with his lewdness? Yet our miserable times are such wherein men think
preaching to be vain, except in persecution; and reading to be needless,
except in calamity; and prayer to be frivolous, except in their sickness. But
bid these wretches to the banquet of afflictions, wherein they may be thoroughly
scourged with temporal miseries, as the proud persons to shame, the Atheists
to death, the swearer to the slaughter, the drunkard to famine, the gentleman
to poverty, and the thief to the halter: then they will cry as loud as
hungry lions, that the scriptures which they neglected, the prophets whom they
reviled, the sermons which they contemned, and the words of preachers which
they disobeied, are the acts of parliament made by God himself; like these
Jews, which now were humble after they had been in Babylon. In the second
Epistle of Peter, cap. 1. verse. 21. the holy Ghost also witnesses, that Holy
men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost. What is that but
plainly to auerre, that not the preachers but the spirit that speaks in the
preachers. This also is confirmed by weighty and special arguments or reasons
drawn from the very word it self. First in Numbers the two and twentieth
chapter and eighteenth verse, where Balaam tells Reason 1.
the servants of Balaack that if he would give him his house full of gold, he
cannot go beyond the word of the Lord to do more or less. If then such
sorcerers and diabolical persons in the cause of God, can speak nothing but
what he suggesteth, much more the prophets and heavenly preachers can utter
nothing but what the holy Ghost inspireth. Again the prophets and true
ministers of God for the words sake only 2
adventure their states and hazard their lives. 1. Kings. cap. 22. verse. 14.
27. which they would not nor could not except upon sure ground of heavenly
warrant: Who would (except desperate mad men) undo themselves and suffer most
intolerable torments for rebuking of sin; unless they were carried by an
ouerruling power, even as Jonah to Niniueth, or Micheah to Ahab, to eat the
bread ofsorrow, and drink the cup of death, that when they might joyfully
solace themselves among their friends, or quetly rest in their poor
habitations, they are sorowfully vexed by their cruel enemies, having the
stinking prison for their easelesse harbor. I grant that heathen men have for
vain devises endured many torments, and Popish Jesuits neglecting their own
lives, and their princes mercy, have and do daily embrace the gallows, but
their sufferings are for matters clean contrary to the word of truth: and
therefore with Tertullian it may better be said to be desperate presumption,
then Christian persecution, and the devils soldiers rather then the Lords
martyrs. Wherein let us with tears of brine lament our humane misery, that
thus casts it self away from worldly comfort and heavenly joys, upon bare
and weak grounds of uncertain serving of God. How strong are the delusions
of subtle Satan, which has bewitched the minds of men so far, that they
have also offered their young children and tender babes through violent flames
for the devils sacrifice: could not their weeping eyes and crying tears,
procure no pity in their hard hearted parents: No, no, where superstition
sits judge, neither nature nor reason may dare to plead the cause. This is
the devils cunning to bewitch his members, (imitating the true servants of God)
to endure death. Augustine said well, Mendacium ex veritate and superstitio
religionem imitatur. Lies come of truth, and superstition takes Religion for a
pattern: yet for all this lies are not truth, superstition is not religion,
nor the torments which desperate men for evil causes endure, shall ever make
good men's sufferings to be less regarded. The sheep must not leave off her
skin because sometimes the wolf comes in her likeness, nor we must less
esteem the martyrs pains, because the devils soldiers likewise die for his
sake: by these two reasons it is evident that the prophets sermons are the
Lords sermons. Now let us make some godly uses of this doctrine. The first
general exhortation which we make Use 1.
hereof is that sentence of the Apostle. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 20. Despise not
prophesying. That is, now it has been clearly proved that the prophets
speeches are the oracles of God, be not so beastly as swine, to tread those
precious pearls of divine wisdom in the filthy dregs and stinking mire of
your vain displeasures: It being apparent that God his ministers speak no
more without his spirit then the conduit runs without his fountains
springs, those disgracing words which many use of the spiritual exercises,
some at their table, others in their clossets, many at the tauerns, and most in
their houses, are nothing else but mere reuilings and spiteful raylings
against the spirit of God. Sometimes the preachers want eloquence to smooth the
itching ears of gallant persons; sometimes they want learning to feed the
curious minds of vain religion bablers; sometimes they want wealth to
maintain their countenance with outward bravery; and sometime they want
manners to make them companions to the gentle sort. And every one of these
think his sermons and labors in God his church to be nothing worth where he
spieth but one want, which his vain conceit desired. I like not this sermon
says one because he wanted words: it was a silly piece of work says another,
because it was not bombasted with the sayings of Fathers, and he seldom or
never confuted the papists: another says that the preacher was but a poor
beggarly fellow, and therefore it is no matter what he say, none of the great
men would have said so much: and others said, he has more learning then wit,
more zeal then behavior, and his confident words are impudent speeches, unto
all these I say, Despise not prophesying. See you not how the devil drives
you to condemn all for want of one, and to a general neglect, for a
particular desire: shall the spirit of God be blamed because every man's humor
is not satisfied? God forbid that such iniquity should lodge among the
professors of religion: that those sermons which displease some should be
despised of so many: there is no pearl which all men will praise, there is no
garden so pleasant but some will dislike it, nor any house so commodious but
some will dispraise it: shall we cast away pearls, plowe up gardens, and race
down houses, because all men are not pleased? No verily, no more shall
prophesying, preaching, praying, and exhorting be rejected, although every man's
idle disposition be not answered. Oh miserable and lamentable days wherein men
come to the congregation like buyers to a fair, and they all cry it is naught
it is naught, though the Lords wares be freely sold, yet who will buie them
at his hands? The more plentifully they are offered, the more scornefully they
are rejected: for look upon those places where the ministry has been of
longest standing, and greatest practice, where pastors according to the Lords
own heart are planted, where the voice of the word sounds at least every
Sabbath day: I say, look there even as narrowly as Ezechiel looked over
Jerusalem, and you shall find them more ignorant in knowledge, more lewd in
living, more obstinate in words, and more disobedient in deeds, then other
people are. Even thus the devil labors painfully, where the Lord speaks
abundantly, that he may maliciously condemn, where the Lord would mercifully
save; insomuch that the Lord may say to the congregations of England, as he
once said to the assembly of Israel. Ierem. 6. verse. 10 Unto whom shall I
speak and admonish? that they may hear: behold their ears are uncircumcised
they cannot harken, behold the word of the Lord is unto them as a reproach.
And where the word of the Lord can have no being, the wrath of the Lord will
take up the lodging: therefore we may say as the prophet speaks. Abak. 1. 5.
Behold ye despisers and wonder and vanish away, for I work a work in your
days, a work which you will not believe though a man declare it. Consider
this ye scornful hearers among us, that God shall punish your contempt with
infidelity; and although miracles should be wrought to convert you, yet they
shall not profit you, even the miracles of Egypt, till ye be utterly
consumed, you which with less devotion serve the Lord then your pleasures,
with less diligence follow the Church then the tavern, with more delight
exercise vanity then religion; with more labor occupy your trades of life,
then the words of life; even you I mean are the despisers of heavenly pearls
for earthly trash, which never are pleased with the servants of Christ. It is
your condemnation that sleeps not, whose conscience can pretend no excuse at
the day of all days, that either ye wanted preachers, or leisure, or
ability, or time, or means, to believe those heavenly oracles. Behold this
ye despisers, and repent, show your sorrow by your amendment, and redeem
the time by diligence hereafter. If the Lord utter his voice the earth is
moved, and the mountains tremble, Psalm. 29. Move therefore your hearts, you
rebellious sort, from the world to god, from ignorance to knowledge, and from
disobedience to faith: stir up your resty bodies and idle limbs, and go from
strength to strength, till you come to the Lords mountain: let not fear of
sickness, dread of poverty, love of pleasures, desire of profit, draw you
from heaven, but draw near unto God, and he will draw near unto you: The
gates of heaven are open, enter you therein. Secondly another use we may add
heereunto, Use 2.
is that exhortation of the Apostle. 1. Cor. 14. 1. Above all other gifts
desire prophecy: what was more admirable, then healing of sick persons? or
more commendable, then to speak strange toongs? or more glorious, then to
work miracles? or more necessary, then to discern spirits? yet above all
these says Paul, rather desire Prophecy. Neither is it marvel that so great
an honor is bestowed on so noble a gift, because the Prophets speeches are the
Lords sermons. Then my beloved as for the merchandise of gold, men endure the
longest traficke, the sharpest pains, and greatest charges, even so for the
obtaining of prophecy (whether it be to preach or hear preachers) sustain
(my bowels in the Lord Jesus) the roughest ways, the longest studies, the
weariest iournies, the coldest days, the hottest threats, and dearest cost,
for even for these shall you receive many thousand times more comforts in this
world, and joys in the world to come. But oh my dearly beloved in the Lord, I
may complain of the neglect of preaching and prophesiyng as Jeremy did of
Jerusalem Lament. 1. How does that city remain solitary that was full of
people, she is as a widow: she that was great among the nations, and princess
among the provinces is made tributarie. Even so weep you chaste doves of the
Lord, and you solitary Pellicans professors of the truth, take you up this
Lamentation and say, how do those lofty cities which are builded on the Lords
hill (the ministers of the word) remain desolate? for there is none that come
unto them, to buy their heavenly wares, preaching of the vulgar and greatest
sort is counted mere babbling, the glorious gifts of the spirit, are as little
as dreamers fits, and many peradventure in some one man have some delight, like
to a strange muse wrought in a male contented mind, by a consort of Music,
but what sins will they forsake at his request? Surely as many as did Herod
at the preaching of John Baptist; nay rather farewell friendship then welcome
repentance, though they like such a preacher well, yet they love their
pleasures better. Hereby may we of the ministry try our own friends and
manifest the Lords followers, if we meekely reprove their follies, which will
bear us in hand they love and like us well. As for example, if they be of the
gentle sort, tell them of their vain expenses; if of the meaner, tell them of
their carnal minds; if of the poorest, tell them of their ignorance; if the
brauest, show them of their pride; if the learned, declare to them their
vain glory, and finally if the noblest, bid them beware of despising the
Gospel; if they will abide these blows and turn you the other cheek also,
then account him for a David, or else reject him for a Herod. Oh how is the
world altered from following preaching, and prophecy! in the purest age of the
church, their greatest glory was in the ministry; since that time even in our
own memory, how would the people of the country flock to follow preaching,
but now even in our days (my beloved) we our selves have lived to see the
preachers mocked, as Elishah was; the same people which once would seem to
care for nothing save Christ, the more are the preachers the fewer are the
hearers: Even the Sabaothes of the Lord are polluted with all manner of
villainies, and vanities, as boldly as if the Gospels sound had never been
showed among us. Even the princess of all professions, I mean Divinity, and
the Queen of al sciences the preaching of the word, is become the vilest in
show, the poorest in practice, the meanest in request, and the greatest in
slavery. The word of the Lord that came to loel the son of Pethuell. That is
to say, which he sent or spoke unto Joel the son of Pethuell. In old time God
spoke diverse and many ways says the Scripture. Heb. 1. 1. to our fathers by
the Prophets, and them I find principally to be these first, by vision as to
Solomon 2. Chro. 1. 7. secondly by dreams as Moses says. Deuteronomy. 1. 2. 6. and
so he spoke to Joseph Mat. 1. 20. Thirdly by plain face to face as he did to
Moses. Fourthly by Angels Act. 8. 26. and lastly by secret instinct or motion
of the spirit Luke 2. 27. and in this manner it is most likely the prophet Joel
received this prophecy. Out of this we observe this doctrine, that if God send
not his word among us we our selves even the greatest among us could or would
not apprehend it. For this cause the Scripture calls it the If God did not
send his word, none would ask for it.
word that came to Ioell: meaning that then it came unto him, when he thought
least of such strange events and terrible judgments, which he had given him in
commission to denounce to his country men. And the truth hereof may appear by
many testimonies of the word of God. In that sinful estate wherein all Israel
stood in the time of Esaias the prophet, the Lord cried out Esaias 6. 8. Whom shall
I send unto them? as if there were none that would offer themselves to this
business. And in the prophecy of Jeremy, the Lord many times complains, that
he himself intended this business early and late, morning and evening, to send
his prophets unto them for their conversion. In other places where he bewaileth
the destruction of his people he assigns this for the cause, The Prophets
ran, but I sent them not, neither did they teach my ordinances. So that if
there be any forwardnes in the preachers and ministers that way, to go on
their message before they receive their arrand, it rather destroys then
saves, curses then blesses, scatters then gathers, the flock of God
together. Indeed when the Lord sends any he gives them before hand the
knowledge of his word, so that they only which are apt and willing to teach,
are to be accounted the Lords ministers and no others. Even as the Lord gave
either more talents or fewer to every one of his servants, and we read not any
called his servant but he which had a talent at the least: even so in the
ministry, where is not some sufficiency to discharge that function, I can
never say he was of the Lords sending. Therefore we must know that the great
store of godly preachers and ministers of the word that abound in our days in
most corners of our country (I would to God I could say in all) were not
either for desire of living, or glorious estimation, or any wordly cause
advanced to the churches service: but the Lord who has endued their minds
with knowledge, their hearts with courage, their toongs with utterance, and
themselves with his spirit and word, even he, above, has chosen them to be
soldiers in his wars, against Satan's kingdom, and by the voice of his word
like canon shot, to batter down the castles of darkness. The reasons hereof
are manifest: first because that Reas. 1.
man's nature, in it self abhors nothing more then God his services. Exo. 3.
11. 12, 13. when Moses was called by the Lord to carry his name before Pharoh,
and the children of Israel, how many delays did he make, and how many shifts
did he invent, to exempt himself from this heavenly message: sometime he
wanted tongue, sometime strength, and sometime authority; now one while he
feared the king, another while the people; and although the Lord wrought
miracles for him, yet would he gladly avoid it. Secondly it is apparent, that
when the people were in 2
greatest extremity and most of all felt the heavy hand of the wrath of God,
there was no calamity that touched them so nearly or pressed them so deadly
as this, to think they had no Prophets left, to inquire of the word of the
Lord. For as a ship in the midst of the sea tossed too and fro amongst ten
thousand waves, being full of passengers, without either pilote or mariner, is
in extreme hazard of drowning, because they have none to sound the bottomes,
for to throw forth their anchor, to stay them in the storms, or when the
calm comes, they have not one among them to direct them to the shore: even
so when the floudes of troubles shall threaten the overthrow of any particular
church or nation, they having no preachers or prophets among them, who should
persuade them to patience, during their adversity, and to cast out the anchor
of their hope during their danger, or having escaped those fiery and fearful
troubles, yet who but the ministers of God, shall instruct them in
righteousness, and direct them to heaven? In the reign of Josiah, although
his days were happy, through peace, and his subjects joyful through a good
king and religious nobles: yet this was the glory of his kingdom, that there
was one Huldah a Prophetess, the wife of Shallum, that told him his own
prosperity, because his heart melted at the voice of God his word; and also
that there is one Helkijah a priest, 2. Kings. 22. that gave him the law of his
God: so are we happy through long enjoyed peace being shadowed under the wings
of a merciful Prince, and religious Magistrates, yet this is the glory of our
nation that many Prophets and Preachers have offered unto us the very word of
God, the which if it were wanting, all were worth nothing, therefore if God
build not, who can rear? If he send not, who can prosper? If he speak not,
who can prophecy? and if he diminish the number of his servants, the
preachers, we may complain in our miseries as the Jews did, There is not one
Prophet more left, and yet remain comfortless. The uses which we will briefly
make here of are these. First the same which our Savior Christ teaches us
upon this doctrine. Mat. 9. 28. Pray (says he) the Lord of the Use 1.
vineyard that he would thrust forth laborers into his harvest. There is no
more Christian exercise or necessary practice, then with unfeigned souls to
desire at the hands of him, who rules all with his hand, that in times of
ignorance and neglect of heavenly worship when the corn is ripe and fit to be
gathered into the Lords barn, that he would have pity upon his wandering,
sheep, and care of his planted corn even the work of his own hands, and
not suffer them to be cast away for want of instruction. Oh, how would it and
does it grieve a christian soul to consider, that the image of God himself
should be lost which shines so beautifully in every one of mankind: pray
therefore my beloved in the Lord, for hereby only shall you perform a work
acceptable to God, because you are humbled, beneficial to the church, because
you ask for her laborers, comfortable to your selves, because you tender your
brethrens souls, and joyful to the very angels for the conversion of
sinners. The ruler of the temple Mat. 9. 18. having but his daughter sick and
diseased, yet came to our Savior and entreated him for her health, which he
performed and she recovered. Let us therefore in pity of many thousand sons
and daughters of the world come to the courts of the Lords house, within the
closets of our own souls and desire with feeling and earnest prayers, the
Lord Jesus that he would show, and shine forth his truth, by his word in the
mouths of many more ministers of peace to convert many more sinners unto
righteousness, to turn the hearts of fathers to their children, of mothers to
their daughters, of princes to their subjects, and of the nations to their God.
There is not any one point that proves more substantially to a man's soul that
he loves Christ unfeignedly, then this, the practice of it to pray for the
increase of heavenly pastors: Even as in the world nothing is so commendable as
the works of mercy, as to feed the famished, to cloth the naked, to deliver
the imprisoned, and to acquit him that is wrongfully condemned; so in the
church of God there is no grace like to the gift of the ministry, the starued
are fed by them with the bread of life, the naked are clothed by them with the
garments of a Savior, they which lie fast bound in the very dungeons of hell
and the prisons of darkness are delivered by them, into the glorious liberty
of the sons of God, and even they which were condemned to temporal miseries
and eternal calamities are acquitted, discharged, and released by their
message. Let us all therefore say unto the Lord: Lord increase the number of
painful preachers. And if 2
we ought to pray for them, how damnable is their estate that pray upon them:
if it be the highest service of God to promote them, then is it the highest
service of the devil to persecute them. If they be blessed where the word is
preached and believed, then are they accursed where it is not heard nor
received. If Christ blamed his disciples that would have had him to blame them
that cast devils out in his name, then are they to be blamed which will upon
every light and easy occasion labor to the uttermost to stop the mouths of
Gods servants, to discourage the people from hearing, the old men from
instructing, the young men from studying, the children from learning, the women
from asking, and the servants from obeying the word of God. Therefore if we
have any care of the Lords service, any compassion of them that are tyrannously
oppressed, any conscience of the souls of men, then pray for the peace, and
number of the preachers. For as when the teeth are fallen out of the mouth, the
life is hardly nourished, and quickly turned: Even so when the ministers which
are the teeth of the church, to grind the word unto them, are removed; then
follows the grave and sepulcher of the Lords family. To Joel the son of
Pethuell: herein is no hardness, and every one may easily perceive the meaning
hereof, for the prophet names himself and also declares his parentage, and
it is very like that his father was a man of good estimation, that the Prophet
thus barely without any further addition prefixeth his name to this prophecy.
We observe out of this description of the ministering cause of this prophsie:
this doctrine, that God prefers the service of men before the service of
angels in the building of Men preferred before angels in the preaching of the
word.
the church, he rather choseth and appoints that his heavenly and immaculate
word, should be manifested by earthly and sinful men then by celestial and
holy angels Act. 1. 8. The Lord Jesus makes this his ordinance that his
disciples shall witness the redemption in Jerusalem, Judea and Samaria and the
uttermost parts of the earth. Even the same Lord which not long before told
them that he had the angels at command, now rather uses the help and
ministry of men. Men would think it a strange proceeding that he which is
cracked in credit, and as it were one proved perjured, should come
afterward in a trial of death and life, whereas they which are never
detected of the like enormities shall be excluded. But God his thoughts are not
like to men's thoughts, nor his ways as men's ways, the weakest things of God
are stronger then the strongest of men, and he choseth the despised castawaies
to confound the mighty; he looks on a beggar and regards not a prince; the
angels lie in the chains of darkness when men are advanced to their places in
heaven. Even this doctrine you may read in the 1. Cor. 4. 9. where the Apostle
teaches that we are appointed unto the ministry as men are condemned to
death, that we might be made a gazing stock to the world and to angels and to
men: showing unto us that the very angels are beholders of the labors of the
ministry, being present by the appointment of God at the assemblies of his
saints, that they might be witnesses of our labors unto God, as we are of
Christ's sufferings unto the world. The reasons of this doctrine may be easily
gathered out of the word of God, whereof this Reas. 1.
may be one, that as our redemption was to be wrought only in the nature of
man not of angels, no more was the preaching of the said redemption to be
declared by angels or any other creature save only man. This reason the
apostle seems to use, 2. Cor. 5. 18. when he says, All things are of God
which has reconciled us unto himself by Jesus Christ, and has given unto us
the ministry of reconciliation: where he makes our reconciliation made by
the man Jesus Christ to be the ground or beginning, or commission of the
ministry, for without Christ, and without reconciliation there is no
ministry. And this serves most highly to commend unto us the dignity of the
ministry of the Gospel, which is as it were the trumpet of peace and pardon
unto the godly to sound unto them those victories which they have obtained
against the kingdoms of darkness, and unto Christ to proclaim his royal
majesty over all the kingdoms of the world, insomuch as those which labor
against the preaching of the Gospel, as all the Romish Religion-bond-slaues
do, they bid war unto the king of glory, and as our savior told Paul, Act. 9.
They kick against the prick, and procure their own pains: Then it is
manifest that Christ is no where more exalted then where he is daily and
continually preached, so is he no where more denied then where his word is
silenced, his ministers banished, his members afflicted, and all good exercises
idly and carelessly frequented: Then let us that are the ministers and
professors of the Gospel gather this comfort to our selves, that we are the
souls and persons which have glorified his majesty in this world, by telling
and teaching, hearing and studying the praises of him who is blessed and
praised for evermore, Amen. Secondly another reason of 2
this doctrine, why the Lord has committed the dispensation of his word
rather to men then to angels or any other creature is this: because none can
be so nearly touched with the feeling of humane infirmities as men can be; who
knows a man's heart saving a man? If they preach, they speak by experience; if
they exhort, they do it as if they were exhorted. And this was one cause
wherefore Christ became man, that he might taste of our infirmities. Heb. 4. 15.
For my beloved, when a man sees his own flesh weeping, will he not weep also?
if he see his own flesh afflicted, will not he be compassionate toward that? if
a man should see a father preaching to his son, a brother to his brother, a
husband to his wife, or one kinsman to another, would not this move him more
to see his dearest friend spending this labor upon him, then if a stranger
whose face he never saw should persuade him? Yes verily: even so the Lord to
move us more earnestly to the obedience of his son, has made choice of such
dispensers of his mysteries, as we know to be men like our selves, feeling our
pains, desiring our pleasures, wishing our welfare, lamenting our losses, and
abhorring our sins: to this intent that when we see them speak unto us in
the name of God, we should thus presently reason with our selves. This is a
man like my self, I am addicted naturally to fulfill my lusts, to enlarge my
profits, to revenge my malice, to care for no pleasure but pastime, to fear no
displeasure but the worlds; but these men (although men) have denied their
lusts, and are become contemptible to the world; they speak the word of God
boldly, and fear no man's person, they bring themselves to poverty, their
names to ignominy, their lives to shame, and their friends to hate them. What
should be the cause of all this? either they have no wit, or we have no zeal,
they are not blessed, or we are ungodly: Reason thus with your selves: then
will it come to your minds that surely for your sakes, even for the peoples
sakes are the ministers made fools, that they might be wise; the preachers
poor, that they might be rich; and the prophets despised, that the flock
might be honorable. 1. Cor. 5. 10. Therefore my beloved when you see us earnest
in rebuking of sin, or exhorting to righteousness, that then we speak with
feeling of those dangers that threaten destruction to all, coming unto you as
the Syrians came to the king of Israel with the halters about their necks to
move him to pity them: or rather we come unto you as the prophet came to
Ahab, 1. King. 20. 35. willingly offering our sides to be gored, and our bodies
to be wounded, that our blood may be your sorrow, by the sight of our wounds
you may come to the feeling of your sins, by the pains we take in this
world you may consider what are the plagues of the world to come. Surely if we
make but a calfe to cry in the field, all the beasts come roaring and running
unto it to succor it: how much more ought men of better understanding then
beasts, hearing their own kindred and friends crying unto them the vengeance
of God, with all speed to run to the preachers to know the cause of their
complaint, and cry with the Iayler, Men and brethren what shall I do to be
saved? Be not so rude as beasts, be not worse then bullockes. The uses which
naturally arise out of this Use 1.
doctrine are these: first we ought not less to esteem of the ministers of
the word being sinful men, then if they were more honorable creatures. The
Apostle Paul, Gal. 4. 14. expresses the sincere affection which the people
ought to bear toward their pastors, when he witnesses that they received him
as an angel of God, testifying unto them their great fall, which once thought
every word of his mouth to be a divine oracle, and that his person was more
then a man; but now the world was turned with them, they being bewitched with
the false Apostles, for at once they had forsaken their faith toward God, and
their reverence toward the preacher. The devil is subtle, and knows very
well that so long as the ministers credit reigns, his kingdom decreaseth;
and therefore where he cannot at the first overthrow the doctrine, there he
labors to bring the prophet into disgrace. But hearken (my beloved) I
beseech you a while, and shut your ears against the devils accusations. If you
will ever live under the wings of the Gospel, you must ever love the feet of
God his ministers: so long as these Galathians bore this mind toward their
Apostle, their faith was glorious, their church was famous, their lives were
godly, and their ends were happy: but when they accounted the Lords messenger
but as a man, when they thought him worthy no more then a common person;
although they would once have plucked out their eyes to have done him good,
then followed and fell upon them, like hailestones upon the Canaanites,
heresies, to disquiet them; divisions to molest them; ignorance to condemn
them; and the wrath of God to consume them. Look to it my beloved, the
contempt of preachers, of ministers, and servants of the Lord has already
wrought many strange effects among us. Those reverend fathers of our church,
which have brought us out of Babylon, as Moses and Aaron brought the Israelites
out of Egypt, whereof some have sealed up our safety with their own blood;
others have wasted their health and wealth in defense of our religion, state,
and profession; and many yet living holding great places in the Church of
England, having only for the Gospel and the Lords Jerusalem, endured many
strange conflictes and unknown troubles: these I say, even by the railing
libels of counterfaite and unknown Christians, have been laid open to the
view offoes and friends, both by truths and untruths, if it were possible to
the utter ruin of learning, extreme sorrow of many good men, and everlasting
disgrace of the ministry: As Origin was wont to say, Sicut omne bonum ab
ecclesia prouenit, sic omne malum ab ecclesia egreditur; As al goodness
comes from the church, so all evil comes from the church: so I fear that
the Lord may say to the ministry, as to Israel, O Israel, thy destruction
is of thy self, but in me is thy salvation. The ministry has been
lamentably divided, and for this cause even by base persons, they have been
and are scornfully reviled; we our selves have wrought our discredit, but the
Lord is our comfort. The ignorance of many silly and dumb fellows disgraceth
the learned, the pride of many lofty preachers discrediteth the humble, the
covetousness of many encroching parsons overthrows the liberal minded; and
finally the negligence of many noble and excellent men in their charges, gives
a deadly discouragement to the painful. But yet these are the faults of the
persons, not of the places, and a personal action dies with the person:
therefore my beloved pray unto the Lord for discerning spirits, that you may
live by the line of the word, and not by the lines of many: although we should
forsake the Lord by our falls, yet do not you cast away your selves by our
example. Maintain the name and credit of every one, whose ministry the Lord
uses in governing and instructing his Church; stand not upon titles, for they
which labor well are worthy of double honor: regard not garments, for
Iustine Martyr preached Christ in the attire of a heathen philosopher: look
not too much upon their faults, for even amongst the Apostles there wanted not
divisions: esteem them as the ministers of God, which watch when you sleep,
labor when you rest, fast when you feast, and pray for the salvation of your
souls when you are sporting in pleasures. Your souls then lie open to the
devil when you are grown in dislike of your pastors: for if the man
displeases, we cannot like of the doctrine. If our countrymen the Lords
flock can once again join with the preachers and promoters of the Gospel,
then shall Atheism be banished, Popery ashamed, hypocrisy discovered,
divisions ended, and truth shall flourish out of our nation.

Secondly, another use we may profitably make hereof, which is this, that
exhortation of the Apostle Philip. 2. 29. 2
speaking of Epaphroditus, a faithful minister of God, whom he sends unto
them, Receive him (says he) therefore in the Lord with all gladness, and make
much of such: we must open our houses and churches with rejoicing spirits, when
we see the ambassadors of peace coming unto us, and account most pretiously
of them who travel with the Lords message for our good. We read that the
Shunamite to entertain Elishah built him a chamber, that when he came that way
he might visit their family: how much more joyful ought we to be to
entertain the messengers of better things then Elishah brought. It was a great
commendation of the Jewish women that followed our Savior up and down, that
they ministered unto him: but most lamentable it is, that in our days the
ministers and preachers have almost as slender entertainment, as Christ
himself had among the Samaritans. Their houses be too great, their livings be
too large, their revenues (say some clawbacks) will suffice a good knight, or a
worshipful gentleman: and why may not a good minister be allowed as well as a
good magistrate? or a man of learning dwell in as fair a house as a lawyer?
Indeed our houses in your conceit are too great for us, and in our hearts we
thank God that they are too little for you; we see many ministeries and
parsonages defaced but none built, many gathered but none sowed: we are
received very joyfully of great numbers, where they hope to have any gains by
us, and their purpose being obtained, then they bid a fig for the parson. Oh,
this is the sin of many gentlemen, that they will never or seldom allow the
fourth part of that, which of duty they owe unto us; but will wage the
customs at the law, to give nothing to the Lord. Who sees not that these men
would have offered if they had lived among the Jews, surely I think burnt
offerings and peace offerings should have discontinued, and the Lord must have
thought him beholding unto them, if they gave him one for a thousand. And for
our ministry and preaching, I dare say it was not less regarded (except
persecution) one hundred year a go then now it is. If gentlemen or noble men
receive their tithes, the people are well contented; but if the preachers take
them, it greeueth them deadly: belike because they go to the right owners. And
thus the world make much of us, our livings are diminished, our labors are
neglected, our presence despised. They account their parishes the happiest,
where is no preaching ministry, no controlling of sinners, no fighting with
the devil, no conscience of religion. O miserable times! O miserable manners!
they had rather go with music to the gallows, then with mourning to a
sermon: they choose rather to go singing to hell, then weeping to heaven:
cursed are they which speak evil of the way of righteousness, and say to the
prophets depart from us. The Lord shall come with speed to render vengeance
to them that receive him not.

The second Sermon.
Verse. 2. Hear this ye elders.
IN these words the Prophet declares the second part of the description of
this book, namely, the subject thereof, that is, the persons whom it
concerns: and the words are thus much in effect, You that are the elders and
governors of the people, hear the word of the Lord, and all you which are the
inhabitants of the land of Judea, the Lords inheritance hearken you also
hereunto, and tell me whether you ever heard the like in your days, or in the
days of your fathers which went before you. Out The ministers must call on the
people to hear.
of these words observe these doctrines following; first that the prophets and
ministers of God must call upon the people to hear the word: for you see in
the entry of this prophecy, the prophet cries to the people to give audience
to his sermons. And indeed this is a most necessary observation to be kept as
an entrance, to call the peoples minds at the beginning, and as a remembrance
to stir them up in the midst, and a conclusion to admonish them in the end.
For this cause also the prophet Isa. cap. 1. verse. 2. thinking that if men
would not give an ear to his sermons, yet he would not want audience, calls
in this sort. Hear O ye heavens, hearken O earth: showing that if men will be
so deaf at the cry of the Lords ministers, as not to lend them their ears to
their preaching; yet the heavens and the earth shall tremble at their word
giving obedience to their heavenly voices, the dumb creatures shall condemn
such intolerable rebellion. In the book of the Apostles Act. cap. 13. ver.
16. We may read when Paul and Barnabas came to Antiochia, being entreated on
the Saboth day to give some words of exhortation to the people, Paul standing
up and beckning with his hand called unto them saying, Men and brethren
hearken. The people in most places are busied in vain speculations, when the
peacher is most diligent in opening the word of truth, some are drousie when
their hearts should be waking to hear what God will say concerning them, others
are scraping in the churches with their feet superstitiously conceited, when
they hear but the name of (Jesus) mentioned; and yet they will swear by him
and make no bones at all: again, others are weary thinking every minute an
hour till the preacher be out of the pulpit, and many show the whole
congregation their backs by departing out of the church: All these let the
preachers call with the voice of Trumpets, Hear the word of the Lord, put away
your vanities, rouse up your drowsines, take pleasure in godliness, stay your
disquietnes, and continue your presence in the Lords assemblies: know you not
that the stones you tread on, the heavens you gaze on, the earth you walk on,
and the words that we preach unto you, shall all come against you like
witnesses and tell the Lord your disobedience, therefore we often say in our
sermons, Hear this men and brethren. The reasons of this doctrine may
evidently be gathered Reason 1.
out of the word of God, and the first is the practice of the Lord himself,
Psalm. 81. 8. beside many other places in the scripture where the Lord calls
upon the people before he declare his mind unto them, for audience and
attention saying. Hear O my people and I will speak, hearken O Israel and I
will testify unto thee. What shall it avail if we bring the toongs of angels
into the congregations, and none or few will lend us their ears? Although I
easily grant our perswasio^s enter as deeply into the walls of the churches as
into the ears and hearts of most of our hearers, even in this we are like
these Israelites, that if the Lord himself should come at one time (as here he
did) and cry, Hear O my people of England: yet it is much to be feared that at
another time he might come and cry unto us: Oh, that my people of England
would have heard me, as to them he does in the latter end of the Psalm.
Secondly, another reason of this doctrine is this, because by hearing comes
faith, Romans 10. 2
17. Faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word of God: so that if the
hearing of the preachers beget faith in the hearers, who shall more fitly or
may more conveniently cry unto them in their sermon time to hear this point
of faith diligently, to mark this doctrine carefully, to lay up this lesson
advisedly, and remember this exhortation continually, then the preachers
themselves which are the midwiues of their faith. Oh, how wonderfully does this
doctrine condemn this faithless age wherein we live; for if faith come by
hearing and hearing by the word of God, whence have they their faith that come
so seldom to our sermons? Does not this argue forcibly that their faith is as
little as their hearing, and therefore salvation is as little as their faith.
How will they answer this argument now before men and afterward before the son
of God, that they which hear not believe not, they which believe not are
condemned already, and they which are in such damnable estate, it is not their
revenues of thousands, their palaces and houses of glory, the garments of
bravery, their provision of delicates, their gentle friends, their soft beds,
their hungry hounds, their ravening hawks, their pampered horses, and their
retinues of servants, that can fray the devil from taking away their souls.
Is not this pity that such glorious gentlemen should be cast away, for not
hearing a seely preachers sermons, being otherwise learned in the toongs,
skillful in the arts, excellent in the laws, eloquent in speeches, valorous
in war, and comely in stature? Surely I believe Paul was deceived when he said,
Faith came by hearing and hearing by the word of God. What an impudent
blasphemy were this, to say that Ladies and gentlewomen, on whose faces the
sun is not good enough to look, whose legs must not walk on the ground,
but either keep aloft in their bowers, or take the air in their coaches,
whose hands must touch nothing but either chains of pearl, cloth of gold
embrodered, and fine needle wrought garments; that these beautiful stars (I
say) should come down from their nicenes and learn faith at the mouth of
preachers? Yet farther, must our gallant youths and proper serving then, whose
heads are hanged with hair, as if they would fright away both Christ and his
ministers from the place where they stand, come from the tauerns, from gaming
-- houses, from the play -- houses, from the Ale -- houses, from the whore --
houses, and from al their disports, to be ratled up for their follies by
preaching, and forsake their fashio^s of the world to be new fashioned in their
minds, that in stead of infidelity (wherewith the most of that crew are
infected) they may have faith engraffed in them by hearing the Gospel, least
as they consume their purses, they condemn their souls, neither can rob for
more souls as they do for more purses? Then will you say beloved, you have
ploughed in vain upon the rock: but better let vanity be vanity then
preaching be vanity, better let gamesters be deceived then Apostles be
falsified, and better let Lords and Ladies, Gentlewomen and seruingmen, and
all the route which be contrary minded to this doctrine, perish and depart from
their pleasures, then that the son of God, the church of God and the
ministers of God should depart from the truth. It is no blasphemy to say with
Paul, It pleased God through preaching to save them that believe: Therefore no
preaching, no salvation: or with John, He that hears us not, is not of God:
Therefore they which stop their ears when they should hear the preachers,
shall hear against their wills, Go ye cursed into the fire of hell. Now let
us come and see what particular uses the holy Ghost makes of this doctrine in
other places of Scripture. And let that general exhortation of our Savior
Matthew. 13. 9. be the first, when he says; He that has an Use 1.
ear to hear let him hear. And this is as if our Lord had said: the Gospel
of salvation is of such weight that it concerns all the people of the world:
by the preaching thereof, the gray headed, the young men, the tender women, and
the little children may and must receive some profit; old men must be
prepared to the grave, young must be strengthened to fight with their
pleasures, women must be governed like the daughters of righteousness, and
children instructed in the work of redemption. The king must hear as David
did: the noble man must hear as Obadiah did: the gentleman must hear as
Sergius Paulus did: the lady must hear as Esther did: the yeoman must hear
as Elisha his host did: the labourer must hear as Apollos did: the women must
hear as Marie did: and the little children must hear as they did, which when
they saw Christ cried; Osanna in the highest. For every one that has an ear
to hear must lend the same to the word of God. The Gospel of Christ is not
like other professions, that when they have most followers, one marreth
another trade; but when all men (if it were possible) shall be joined to the
Lord in the profession of the truth, then is the glory thereof greater then
the brightness of the sun. Therefore my beloved, rouse up your heavy and
hanging down senses, and consider with your selves, that if the Lord has
given you your eyes to see withal, your hands to work withal, your toongs to
speak withal, your feet to walk withal, then think also that he has given
you your ears to hear his word withal. And if they which have ears to
hear must hear, what, shall they not forfaite their ears for not hearing?
Truly if the forging and counterfaiting of a noble man's seal, or of a piece
of evidence, be by the laws of man most woorthily deemed to be punished with
cutting off their ears, because it brings harm to a common wealth: then
also it may easily follow that in like case they deserve the loosing of their
ears which will not lend them to the Lords preacher. This I speak not to make
any civil constitution, but comparing sin with sin, I would gladly
manifest the great evil that hangs on their necks, which have their elbowes
as ready to hear as their ears. Most lamentable it is to consider that if
they were all deaf, that will not hear our sermons, what a deaf world would
this quickly prove. O my beloved brethren! know you not that hearing is the
sense of obedience, and therefore you cannot justify your selves to obey,
unless you testify that you will hear God his ministers: If he were accursed
that lays a stumbling block before the blind, then are they also accursed
which stop their ears against the Lords ordinance. Was it not a heinous thing
to remove but a land -- mark which our elders planted, and therefore much
more heinous is it to remove hearing God his word from our ears which the
Lord himself has planted. Come therefore my beloved, and as you would be
called Christians, so fulfill the mind of Christ; for as the vine branche is
good for nothing, but to bear grapes: even so the ears of man are but
combrances into us in most matters except in hearing the word of God: in the
world they are too long, in the Lord they are too little, therefore for amending
of our follies, let us apply our ears to hear while we can hear, least it be
too late when we would. Secondly, we make another use thereof, that seeing the
ministers of God must call upon 2
the people to hear the word, it is also requisite to show you the true way
for the saving hearing of the Lords truth: for in one and the same manner of
preaching there is not one and the same manner of hearing, therefore the holy
Ghost speaks by the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews cap. 4. ver. 2.
Unto us was the Gospel preached as also unto them, but the word that they
heard profited them not, because it was not mixed with faith in those that
heard it: where we may learn if men and women hear the word of God with such
diligence as the dearest servants of the Lord do, yet are they many times
never the better, and he gives the reason thereof, because they do not mingle
it with faith. There are some seeds so small and of that nature, that when the
gardener will sow them he must first take up a great deal of earth, and
crushing it very small does mingle it with his seed, and then casts it into
the earth and it prospers exceedingly: even so (dearly beloved) if you
mingle not the pure earth of a sound faith with the seed of the Lords word,
you shall never receive any profit by our preaching. And this is the very
cause that the Gospel grows not, men's hearts tremble not, and their lives
amend not, because they bring minds full of infidelity unto the congregations.
The close Papist says to himself, I will hear this preacher, but I will
believe nothing that he utters contrary to my first received superstition:
the proud man says to himself, all the sermons in the world shall never
humble me: the covetous man he says, for all their preaching and telling me
that I shall never enter into the kingdom of heaven, yet I will not believe
them if Christ himself say so: the ruffians will not forsake their vanities
for any instruction: the common people say we preach but for our livings, and
God forbid that all should be true which the scripture and preachers tell us:
go forward I beseech you in all other sins, and you shall find but a very
small number that say, I believed and therefore I heard. The medicine to purge
out all these corruptions is a true faith, the which if either you leave at
home, or lose it by the way, the labor is all lost that you take therein. Oh
how lamentable and damnable a sin is infidelity! when the judgments of God
are not believed and the mercies of God are abused. But this greeueth all godly
hearts to the quick, that even in our days and times there should be such,
that as a godly father says, are armed with the name of good christians, and
yet fight against the faith of true believers. Look upon it in time, least as
death follows sickness through want of physic, so the death of your souls
follow their sickness through want of faith. Believe, says Christ, and al
things are possible; the dead have been raised by faith, the sick have been
relieved by faith, the mountains may be removed by faith, and the devil
himself is drove away by faith: therefore bring faith with you unto the
hearing of the sermons, the scriptures are the Lords words, and they are set
to sale by the preaching of the ministers, themselves being his factors, faith
must buy them as money does, or be exchanged for them as one thing is for
another; for there is no crediting upon words, no obligations upon days, that
can get them from us, but present payment of a lively faith. Therefore if any
will know how to hear the Gospel with profit, and to enjoy it with comfort,
let him bring faith with him, that the word delivered may be sealed for
truth, and sins being reproved may be received for truth, and suffer no
starting holes of infidelity to carry our souls from the rock of God his
truth, into the sea of heathenish security, or endless adversity. O ye
elders. That is, you governors of the people, whom the Lord has honored with
long life, and the world The greatest men should be the greatest professors.
with great authority. And from hence we note this doctrine, that the most
honorable must most of all give ear to the word of God, whether that honor
be in the Church as the ministers, or in the common wealth as the magistrates,
or in the family as the father thereof, or in the wars as the general
thereof; all these being exalted above other, have also a charge above other,
that every one walk worthy of his profession, which is only by studying and
hearing the word of the Lord. The Lord so commands Deuteronomy. 17. 19. That the
king himself shall cause to be wrote a book for him of the law, that he
keep it with him and read therein all the days of his life. Those which have
the greatest charge must use the greatest labor to discharge their places, as
none could be judges in Israel till the Lord had given them of the spirit of
Moses; so none can sincerely execute their duty that the world may be
satisfied, the Lord may be glorified, and their own souls comforted, unless
they receive of the spirit of God, and by the ministry of the word is the
spirit delivered. Gal. 3. 2. Hearken therefore you rulers of the Lords people,
that which excels all glory, being richer then all wealth, and wiser then
all learning, even the spirit of God may be received when the word of God is
delivered: Oh how are they deceived that think the ministry a base
profession, not meet for any, but for the poor to live by, for the lame, and
disfigured, for younger brothers, for bankerupt, for seruingmen, for
blunt-headed-schollers, and such as can be good in nothing. How are they also
deceived that think it not an exercise fit for noble men and persons of
estate, knights, and gentlemen, and such great ones which have the world at
their wills, and the country at their pleasures: shall these say they, make
themselves drudges to the Gospel? scholars to the preachers? and go on
pilgrimage to a public sermon? Yea all these must resign their crowns of
majesty, their gowns of nobility, their swords of chivalry, and their
estimation of gentry, unto the voice of the blessed spirit of God, speaking in
the scriptures and preaching in his ministers. And if these must bend their
knees, we must bow our bodies to the earth, and put our neck under the yoke of
Christ Jesus, that he may lift up our head and lives to the participation of
glory. The Lord that binds kings in chains, and nobles in fetters of Iron,
and makes the mountains to cleave in sunder at his roaring, wills and
commands us from heaven to hear his son: and it shall so come to pass that
the soul shall be cut off from the Lords people, that has not kissed the
prince of glory, and comes not to offer obedience and service to his royal
Lord, who is able to cast him body and soul into fire everlasting. Let us
therefore study to enter into the courts where the Gospel of Christ sounds
and reigns, least we fall away from grace and glory after the evil example
of those long ago condemned infidels and reprobated apostataes, which gave
their ears to falsehood, their toongs to blasphemy, their lives to vanity,
their bodies to luxury, and their souls to everlasting misery. Let not the
graye hairs of old men, the great wealth of rich men, the worship of
Magistrates, nor the honor of government, draw away our hearts from the
hearing of this message, which being hid from us, makes us cursed castawaies,
but being declared unto us, regenerateth us to the hope of eternal happiness.
The reasons of this doctrine are also easily Reason 1.
gathered out of the word of God. First the same which Samuel uses in his
first book cap. 12. ver. 14. at the anointing or crowning of their new king
Saul to persuade them, and their king to the diligent hearing of the word and
reverent fear of God, he uses this as a reason, That then they shall be the
people of the Lord God. As if Samuel had said unto them, you know that this is
the glory of our nation, that we alone are the selected band and chosen
soldiers to fight the Lords battles; and this is an honor against all the
world beside, that they serving Idols and worshipping devils, we serve the
Lord of hosts: if therefore you will indeed be the Lords people, you must in
truth hear the Lords word: what could be said more forcibly to move a
rebellious nation to a quiet submission? And this being the badge and liuerie
of the Church of God, we may be bold to say openly and defend confidently, that
they which hear not the Gospel as now it is preached in our English nation,
are none of the true followers of his heavenly majesty: Even all whether they
be the archenimies of Christ the Papists, or the new sectary of Recusants, the
Brownists, or the vain religion bablers, the Newters or the privy haters of
the preachers, the carnal and time serving professors, these shall go to the
place from whence they came, and there to be tormented world without end. It is
not cold and idle hearing that makes us the people of God, but a sincere and
diligent frequenting the place where his person dwells. We must not be
contented to be the Lords retayners, but we must sue to be made his household
servants. The Apostle Peter in his first epistle cap. 2. ver. 5. calls us all
that profess the Lord Jesus, a spiritual priesthood: now this was the office
in old time of a priest every day to appear at the altar, and their very
lodging was in the Temple; therefore must we come often to the Lords house and
desire to dwell in his tabernacle, that we may evermore hear and speak his
word. The second reason 2
of this doctrine is taken from the continual course of the Judgments of God:
All Egypt was plagued because they heard not the word of God, even their king
lost his eldest son, and afterward he himself for the same folly was
drowned and swallowed up of the sea. The noble man which would not believe and
harken to the voice of the prophet, when he told him of the great and sudden
cheapnes of corn, answered him that it was impossible, except the windows of
heaven should be opened; but he saw it accomplished, and for his infidelity
was trodden to death by the people. Read the whole book of God, and you shall
every where plainly perceive, that for disobedience to God his word, and
contempt of his messengers, Kings have been deposed, and Queens have been
punished; Lords, Ladies, Magistrates and subjects, old men and children, have
tasted of the deadly cup of the Lords heavy wrath. Lay up this in your hearts
(my bowels in the Lord) happy are they which avoid danger by the falls of
other men. Oh that the tears of our countrymen couldewash away the guilt of
this sin; for our score is grown so great by our long continued credit, that
we have made no conscience to pay the Lord his own: and we have urgent cause
to consider, and also to fear, least the Lord sue the extremity of the law
upon us, and never spare till we have paid the uttermost farthing, and felt
the full weight of his hand, and spent every drop of blood in soul and body
for the notorious contempt of his most glorious Gospel. There is no sacrifice
to be compared to the hearing of the Lords word, and therefore the neglect
thereof in whomsoever, is most fearful, most deadly, most damnable. The uses
which offer themselves unto us Use 1.
out of this doctrine are these; first that the ancient and great men must
suffer the words of the Lords ministers patiently, and for this cause the
Apostle wills us, Tit. 2. 2. To exhort the elders to soberness and faith.
There be two things which should shine as bright in age and authority, as the
eyes do in the heads of strong young men, that see and be seen of others, and
yet see not themselves; even so ought sobriety and faith to offer themselves
unto the view of all persons, where the graie hairs appear like the buddes of
an almond tree, whereby the aged may see and correct the follies of youth, and
young men may see their example to be drawn in love with their lives; but they
themselves ought not to be proud for that honor which the Lord has bestowed
upon them. Oh how unhappy is that time when old men and great men are as
wanton as children, and as faithles as those which never knew God? Woe be to
that land whose Prince is a child, says Solomon. Meaning that the whole
country is distressed where the gouerners thereof have as little stay as
children, or as little faith as children. In our days if the Lords ministers
which keep the souls of our countrymen, shall in meekness admonish old men;
they tell them they are but boys to themselves, and they knew what religion
was before they were borne, not knowing their antiquity cannot prejudice the
spirit of the Lord, or not considering what our savior said to the laborers
in the vineyard; They which were first shall be last, and they which were last
shall be first. Others think, that if they bear an office in the common
wealth, no man may dare to counsel them in the Lord; they themselves think
they are injured, and their friends think they are disgraced, if the word of
exhortation pass upon them: shall I, say they, being a gentleman well
descended, well instructed, of so many hundred pounds revenues, be in as much
slavery to this preaching as the poor artificer? But unto these we may
answer, that if their natures or offices exempt them from sermons, they also
exempt them from salvation: For it pleased God through the foolishnes of
preaching to save them that believe. What is a Principes cum ad limen delubri
veniunt, proinde sunt atque priuati.
King better then a farmer? a noble man better then an artificer? a gentleman
better then a plowman? and a magistrate better then a subject, without true
religion and obedience to the gospel? Surely nothing, for now whether had you
rather be poor Jacob bowing to the earth alone, or rich Esau attended with
four hundred men; whether had you rather be Pharaoh or Moses; Jeroboam or the
prophet; Ziakijah or Jeremy; the rich man or Lazarus; Pilate or Christ; Herod
or John Baptist; the Apostles or the high Priests; stagger not heereat, but
show your consciences whether of these you would be, you cannot be both,
therefore choose one. The way to heaven is narrow, and we being clothed with
our own conceits can never enter in, there is too little room for both: we
cannot bear the yoke of Christ and the world at one time, the least of both
requires a whole man. Therefore you my beloved fathers, bear with the voice
of us your yoongers, for when we exhort you, it is not done in our name, but in
his who is the ancient of days, elder then the oldest, wiser then the wisest,
stronger then the strongest, and yoonger then the yoongest, who is every day
borne in his members. It is not us, but him that you hear, who knows your
hearts, sees your lives, and shall condemn your incredulity. The Lord told
the rebellious Israelites when they refused Moses and Aaron, that it was not
against them but him, that they had murmured and refused; so it is not our
youth, it is not our frailty, it is not our weakness that you blame, for if we
were not ministers, you would love us the better for it: but it is against the
Lord that you strive. Oh stay your toongs before they go too far; God which
dasheth in pieces young infants, cares not for your gray hairs, your swords
avail not against him, neither can your revenues redeem your souls.
Secondly, we may make this 2
one use of this. That for so much as the Elders and Magistrates must above
others use the hearing of the word of God, what is their estate which are
negligent in this action and the estate of their government, the estate of
their families, and estate of their children? Surely most dangerous above
others, for as when they perform this they are noted through a whole country,
and thereby they grow famous; so the neglect hereof is spread far, and
thereby they grow infamous. For this cause has the holy Ghost left us in his
word sundry examples, where light and graceless fathers have brought their
lewd and godless children with themselves to destruction: Look on Elie 1.
Sam. 3. 12. and Saul and Haman, Esth. 8. 13. who was the destruction of the
fathers but themselves, and who was the destruction of the children but the
fathers. If Helie had harkened to God, and corrected his sons, the Arc had
not been taken, the Philistines had not prevailed, his sons had not been
killed, and he had saved his own neck from breaking. Oh consider this, I
beseech you my reverend and gray headed fathers, your age shall not discharge
you: this man wanted but two years of an hundred year old, he was priest and
judge of Israel, yet when he forgot himself he forgot the Lord also; then had
he no pity of his years, no mercy on his children, and no compassion of his
own life. Samuel told Saul that there was no sacrifice like to the hearing of
the word of God; then if you will offer the best sacrifice, hear the word of
God. The Lord you see which made the ears, requires but the ears again: why
should you bring your children into the curse out of the covenant? why should
you drive the Lord to reject you, as he did Saul, because you hear not his
word? Are you the fathers of our bodies? be also I beseech you, the fathers of
our faith, the authors of our profession, and the ensamples of our obedience As
Esau cried to Isaac bless me my father, so we cry unto you to bless our
country, to bless your own posterity, and to bless the lives of them whose
souls you have in your hands. Let the elders among us know for a certainty,
that if they hear us not, though we be young that speak unto them, yet we
will use them as the woman did the wicked judge, overcome them by importunity.
And let every man know his duty, even to pray that their fathers, and
masters, and magistrates, and governors, may be as willing to grace the
Gospel with their presence, as they are to defend it by their policy: surely
we can hardly embrace that, which we see the chief commanders to neglect. But
yet I beseech you for your own souls, and for our lives, for the children
borne and unborn, and for the general comfort of our whole country, fulfill
that heavenly voice Matt. 17. 4. Hear the heavenly son of God.

The third Sermon.
Harken ye all inhabitants of the land, whether such a thing has been in your
days, or yet in the days of your fathers.
ALl the inhabitants: By these words we observe this None must live in the
Church, unless they outwardly be subject to the Gospel.
doctrine; that there must not any live in the church of God, but such as do
and will at the least outwardly humble themselves to the ministry of the
word: the church of God is the company of selected saints, chosen before all
worlds to the worship of God; and if they be chosen from the contemners, as
good wheat is from the chafe, then must they not endure the hazarding of
their souls by harboring the children of disobedience. We may read in
Nehem. 8. 2. that when he brought forth the law of God, Ezra read it before
the congregation both of men and women, and all that could understand it. And
in the next verse he adds, that he read it in the streets, and all the
people harkened to the book of the law. As in the common wealth there is a
law which every one undergoes, unless they be weary of life, so in the
church of God this is a law, Let him that has ears to hear hear, except he
will be banished from the land of the righteous, and cut off from the body of
Christ: Surely as the Apostle said, Woe is me if I preach not the Gospel. So
must all the ministers of the Lord every day sound alowde to their people, woe
be unto you if you hear not the Gospel. The reasons of this doctrine Reason 1.
may thus be gathered out of the word of truth. First that which Moses has
recorded Genesis 17. 14. where the Lord will not have any to be of Abraham's
family, but they which would be circumcised; and if any would not receive
this wound (as our Savior calls it) in the flesh, the Lord commanded him
to be cut off from his people: Now we know that the church is the family of
Abraham, who was made the father of all the faithful, that they being made
partakers of his belief, should also be partakers of his obedience. There is
not a prince or a noble man, or a learned man, or a rich man, or a preacher, or
any base person among the common people, but he may challenge this privilege,
if he believe in the Lord of glory, that he is the son of promise as Isaac
was, and therefore the son of Abraham as Isaac was. All are not the children
of promise that hear and are borne under the preaching of the Gospel; but
there are Ismaelites also which have outwardly the badge of a true son,
though they be but bastard Christians: yet old Abraham ready for the grave
must be circumcised before he die, and young Ismaell if he will ever be blessed
of God must be circumcised, although he were heir apparent to the land of
Canaan (for as yet Abraham had no other son) and the shepherdes, the
neatherdes, the seruingmen, and every kitchin-boy receive the sign, or else be
banished from their masters tents: Even so must the hoare headed father, the
green headed young man, the wanton youth, the simple plowman, the gallant
ruffian, and the poor turne-spit, be present and obedient to the voice of the
minister. Many I grant of the better sort, think their duty discharged, if
in their own persons they learn to know the Lord, and for their families
they let them do as they list: but you must remember that this was the
commendation that Abraham received of God, That he would teach his children
after him, Genes. 18. 17. and therefore if you will be Abraham's sons, teach
that to your families which you have learned your selves. Oh how lamentable is
it to see and consider of a great number, that set as good faces on the Gospel
as the best, when on the Lords own day some send their servants many miles
journey, and suffer silly persons to wait in their kitchins, (I mean
continually) as if there were none that had any souls but those that are
called the rulers of families. We may say of them as Bernard said of the
church committed to careless clergy men, O miserandam sponsam talibus credita^
paranimphis: O miserable souls lead by such bridegromes which keep them for
to serve the lusts of their own bellies, and have no care to marry the^ to
the Lord. Take you heed you that have the wealth of the world, and search and
rake in the sinkes of your houses, in the stables of your horses, in the
staules of your oxen, and in the hearts of your servants, that you may bring
souls into the kingdom of heaven: a pearl taken out of the dung is as good
as that which is hoarded up in a princes treasury; and a simple soul saved
from the walking of horses, or turning of spits, is as glorious to the Lord as
he that rules in the throne. Another reason for the confirmation of this
doctrine our savior 2
gives, John. 10. 26, 27. There are none that hear not Christ which believe
in Christ; and there are none the sheep of Christ, but those that hear the
voice of Christ: meaning that at that time when he was living in the world,
and preaching to the Jews they could not be his flock, that came not at the
call of the Gospel: and when he should be dead and taken from the earth, they
should not be reckoned for the lambs of his church, which flocked not to the
cries and sermons of the preachers. So that in one word he sets us down
thus much, that they are none of the Lords which are not hearers of his word:
Therefore one said well; Ecclesiae non iungitur qui ab Euangelio separatur:
He which is separated through ignorance or idleness from the Gospel, is also
through infidelity parted from the church: for they which hear not Christ are
none of his. The weight of this reason must be put into the balance of every
ones heart, and let him reason thus with himself; My poor servant, my drudge,
my simple slave, my maid, my cook, and every one of my family, they know
nothing of the Gospel, but some voices that there is a Savior, and a Christ,
that they must come once in a year, or peradventure once in seven year, and
receive the Lords Supper, and never know or think more of it: they are
diligent to me, they work when I play, they run when I ride, they watch when
I sleep, they fare hard when I feast, and they find me all things, keeping
nothing to themselves, only indeed through my business they come not at the
church except very seldom; they know little more then infants, they have been
baptized when they were young, they may follow any religion, or rather
superstition; their obedience is so little to the Scriptures, yea they hardly
can tell me whether there be any Scripture, whether the holy Ghost had any
hand therein or no: if I will let them play on the Sundaies according to
their pleasures, the popes profession, the Turkish religion, the Infidels
practice and all heretics opinions may be sected in them. But what shall
become of their souls? Surely it greeueth us that such diligent and faithful
servants should after a miserable and slavish life, have a merciless and a
cursed death: Yet Christ's words are general; they are none of his that hear
not his voice and follow not his call. O consider this you wealthy and poor
people of this land, think on the miserable condition of these your own
flesh, and fly from that terrible danger which threatens your souls horror,
all, (yea) every mothers child must be present when the word is preached,
because this tries us whether we be ashamed of Christ or no. When David was
absent from Saules court, the king presently missed him, and asked after him,
for his place was void: In like manner, if we be absent from the assemblies of
the faithful, the king of heaven and earth, sees our rooms be empty, and
calls for our presence. Let this therefore persuade us, that we cease not
hearing the Lords word, and following his heavenly call, least of sheep we
become goats wanton and wild; and so when the general appeering shall be,
the Lord separate the goats from the sheep, and send them to everlasting
perdition. The uses which may arise from this doctrine are these: first, that
sharp sentence of our Savior, Vser
Mark. 10. 14. Suffer little children to come to me and forbid them not: for
unto such belong the kingdom of heaven: The well minded people desiring the
blessing of Christ to rest upon them, their posterity brought their little
babes to be touched by our Saviors hand; the which thing was reproved and
forbidden by the disciples, and therefore they were rebuked and reprehended by
Christ. There is none though they be as young as babes, as simple as children,
as weak as women, as base as servants, or as bond as apprentices, but if at
the ordinary times of preaching, I mean the Sabbath, they will travel to
the Lords house and there spend their time, they must not be restrained, they
must not be forbidden. I am not ignorant of the vain and wicked authority
which some challenge to have over their families, thinking that their duties are
discharged, although their servants be wandering from the Lord about their idle
business; and servants think themselves satisfied because their masters who
have rule over their bodies, command them thereunto: And thus men cross one
line of their reckoning, and leave a whole sheet behind; and race out the
condition, letting the obligation stand; they heap up one sin upon another,
and while they mende one breach in a christian life, they make two more. For by
this means it comes to pass, that masters think it lawful to busy their
servants, whom they hire for their money at al times when any small occasion
offers it self, sending them on messages, in keeping them at home to wait
on themselves; and in saving an hour or two, or three, to work in the week
days, they make bold with the Lord, and give them leave on the Sabbath
days to visit their friends. Do we not think that the ministers of God may
have their actions of maintenance against such careless masters, which bear
out their servants and themselves contrary to the law of God, whereby their
own hearts are hardened, their neighbors offended, the glorious work of the
minister despised, the heavenly voice of the Gospel neglected, and themselves
with their servants in danger both body and soul to be damned? May we not call
for the law (if not of man yet of God) to turn away these evils from us? But
Oh lamentable manners in this latter end of the world, which regards as
little the voice of Christ, as wise men do the noise of young children. Again
sometime the servants are of godly disposition, and would willingly use the
liberty of Christians, to go as the Israelites did and sacrifice to the Lord;
but then comes one or other, and many times their parents and governors of
their own mother wit forbiddiding them to use it, increasing as Pharaoh did
the measure of their works, and forbidding them to come near unto Christ, as
these disciples did these young children: yet know I beseech you that that
master that forbids is in more bondage then he which is forbidden, and he
were better be an humble servant, then such a proud and presumptuous master;
and if he receive not the kingdom of God as his servant, he shall never enter
therein. If he labor not for the meat which never perishes; if he run not
for the price which never ends; if he study not for the knowledge which
always lasts, and if he obtain not that faith which comes by hearing of the
word preached, but also keeps other from entering, whether they be his
servants, or his sons, or his daughters, or his wife, or his friends, or
himself, the sentence is long ago denounced, that he is the least in the
kingdom of God. It is an heinous offense to draw away a man, though it be but
a servant from obeying the warrant of a magistrate, and much more if he wish
him to withdraw his allegiance: in like case is your estate which by your own
security, drive other men to forsake God, leading the blind upon the
stumbling blocks, making them believe that the fire cannot burn, and though
they pearce their bodies with swords, yet they shall not hurt them. Secondly,
another use hereof shall be that saying 2
of the Lord himself, Psalm. 95. 7. 8. To day if you hear his voice harden not
your hearts. The neglect of the word proceeds of the hardness of our hearts,
and therefore the Lord bids us not to harden our hearts if we will hear his
word. What a world of hard hearts are now a days, if they be all hard hearts
which will not be present at the ministry of the Gospel. The sea is but a
soft and slender substance, yet it brings forth many hard stones: even so
the weak nature of man engenders many hard hearts. This is most strange to
see the tenderest place to be the hardest, even the heart which will die if it
be but pricked with a needle: but as the heart does help all places of a
diseased body, and it self it cannot help; so when this festering sore of old
corrupted consciences, and ignorant dispositions inuadeth the minds of men, a
thousand to one, but they give him mortal wounds, for then cannot the mind
help it self: Therefore above all evils beware of hard hearts, the ground
being hard will not let the purest seed grow in it, and the heart being hard
will not suffer the immortal seed of the Lords word to grow therein: it
choaketh all pity, and condemns all piety. Come therefore to hear the word
of God, but bring melting hearts thereunto, otherwise you shall still remain
the enemies of the truth, for he that gathers not with it scatters abroad.
The priests and scribes and Pharisees were present at the most of our Saviors
sermons, yet they reaped no benefit thereby, because their hearts were not
touched in the presence of God: no more shall many thousands be comforted by
the preachers voices, because their hearts are in their barnes, when they
should be in the Churches, and their eyes are shut, when they should behold the
ministers. Many imagine that they preach best which can move the people to
tears, and their hearts to be pricked whose eyes fall a weeping; yet this is
not always an infallible token of a good pastor or an humble soul: the hard
marble stones do sometimes sweat out tears abundantly, and yet they are never
the softer; even so may many weep and howl for their sins, and be pricked
with the word of God bursting out in lamentation, and yet remain reprobates
still. But let us break up the fallow ground of our hearts, let us keep them
in continual moisture, that whenever the word shall be cast into them, it
may grow effectually. It is a fearful thing to receive the graces of God in
vain, which they do that without all reverence and carefulnes, come
unadvisedly without former preparation to the hearing of the word of God: that
which is rashly heard is quickly forgotten; and that which is irreverently
received, is presently despised, but of this matter we have already spoken.
Fourthly, when he bids them to ask their fathers, he thereby wills us to
call to our minds those things which have been done long ago, the noble and
wonderful works of God are not so slenderly to be regarded, that we think on
no more then we see, and consider nothing but that which we feel. But what
the Lord does, it stands God his works must be perpetually remembered.
for ever, and therefore is to be recorded in all generations, read the 104. 5.
6. Psalms throughout, where the holy Ghost gathers together the sum or
rehearsal of the Lords benefits, and charge oftentimes that we should teach
them to our children, and that we think upon them to do them for evermore.
The reasons of this Reason 1.
doctrine may be these: First because as the Apostle says, Romans 15. 4.
Whatsoever is written in foretime is written for our learning, that we through
patience may have hope: God of his eternal goodness and wisdom has so
provided, that the principal and excellent works of his justice are by
himself recorded for times succeeding, and so plainly engraven, that as he
speaks by the prophet Abacuck, He which runs may read them, and these
(says the Apostle) are written for our instruction. It is a world to see how
men forget the works and word of God: they make no account of Adams curse,
because it was in the beginning; and small reckoning of the flood, because it
was in the old world; and they little esteem Ierusalems destruction, because
it was, say they, before our time: and thus they wash away all fear of
judgments and love of God. So that if we warn them of wantonness, by the
example of the old world, we are not so lascivious, say they: if we exhort
them to holiness, by the example of Abraham, Moses, David, Zacharias, and the
Apostles, then they tell us, their examples pertain not unto them, for then
there was more faith stirring in the world then now there is; and lay what we
can unto them, yet they have one way or other to escape: And all because they
think that the Lords works are like to musicians labor, which causes men to
dance so long as they hear it and no longer, or an almanacke that lasts but
a year; so they think that the ancient works and former actions of the
Almighty have no farther use, but for the present time wherein they were
performed: But if they think so, they will in the end gain nothing by the
bargain. It was an old work of God to make the beasts subject to man, and
should they not be so now? it was an ancient work of God to make the rainebowe
in the cloud, that the world might never be destroyed as it was, have we no
benefit by this wonder? Christ our Savior died long before we were borne,
and does it not pertain unto us? then have we made a wrong match, if all these
be not true; but they are all certain and evermore to be remembered. Therefore
our wantonness, our wickedness, our idleness, our infidelity, our
beastliness, and our security, if they be not amended by the examples of the
scriptures, they shall be condemned by the ensamples of the scriptures. You
ancient fathers, which have lived long, seen much, and heard the woonders in
old time, meditate them in your minds, and deliver them to your posterity:
even as you would have us to continue your names because you are our fathers,
so do you remember the works of God, for he is the father to us all. Secondly,
another reason of this doctrine 2
is this, because the rehearsal of these works of God, done before our time
either unwritten or especially recorded in the word, do terrify our proud
hearts when we hear them declared unto us. The church of Corinth being happy by
the Apostles preaching, grew insolent in divisions, loose in opinions, and
intolerable in manners: the Apostle to remedy this 1. Cor. 10. 5, 6, 7, 8.
verse. brings in the tragedy of the Israelites destruction, showing them how
for the like offenses thousands and ten thousands perished in displeasure, to
terrify and humble them by these wonderful works of God, that they might
know howsoever they were not yet executed, yet they were as guilty of
condemnation as those that were destroyed. David says of himself Psalm. 119.
120. that the hearing of the Lords judgment wrought fear in his soul, and
trembling in his body: And therefore we may many times read and hear the
story of wars, wherein as in a glass we may behold the miseries of our lives,
to see princes massacred, noble men murdered, and the common people butchered,
like bullocks in a slaughter house. Let us often rehearse the story of famines
and robberies, wherein we may see the uncertainty of our wealth, to see our
houses burned, our barnes emptied, our estates impouerished, our lives
famished, our children left breathless, and our wives left comfortles. Let us
often meditate on the diseases of our bodies, to mitigate our pleasures, to see
how some have died suddenly, other have lived so long in sickness that their
friends forsook them, their physicians gave them over, and the stinking
savors of their own bodies have taken away their lives. Let Traitors think
on Achitophell, rebels on Absolon, proud persons on Haman, corrupt judges on
Samuel sons, idle ministers on Eli, wicked magistrates on Shebna,
fornicators on Zimry, covetous persons on Achan, disobedient persons on Jonah,
prophaners of the sabbath on the stick gatherer, swearers on the Egyptian
Israelite, and despisers of the Gospel ministry, sacraments, and all true
religion, on Simon Magus; and the Lord grant that their punishment may be our
amendment. The uses which arise from this doctrine are these first, seeing that
we must Use 1.
often call to remembrance the old wonders in times before passed declared to
the world, then let us as often meditate on our own particular lives which we
have spent and lead in our former days, as the scripture exhorts Heb. 10.
32. Call to your remembrance the days that are passed. Let us look throughout
all the years of our life and make as diligent a search, as the woman in the
Gospel did for her money, and begin at our birth and first being in the world,
in infancy behold our weakness, and God his kindness; in youth look on our
wantonness, and the Lords bountifulnes; in ripe age view our wickedness, and the
Lords long suffering; and in old age mark our unthankfulness, and the Lords
pardon. Call to remembrance the days that are passed: in infancy we could not
serve God, in youth we cared not for God, in ripe years we did not fear him,
in our old age we did not know him: in our infancy we were more helpless then
all creatures, in youth we were more graceless then beasts, in our middle age
more foolish then godly, and in old age more desperate then reformed: in
infancy we ever cried; in youth we ever feared; in our middle age we lived
in care; and our old age spent in sorrow: in our infancy our wants which we
could not express made us miserable; in our youth the rod scourged us; in our
ripe age the world disquieted us; and in our old age the grave which we could
not avoid tormented us: would not these considerations offer long discourses
to tame our wildenesse, to reform our prophanenes, and to overcome our
unruliness? might I not hereby take occasion like a divine philosopher to
paint out the misery of mankind, to cause all men's eyes to bewail infants in
their cradles, boys in their schools, young men in their pleasures, and old
men to their graves? might not I here stir up your affections, to show you
the unhappy condition of a bare natural life, babes to be brained; children
to be cursed; young men to fall by the sword; women to be ravished; and old
men to be without all honor and pity murdered? surely in these we are of al
men most miserable. But now seeing I have searched the register and records of
nature, let me also show you how you shall look on the court-rolles of grace,
and begin with that saying of the Apostle, Ephesians. 2. 11. Wherefore remember
that you were in times past Gentiles in the flesh, and called uncircumcision,
that you were without Christ, aliants from Israel, strangers from the promise,
without hope and without God in this world: Here you may search for your
several estates, and admit you have all natural benefits attendant, when you
are young, pleasure; when you are youthful, riches; when you are strong,
quietness; and wisdom, when you are old; what are these to a condemned soul?
Take a thief appointed to the gallows, and before he go to execution let the
king call him son, let him be apparelled with silk, let him have a chain on
his neck, bracelets on his arms, bring him into your treasury of abundance
of gold and silver, bid him take his fill: carry him to most delicate fare,
and bid him eat cheerfully, and strike up most pleasant music, bid him be
merry, but tell him anon he must be hanged; how joyful would his heart be at
all this pleasure, when he knows presently after his chain shall be changed
into a halter, his garments to a winding sheet, his carcass to worms meat,
his throne into a gallows, his servants into executioners, and his money taken
all from him before he can spend a penie: even so are the best of us all by
nature condemned, and we find no comfort in our parentage, or pleasure in our
wealth, or profit in our clothing, or benefit in our meat, or joy in our
bodies so long as we know that after a little while al these shall be forgotten,
and we in destruction. Now remember what you are without grace that is by
nature: wrath is our father, heathens are our brethren, or rather devils,
uncircumcision is our garment; that is a piece of raw cloth vnfulled, which
opens it self to every wind and storm: Christ the Savior is our enemy,
and we persecute him and crucify him: the Saints of God we regard not; the
promises of God we know not, our hope is vanity, and our God is iniquity.
Call to your remembrance the hours, the days, the weeks, the months, and
the years of your life; think evermore on that mercy and that power that in
the ruff of all this iniquity forbeareth, forewarneth, and forgiueth you.
Think thus with your selves, I was a helhounde, I was a heathen, the tiger is
better then my parentage, and the serpent then my education; I was naked
without grace, and not able to buy it: the Lord that sold it was my enemy,
and I durst not ask upon credit. How many enormities have I run into
against my God, which the Lord foreseeing has forgiven; the curse of my nature
he has removed; the evil of my conversation he has remitted; the emptines
of my soul, he has replenished; and the sentence of my condemnation has he
recalled. Thus has the Lord dealt with my life, when I was sinful, he was
merciful; when I blasphemed, he blessed; when I made war against him, he
made peace with me; he took my blows on both cheeks; he gave me his coat
and his cloak; and to conclude, when I walked through the valley of the
shadow of death, his rod and his staff was my comfort: therefore now will I
give my life for his; my body for his garment; my blood for his blows; my
soul for his sake; and my whole person, wealth, honor, dignity, labor and
leisure for his salvation. Secondly, 2
another use we may make of recording time past, and the several works of God
with his particular judgments, is the same which the prophet David makes,
Psalm. 8. which is this, after the rehearsal of the glorious works of God, he
compares man with them, and says; Lord, what is man that thou art mindful of
him, or the son of man that thou visitest him? Even so when we see and hear
of the great works of God upon others, lay them to your selves by particular
application to your souls, and reckon them up in order for your furtherance.
Little Canaan told his father of his grandfathers drunkenness and nakedness, and
he was accursed and all his posterity: But I have in my youth done many
thousand greater sins, and yet the Lord does still bless me; was the Lord too
rigorous against him, or too partial with me, that he all his life long wore
such a badge, as also disgraceth all his progeny; but he lays not to my
charge the follies of my youth? Moses and Aaron, because they once distrusted
the hand of God they were never suffered to enter into Canaan: but I not once
only, but many hundred times have distrusted his promise, denied his word,
and forsaken his truth; why do I live so long in the land of promise? when
more righteous then my self could not set their foot therein. Ananias and
Saphira kept back but a part of their own to serve them in adversity, and
denying the same, were suddenly slain by the Lord: but I have kept back not
mine, but the Lords, from the Lord, and have lied not once to the holy Ghost
but many times; and yet I live, my credit not impeached, my profession is not
blamed, my life is not shortened, and my days are not ended. Oh, behold the
severity of God toward these that fell, but the mercy of God toward me that
stands: And thus may we say of nations and whole people, why was Egypt
destroyed, and Israel saved? why were the Canaanites cast out, and the
Israelites planted in? why was Edom made tributarie to Jacob? Babylon to
Persia? Persia to Graecia? Ireland to England? Surely, surely, we might have
been the slaves, and they the Lords; we the bondmen, and they the freemen.
Evil wars might have been in our days, as it was in our fathers, and that
which was greatest popery or heresy, or hethenisme might have been professed
in these our times as it was long ago. Think therefore my beloved, how many
bonds of obedience the Lord has bound us in: and consider what had been our
hap, if we had been those children that were ripped out of their mothers
bellies; if we had been those young men that perished in battle; if we had
been those women that eat their babes to save their lives: and finally, how
much more are we bound unto God that we were not Infidels, Pagans, and Papists,
haeretikes, Atheistes, or any other kind of cursed men. Let us also say with
the prophet, Psalm. 147. vlt. With every nation has he not dealt thus. Let
therefore evermore the word of God be in our mouths, the praises of God be
in our hearts, the Gospel in our lives, and by how much more we have tasted
of the Lords goodness above other, so much more let him taste of our
thankefulnes above other.

The fourth Sermon.
And tell you your children of it, and let your children show to their
children, and their children to another generation.
NOw the prophet having bid them to enquire of their forefathers, also
wills them to tell this wonder to them that shall come after, namely, to
their children, with this commandment also, that they in time to come being
made parents should likewise declare this unto their posterity. Where first
of all the prophet gives us this doctrine, that it is the duty of fathers,
that if any notable and worthy work of God happen in their days, to show
the same unto their children, for the words are, tell your children, etc. Even
this does the Lord warn the Israelites, Exodus 13. 14. to show the wonders in
Egypt unto We must tell our children what God has done in our days.
their posterity, and peculiarly at the eating of the passover. For in truth,
this care and conscience of godly parents is the very conduit pipe or kings
highway whereby all religion, all fear of God, and the uniform profession of
the truth is preserved. By this means came Moses to be a fit and able writer
of the Scriptures, although he handle matters done two thousand years before
he saw the world, he had no records nor writings to help him, but that
truth which descended as it were by propagation from father to son unto his
days, which began to be corrupt, the holy Ghost approved, and Moses recorded.
Therefore the learned have observed that in seven generations it came to
Moses: Adam, say they, taught the History of the creation and fall of man with
other things to Methusaleth; Methusaleth told them to Sem; Sem showed them to
Jacob; Jacob to Kohath; Kohath to Amram; and Amram to Moses. And in this sort
was this noble story of Genesis with visions, places, and persons delivered
from hand to hand, from father to son, and from one generation to another,
that the words and works of God might be everlastingly remembered. This
shows how by the carefulnes of parents the pure knowledge of God was
maintained, and the true worship of God continued: Then every father of a
family was a magistrate to punish; a prophet to instruct; a prince to govern
his own household: Then was there no writing, but much religion; few books,
but many faithful hearts; all studied in unity to preserve unfeigned verity.
But in Moses time the church grew to a nation, and therefore although as
Jerome says it were, Mayor numero, yet it was Minor virtute, the number of
professors grew to be greater, yet the zeal and power of godliness grew to
be lesser: And therefore now was it to be put in writing, or else all had
been clean forgotten; for the hearts of men began to be deceitful, and the
words of God could not safely lodge in the breasts of all, and therefore could
not easily and effectually be conveyed from one to another. The Lord first
of all wrote his law, then grew the church to another government, more
general then before, wherein the priests did publicly care for the service
of God, and souls of the people, and every father and master privately for
himself and his family: and evermore this is to be remembered, that the
children prayed to the God of their Fathers, meaning the same God whom their
Fathers taught them to serve. And this beloved, puts us in mind what manner
of men fathers and masters ought to be, even such as are able to commend the
true worship of God unto others: for sithence the worship of God became
public and general, the private neglect of this duty in the governors of
families, has wrought the poison of all mankind, and the undoing of all
religion. For now the common sort think that they must not pray but in a
church; that they are not bound to teach others, but the whole charge depends
on the minister; that the preachers and not the people must learn the word:
and finally it makes no matter for their faith and manners, if their pastors
and teachers have the knowledge of the Gospel. Oh lamentable men! Oh
lamentable manners! which only is to be imputed unto this neglect of parents
duty. By this only gentilisme and heathenisme grow: for if Noah's sons had
taught that to their children which they learned of their father, the world had
not been wearied with many devilish Idolatries: if David's children had served
that God which David taught them, their throne had continued as long as heaven
and earth endured: neither had so many women been husbandlesse, so many
children been motherles, so many old men been helples, and so many of all
sorts, and degrees been utterly destitute of all worldly ease and heavenly
bliss; the decay of their faith wrought the destruction of their blood: If
Christians had taught that religion to their children, which they received
without all corruption from Christ and his Apostles, so many countries had not
been conquered, so many cities had not been laid even with the earth, so many
famous churches had not been buried in oblivion, popery had not so much
prevailed, Mahomet had not so long prospered, wicked ceremonies had not reigned
in the place of holy truth, and where now is the synagogue of Satan, there had
been the Temple of our Savior. And I fear me beloved, least this parents
fault bring forth once again the childrens folly, and then oh then, will the
devils banner advance it self against Christ's standard, and so that when the
Lord shall come he shall find no faith on the earth. Look to this you fathers
of our bodies, and let not the blood of our souls cry vengeance against the
parents of our lives: teach us what you have learned, and charge us on your
blessing, and God his blessing as we will answer before the Judge of men and
angels, to save the souls of our children by the precepts of your doctrine.
The reasons of this doctrine Reason 1.
may be these, first because as David witnesses that the works of God are
great and ought to be sought out of all that love them: So that this is an
argument of unfeigned affection and true love to the works of God, when with
diligence we observe them, and with conscience we declare them: and also it is
an assurance of sincere piety and reverence toward God, when as the same
prophet speaks, all the day long we meditate on his judgments and speak his
praises. This love of men to the works of God is then proved and approved
when they teach them to those whose lives are in their hands; and also it is
the playnest token of true love to your children, when you keep no part of the
counsel of God from them, which you know your selves. For the Lords doings are
of that majesty and authority, that by them tender hearts are nourished,
wavering hearts confirmed, and stubburne minds are persuaded. Your kindest
friends will be more kind unto you, when you show them the kindness of the
Lord; and your deadly foes will be more afraid of you when they shall see and
hear the works of God in your mouth, and the word of God in your hands.
Therefore my beloved in the Lord Jesus, seeing we have no more plainer way to
know the Lord then by his works, then have we also no surer token that we love
the Lord, then when we love his doings: Let us seek them in the cradles of our
childhoode, and the beds of our old age, making as much of the Lords
judgments, as we do of our children, whom we desire to leave behind us to the
end of the world; even so let us leave the Lords works in remembrance for
evermore. Secondly, another reason of this doctrine is declared by Solomon,
Eccles. 3. 14. That what God does it stands for ever, that men might fear 2
before him. The works of God are affected, not as the ground is ploughed
which serves one for one season, but as the earth was established which
stands for ever. The Lord in every age accomplisheth many wonderful things,
and different the one from the other, that men might fear him for his
judgments, and honor him for his power: And therefore being not willing at all
times to make trial and show of his omnipotency, he wills us to remember
the things that are done, unless we would have him once again open the
fountains of waters, that the whole world might be destroyed, or once again
rain fire and brimstone from heaven to confound us as he did the Sodomites, or
once again bring a universal darkness over our land as he did over the land of
Judea: or else once again suffer our fathers to be burned, our goods to be
rauened, our wives to be shamed, and our selves to be murdered for his sake,
as some have bin before us. Therefore by how much more easy it is for our
hearts to consider those things, then for our eyes to behold them: so much more
careful let us be to instruct others by word of mouth, least we our selves and
our posterity feel in full measure that heavy hand of his wrath: and then Oh
then lamentable is our case, when we shall not fear God as a father, but dread
him as a Judge, we cannot pray unto him as a Savior, but behave our selves
like bondslaues in his presence: When it shall be said, you have had no
pleasure in his works, therefore I will have no delight in your souls. The
uses which arisefrom this doctrine are these; first, the same which Moses once
did after he had brought Israel out of Egypt, and afterward Use 1,
the whole company of Martirs are said to make, Apoc. 15. 3 Great are thy works
(say they) O Lord almighty, just and right are thy ways O king of Saints. That
is with the consideration of God his mighty power join also the confession of
his ever blessed justice. You O fathers of our times, teach us this doctrine by
your several obseruatio^s during all the life of your pilgrimage, that you may
say the Lord is just in all his ways, and holy in all his works. Even this
fruit reap and take of this florishng tree, that you also may be able to tell
us, in this we found the Lord to be merciful, and in that work we received a
due trial of his justice. And freely my beloved in this point of doctrine I
might profitably spend many words, to show and teach you with what manner
recital of his doings, the Lord is pleased: it is no more available for us to
confess that hughe armies of soldiers were discomfited by the Lord, except we
also know and acknowledge the end, wherefore the Lord did the same, then in
old time it was for Pharaoh to sigh under the burden of God his works being
therewith oppressed, and not considering the due end of the same: his hand
does not warn us, nor his power amend us, when either we see or hear it
without holy consideration of the end of the judgment. And this self same use
must we make, when we hear or read of the woonders of ancient time, that we
can say, behold the punishment of sin, the reward of godliness, the power of
the almighty, and the justice of the everliving God. In the scriptures the
holy Ghost in every history shows this use, although not in plain words,
yet in easy manner to be observed: That Caine was cursed being the heir
apparent of all the world, and notwithstanding his large birthright he should
be a vagabond on the earth, was not this a great wonder? But why came this to
pass? First because he was loose in the service of God, and afterward murdered
his innocent brother: mark you then the falls of many princes, such as be
recorded in scripture, and out of scripture, and you shall see for their
insufferable wickedness and intolerable tyranny they were destroyed. That
Sampson killed himself and so many thousand Philistines; was not this a
wonderful work of God? But why was this effected? I grant that by this he was
a figure of Christ, which by his own death overcame his enemies: but the
Philistines might learn hereby, that the Lord will be revenged for the wrongs
done to his saints. In like manner read and run over the volumes of T.
Liuius, the writings of Tacitus, the books of Arrianus, the histories of
Italy, France, Germany, England, and al Chronicles, wherein any worthy or
memorable thing may be noted: yea the very fables of Poets, and you shall
therein observe the variable punishment of sin for the several transgressions
of princes and people. And if we may come nearer to our own times, consider
how much blood has been spilt in France and the lowe-Countries, we cannot
only say it was the Lords doings, and it is marvelous in our eyes; but we may
say this came to pass for the cruelty of the one, if not for the drunkenness
of the other. But why should I travel over the seas for strange things? when
our own country yields more worthy works of God then all christendom
besides. What is more wonderful that so great a people, so noble personages,
so large dominions, and so many foreign nations should be governed, preserved,
and defended by one woman Prince? Let me now ask you O Elders, was there ever
the like in your days, or in the days of your fathers before you? Was there
ever such peace in this land since it was a land? till we flocked to the
preaching of the Gospel at the call of one glorious and godly Prince; ask
your fathers of this, and tell us if ever there were the like. Was there ever
so hughe a navy so easily dispersed as the Spanish fleet was? coming with
purpose to invade us, and yet never could set foot on our land, till they were
brought prisoners, and yet with smaller forces they have made France to bleed,
and Flanders to ache. Was there ever so many wicked attempts confounded, so many
treasons revealed, so many wicked persons executed, and so many good men
preserved, as has been in her majesty's happy reign? Ask your fathers if
ever they knew the like, and we will tell our children, and they shall tell
their children, and their children shall show another generation, that our
times were happy, our lives were blessed, our professions were godly, and our
country was glorious, witnessed and proved by thus many works of God. Our
Prince reigns, our people obeys, our forces are increased, our enemies are
confounded, our afflictions are ended, our peace is continued, our religion is
magnified, our land is fruitful, our laws are equal, our quarrel is
lawful, and therefore hearken al ages what the Lord has done for England.
Secondly, another use we must observe in the narration of the 2
Lords judgments is this which David makes, Psalm. 119. 46. I will declare thy
judgments before kings and will not be ashamed. That is, the deeds and
words of the almighty must work so powerfully in the preachers thereof, that
no rebukes, no scorns, no mockes, nor any shame be taken for the utterance of
them. We live in a contrary time to David's affection, for many are so modest
in any good actions, that all godly companions and holy exercises do shame
their estates, and abase their callings; but in evil enterprises they are as
immodest as brute beasts, thinking it no scorn nor disparagement to them, to
brag of their blasphemies, to tell of their whooredoms, to sport themselves
with their drunkenness, and to play with the devil himself. And this is too
too common in our times, wherein gentlemen and rich men are ashamed to have so
much as a bible in their houses, or at any time to show a good and friendly
face to a preacher of the word, or to minister any occasion to talk of
religion, least say they, we be accounted fools: yea they make fools of them
in the world, that follow not every fashion of apparel, use not every
invention of idleness, and conform not themselves to the manners of the most,
although they be most wicked. This ravening and greedy appetite to sin, must
also kindle the fire of our zeal, that the wicked be not more desperate in
their sins, then the godly be resolute in their holiness. Let us never be
ashamed of the power of God, although in aduauncing there of we detract
somewhat from the noble enterprises of men. Let us give unto the instruments
that which is theirs, and unto God that which is his: let us not glory in our
shame, but be ashamed of our sins, and with the three children at Babylon
against princes and potentates, even with the hazard of our lives witness the
power of God, that they may be ashamed of their doings. Another doctrine which
we may observe out of these words, wherein the fathers are so severally
commanded to show their children the works Be careful what we commit to
posterity.
of God, is this: That we must evermore be careful what we commit to
posterity, if the credit of men must be regarded what they utter one to
another, and one of another while they are living together, when as the truth
may be proved, and the lie may be convinced; much more must they be careful
what they deliver to posterity, as it were in their last testament lying on
their deathbed, that so the lives which they have lead, may be commended for
their fidelity, or the souls which they have expired must be condemned for
their iniquity. Of this matter there is a famous history in Ios. 22. 10, 11,
12. verses, and so forth to the end of the chapter: when as Israel was
planted in Canaan, having long before by Moses received a commandment that
they should make no altars nor assemblies of worship in all their land, but
where the Lord gave them commandment so to do: The Rubenites, the Gadites,
and the half tribe of Manasseh being seated on this side Jordan in the land of
Sihon and Og; contrary to this commandment as it seemed, builded an altar
Joshua being yet alive. This good man with all the Ancients of Israel, fearing
this mischief, and doubting if they put up this contempt, al religion would
soon be forgotten, and in short time in another age, the sacred deity would be
idolatrously denied: first they determined a war against them, but after
better co^sultation they sent Phinehas and ten princes of Israel in embassage
unto the^, to know the cause why they built that altar: they answered that they
built this altar for a pattern of that other which was in Shiloh, least in
time to come all that generation being dead, their children should be denied to
be of the Lords flock, and therefore to have no portion nor part in Israel:
and therefore was this altar not built for sacrifice, nor for burnt offerings,
but should be a witness to their posterity, that although they were possessed
of the land beyond Jordan; yet they were of Isreal's seed, and God his
inheritance. Which answer satisfied the messengers, and being declared to
their brethren, pacified Israel. Here may you see on both sides, an honorable
care for the children unborn: Israel would not permit another sacrificing
altar, least posterity should be drawn from God, and Ruben would yet make
an altar, least their children should be rejected out of the Lords covenant.
Israel adventured his labor to save his progeny, and Ruben offered his life
to save his posterity. Would God our Israel were as jealous of their children,
and that our brethren were as careful of their profession; then should not so
many presidents of evil like Ieroboams sins, and Balaams counsel be
suffered to stand, and offered to other ages: Then should not houses of sin
be erected, as Theaters of play houses, which gain more persons to the devil
then the churches can souls to the Lord: Then should it not be said, That
the fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge:
Then should the arguments of Papists and other idolators be easily answered,
when they object as Laban did, that they worship their fathers Gods, and
follow the follies of their predecessors. The longer a sickness grows, it
waxes more incurable: and the longer our wickedness stands, and the farther
we suffer our vices to stretch, they wax the more unrecoverable, insomuch as
in other ages they will swear by idols, violate Sabbaoths, rent in sunder
religion, make no conscience of haeresie, and embrace atheism, by law and
arguments, because we have sported our lives in this manner of vanities. But
remember as Balaams curse was renewed upon him fourteen hundred years after
he was dead; because other followed his sin: so shall our bodies and souls be
condemned to more intolerable torments, because the loosenes of our lives will
breed the loss of them that come hereafter. And this doctrine has good
reason to establish the same out of the word of God; first, because there is
Reason 1. No impiety but it will find some followers.
not any monument so lascivious, or opinion so wicked, or work so abominable,
but some, if not many will embrace the same: the which thing, the Apostle Peter
in his second Epistle, second chapter, first and second verses declares unto
us. Whereby we may observe the dangerous condition of men, which will submit
themselves unto every kind of devilish slavery rather then to godliness: we
read in the Scriptures that so soon as Core and his company inurmured, that
three hundred families followed his ill example: We read of an Egyptian in the
Acts of the Apostles, and one Theudas, who by their rebellion drew great
multitudes to final perdition: We have learned by ecclesiastical stories that
the impiety of Simon Magus, who would be worshipped as God, had ten
thousands of favorites: that the apostasy of Julian drew infinite companies
to hell: and for popery which is a corruption of all religion, what nation in
this west end of the world received not the same? even as once all the
eastern countries were generally infected with Arrianisme, and after they were
reclaimed from that, they embraced the errors of Nestorius and Eutyches. But
Peter says, the damnation of such persons sleeps not, but was prepared long
ago, as we may see by those lamentable examples of the eastern churches, which
for the most part are either subject to the barbarous Turk, or else the slaves
of some heathen prince or other, where remain not so much as the stones of
their temples, much less the remembrance of any religion: and the Lord grant
that the like judgment fall not upon the west. Another reason of this doctrine
may be this, that if there have been any fault in the fathers, it may be
amended in 2
the children, and this the word of God makes Psalm. 78. 8. 9. it is most
dangerous to corrupt the posterity, for it is like to the poison put into
meat before men shall eat thereof; we must always study to leave the
worship of God purer to them which succeed us then we found it. And therefore
we must greatly regard, if we have at any time gone awry from the mark, that
we charge our children to beware thereof: for as their sins are accounted our
sins because we reclaimed them not; so their righteousness shall be accounted
ours, if we advertise them thereof. If this be the commendation of all humane
arts and worldly trades, that each one leaves more skill, and greater
perfection behind him then at the beginning he found: why should it not
then so fall out in heavenly works, that every father for his son; every
pastor for his people; every captain for his country; and every doctor for
religion, should leave more then was before? Surely how great an abomination
is it to see all worldly things grow better and better; but all spiritual
things to wax worse and worse, that we should be better Philosophers since
Plato; better Physicians since Galen; better husbandmen since Virgill; and
better Poets since Homer: but religion and sanctification being wrote by God
himself, and all the Prophets and Disciples of Christ: yet is it in worse
estate then it was in the beginning: It should be as gold which is more fined
by coming through many furnaces, but it is like (not of it self) to the
river Nylus, which the farther it flows, the more dirt and draffe it draws
with it; so every man patcheth and peeceth the worship of God, that fathers
leave it woorser then they found it. The uses which arise from this doctrine,
as they are found in the word of God are these; first seeing we Use 1.
must be so careful what we commend to our posterity; first that we leave
not any practice or president behind us which we have not learned of the Lord,
Deuteronomy. 24. 8, 9. If in the leprosy men ought to be so careful where they were
assured of apparent danger, that not in any thing they must forget the Lords
ordinance, or add any more to his commandment, upon pain of so heavy
displeasure of his highness; then must all the world be careful also to frame
their actions according to the word, which doing, they shall not deceive, nor
be deceived. And first of all we must beware of false and foolish prophesies,
which being but the dreams of many brainsicke persons, have bewitched the
hearts of men that heard them, and seduced the lives of some that received
them: and we may read both in the book of God, and out of the Scripture, that
princes and countries have been destroyed thereby. Many of the learneder sort
are much affected with the prophesies of the Sibilles, Methodius and others;
many of the popish sort are continually contemplatours of the oracles of
Briget, and other papistical and monastical dreams; but above all the simple
and vulgar people imagine that there is no Scripture like to Merlins prophecy.
If I should stand in the specialties to show you when, where, and wherein the
unstable and new fangled minds have bin deceived, I should rather feed the
curious then fill the righteous. This shall be sufficient to admonish us, that
we neither presume to make our names famous by this means by giving errors,
nor yet be so base minded as to embrace and receive the same for truth,
whosoever he be that utters it: because Peter tells us, 2. Pet. 2. 1. That
there shall be false prophets in the church, who^ we must beware, least we fall
with them into the same perdition. Others there are also which regard neither
prophecy nor religion, or any other spiritual exercise, either feigned or
unfeigned, but give their whole lives and travail to an insatiable desire of
gain, to gather lands and lordships by right or wrong, and to leave great
store of wealth to their posterity: let these men be also warned if they
would be warned, that they commit not the gain of ungodliness, the wages of
unrighteousness, and the Lords portion for their inheritance. For surely as
our Savior speaks Matthew. 15. 13. Every plant not planted by his father shall
be pulled up again. Their houses shall be ruinous, their posterity infamous,
their possessions troublesome, and strangers shall inherit their labors. But
in our days also there is another wicked and wretched president for posterity
to be lamented, that so many in this golden age of Christ's Gospel are tickled
with vain conceits, accounting their glory if they can prove the founders
of new sects, whereby religion is defamed; or pen some idle toys for
histrionicall plaiers, whereby many good souls are endangered. There are few
or no Italian follies, Spanish inventions, or French-faynedwanton-volumes, but
in our days for the times succeeding they are taught to speak English, I
think for this purpose, that now whiles religion rules, it might be troubled
by them, and when christianity is removed, by their means iniquity may be
enthronized. I have read many of them, and considered of them too long, and I
must freely confess that they be the voices forerunning and preparing a way
for Atheism, idolatry, heathenisme, or any kind of impiety: And therefore all
good Christians should do with them as the Ephesians did Acts 19. 19. with
their books; for I protest unto you either you must forsake God or them.
Secondly, we must make one use more of this doctrine, which is this: Seeing we
must be careful for posterity that 2
we suffer nothing to pass from us or by us to them, that sauoureth of
iniquity: let us also living in these times like to the days of Christ,
follow the example of Christ, which is to pray for them which shall come after,
Luc. 22. 31, 32. where he tells his disciples that he has prayed for them,
that although satan should have them in his fan to winnow them as a man
cleaneth wheat, yet should not they fail: so likewise John 17. Christ prays
for all them which should believe in his name to the worlds end. Now my
beloved brethren, if you consider the causes why Christ did not only procure
the welfare of his children while he was living, but also prayed for their
sincerity when he should be dead, you shall also find that we have all as
great cause to pray for our children, as then our Savior had for his
disciples. One was because as we heard that they lay open to the malice of the
devil, who would try his uttermost, either to make them deny him, or to die
for him: So my dear brethren, the malice of satan is as hot against us, as
ever it was against them: if he could he would turn our country into seas,
our people into devils, our meat into serpents, our drink into poison, our
profession into Atheism, our pleasure into hell: And will he think you, be
more favorable to our posterity? No, no, assure your selves if he may or
might work his will, he would make them as poor as beggars, as miserable as
Job in adversity, and as desperate as Judas, to make their own hands to be
their own murderers: he would feed the dogs with their blood, the birds
with their flesh, the ravens with their bowels, the infidels with their lands,
the Atheists with their houses, and damnation with their souls: pray therefore
with tears and zeal that the groans of your heart may preserve the fruits of
your bodies. Another cause why Christ prayed for the disciples, and the
posterity of the Church to the worlds end was this, Ioh. 17. 21. that there
might be a unity betwixt God and Christ and his members, and considering this
unity the unbelieving world might be reclaimed. Would not this unity do
well also betwixt us and our posterity, that there might be like father like
son, like mother like daughter; Christians by regeneration and Christians by
generation, that our religion might abide with our names and our inheritance,
and that we might be joined in the affinity of souls, as we are in
consanguinitie of bodies. But oh wretched men or wicked satan, the oak feeds
oaks, the vine vines, the olive olives, the beasts engender their kinds, and
the fishes multiply their like, only righteous men breed unrighteous impes,
and their fruit is not pleasant till they be graffed. Why should not good men
have good sons as good seeds bring good corn? the question is easily
answered, though with sorrow considered. Religion goes not by propagation but
by adoption; they beget such children as themselves were begotten, that is, the
sons of wrath, for whom we must pray without ceasing, weep without comfort,
and watch without weariness, that they may be made the sons of
righteousness.

The fifth Sermon.
Verse. 4. That which is left of the palmer worm has the grasshopper eaten, and
the residue of the grasshopper has the canker worm eaten, and the residue of
the canker worm has the caterpiller eaten.
NOw we have by the merciful assistance of divine grace finished the preface
of this prophecy, let us also with the same power enter upon the prophecy it
self. We showed you at the beginning that from this fourth verse unto the
twelfth of the second chapter, is uttered by the prophet those judgments,
which are threatened by the Lord. In declaring whereof he observes this order:
First in this fourth verse he shows the isntrumental cause or beginners of
their misery, under God; and afterward by exhortations and sundry
amplifications he describes before their eyes, the force of these hurtful
creatures, bred and brought forth only for the destruction of these Jewish
people. The isntrumental causes are named to be these four, the Palmer-worme,
the Grasshopper, the Canker-worme, and the Caterpiller; small creatures coming
with great force to invade this country. And this is that which made the
Prophet so cry and call to the people for audience and attention, that so
wonderful a matter should be effected: not only as Esaias says, that a woman
should compass a man; but that a flock of little worms should overthrow a
whole nation: and these beasts should come successively the one after the
other, that whosoever escaped the first, should be taken by the last; and that
which was not touched by the former, might be consumed by the latter. And it
may seem that the foundation of their overthrow was wrought by a famine: for
we must not imagine that at the first, these beasts set upon men; but began
with their fruits, with their corn, their vines, their trees, and their store,
to cast down those castles of confidence which they had raised up in the
abundance of their belly-cheere. In like manner if it were lawful for me to
compare us with them, and to weigh the event of our times by that which we
fear, and not by that which we feel, might not all godly minds justly doubt,
that whereas there is and has been so great an harmony in the transgressions
of both people, and such a consent in both our calamities, that they are both
begun with famine, the continuance and the end should also resemble theirs. I
prophecy not what shall be, but what may be: I cannot say certainly, that as
their land was wasted, their stores consumed; their corn accursed, and their
richest men impouerished: so shall ours be: or that as they had their
sacrifices stayed, their temple emptied, their law removed, their chief
glory, the outward worship of God utterly forsaken; so shall ours be: or that
as they were at one instant time lamenting their losses, weeping for their
miseries, and shedding abundance of tears to see their own bodies famished,
their own children perished, and the grauest persons among them to be
pitifully tormented, having their houses filled with cries of people, their
streets swarming with dead corpses, and their fields and woods ringing with
roaring and bellowing of beasts; so shall ours be, no not so, but so may ours
be, and the Lord grant that this as we feel be not the beginning of sorrows:
for verily I persuade my self, that our country which has received great
heaps of benefits as the Jews had, and has rewarded with great heaps of
sins as the Jews did, shall also (if not shortly) be finally overthrown
with great plenty of judgments, as the Jews were. But now let us return to
the words, and herein look for some doctrines which may edify us and admonish
us, for of the other matter we shall have fitter occasion to speak hereafter.
Then here we have the prophet after his cry, making his proclamation in the
name of the highest king of heaven and earth, telling them and us that there
should come an infinite number of palmer-wormes to devour their fruits; and
that which they touched not should the Grasshopper devour; and that which the
grasshopper left, should the canker-worme poison; and that which the
canker-worme poisoned not, should the Caterpiller consume, that by a quaternion
of successiue spoilers, they might be made to feel that which they were not
willing to hear. But some will say, this was a small matter for the prophet to
preach on, thinks he that we have no other business then to hear a tale of
Grasshoppers and Canker-wormes, which leap in every meadow and hang on every
leaf; or does he imagine that we are such weak hearted soldiers, and faint
hearted persons, that we should be terrified with a muster of fraybugs, and
little worms of an inch long: indeed these are matters to fray children, and
not old men; and therefore he must either tell us of weightier matters, or
else silence his tongue from such trifles? And yet if any think thus in these
days as they were never more ready to take exception against the preachers, I
might answer them, that they are not trifles which the Lord has treasured in
his word, neither are they recorded only to fear children, but also to
terrify, yea, and condemn old men. We must not weigh them in the balance of
natural reason, but lay them to a sound spiritual judgment, and we shall
find them more heavy then mountains, which we deemed lighter then feathers.
The ways of God are not like the ways of men, First of all we must know, and
remember unto you that these four kind of beasts had every one his year to
work the hurt that the Lord had assigned him to do, wherein they multiplied
exceedingly, and prevailed mightily; in so much as no industry of man could
counteruaile their forces. By this we observe that there is a special A
special judgment to increase hurtful beasts.
judgment of God when hurtful creatures are increased: If either the flies or
the worms, or any small beasts arise above their usual number; the^ know for a
certain that these little beasts are infallible tokens of the Lords wrath,
Psalm. 105. 34. The Psalmist describing unto us the wonderful workers of God
which he wrought for his church, says, He spoke and there came Grasshoppers and
Caterpillars innumerable: so likewise the Prophets Jeremy and Ezechiell among
the grand and invincible plagues of God, reckon this for one, the growing or
multiplying of noisome beasts. For the Lord which is infinitely wise, is able
infinite ways to manifest that divine power of his majesty, whereby once he
created all things of nothing, and every day shows us our sins by changing
his good creatures into hurtful destroyers, making the earth to pine us, the
heavens to burn us, the air to benum us, and the silly beasts to annoy us.
The Reason 1.
reasons of this doctrine are these, First because the Lord by these means
does not only admonish us all of our transgressions, but especially punishes
us for our singular rebellion, Exodus 10. 4. 5. Among all these plagues which
were wrought in Egypt to punish hard hearted Pharaoh and the blind minded
Egyptians, the Lord in great number sends grasshoppers, that prince and
people might be brought to destruction. And surely if the Lord have so many
means to revenge the cause of his Saints, that he makes brute beasts the
executioners of his wrath; then let us learn never to molest any in whom any
graces of God appear; for then shall we bring an heavy house of wrath upon
our heads. Another reason of this doctrine is, 2
because that he sometimes sends and multiplieth plentifully his good
wholesome creatures to the destruction of them that receive them: and if the
good creatures of God be sent that he may more freely take vengeance by them
upon our iniquities; much more when the noisome hurtful beasts are increased
does he power out his wrath and execute his anger. We may read Numb. 11. 31,
33. that the Lord brought abundance of quails upon the tents of Israel, but
withal, he sent leannes into their soul, and his wrath came upon them while
the meat was in their mouths, that the lusts of their minds cost them the
blood of their bodies; and although they seemed to have a great blessing, yet
it turned to a heavy curse: In like manner they are not always the happiest
persons which have all things at their wish; nor yet is it always a good thing
to be advanced to the highest rooms as Haman was; to eat of the daintiest
meat as the rich man did; to be clothed with the softest raiment as the
courtiers are; to have the poor bowing to our persons; the world woondring at
our wealth; and the voices of all men to commend our works: For
notwithstanding all these, the soul may be poor, naked, comfortless, and
despised in the eyes of the Lord; and what shall it profit us to win the
whole world, and loose our own souls? Let not poverty dismaie us, for that
was on Christ; let not riches advance us, for they were on Herod; let not
adversity trouble us, for good men profess it; and let not prosperity
rejoice us, for evil men enjoy it. Now let us make some uses of this doctrine,
which may either strengthen our faith, or amend our lives: Therefore first of
all the Lord showing how many judgments he had powered upon the Israelites,
Amos, 4. 9. tells them the use of all, which was, that they should be
converted unto his majesty: so that as David says, He makes his angels his
ministers: in like manner Amos might say, Use 1.
He makes the beasts of the earth to preach repentance unto men. For it is
most requisite that when men become beasts in their lives, drowning al reason
within them, then should beasts like themselves in reason (though not in
body) come unto them to reprove their folly; whose blows should break
their hearts, that would not turn them at the preaching of men. Now then the
whole course of nature and natural things do remember us, and help us to
worship the Lord: for if they be subject to us, and serve to our uses, they
tell us that we must be subject to God, and serve in his vineyard; if they
rebel against us and annoy us with their presence, they preach repentance to
our lives, and conversion to our souls: whither then shall we go from the
presence of the Lord? If we bury our sins in the earth, as the wicked servant
did his talent, yet we must bring them forth again to receive our
condemnation; if we keep them in secret, yet the birds of the air shall
reveal them; if we neglect them and not regard them, the lions of the wood
shall requite them; if we dissemble them, the Lord himself in flaming fire
shall disclose them; and if we continue in them, the little woormes, the seely
grasshoppers, and the simple creeping creatures shall revenge them. But we in
our days have not much tasted of this fourth plague, which is the multiplying
hurtful beasts; I mean our land has not been given to the locusts, and our
labors have not been spoiled by the caterpillars; yet we are more troubled
with more hurtful beasts, I say in the similitude of men, such beasts as
wander not in the fields, but lodge in our houses, being more unreasonable then
the palmer-wormes, and more irresistable then all the herds of canker-wormes.
The godly may cry out with David, the fat bulls of Bashan did roar upon me, and
with the Apostle, that they fight with beasts in the likeness of men; and yet
David neither feared the bulls, nor the Apostle fought with beasts indeed. But
such beasts as have al reason against reason, and no reason to any religion,
are swarming almost in every corner of England: we may as easily persuade the
ox to eat no grass, the birds to eat no corn, the lions to seek no pray,
and the lamb to refuse the pap of his dame, as reclaim this kind of beasts
from their evil kind of sins. Deaf adders they are, they will not hear,
witty and politic foxes, they will not be taken; vipers without feeling the
sorrows of others; wanton kine ever kicking against the poor; stately lions
ravening whatsoever likes them; greedy bears biting all that com nigh them;
sleepy dogs profiting no body, and what shall I say more? They deprived
themselves of all kind of humanity; therefore let these great beasts move us
seeing we have no fear of little beasts. These sleep in our bosoms, eat at
our tables, gather up our profits, and consume God his benefits: Let these I
say make us innocent, watchful, wary, diligent, obedient, meek, gracious,
and zealous in religion, that either our lives may convert them, or their
beastliness amend us. Another use of this doctrine 2
is this, that as God can use and also does these his creatures to be revenged
on his adversaries; so also he will and can do the same to the benefit of
his chosen. He used the ravens to feed Eliah, 1. King. 17. 6. and we know
that al these noisome creatures which devoured and destroyed the cattle and
people of Egypt, neither devoured or destroyed man or beast among the
Israelites. The viper a hurtful beast, yet it could not harm Paul, Act. 28.
5. when it hung upon his hand: What shall we now say my dear brethren, to
commend the large liberality of our God, to convince the intolerable
ingratitude of our souls? The angels wait on us above to keep the heavens
from ouerwhelming us, the creatures attend on us beneath, to make the earth to
yield us maintenance: oh how shall they want any thing that lead a godly life,
yet who does depend on the Lords promise, or who does make conscience of the
Lords liberality? We are like to the Jews which Nebuzaradan left in Jerusalem
with the Samaritans, seeing the serpents destroying the Samaritans, sparing
them yet still, they continued in their idolatry: so although we see and hear
our neighbors, our countrymen, or any other nation to be wasted and we
preserved; to be famished, we sustained; to be weakened, and we strengthened;
to be punished, when we go scot-free; yet still we serve our pleasures, we
blaspheme the Gospel, we profane the Sabbath, and we dishonor the
almighty: although he has not dealt with any nation as he has dealt with us;
yet we care not for his creatures, we love not his truth, we forsake not our
sins, we embrace not his fear, and we have no resolution for our own
salvation: the Lord for his mercy turn our hearts. Another doctrine we may
observe out of this verse, which is this, that every light and Every little
beast can overcome the welfare of man.
little creature can trouble and overcome the welfare ofmen: Why did not the
Lord rain down fire from heaven to consume their field of corn, or to
burn up their fruitful gardens; or why did he not send his angels
immediately from heaven to weed out the wicked from the land, and so to have
made an end at the very first of these Jewish calamities? This he might have
done, although he did it not; but rather sends creeping worms to overthrow
a great nation, which is to man's reason as if one spark of fire were sent to
burn up the whole sea. We read Act. 12. 23. that Herod by his flatterers was
magnified to be a God, the which thing pleased the wretch too well, for shortly
after it cost him blood and life, to show himself and his favorites that he
was but a man: for it was said that he was eaten and devoured of worms. O
worthy example of so worthy impiety, which wearing the crown but of an
earthly kingdom, would also be advanced to an heavenly regiment: therefore he
received the greater condemnation. Where were his Phisicians, could not they
purge away the evil which did eat up the kings heart? where were his servants
which would do all things for him, and now could not they deliver him from
little worms? nay what did this new made God if he were but a god of flies,
could not he comfort and cure himself? No, no, the darte was too deep, the
wound was too great, and the disease too desperate: but he in the midst of
these his torments having his heart eaten, and the worms crawling out of his
body, with intolerable anguish cried out, Ecce me, inquit, qui vobis Deus
videor, nanc finem viuendi facere cogor necessario.
Behold your Godwhich is enforced to die: Let all proud persons be warned by
the example of Herod; especially great men, who think themselves if not
better, yet equal to the son of God, the king of heaven and earth; least
they be punished after the example of Herod. The flies did trouble and
terriblie molest the whole land of Egypt: think always the Lord can easily
turn our meat into worms; our drink into flies; our blood into lice; our
garments into serpents; and our joyful friends into spoiling beasts. We are
not so high, but there is one above us; we are not so low, but there are some
beneath us; we are not so wise, but the Lord is within us; neither are we so
noble, but his highness can confound us. And this doctrine Reason 1.
has good reasons, beside lamentable experience, whereon it may be grounded,
the weakest things of God are far stronger then the strongest of man. 1. Cor.
1. 25. 27. and by the weak things of this world will he confound the
strong: the which although it be spoken in another sense then it is here
alleged, yet does it serve also to this purpose, to show unto us that the
Lord will for his glory overcome by the weaker forces. And it is most true that
a little beast with his wrath is as forcible to destroy us as a mighty
serpent; and the fall of a feather upon our heads, although they were guarded
with a helmet of proof, yet should it through his indignation be as heavy as
a mill -- stone to dash out the brains of the proudest. He which made these
things is not tied to his own works, but when he will he can alter light
into darkness, turn the land into the sea, the mountains into valleys, and
make iron to swim when lighter matters shall sink. Now good men must ever be
mightily comforted with the consideration of this heavenly power: this made the
men of Babylon to offer their blood to the fiery flaming furnace: this made
the worthy Gideon with a few persons to adventure the overthrow of many
thousands: this encouraged Elisha, being besieged with an huge army of
Syrians: and therefore this must force us to die, in persecution to fight for
the Lords truth, to pray where we see no help, to profess his name though we
loose the sweetest pleasures of this life.

The uses which offer themselves unto our consideration are these: first, that
it teach us to think most humbly and Use 1.
most basely of our selves, as David that noble king that ever was did, Psalm.
22. 6. I am a worm (says he) and no man, even the ofscouring of men: Seeing
the basest creatures of the world are able so easily to destroy us, what can be
better sign of our humility, then as David does, to call our selves by their
names? Abraham talking with God called himself dust and ashes, such as lie
under foot to be trodden upon by every one; and David gives himself a name
which none has done before him, and very few after him, by taking on him the
title of a silly creeping worm engendered of the dirt, fed only with earth,
and the lowest of all kind of beasts: would God the spirit of mildness
could drive away the spirit of stateliness, which reigns in those which are
many thousand degrees inferior to David. Let them imagine through the wrath
of God that the hairs of their head were turned to living creatures, which
were an easy thing with God, and yet would it not make them humble: how if the
intrals and bowels of their body were changed into worms, as Herod's was,
should not this neither? Oh, yes; but seldom times will you say, are these
things wrought: I grant it so indeed, but much seldomer are men amended by
hearing of them in other, or feeling them in themselves. Tarry not to convert I
beseech you, till these wonders be wrought again: tempt not the Lord of heaven
and earth, with deferring the day of repentance. For be you assured, that
contemning the riches of his grace, and abusing the patience of his long
suffering, while his word and Gospel is preached, and not believed; he will
verify that prophecy upon you, that was long ago pronounced, Revel. 19. 17.
upon the enemies of Christ's Gospel: Come ye fowls of the heaven to the great
supper of the great God, that ye may eat the flesh of kings and captains,
and mighty men, of horses and riders, offree and bond, of small and great: Oh
then will it be too late to cast away pleasures, to curse your delays, to
embrace the Gospel, and to cry peace when the sword of God is dipped in
blood. Another use hereof may be this, that seeing 2
the greatest and strongest creatures were by nature and creation subject to
man: now not only they but also all other both great and small through our
transgressions, are become either our enemies, or else our conquerors. This
must teach us how odious and abominable a thing is sin and wickedness in
the presence of the eternal God, and his unreasonable creatures: it was
forbidden by God, it was condemned by angels, it is revenged by beasts, and
punished by devils: it drove Adam from paradise, it kept Moses from Canaan, it
destroyed the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and has excluded infinite thousands
from the kingdom of heaven. It was committed by the blood of souls, it was
redeemed by the life of Christ, it was reproved by the death of martyrs, and
yet it is maintained by the practice of multitudes: Oh whose heart is not
divided to see such a monster more made of than all good things, which was
hatched by the devil, and fed by the life of souls, and yet reigns that it
may win millions of souls to condemnation. Shall reasonable men rescue it,
when unreasonable beasts fight against it? every creature in his kind cries
vengeance against it. It made the angels damnable, it made the world
abominable, it makes the beasts corruptible, and it makes men miserable:
Miserable I say by birth, for they are borne in it; miserable by life, for they
are vexed with it: and most miserable by death, for they are cursed with it. We
have already heard that the sins of Egypt were punished and revenged by lice,
and the sins of Herod were requited by worms, and unto these add the sin
of the prophet that reproved Jeroboam, 1. Reg. 13. 24. which was rewarded by a
lion; Thus does the earth cry woe unto it, for it cursed her; thus does the
heavens hate it, for it destroys her children; thus does the stars fight
against it, because it dazeleth their light; and thus do wild beasts war
against it, because it increases their groans. Oh, then let not us men bring
up that mo^ster, and hatch up the coccatrices eggs, which so soon as it is
delivered and conceived, it gives our lives mortal wounds. If wicked Herod
in slaying the children of Bethleem, thinking thereby to slay Christ, did not
refrain his cruelty from his own household, but also put his own sons to
death, least they should afterward trouble him for his kingdom: how much more
ought we (not to imitate his cruelty, but his policy) to bridle our natures,
to chain our affections, to subdue our lusts, to conquer our desires, and to
forsake our pleasures, that we might bathe the sword of God his law in the
blood of our own sins; seeing if it live we must die, and if it die we shall
live. It comes unto us with the Sirens song, it embraces us friendly as Ioab
did Abner, but while it saluteth us with one hand, it stabbeth us with the
other. It promises us fair as Iael did to Sisera, and it gives us milk in
steed of water; it serves us in plate, it clotheth us in purple, it lodges
us in ease, but in the end it slaieth our souls, as she did Sisera: it makes
much of us as the high priests did of Judas, it makes us gentlemen of rascals,
it makes us rich men of beggars, it makes us companions of princes, it
delivers us when others are endangered, but in the end it tieth the halter
to our necks, and makes speed for our execution: it serves us as the harlot
did the young man, Proverb. 7. it kisseth us, it flattereth us, it pleases us,
and it promises us all sugared joys, but yet it draws us as the ox is
drawn to the slaughter: it bids us take our ease, follow pastimes, avoid
preaching, love not the prophets, come not at the churches, and forget all
manner of godliness; but in the end it serves us as a noble man does his
old spannell, commending some to the gallows, some to the prisons, some to
noisome sickness, some to poverty, some to slavery, some to madness, some
to untimely death, and some to unmerciful hell. Therefore hear and follow
Salomons counsel, Prou. 7. 24. Hear O my children, let not your hearts
decline to her ways and walk not in her paths, for she causes many to fall
down wounded, and strong men are slain by her; her house is the way unto the
grave which goes down to the chambers of death.

The sixth Sermon.
Verse. 5. Awake O ye drunkards, and weep and howl O ye drinkers of wine,
because of the new wine, for it shall be pulled from your mouth.
NOw we are to handle the exhortations of the prophet made and grounded on the
premised calamity. The which exhortations for our more orderly and formal
proceeding, I will thus divide: some of them concern the miserable overthrow
of their country by famine, whereunto they are prepared by the prophets
sermons, and these are in this first chapter, and to the twelfth verse of the
second chapter: the other generally stir them up unto repentance, from the
twelfth to the eighteenth. The first of these, whereby the inhabitants of the
land are admonished and prepared for the judgment, is either for the people as
in ver. 5. 8. 11. or for the clergy or ministry, as in the 13. of the first
chapter, and the first of the second chapter. That part which is directed to
the people, is by special names and notes of persons described, which are of
two sorts, either for their manners, as drunkards, ver. 5. or for their
occupation or trade of life, as husbandmen, ver. 11. And also these
exhortations have their several reasons to move the people withal, as in this
we have in hand he moves the drunkards, either to awake or to lament, ver. 5.
8. Upon these causes, the first concern themselves, unto the nienth; and from
the nienth to the eleventh, they concern the Lord. That which moves them for
themselves, is first of all their penury and want, ver. 5. their pleasures and
plenty should be pulled from their mouths. Secondly, in regard of the means
how this should be effected, which he describes metaphorically, by comparing
the little beasts to a mighty nation, ver. 6. whose power is there also
described, and in the 7. ver. the work which he should work, that the vines
and fig trees, the most pleasant, profitable and necessary plants of their
country should be utterly subverted. And this we will by the merciful
assistance of God his holy spirit first of all handle. First of all the prophet
calls upon those drunkardes to awake, for we know that much drinking brings
much sleeping; and therefore before the prophet could speak unto this kind of
persons, he calls upon them to awake from their wine, and to rouse up
themselves from the soft bed of their easy, or rather beastly sins. And out
of this we may behold how sweet is the sin of drunkenness, even as sweet as
sleep is to the weary body. Again, here we may note how dangerous is the
sin of drunkenness, that reigning in the bodies of men, their minds cannot be
instructed, their follies cannot be reproved, and their lives cannot be
amended: for they are always sleepie and drouzie, so that nothing can enter
into their hearts, so long as the love of drink reigns in their mouths, and
many other ways I could urge this similitude or metaphor of the prophet, but I
omit them because they are well and worthily declared by other. This therefore
will I observe out of this word Awake, that if men be not If the preachers
awake us not, we shall sleep till we be destroyed.
reclaimed by the preaching of God his word, they shall suddenly be destroyed
by the coming of his judgments. Awake, says the prophet, as if in other
words he had declared his meaning, you sinners, you gluttons, you drunkards,
you unmerciful men, which are taking most delightful pleasure in your
several iniquities. You are lulled a sleep by them, but lift up your eyes
with speed if you be not speedily removed ere every you think thereof, you
shall be suddenly confounded. The prophet David, Psalm. 58. 5. 7. 8 tells us,
that those which will not be rebuked by the prophets are like to the deaf
adder, which will not be cast out by the charmer: and therefore he plainly
tells them that they should consume as the Ise does, and that they should
melt away as a snaile in her own shell, that they should be overthrown as
quickly as a fire of small thorns, that they should be like the untimely fruit
of a woman, and that they should as speedily perish as an arrow flies out of a
bow: this self same wisdom threatens to her disobedient and incredulous
children, Pro. 1. 27. that seeing she had called, but none had answered;
therefore their fear should come like sudden desolation, and their destruction
like a whirle wind. There is not any thing among us but serves for some use,
and the want thereof is noisome unto us; the day for labor, the night for rest,
the winter for ploughing, the summer for reaping, and so the word of God is
sent to awake us before judgment, least judgment should destroy us. The old
world would not be awaked by Noah, and therefore they were drowned: the
Sodomites would not be awaked by Lot, and therefore they were burned: the
Israelites would not be awaked by Jeremy, and therefore they were captiuated:
the Jews would not be awaked by Christ, and therefore they were destroyed: the
Corinthians would not be awaked by Paul, therefore they were spoiled by the
heathen: the inhabitants of Constantinople would not be awaked by Chrysostom,
and then the Barbarous Turk devoured them: and our countrymen of England will
not be awaked by the preachers, therefore famine, wars, plagues, and
sickenesses are seized upon us to overthrow us. Oh if ever we will, let us now
look upon it: there is not one among us, but will cry against an open and
notorious witch, burn her, burn her, she were not worthy to live, but
against the open rebels against the word of God, which as Samuel told Saul,
is equal or as damnable before God and all good men, as is witchcraft; yet we
say nothing thereunto, yea rather as Augustine says most heavenly: He is
accounted a public enemy, who is displeased with these kind of coniurations,
and him do the multitude turn out of audience, displace out of reverence, and
(if they durst) destroy him from among the living. Oh my dear brethren, what
will be the end of these mischiefs, God his majesty is already reviled, Christ
his son is already denied, the devil their enemy is already embraced, the
Gospel our salvation is already despised, the church of God our most dear
mother is already weakened, the preachers of truth our most painful watchmen
are already defaced, and will not the judgments of God come also speedily to
take vengeance upon so manifold contempts, and so abominable rebellions; yet
let us at least receive this for truth, that if yet we be not awakened, we
shortly shall be confounded. The reasons of this doctrine are manifest, Reason
1.
First because as Solomon says, that the prosperity of fools shall slay
them: that is even the meat which wicked men eat, the clothes that cover
them, the friends that flatter them, the professions that enrich them; and the
pleasures that rejoice them, shall turn God his word from them, and them from
everlasting comfort. Oh lamentable misery, or miserable folly! that we should
all of us be so bewitched with our wealth, which is a most merciful and
liberal blessing of God, that we should be all rather payred then amended
thereby; such is the state of them that be rich to themselves and not to God.
Let us then take heed to the most certain word of God, to be instructed by
it; to the most holy voice of preachers, to be reclaimed by them; and to the
most terrible judgments of God whenever they be uttered, that we be not
condemned by them: for if we embrace and believe not the former, we shall be
embraced and corrected by the latter. Secondly, another reason hereof does
David give, Psalm. 73. 27. That all those which withdraw themselves from 2
God shall perish, and those which have not the word of God have not God,
neither any comfortable feeling of his presence, but rather a fearful looking
for of vengeance. Oh how terrible and dangerous is the condition of all
papisticall and carnal Recusants, which do willingly absent themselves from
our assemblies! what do they else but withdraw themselves from the Lord, and
work out their own condemnation? and therefore heavy is their case, which as
Esaias says, 5. 24. As the fire deuoureth the stubble, and the chafe is
consumed of the flame, so their root shall be as rottennes, and their budde
shall rise up like dust, because they have cast off the law of the Lord of
hosts, and contemned the word of the holy one of Israel. But for us which
have already given up our names to the Lord, let us with David Psalm. 73. 28.
draw near unto our God, that our zeal in preaching, our labor in hearing,
our feeling in praying, and our joy in all manner of reverence to the holy
Gospel of Christ, may ever arise higher and higher, to the intent that we also
may declare his works unto other, rather then in lamentable rebellion be made
examples of his feueritie. But now let us come and see the uses of this
doctrine, as they are left in the holy word of God; and this may be one, that
seeing only in the word of God is the Use 1.
foreknowledge of hurt, and the continuance of our peace: oh, then let us
beware of whatsoever that shall endeavor, or any way be able to pull us away
from the same. Our Savior himself having preached a long and sweet fermon
unto his Disciples to arm them against troubles, and to forewarne them against
corruptions, shuts it up with this exhortation, Luk 21. 34. Let not your
hearts be overcome with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and
so that day should come upon you at unawares: whereby the whole church of God
are likewise taught, that the devil should mightily labor by these
instruments of drunkenness and worldly care, to bury the word of God, and to
blot out if it were possible the very names of the elect from the book of God:
and when were these days if now they be not? Shall we look upon the families
of all our land, the very special and distinct persons therein, we shall find
very few that are not infected with one of these poisons: Drunkenness has
banished all religion; invaded the houses of court and country; and already
made the heavens to weep, the earth to fast, the beasts to pine, the poor to
famish, the enemies of God to rejoice, the saints of Christ to be sorrowful,
and the souls of many to be utterly destroyed. The cares of this life have
also so far prevailed, that hell may seem to be enlarged; and the devil
with golden apples has raised up contention in all kingdoms, and by this
means gained infinite possessions. Some have all their minds on wars,
thinking it long till they be at the spoils of their enemy: do these men
either think upon the word of God, which is, or the day of God which shall be?
No, no, the cares of this life have overcome their hearts: some are too noble,
some are too base; some are too rich, some are too poor; some are too learned,
and some are too ignorant: thus by one way or other many are overthrown. But
yet let us not be hindered from preaching, or discouraged from hearing, let us
not want the means to obtain life eternal, and much more let us not refuse
the same being offered. If the Ninevites had not repented when Jonah preached,
within forty days had Nineveh been destroyed: oh happy Nineveh, that thus
was warned by the preaching of one: yea rather blessed be our God that would
not suffer a city to perish, before he had called them by his prophet. But
how blessed are we that have had many prophets and preachers, and yet have not
repented in sackcloth and ashes: yea although the world be hardened with
preaching, and say, where is the promise of his coming? where is the
destruction that you have prophesied? where are the desolations that so many
preachers have threatened? Yet take heed, although the cock crow at
midnight, yea many times before the day, will you say therefore it will never
be light: so although we have a great while ago, and yet continue to cry and
call on you to awake before danger come, be assured it will come as the
morning star after the nightlie darkness. Oh, then let us arise; put on your
clothes, travail to the Lords house, and hearken every one what he will
inform us to amend us, or instruct us to forewarne us. Another use hereof we 2
may make for the conversion of them that are yet hardened in their sins: then
the prophet has taught us, that our whole conversion and safety depends on
the word of God in the mouths of the ministers, and we have learned to watch
over our lives, that none steal away the same from us. But yet we have nothing
to say to them that are no drunkards, no covetous misers, no open and profane
persons, nor yet despisers of the ministry and means of reconciliation: but
rather loving unto them, and yet for all this make no conscience to know God
out of his word, or to doubt of many maine points of salvation, or to disport
themselves in vain and unseemly mirth, and such like, even unto them I say
with Paul, 1. Cor. 15. 34. Awake to live righteously and sin not. You have
lived indeed as Herod that honored John Baptist; as Pilate that thought Christ
a good man; as the Jews that followed him from town to town; but what change
has there been of your lives since you knew these things: if there be none,
as there can be none as yet; then let Paul and Joel cry unto you, Awake to
live righteously. I may say unto these men as Christ said to the Lawyer, that
they are not far from the kingdom of God, they are asleep, but not heavily
asleep; and they may say of themselves as Agrippa said of himself, that they
are almost persuaded to be Christians, but not altogether. Yet one thing more
wants my beloved, not the selling of your houses, nor the distribution of
your goods, nor the relief of the poor, nor the chastening of your bodies;
but the banishing of your vain pleasures, the ouerruling of your affections,
the crucifying of your lusts, the putting from you your ignorance, your
pastimes, your oaths, your tabling, your dicing, your gaming, and all your
cost and time that is evil spent. You have indeed made a good beginning, but
also I wish you to make a good ending; you have cast the devil out of the hall
of your hearts, oh cast him out also from the parlour; you have thrust his head
out of your minds, suffer not therefore his feet to remain within you. Is it
as sweet as sleep unto you to do as ye do, beware least it be as bitter as
gall unto you to receive as you have done; therefore awake my brethren, and
cast off the couerlets of your evil, forsake the sheets of iniquity, and
leap out of the soft bed of selfe-pleasing delights: put on the garments of
righteousness, embrace the cross of christianity, and break the neck of all
your pleasures, as Sampson did of his enemies. The Lord bids us awake to
judgment, the Gospel bids us awake to righteousness; the church bids us
awake to sobernes; the preachers bid us awake to holiness; the creatures bid
us awake to obedience; the earth bids us awake to fruitfulnes; and the
heavens from an high bid us to awake either to salvation, or else sleep to
condemnation: shall we have more need yet to be awaked? Oh no, let us arise
quickly as the church does, Cant. 3. 2. and seek that we may find grace, pray
that we may obtain faith, and knock at the gates of mercy that they may be
opened, least if we slumber any longer we be utterly excluded. Another
observation out of this verse may be this, that seeing the prophet does
especially and by name call upon the drunkards, which are beastly men, or men
like beasts, aduertising them in the first place above others, to look to the
maine chance as the proverb is, he does thereby teach us, that those Such as
are our sins, such shall be our wants.
which above others mispende the good creatures of God, shall also above others
be tormented with their want; drunkards are co^sumers fo corn, neglecters of
time, prodigal in their purses, fools in their heads, disclosers of secrets,
and deuourers of god his benefits; therefore the prophet tells them, they
shall lament in misery, and perish in adversity. We know that the first
folly that ever was wrought by mankind, was wrought by a woman: and therefore
women sithence are evermore accursed more then men, their bodies weaker, their
stomachs tenderer, their pains greater; their lives more slavish, and their
minds more servile. Who was more merry then Naball at his drunken feasts;
and yet who died more miserable then Nabal? Who were more lascivious then
Sodom, and who was more accursed then Sodom; who lived more deliciously then
the Giants of the old world, and yet who perished more generally and decayed
more suddenly? who were more gorgeous then the women of Jerusalem, Esaias 3. 17.
24. 25. which lauished out their wealth in bravery, and beautified their
bodies in pride, but in adversity who were more punished then they, their
secrets were opened, their beauty withered, their bodies uncovered, their
garments torn, their heads balde, their feet bare, and sackcloth in steed of
satin? Most miserable are the abusers of meat or drink, garments and health,
riches and friendship; for unto whom much is given, of them shall much be
required. If the Lord should suffer of his blessed justice, this dearth and
famine to continue, they which have had greatest plenty, being always filled
and clothed with the best, would be more cruelly vexed then the poorer
people, who have been taught by long experience, to content their hungry
stomachs with pinching, and scantie morsels. So that herein you shall find a
most comfortable benefit of abstinence from meat, and temperance in meat;
they teach us to abound, and they teach us to want, they preserve us in
health, and prepare us against adversity. Hearken unto this you belly gods
that worship your tables, and pray to your kitchins: and do you also that sit
all the day at tauerns and alehouses, lend your ears to this lesson, that
your wicked custom and company draw not your lives into most fearful
extremity: Consider before hand what were your misery if the streams were
dried up, the cellers were emptied, and the corn fields desolate
wildernesses, that you could not be satisfied abroad, nor yet contented
within; what relief could you find to pacify your greedy appetite? would you
then be contented when you have no other remedy? that is not thanks worthy:
will you pray for your flesh pots as the Israelites did? that were to work out
speedily your own condemnation: will you then turn to the Lord and confess
your gluttony? but such conuersions are seldom unfeigned; will you patiently
endure intolerable famine? oh but that you are not able, but will rather eat
of the flesh of your own bodies, and drink of the loathsomnes of your own
waters: Therefore either now spare your riot that you may be prepared to want;
or else fill up your bodies with all manner of luxury, that you may be
confounded with all manner of penury. The reasons of this doctrine may Reason
1.
be these: first, because this kind of men shall want their God and cheifest
felicity, when the drunkards want their pots, the gluttons their belly cheer,
the proud men their bravery, and the idle persons their ease, Phil. 3. 19.
Some persons there are that are so far besotted with their lives, that they
make as the Apostle says, Their God to be their belly; and in another place
he tells us what shall be the estate of these days wherein we live, That
men shall be lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God. Oh wretched time that
hatched such monsters, or rather wretched men bewitched with such pleasures!
what will some say, the Apostle never heard, nor any other preacher can ever
prove, that ever a man was so foolish as to make his belly his god, or so
faithless as to say he loved his pleasures above his God. Indeed I grant at
the common law we can hardly prove it, but in the spiritual law we can
easily show it: we weigh not the word but the practice of men, and if you
find a man (for every one must search himself) that has bestowed more on his
belly then he can affoorde to the church, and poor members of God, that
robs and spoileth the church liuinges that he may entertain noble guestes,
and keep a liberal house; or that raketh by extortion and unlawful means
from his poor tenants, that he may brave it out in London, and exceed
voluptuously at home, in the mean season not regarding religion, nor obeying
the admonition of a good conscience, nor the Gospel of God, I say such a man
has his belly for his god, whatsoever outward profession he make to the
contrary. Again, if men do not spend more time in pleasures then in praying,
preaching, and hearing God his word, but omit the time thereunto appointed, and
admit other vanities into the place thereof, which almost all the young men of
England do, I say also that these men love their pleasures more then God. Then
hearken to your doom you despisers, and be ashamed or else confounded, that
the earth which is not yours but the Lords earth, should bear up such rebels
from the pit of hell. See we not the preachers of God his word, how our
congregations are lessened, how our sermons are mocked, how our doctrine is
derided, and how our exhortations (nay not ours but the Lords) are scoffingly
refused. See we not gentlemen and their families at their ease, when they
should be laboring in the Lords vineyard; Lawyers in their studies, when they
should be in the churches; merchants in their counting houses, when they are
wanting at sermons; ruffians at tauernes, young men at dancing schools,
husbandmen at drinking feasts, though heaven and earth cry against it. And the
fear of a mortal man prevails more then the love of the immortal God: and
yet for all this men will say they love God above all, and their neighbors as
themselves, when they do not, nor can do any of them both. Then does it
necessarily follow, that if you want these things, you want your God; and
therefore they shall leave you in most miserable adversity. Another reason of
this 2
doctrine is, that which David gives Psalm. 17. 14. They have no portion, but
in this life; they can have no comfort of the graces of the Lords children, so
that when they are perplexed and weaned from these things, they are more vexed
then other men. This is the just judgment of God, that where men have most of
al set their heart, there above others they should receive their hurt. Now my
dear brethren, take up a taste of this food which I have prepared for your
souls, and lust not after the wild Do, when the tame kid may serve your
turn. Use I beseech you, these plain and easy doctrines, to show us the
misery of our times wherein we live, and of their lives among whom we live:
We are altogether set on eating and drinking, as if our souls delighted in
wine, or should be saved by meat; we regard not the want which the poor
endure, we think not on the hand which is ready to strike us, and we fear
not the calamity which does already compass us. Make not your belly your
God, and take not your portion in this life only: know you that a good
Christian cannot come to heaven, but by often fasting and continual
watchfulness: and see you not how little this was practiced, till the dearth
came and put us in mind hereof; now then let us redeem the time that we have
evil spent, and spare that meat for the poor, which we may save for our
selves. We have long lived by bread, but now let us live by the word of God,
let us I beseech you, cast off our carnal desires, and take no rest in our
own houses with Vrijah, till the Lords people be in quietness: let this
prevail with us, that look how much comfort we take in abusing these, so much
discomfort shall we find by forsaking them. The uses which offer themselves
out of this doctrine are these: first, that the confidence which the wicked
raise up to Use 1.
themselves in the things of this life, shall be their utter overthrow, Isai.
20 5, 6. that whereas Egypt and Ethiopia were the comfort of Israel, contrary
to the express commandment of God, the Lord threateneth to captiuate these
nations, and to destroy the people in their own expectation, that both the
comfort and comforters should be at once confounded. Even so does he in like
manner in these days, where men lean more on the weak staff of meat and
drink, then on the strong rock of God his word, he breaks the staff in
pieces, and makes the flitters to pearse through our own hearts. This is the
reward of belly-gods, that their joys are removed, their hope is decayed,
their consolation confounds them, and the want of those things wherein they
most delighted, shall procure them most easelesse pain, because they most
corrupted them. The rich glutton which exceeded in delicious fare, and in all
abundance of wines and pleasant drinks, was tormented without all pity for
want of water. The prodigal son, who lauished out riotously his fathers
legacy, like our English spend-thriftes at tables, at drinking, at whooring, at
gaming, in bravery of apparel, horses, hounds and delicates: was constrained
for his office to be a swineheard, for his meat to want that which his beasts
were fed with, for his bravery to be basely and beggarly araied, and his
whole felicity was turned into most lamentable, yet due deserved misery.
Harken therefore unto me my brethren, and hear me when I tell you the issues
of your pleasures: If you be aged, think what were your sorrow, that if those
riches, which in youth you labored for with your hands, to comfort you withal
when you should be old, should be suddenly taken from you, then may you say,
my yoonger years I consumed in vanity, and elder days must perish in
poverty. If you be young men, consider with your own hearts, that if the
liberty you took should be abridged, the pastimes you played should cause you
so many stripes, and your youthful days should be turned into languishing
infirmities: would not this amaze you to feel it, and discomfort you to
consider it? Yes, yes, my beloved, when your riches are the coals, your desires
are the fire, your pleasures are the bellows, and your own lives are the
irons to be burned in this miserable misery. I delighted, shall one say, in
hunting, and now the beasts devour me: I delighted in dancing, but now my
woonted mirth is turned into hellish yelling: I delighted in drinking, but my
cups are empty, and the natural heat of my stomach deuoureth my body like
a fire; I delighted in stealing, but now does the world rob me of my life, and
the devil of my soul: I delighted in whooring, but alas my diseases are become
loathsome to God and man: I delighted in slandering and hurting other, but my
lies are recompensed with my own life: I was a swearer, but the Lords wounds
which I blasphemed have witnessed my death: I was a coniurer, the devil has
me: I desired large fields, but now have I lost mine own. And thus shall all
sinners come to their ends, as Esau which loving hunting, by his love lost his
blessing. Another use arising 2
from the same doctrine shall be this, that seeing we which be most abusers of
the Lords benefits, shall by their want be most of all punished: let us before
this time of adversity come, humble our souls and amend our sins, as the
prophet calls upon Babylon many years before she was destroyed, Isa. 47. 1.
23. Come down and sit in the dust, O virgin, daughter Babell, sit on the
ground; for there is no throne O daughter of the Chaldeans, for thou shall no
more be called tender and delicate. So my beloved, come you down now while you
hear me calling unto you, and while this wrath is but coming upon you: you
have every one advanced a throne for your sins to sit on, but pull it down,
or else it shall defile your souls. Yet there is time, turn you from your
evils, you drunkards to sobernes, you wantons to modesty, you swearers to
pity, you idle ones to diligence, you rich men to humility, you gentlemen to
religion, you women to righteousness, you young men to learning, you old men to
praying, and you poor men to patience: turn turn I say before this
adversity, that either your change may change the Lords meaning, or use may
ease the rigor of your punishment. Come down I beseech you, take up your
cross and follow Jesus Christ: let temperance rule you, let religion persuade
you, let your Savior win you, let his ministers warn you, let the earth
speak unto you, and be ye all converted, or else continue in your delights,
and cease not to offend God which hates your lives, or the church which
wishes your wealth, or the poor which pray for your peace, or the earth which
threatens want, or the devil that gapeth for your souls. Howl allye
drinkers of wine: Now the prophet tells these drunkards when they were awaked
what they should do, not go to their feasts again, or to the vomits again,
or to the tauerns, or to the alehouses, or to their mirth: but he bids them
go to the house of mourning. Weep says the prophet and howl: that is, as if
he had said, lay away your pleasures, and banish all evil companions; drink
up your tears as wine, and eat your sorrows as bread: for a sudden calamity
is come upon you; the meat that is in your hand shall not come into your
belly, and your mouths shall be weaned from sucking and swilling in of strong
drink. From hence when the prophet bids them to weep, I might note unto
you the nature, or rather an inseparable companion of true repentance, which is
a mournful heart and a weeping countenance, which does not only sorrow for
the fault, but as it were wash away the sins of the soul: for the tears
which we weep in this life do show our uncleanness, which if they were able
they would cleanse away. Tears are said to be the blood of the soul, because
they proceed of a wounded and sorrowful spirit; and therefore let not
desperate ruffians and carnal persons, think that the sighs, and groans,
and wishes of their hard hearts, can go for payment in the Lords presence, or
that the bare misliking and leaving of their old sins, is true repentance:
for as the wound cannot be healed, but the party shall be payned; so the life
cannot be amended, except tears or true sorrow be expressed. But I will come
nearer to my purpose, for I cannot stand on every word; and therefore I will
only note that which is fittest and of greatest necessity.

The seventh Sermon.
IN the next place he bids them to howl, which is an action properly
belonging to wolves, and is metaphorically applied unto these drunkards, for
they are both deuourers; the one of lambs, the other of corn; both are
beasts, the one in nature, the other in likeness: and seeing they have reioised
like beasts; now also he bids them to lament like beasts. And therefore
seeing I seldom find this word Howl, but it is applied unto beasts or wicked
men: I therefore note hereby that the ungodly coming Ungodly men very beasts
in adversity.
into adversity are like to the brutish and unreasonable creatures. They
sorrow without hope, they weep without comfort, they howl without prayer, and
they have their wits and their ease taken away at once; if they be merry, it is
for their wealth; if they be heavy, it is for their want: So that then we may
say justly of them, as Paul said of some Ephesians, they are beasts in the
likeness of men: the prophet David tells us, Psalm. 49. 20. That man being in
honor continues not, but becomes like beasts that perish. The wicked being
in honor are inconstantly seated, that serves for their glory: but they are
like the beasts that perish, that shows their misery: in prosperity, they
are uncertain; in their adversity, they are unhappy: when they are lifted
up, they will be more then men; but when they are thrust down, they are found
equal to beasts. The prophet Isay, cap. 16. ver. 7. prophesying the
destruction of Moab, because of their pride, arrogancy, indignation, and lies,
tells them as this Ioell does, that Moab shall howl unto Moab: and every one
shall howl: for the foundation of Kirhareseth shall ye morn, and yet they
shall be stricken. Will a man spare a woulfe although he cry bitterly? No, no,
for he knows he will raven again: so God will not spare the wicked, although
they howl mournfully, for he knows they will sin again. Look upon this
you desperate wicked persons and wretched bondslaues of Satan, here may you
see what you will do when the Lords hand is upon you, will you then turn unto
him when he is turned from you? or will you then remember him when your own
memory is removed? think you then to have power to pray, or any hearts to
hope in Christ, when your reason and heart is taken from you? think upon it (I
beseech you) before hand, for else you undo your own souls, insomuch as
when the water floudes of trouble come upon you as the just vengeance for your
lives, then you be filled with easelesse yelling, beastly howling, unmerciful
suffering, intolerable complaining, and no manner of relieuing; then shall you
find that they which refuse knowledge and instruction and correction in mercy,
shall feel the same in judgment; and you shall wish that you had endured any
torment to be released of your present desperation. The reasons here of are
plain: first because Reason 1.
they cannot understand judgment, Prou. 28. 5. If they be crossed in their
affairs and cast down in their lives, they know not that then they are
arraigned before the judgment seat of God, which makes them as far without
all natural reason, as they were before without all spiritual religion. David
said of them that the Lords judgments are far above the sight of the
wicked, and therefore says he do they defy all their enemies: alas seely
souls, they think that other men's harms do not warn them, and that the
Lord will never call them to account for their follies. They imagine if they
please themselves they displease not God, and think if the hardest fall upon
them that ever can come, yet their estate is better then other men's. But my
beloved, save your souls (I beseech you) out of Satan's claws: he draws you
on with deceitful persuasions, telling you that in adversity you shall be
like other men; in the mean season your eyes are blinded that you cannot see
how heavy the judgments of God lie upon you, purposing to take you at
advantage in extremity; that in sickness he will make you raging; in famine he
will bring you to blasphemy; in wars he will make your desperation, and that
which is worst of al, in death he will bring you to endless condemnation.
Therefore think (I beseech you) with your selves, and rejoice not like
beasts, and then shall you mourn like beasts: learn the course and causes of
the Lords judgments that you may never feel the want of a peaceable and
bold conscience. Another reason is this, because this is only the prerogative
2
of the Lords children in adversity, to keep their souls by patience, Luke
21. 19. Romans 5. 3. and therefore the Lord will not give his childrens meat
unto dogs, nor yet cast such a pearl before such swine: Where there is a
dissimilitude of joy, there is also a dissimilitude of sorrow; but betwixt the
good and bad there is no likeness of their mirth, and therefore there shall be
no likeness of their woe: they are proud when we are poor; they are many when
we are few; they are merry when we are sorry; they are glorious when we
seem comfortless, and therefore when we are relecued they are distressed. God
is our comfort, but it is their comfort if there were no God: the devil is our
enemy, but their father; hell is our bondslaue, but their hangman. We rejoice
as if we reioiced not, but they rejoice as if they were borne for nothing else:
we sorrow as if we wept not; but they have their eyes weeping in life, their
hearts weeping in death, and their souls weeping in hell. Think now my
beloved, that this is our time of lamentation, and this is our lamentation of
time, to see men weeping that should rejoice, men reioicing that should lament:
Woe be unto them, for they have their consolation. Therefore if once the world
turn with the wicked, then shall happiness be like ise, their pleasure like a
summer dew, their friends shall forsake them, their fear shall possess them,
and their misery shall overcome them. Seeing therefore this is the case of the
wicked, that know not nor fear not God, hence arises this most assured and
fearful, and yet comfortable use to be known: that such as is Use 1.
the life of the wicked, such shall be their end, Amo* 4. 1, 2, 3. The prophet
in the said place calling upon the heads and rich men of Israel by the name
of the kine of Bashan, that fed in the mountain of Samaria, tells them
that the Lord has sworn, that seeing they behaved themselves like beasts,
he would also use them like beasts: for the thorns should stifle them, and
their posterity should be taken with fish-hookes, and they should go out of
the gaps and breaches forward like kine, and they shall be cast headlong out of
the palaces. And these kind of beasts are the oppressors of the poor, the
deuourers of meat and drink, the neglecters and despisers of the Lords
worship, and such as profane the Lords sacrifices with their own inventions,
verse. 1. 4. 5. Consider now if ever there were mo beasts in Israel then are
in England. O lamentable world, will thou ever proceed to provoke the Lords
wrath, to oppress thy own flesh, to spill the life of thy own brother, and
to shed the blood of thy own soul: do thou not yet know that if thou
delight in cursing, thou shall receive cursing, and because thou love not
blessing, it shall be far from thee? Yea I will add this also, think thou
not that thy cruel life shall have a cruel death? and thy merciless heart
shall receive a merciless plague? does not the scripture say, That the same
measure shall be heaped on thee that thou did power upon other? Have thou lead
all thy life in swearing, and do thou think thou shall die with blessing?
have thou walked wantonly, passed the time pleasantly, pampered up thy own
body delicately, consumed thy strength lecherously, wasted thy wealth
prodigally, despised the ministry wickedly, frequented evil company
joyfully, used all manner of gaming greedily, and will thou hope for all this to
die the death of the righteous, and to make a blessed latter end? Then is it
not true (which is most true) that such as men sow such shall they reap; and
if their life be the season, their death is the harvest. Oh that I could
persuade you to live well, as you persuade your selves to die well; then
should your times be happy, your lives be godly, and all our ends be
blessed. Therefore on the other side, we that are in league with the Lord of
glory, how happy is our case, seeing as we live, so shall we die; our
wearied bodies shall rest in his kingdom, our sorrowful souls shall be
refreshed in his kingdom, our wounds shall be healed in heaven, our tears
shall be wiped from our eyes, our lives shall be disburdened of slanders: and
to conclude, seeing we being alive are buried with Christ by our profession,
we shall also at our death be raised up with Christ to his everlasting
possession. Secondly, 2
another use which does arise from this point is this, that seeing the wicked
are so beastly in their sorrows, and so desperate in their afflictions, that
sometimes wickedness is rewarded in this life, though not always; for their
comfortless estate, is the just punishment of their wretchlesse behavior. We
have manifold examples hereof in the sacred word of God: who was more cruel
then Adoni-bezek, who cut off the thumbes and toes of seventy kings, and
afterward by the Lords commandment he was so served himself? Judge. 1. 6, 7.
Who was more proud then Nabuchadnezzar? yet in this life was his understanding
taken from him, and he driven to eat his meat with brute beasts. Tzedechias,
which burned the book of God, was taken by his enemies, had his children
slain before his face, and afterward had his own eyes put out, and died at
Babylon. Herod that wicked wretch was eaten of worms, Ananias and Saphira were
slain by the Lord himself, with a great many of like terrible judgments of
God, of which you may read both in the scriptures, and in the writings of
other. There are a viperous brood among us, which are not ashamed openly to
profess, that they care not so much for the pains in another life, if they may
escape the plagues of this life that is present, and notwithstanding they fear
the punishment of their sins should be executed on them in this life to
their open shame, and in the life to come to their utter destruction; yet they
will never be amended by Gospel or iudgemen: t let such persons think what
shall be their danger, if they continue in this wicked opinion and wretched
life. For assuredly as David once said, so will we ever say, that the same
which the wicked fears shall come upon them: why should thou be more
ashamed to be punished before a few of thy friends in this life, then to be
laid open to the full unto all the world at the latter day? Learn therefore
to purge thy hands and heart from sins wherein thou dwell, and when they
shall be burned thou shall be saved: think that thou art not better then
those which are already named, and therefore thou may be hanged with;
Absolon, be stoned with Achan, be cursed with Canaan, be brained with
Abimelech, be eaten with dogs as Iezabel was, be slain with the sword as
Adoniah was, and finally fall from the top of honor to the bottom of
ignominy, as Haman did. Because of the new wine. This is the cause why he
bids the drunkards and drinkers to awake, because they should loose that
which they best loved: your new wine that is so sweet to your mouths,
wherein you dwell day and night, shall be taken from you. And in this the
prophet notes unto us the whole corruption of carnal and wicked men, that if
they be joyful, or if they be sorrowful, it is only for the things of this
life present: when Wicked men only merry and sorry for wordly things.
their barnes and storehouses are filled, their fields clad with cattle,
their names exalted with worldly honor, then they strike up the ioyfullest
music to their hearts that they can invent: but when their wealth decreaseth,
or sickness takes them, or the famine vexes them, or the rumors of bloody
and deadly war disquieteth them, then are they heavy, then only are they
sorrowful, Reu. 18. 9, 10, 11. Luc. 17. 27. Hose. 7. 14. They account it a
special madness to mourn for the affliction of Joseph, that is, to weep for
their own sins, for the persecution of the Lords flock, for the decrease of
the faithful, and contempt of the Gospel: also they think it a mere folly,
for men to rejoice at the hearing of a sermon, or the reproouing of sin, or
the planting of a preaching minister, and the remoouing of a cipher, or the
establishing of religion. But let them know it is a thing accursed, to rejoice
for vanity, and not for godliness; to weep more for the loss of a father,
or the want of bread, or the feeling of sickness, then for the famine of God
his word, or the death of a faithful man. The reasons for confirmation hereof
may be Reason 1.
these, because only in these temporal and worldly things they place the rest
of their souls, Luc. 15. 19. The rich man having new builded his barnes,
reaped his corn, and filled his storehouses, bids his soul to take her
ease, for he had store enough for many years: we marvel then that the loss
of these things goes so near them, when with them they loose the very health
of their souls. What shall we say to the greedy cormorants, which to gather
wealth as this man did, reposing therein the hope of their health, while
unlawfully they would save their souls, unrighteously they condemn them: Oh,
let them also beware, which being the outward professors of the Gospel, yet
never make an end to encroach more living. I cannot say they, hope to be saved
by them; but I may be bold to say, that they much distaine the glory of God,
while they advance their names they endanger their souls. Secondly, another
reason is, because the love of these carnal 2
commodities banisheth away the love of God, 1. Ioh. 2. 16. How shall men which
have denied God, and are become idolaters, as all worldly men are, Ephesians. 5. 5.
care for any religion, or rejoice for any goodness, yea rather lament it; or
how shall they lament any evil, but rather rejoice in it; because they are
void of all goodness themselves? A godly father said of them in this sort,
that they account that evil, which does not make them evil, as famines,
sickness, and other calamities; but for swearing, drunkenness, whooredome, and
other vices they call them not evils. They are not ashamed while they praise
good things, themselves to be evil: and they think it a greater disgrace, to
have a ragged town, a thatched house, an unhandsome leg, or a poor estate,
then to have an ill life. This said he long ago, and now with tears I may
say it again, that men in our times, through the want of religion, which
through abundance they have loathed, and rebellion they have vomited up: fear
no God, but the enemy: love no knowledge, but their law evidence; and they care
for no health, but bodily medicines: and thus they weep when they should
rejoice, and rejoice when they should weep. The uses which arise from this
doctrine are these: First, that these carnal minds, and men shall never Use 1.
be eased in their carnal sorrows, or comforted in their worldly comforts.
Therefore James said, cap. 4. 2, 3. Ye lust and have not, ye envy and have
indignation, and cannot obtain: you fight and war, and get nothing be cause
you ask not: you ask and receive not, because you ask amiss, that you might
consume it on your lusts. Wherein the heavenly Apostle has set out to the
full the nature of al worldly wishers, and carnal criers, wherein these things I
be seech you to observe most diligently: First, that this is the nature of
wicked me^ in their prayers being in distress, that they envy and have
indignation even at God himself, thinking that he does them great injury thus
to disquiet their ease, and to trouble them with want: Oh fearful condition
of wicked men, that their very prayers are nothing else but murmuring against
the Almighty. Secondly, he notes the very cause why the wicked crave any
thing at the hand of their creator, that (says he) they might bestow it on
their lusts. And surely I am much afraid that the feigned prayers of a great
number in this time of dearth and famine, have had the like inward motion;
which is the cause that the Lord regards not our prayers, and remooueth not
his judgments. Think not therefore that ever your cries for corn, for bread,
for meat, for plenty, for cheapnes, and for comfort shall take any effect:
although you fill the air with your outcries, or the earth with your tears,
until your carnal minds be banished; your envying spirits be humbled; your
unjust and unlawful suites be silenced: yea until you have more regard to
your souls then to your bodies; to the Gospel, then to the corn fields; and
to the glory of God, above wife or children, life or salvation. Another use
belonging to this doctrine, our Savior gives Mat. 6. 31. 32. Take no thought,
says he, 2
what you shall eat, or what you shall drink, or wherwithal you shall be
clothed; for after these things seek the Gentiles, and your heavenly father
knows that you have need of those things: but seek you first the kingdom
of God, and the righteousness thereof, and all these things shall be ministered
unto you. Here may we learn the medicine for our sickness, the supply of our
want, and the comfort of our distress, who shall bid us mourn because we have
no meat? Indeed it is to be lamented; yet Christ says, take no thought for
it; thou art a poor man; so was he: thou have a family; so had he: thou
live by thy labor; so did he: thou live in times of scarsitie, so did he.
Then he speaks by experience, sorrow not for thy want, he was the son of
God, so art thou: it was his meat to do his fathers will; so let it be thine:
Say not as the woman did to Eliah, we will eat this and then die; but rather
we will endure this and then die. The Gospel is my meat, the son of God is
my clothing, and the kingdom of heaven is my inheritance: shall I lust after
other meat, or desire a woollen garment, and wish for a worldly inheritance?
No, no, heaven is all things, there is for me and my children: Christ is all
things* he will cloth me and my children: and the Gospel is all things, it
shall feed me and my family: my soul shall eat my body, my body shall not
devour my soul. Thus let us comfort the poor members of Christ that want,
and encourage one another, in distress against distrust: let us weep with them
that weep, and mourn with them that mourn, that we may rejoice with them
that shall rejoice in the kingdom of heaven. For it shall be pulled from your
mouth. Having awaked these persons by calling, and troubled them with mourning,
least they should esteem the matter lightly, that their sin could be washed
away with tears; he tells them plainly that the wine shall be pulled from
their mouth: and this he does in my judgment to drive them to a deeper
conscience of their sins, and consideration of the Lords wrath. So that he
may seem thus to say unto them, it is already decreed, that your evil shall
not be turned away, therefore lament your calamity. And from hence we may
note, that all the feigned repentance, and vnco^fortable cries No mercy
procured by feigned and worldly sorrow.
of the wicked shall never turn away the wrath of God from them. So does the
holy Ghost declare, Heb. 12. 17. Genesis 27. 38. when Esau with abundance of
weeping cried out for the blessing, yet he could not obtain it. Wherein there
appears their endless misery, that their tears shall be no more accepted of
God, then are the cries of a beast in the hand of a butcher. The Lord knows
that they are not humbled for his sake, but for their own; and were it not
more for the fear of their own misery, then of his judgments, they would never
take his name in their mouths, except to blaspheme him. The Lord can and will
show himself froward with them that are froward, Psalm. 18. and have as deaf
ears at their cries as ever they had at our sermons: he will be as merciles
unto them, as ever they were to their brethren: no children which seem
innocent, no women which seem penitent, no old men which seem religious, no
young men which seem glorious, nor any blood which seems precious, shall
remove their pains, and reuerse his sentence. And this does the holy Ghost
always persuade unto the wicked, because he tells them in other places, as
Prou. 15. 8. Mich. 6. 7. That their sacrifices are abomination unto him;
Reason 1.
and if they would give him the fruit of their bodies for the sin of their
souls, yet will he not be merciful unto them. What did the Lord in outward
show better accept then sacrifice, and what could outwardly show greater
obedience then with Abraham to offer up their own children: yet it being done
of a wicked man or womon, all were worth nothing? Secondly, the Lord has
appointed 2.
a time wherein he would have our conversion performed, which being passed,
there can be no redemption, Psalm. 95. 7. Cant. 5. 6. To day if you will hear
his voice, then harden not your hearts: the fruitless tree in the Gospel had a
time wherein it should bear fruit, which being omitted, without all mercy is
hewed down. Therefore have you also a time, in the which if you be converted,
then shall your death be dear in the sight of the Lord: but if you neglect this
time, your blood shall be vile in his presence. But when will you say is this
time, and how shall we know it? Surely, if a man in his last testament give a
legacy of money to his son or servant, and name not the time of the payment,
the law does adiudge it to be due at the death of the testatour: so the Lord
having set no time in his testament when thou shall repent, either in young or
in old age, in the day or in the night; he thereby teaches us that every day,
yea every minute is appointed for our repentance, till we have repented:
therefore how much we live without conversion, so much we loose; and every day
calls upon us to fulfill our fathers testament, except we be bastards. Seeing
now that the case of wicked men is so pitiles at the Lords hand, let us see
what exhortations we may gather from hence for our instruction: and first of
all let us take that which our Savior has left, Luke 13. 24. V se 1.
Strive says he, to enter in at the strait gate, for the time shall come that
many shall strive and not be able to enter. Labor (I beseech you) for
Religion; for the knowledge of the Gospel; for obedience to the ministry,
that your prosperity may be continued; and your adversity may be relieved?
What a shame is it for men of wealth and worth, to be shut out of a noble man's
gates? or rather what a shame is it that the tears and suit of a son being
in prison or beggarly, shall not move his own parents to clemency? so shall
it be with you when you shall have mercy shut against you, because you cared
not for the blood of Christ; and you shall have your own father by creation
not once acknowledge you to be children, or pity your calamity, because you
disobeied him: therefore now strive, that then you may enter; now obey, that
then you may be received; now humble your selves, that then you may be lift up;
and let this provoke you like an iron grate unto the embracing of the fear of
God. Presume not on the Lords mercy, despair not of your own estates, say
not it is too soon, for that is impiety, yea, the hour now is: think not it
is too late, for that is blasphemy, but if now thou can enter, now also thou
shall be received. Another use heerof does the Lord himself make, Esaias 17 13.
That even the same 2
things wherein we trusted being in prosperity, shall (if they can) deliver us
up when we are in adversity: when thou criest says the Lord, the things that
thou have gathered together shall deliver thee, but the wind shall take them
away; vanity shall pull them away; but he that trusts in me shall inherit
the land and possess my holy mountain. The Lord mocketh and derideth at the
wicked men, as if he should say unto them in this sort: you old men, you have
gathered many fables; you young men, you have hoarded many pastimes; you women,
you have laid up many trifles; you rich men have encroched many purchases; you
noble men have increased your wordly honor: now call to these your gods in
sickness, in famine, in war, in poverty, in misery, in death; but I will
blow them from you, they cannot help you: you shall only know, that they
which have relied on my blessing, believed in my promise, delighted in my
truth, they only shall have the earth for their possession, and the heavens
for their inheritance. How foolish are men that seek not for these things
before hand, that know not that in their wealth they choose for their life
which they must abide and cannot avoid when they are in distress, either
godliness which procures their worldly ignominy, and their heavenly glory,
or else wickedness and unlawful riches, that causes their worldly majesty,
but their everlasting misery.

The eight Sermon.
Verse. 6. For a nation comes upon my land, mighty and without number: whose
teeth are like the teeth of a lion, and he has the jaws of a great lion.
NOw the Prophet comes to his metaphorical allusions, whereby sometimes he
moves the people, sometimes he describes the persons, which are the workers
of this calamity, as in this verse. where he resembles the beasts to a
nation, as he does the Pismires and conies, Prou. 30. 25. 26. Then he shows
for the terror of the people how they are armed to destroy, even as lions
with their greedy jaws and sharp teeth, which tear in sunder whomsoever
they meet: neither shall they only execute this malice upon men, but they
shall take vengeance on the vines and fig trees, stripping off the bark,
breaking down the branches, and devour the fruit and the body together. From
hence we may No resisting of the Lords judgment.
first of all note, seeing he makes these beasts infinite in number, mighty
in power, and a nation for policy and unity, that it is in vain to resist
the judgments of God seem they never so small: What could be more base then
to threaten the Jews, which had so many cities, so many castles, so many corn
fields, so many storehouses, and so many inhabitants to be destroyed by a few
grasshoppers and caterpillars, which a man may tread on the ground; or physic
or natural means may drive away: yet we see in this place the spirit of God
so deals and armeth them with sufficient power to dismay and devour all
things. Shall we now say that any judgment of God is small and of no
reckoning, when he can make the unarmed worms to weary the harnished
soldiers? No verily, for he has set his judgments, some in the heavens,
some in the earth, some in the air, and some in the waters, that every where
we might be driven from rebellion, and drawn from disobedience. We may see in
the heavens sometimes darkness, who can remedy it? we may feel in the earth
barrenness, who can redress it? we may smell in the air loathsomnes, who can
purge it? and a little billowe of the waters can ouerwhelme us, who then can
save us? For this cause Solomon Prou. 27. 12. called him a fool, that running
against judgment destroyed himself. Oh says he, in sickness why should I
repent, I hope the physician can remedy this, and so delaieth till it be too
late. If he be poor, then says he, I will take of other men's goods, and they
shall maintain me, and considers not that the gallows are at hand: Nay that
which is worse, they see the judgments of God against idle teachers,
unfruitful hearers, unclean livers, and intolerable blasphemers, and yet they
cannot hide themselves from it. Oh my dear brethren, we have many judgments
in our land, and how do men resist them? the husbandman by plowing, the
gentlemen by fining, the rich men by gayning, and almost every one by ungodly
flattering: therefore I beseech you, let us no longer be hardened, for we do
strive against the stream, and bid war against the almighty; if there be
any means to escape them, it is by yielding, or else assuredly we shall never
be eased. Let us then set our hearts at rest, and never wage battle against
the Everlasting: Reason 1.
for he as we may read Job. 34. 20. and 29. 37. can easily without all might
destroy the strongest, catch the wisest, ouerturne the swiftest, and confound
the noblest: why do we then take a contrary course, as Balaam did, which the
Lord has not hitherto blessed? It is not in our labor to relieve us, or in
the earth to redress us; it is not in our repentance or submission, but
principally in the mercy of God to deliver us. Then I beseech and entreat by
your morning and evening prayer, that our hearts may be plowed, and then shall
our barnes and garners be filled. Again, why should we delay to work our own
reconciliation, 2
who is able to abide the angry countenance of the Lord? for the Psalmist
says, If his wrath be kindled but a little, then blessed are they that trust
in him. Oh, how infinite is his mercy toward us, which have so long felt his
judgments, and yet has not his wrath been kindled. I may fear, and all that
have any souls may fear, that all this time the coals of our transgressions
are in gathering together, and shortly will the Lords wrath set them on fire,
and then who shall not be burned? This is evident that we resist the
judgments of God, because we seek not a truce with him: And therefore look
shortly to be served as the Jews were, to have our flies turned into lions,
our worms into beasts, our friends into foes, and these small evils which
already we have, shall be grown insufferable. The Use 1.
uses which arise from hence, is first the same that Elihu Jobs friend makes,
Job. 37. 24. when he had reckoned up the wonderful judgments and works of
God, he thus concludes, Let men therefore fear before him, for he regards
none that are wise in their own conceits: Wherein he teaches us, that
although the Lord works strangely in the world, and yet forbeareth to destroy
us, it is because that thereby we should learn to fear him: for in the fear
of God is all religion, and assurance of salvation. David says, it is the
beginning of wisdom: Peter tells us, it is the continuance of our adoption:
and Paul says, it is the end of our profession, when he bids us to finish
up our salvation with fear and trembling. Then my beloved, let us fear God,
for so the word of God exhorts, and the Lord commands, and the world and
course of nature teaches, Fear him not as a judge, for then thou shall be
condemned; fear him not as a servant, for then thou shall be punished; but
fear him as a father, and then thou shall be delivered. But some wax
desperate, through feeling of the Lords judgments, and others are hardened,
because they have seen others taken, and themselves escaped: and in our times
although we have so many causes to fear him (oh fearful times wherein is so
little fear?) we may fear this one thing, least as it falls out with a
sick man a little before his end, he has a lightening of his pains, so that
he feels himself void of pangs, and then presently dies: so now having so
little fear after so long fear, we be suddenly destroyed. But some will say,
if we knew that the Lord had sent it, and not appointed any means to
redress, then we would rest contented, and in the mean time we cannot choose
but labor to be eased by some way or other. I grant if the Lord should sound
from heaven unto you, or send an angel to reprove your rebellion, then it is
like you would give over; but why are you not contented to know this by his
word, that it is the punishing of your sins, and till you do away your
sins, he will not do away his judgments. Well said Elihu, Job. 33. 13, 14.
Why do thou strive against God, for he does not give account of all his
matters: for God speaks once or twice, and man sees it not, then he opens
the ears of men by their corrections which he had sealed, that he might turn
them from their evil, hide their pride, and keep their soul from the pit. So
long therefore as we are not admonished by once or twice, we regard not till
we be chastened, and then like wretches murmur at our pains, envy at our
sufferings, and rebel at his judgments: we open that which he would cover,
that is our pride, and we destroy that he would save, that is our souls; then
shall his weakest instruments work our greatest calamity.

To make my vine waste, and to pill off the bark of my fig Verse. 7.
tree, to make it bare, and to cast it down, that the branches thereof be made
white. Now the Prophet tells them where this nation should conquer, that is,
among the vines and fig trees, which were very common in Judea, being the
sustentation of the poor, and the delight of the wealthy: and these should
all be broken, all be barren, and all be withered and left fruitless. From
hence we may observe this doctrine, that the fruits of the earth are destroyed
for Fruits fail for man's sin.
the sin of man: what had these vines offended, that they should be wasted?
or what had the fig trees sinned, that they should be broken down? Surely
nothing, but the men that used, or rather abused them, were the only cause
that the juice was dried, and their sweetness denied them. For this cause
said the spirit of God by David, Psalm. 107 34. A fruitful land makes he
barren for the sins of them that dwell therein. This is a judgment worth the
noting, that we might know how to amend our land when it cannot yield her
increase, which is to compass it with our sorrowful hearts, and water it with
the tears of our eyes: And this may serve for evidence in our times, against
them that think all is in good order, and there needs no farther
reformation. Yes verily, the earth it self cries out for a reformation, for
she may say as Naomi said to her friends, I went out full, but I returned
empty: or as Jacob said to his sons, You have robbed me of my children: it
is we that have enclosed great fruit in a little storehouse, for our sins
have blasted it, and the earth is made barren. The reasons of this doctrine are
these: because there is nothing Reason 1.
that will so move us as want will, and therefore we are punished with that
which goes nearest unto us. Nehem. 5. 3. 4. The want of corn made the people
to sell away their houses, and their lands, yea their own children they sold
to buy them bread: what would have made them thus servile but famine, or what
would have grieved them so far as this? And this selfsame complaint have
many among us taken up, being ready if any would give them any money, to sell
their own children. May not this admonish us, that our land abounds with
iniquity, that is thus filled with the misery of the poor? yes verily, and
if it be not speedily prevented, the richest and wealthiest shall feel it as
well as the basest. The proverb is almost verified in famine, which was wont
to be in war, that the great men make the wars, and the poor men bear the
blows: so the rich men's sins have made the dearth, but the poor men lives
abide the death. Another reason hereof may be this, because by this means the
best and the greatest 2
come into misery as well as the smallest, not so soon I grant, but in
continuance of time it is effected. Iere. 14. 3. The noblest send their
servants for water, but alas they return empty, and cover their masters
heads with shame. Therefore let us learn what shall be the pinching estate of
the poor, when the noblest men thus wring; and how are the servants plagued,
when the masters are thus famished. Look upon it my dear brethren, for not
one of you shall escape it, if this calamity continue: your jewels shall be
worth nothing, your pearl shall perish with you, your money which you have
gotten by oppressing the poor, shall rather afflict you then comfort you. You
have as it were in sport began to make a dearth, and it makes you laugh
inwardly, to see the coin come so fast into your cofers: beware least the Lord
turn it into good earnest, and laugh as heartily at you, to see the souls go
out of your bodies. The uses which we must make of this doctrine are these: the
first is the same which the prophet exhorts Use 1.
unto, Hag. 1. 5. That every one of us consider our ways, since the
continuance of this famine came upon us. Consider you rich men whether you have
not scored up many sins, that might cause this misery: consider O ye poorer
sort, whether you have not added many vnthankfulnesses, that thus are revenged
with want. Consider O you drunkardes and belly -- gods, whether your appetites
have not brought this scarcity, and your fullness this emptiness: think with
your selves O young men, if it be not likely that your costly pleasures and
chargeable pastimes have cried for a penury on the earth, and a dear
reckoning on the Lords benefits. If you find these things, then begin a new
consideration, and think with your selves, whether the earth cry not for
vengeance, and the Lords ministers for repentance. Take up a lamentation, and
say with our selves, O Lord, it is we and our fathers house that have caused
thy heavy hand to be powered upon us; for our sakes have many poor men
labored, many women sorrowed, and many children perished; we have their blood
upon us, and thou may justly require it at our hands: but pardon thou our
sins, increase thou our repentance, remove thou thy judgments, and
multiply the fruits of the earth: So shall you not satisfy the injuries
done, but the expectation of your brethren, and the cry of the poor that are
yet living. For assuredly, if you help not to bear this burden in your
bodies, you shall wear it in your souls: and if you fast not with us in this
life, you shall famish without us in the life to come. Consider (I beseech you)
your ways, avoid that enemy, that by your often sinning would destroy both
body and soul. Oh our dearth may be perpetual, our grief is immortal, your
pains shall be eternal, your liberality but temporal, your want (if any
want) but external; but your and our joys shall be continual: therefore
consider how long we have sinned, how little we have amended, how much we have
transgressed, and how soon we may be confounded. Amend every man one, then
shall families be saved; amend families, and then shall villages be blessed;
amend villages, then shall cities be cleansed; amend cities, then shall
countries be sanctified; amend countries, and then shall the whole world be
converted, For the world consists of countries, countries of cities, cities
of villages, villages of families, families of several persons: therefore if
several persons will amend, then all the world shall be amended. Another z
use which we may make hereof shall be this, to imitate the example of the
godly Jews, Ezr. 10. 9. that is, that we weep and tremble for the raines and
unseasonable showers, which have brought upon us this lamentable and miserable
dearth: for our wet and waterie weeping times, are most like unto them. They
were in danger of the enemy, who watched but the opportunity to ouerrun them:
so may we also fear that our enemies, which are many within us, and mighty
without us in other countries, by these times of opportunity shall likewise
adventure to overcome us. They were in danger to have their raines continued,
and their dearth increased; and so also are we: for as yet we have noted and
found the waters, sometimes at the banks, sometimes over the shoares, sometimes
in the plain fields, and sometimes beating down the goodly planted corn,
turning the wheat into dirt, and making dung of that which should be bread.
Therefore lament (I beseech you) and tremble every soul among us, in our
houses talking, in our streets walking, in our congregations praying, and in
our meats eating and drinking. Let us make our hearts sorrowful, our tears
plentiful, our lives pitiful, that the Lord may be merciful. Let us weep,
that the heavens may rejoice; let us plough our hearts, that our fields may be
fruitful; let us cast away our sins, that we may carry in our stores; let
us weed our lives, that we may reap our corn: finally, in us it lies to
recover our plenty, therefore pray with David, Psalm. 144. 12, 13. that our oxen
may be strong, our sheep may increase thousands, our children may be godly,
our garners may be filled, our streets may be joyful, and our whole nation
may be thankful.

The nienth Sermon.
Verse. 8. Mourn like a virgin girded with sackcloth, for the husband of her
youth.
THis is the second exhortation, wherein the prophet teaches them by a
familiar example how they ought to weep, even as a virgin lately married, or
contracted mourns for her husband, who dies before they have filled their
hearts with love; so the words are an exhortation, grounded on a similitude of
mourning in sackcloth for the dead; for so it appears was the ancient
custom of lamentation. From this similitude we may observe We must as
earnestly affect heavenly things, as earthly.
first in this allegory this doctrine, that our affections in heavenly things
must be as passionate, and at the least be as earnest, as they are in earthly
things. For thus the prophet calls unto them, mourn now as bitterly, and
humble your souls as unfeignedly as a young woman does for the death of her
first love. This our Savior proves, Luke 16. to verse. 13. in the parable of
the false and unjust steward, how he discharges his office and provides for
hereafter, willing us to be so wise in the heavenly matters, as we are in the
earthly. So that have thou rode long iourneys for thy profit? then thou must do
the like for the Lord: have thou spent liberally on thy wife, children, hawks,
hounds, and other vanities? then thou must do the like for the Lord: have thou
watched many nights at cards, dice, dancing, and dalliance? thou must do as
much in prayer: have thou fasted many hours for physic? thou must do as much
for devotion: have thou wept bitterly and would not be comforted for many
days and nights together, for thy wife, thy children, thy parents, thy
brothers or any other? thou must do as much for thy sins, or else as thou
have lost thy friends; so shall thou loose thy soul: and to conclude, thou
must as zealously thirst after the blood of Christ, as ever thou lustedst
after thy meat and drink for thy body, or as a chased heart for the water, or
else thou can hardly be saved. The reasons of this doctrine may easily be
rendered, although in truth it needs no reason First, if we be not as earnest
in heavenly, as we are in earthly Reason 1.
things; then may we be well said to be those cursed wretches, which were
prophesied of long ago, 2. Tim. 3. 4. Lovers of pleasures more then lovers of
God. What can thou or dare thousay, O wicked man, that thou love God
above all, and thy neighbor as thy self, (for this say the ignorant sort is
as much as all the preachers in the world can tell them) when thou will do more
for thy earthly master, and go farther for thy whore, and deal more liberally
amongst drunkards, and labor more painefully for a worldly trade, and humane
art or science, then thou will for God, for the gospel, for the poor, and
for religion: so thou may persuade thy self, but never any wise man will
believe thee. Secondly, if we give not as much zeal to our souls, as we do
greedines to our bodies; then as Paul says Romans 7. 5. we are still in the
flesh, and the motions 2
of sin shall bring forth fruit unto death. Now if you account no disgrace
to have your flesh for your God, your motions of sin for your profession, and
the condemnation of your souls for your reward; then go on still and fill up
your measure to the brim: and dare the Lord to his face, not caring for his
majesty. No my beloved, I will not suffer you to go this way to heaven, as God
would not suffer the Israelites to go the easiest way into Canaan, but you must
go another way farther about and safer for your passage. Although you would
raze your names out of the book of life, as Moses would (though not for zeal,
but for pleasure) yet you must not be suffered: but rather say with Peter, 1.
Pet. 4. 23. Hence forward as much time as we shall live in the flesh, let us
live after the will of God, and not after the lusts of men: for it is
sufficient for us that we have spent the time past of our lives, walking in the
lusts of the Gentiles, in wantonness, drunkenness, lusts, gluttony, drinkings,
and abominable idolatries. From hence we first learn that which Paul has
taught us, Romans 6. 19. Use 1.
that as we have given our members to be the servants of sin unto
unrighteousness: so now we must give them to be the servants of holiness unto
righteousness. Now let us stir up all the parts of our souls and bodies unto
Christian conversion; our feet must run in it, our hands must work in it, our
eyes must see in it, our ears must hear it, our taste must delight in it, our
affections must meditate in it, our hearts must conceive it, our memories must
remember it, and our whole man must be spent in it: we must walk soberly, we
must work righteously, we must behold chastely, we must hear diligently, we
must savor it pleasantly, we must think on it holily, we must receive it
reverently, and we must remember it perpetually. Give up your members (I
beseech you) unto righteousness: Was thy mouth made for eating and drinking, and
not to speak the Lords praise? was thy heart made for the world, and thy wit
to make good and thriftie bargains, or rather for the embracing of heavenly
Christ? were thy hands made to play at tables, to write well, and to fight for
the defense of the body, and not to work good works against the world to come?
were thy feet created to dance a fine galliard, or leap a long iumpe, or
run a long race, and not rather to walk to sermons, to carry thee to
prisons, and to bear thee to the chambers of sick persons? thou art much
deceived if thou think not thus. Therefore now study with thy self how many
parts the Lord has given thee above many other, (not only creatures) but men
also; for some are blind, lame, deaf, dumb, weak, sick, lunatike, foolish,
and many other ways crossed; but thou shall find with thy self that thou
have all which they want, therefore above them, yea above thy self, use all
thy parts in one service of God or other, whereby his name may get glory and
thy soul salvation. Another thing we may learn from hence, that now our
affections be set on heavenly things, Col. 1, 2. and the 2
rather because Christ our Savior is there, whom we daily look for to
appear for our deliverance. Indeed such is our bodily estate, that we can
never watch over all our parts, neither is it necessary or requisite that we
should bestow altogether so much time in praying, and hearing, and travailing
to godly assemblies, as we do in the worldly business, and the natural works of
this life, such as is eating, sleeping, and such like, yea it is impossible for
us so to do: But our affections must be raised up continually to heaven in all
our actions of the world, that whether we eat or drink, laugh or weep,
watch or sleep, work or rest, we may still be the Lords: therefore have we
need to choose out some part of our time, every day to be employed in this
heavenly business, and not to be omitted for friend or foe, sickness or health,
idleness or business, sleep or work, wherein we may daily show and
continue our souls, in the Lords presence. Religion is the food of the
soul, therefore we need not be always eating, the scriptures are the testament
of our father, therefore we need not always be looking in them, but use them
for our assurance. By prayer we talk with God as with a friend; but if we
always confer with a friend, and never cease, we shall be tedious to our
selves, and odious to our friends: and yet we must often eat, and often
read, and often pray, that we may increase our knowledge, remember our
duties, and continue in friendship and favor with the Lord of heaven. Another
thing which we may observe in these words is this, that it is lawful and not
contrary to the rule of truth to make a moderate lamentation of the dead, as
the apostle says, 1. Cor. 15. Phil. 2. 29. For I think it an unnatural
Lamentation for the dead not unlawful.
and Stoicall affection not to be at all inooued, or not to show any outward
sorrow for those whom we loved being alive. The reasons thereof may be these;
first, because many times they be taken away for our hurt that be alive, Reason
1.
Esaias 57. 12. therefore in lamenting their loss we bewail our own lives.
Secondly, the Lord shows it to be a 2.
great curse, not to be lamented being dead, Ierem. 22. 18, 19. And therefore
if it be a blessing added to a good and religious life, I think it necessary
that we be not unnatural to kindred, unkind to friends, and unfriendly to
neighbors, to have our eyes dry, or at the least our hearts merry at their
departure. I might add that death is a punishment of sin, even in the most
righteous, and therefore it deserves some lamentation, unless we will
rejoice in our own execution. But this matter needs not the blotting of much
matter to uphold it; I would God there were not many thousands more
unnatural and unlawful abuses among us then this is, although this be too
much. We must learn therefore, although it be lawful for us to lament, yet to
remember the exhortation of the Apostle 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14. That we mourn not as
men without hope; Use 1.
that is, that we abuse not a lawful thing by making it unlawful, as if we
our selves had our hope buried with the dead, and therefore despair altogether
of any other such benefits from God. Again, let us also remember that 2
which Christ says to the women, Luke 23. 28. That we weep not so much for
them that be going or gone out of the world, as we do for our own sinful
lives. And if we look well to this matter, we shall find we have a great
many friends dead, whom let us lament that our pitiful tears may raise
them up to a righteous life. The meat offering Verse. 9.
and the drink offering is cut off from the house of the Lord, the priests
the Lords ministers mourn. Now the Prophet goes to show more reasons to
induce these people to a general mourning: first, because the worship of God
is violated by reason of the famine, and their brethren the Lords ministers
are in mourning: yea, the earth it self mourns, for both corn and oil and
wine have failed. And therefore first of all in the cohaerence of this reason
with the former exhortation, that they should mourn because the meat
offering and drink offering are cut off from the house of God; that is, the
ordinary worship of God is abated and abolished: the prophet does thereby
teach us, that he cannot be a true and unfeigned godly man; nay he is not
worthy to live in the Lords flock He cannot fear God that sorroweth not
when religion fails.
that sorroweth not the neglect of the Lords service, whether it be by
famines, wars, or sickness, or idleness, although the last deserves rather to
be punished then to be lamented. We may read this practice of or in the
Israelites, 1. Sam. 7. 2. When they wanted the ark of God without which they
could not sacrifice, they lamented it grievously, for it was absent from them
twenty years: And this is the thing which will try whether there be any
spark of grace within us, to behold those times when Religion goes backward,
declining as the sun does toward the evening: What heart of flint will not then
shed abundance of tears? when there is no food for the soul, nor instruction
for the mind, to see the churches emptied, the pulpits defaced, the faithful
scattered, and all exercises and meetings for religion utterly abolished. Look
on it my dear brethren I beseech you, we may sorrow as Nehemiah did, because
men do willingly suffer the Lords building to decay: even in our time may we
see the congregations thin with hearers, and true devotion cold with
professors: in many places preaching is put out, and prattling enters in the
room thereof. O how weary are the people of preaching, in all places they
are hardly gathered to the churches; being present they are as hardly kept in
their places; but when they are gone they vomit up again whatsoever they have
heard: We may say of them with Augustine, Comlines is covered, shame is
opened; evil gets many beholders, but goodness has very hardly any hearers.
The reasons of this doctrine are these, because in that time the Lord shows
himself to be an enemy, Reason 1.
Lamen. 2. 5, 8. And who is he that will not sorrow, knowing that the Lord is
his enemy; would he ever fall out so far with his own people, as to suffer
his own glory to be darkened? were it not because he has kindled his wrath
against them: even as a Lord in this world takes from his servant his
office, his cognizance, and in the end turns him out of his doors because he
has displeased him; so deals the Lord with us when he makes men cold in
his service, and weary of his Gospel. O my beloved, now I fear, is the Lord
an enemy unto us when he suffers such abuses, and abusers of his goodness to
live among us. Popery begins again to grow joyfully out of the earth in
the Lords fields; Atheism privily stretches his self as the Iuie does
about the Oak: the ministry grows careless, the people waxes wanton; the
rich men are idle; and the poor men are ignorant of the Lords service: Are not
these sufficient tokens that the Lord begins to be an enemy unto England? O
mourn therefore as a virgin girded with sackcloth for the husband of her
youth. See we not how the world wins upon the possessions of the church, if
we have a unity, then brings he in security; if there be divisions, then
brocheth he many blasphemous heresies; if we agree among our selves, he
makes the world to hate us; if we please the world, our own brethren suspect
us; if we have great gifts, then are we envied; if we have but small gifts, then
are we despised; and thus with nothing are all men pleased, and the Lords
business is still deferred. Surely this will make the Lord fall out with us, and
be our enemy, for every one thinks that his own dislike is reason enough
to be absent from the Lords presence: And if there be any that love the Lord
Jesus, let them before hand sorrow that his second coming shall find no
faith on the earth. Let us therefore cast down our selves as the Apostle
wishes us, Iam. 4. 9. Endure afflictions, Use 1.
and weep, and sorrow; let your laughter be turned into heaviness, and your joy
into mourning; now is the time as Jeremy said, that we give glory to the
Lord before he bring darkness, or ever our feet stumble in the dark
mountains. Let us behold as in a watch tower this enemy of the church
marching near at hand ready to fight against our salvation, to poison our
faith, to abolish the Scriptures, to silence the preachers, to distract the
people, and to root up again that foundation which the Lord has builded.
This let both princes and people, clergy and temporaltie lament with all
speed, and without all ceasing: that the bane of Religion is already
received, and the foundation of darkness is already laid, the workmen of
iniquity are building upon it: we cannot hinder, but we will pray against it;
we cannot root it up, but we will set the fire of the Lords word to burn it;
we cannot deface it, yet we will lament it. Mourn O ye elders, that your
posterity shall be thus endangered, that in your days you have seen the
Lord a friend, and an enemy to us, that you have suffered the decay of that
which all the world can never build, that you have so labored to build your
own houses and names, and have rooted up the walls of the church. Weep O
young men for your selves, and for your souls: for your lives shall smart for
your pleasures; and I am afraid that the blood of your hearts must cleanse the
wickedness of your times. Cry out O children, that you are deputed to have but
the reuersions of the truth, which your elders devoured, and leave you nothing
but pay those debtes which they owe for their iniquities. The meat offeringe;
All the offerings which were sacrificed in the old law did betoken Christ to
be sacrificed for us, unto the which there was to be added as the Lord
commanded, Numb. 15. 4, 5, 6. a meat offering of fine meal and oil, and a
drink offering of wine, without which there was no offering, no sacrifice,: so
that in this place when he says the meat offering and drink offering are cut
off from the house of God, he means by one part the whole worship of God to
be intermitted. From whence God will punish sin although he take away his
own worship.
we may note this, that God has so great regard to punish sin, that rather
then it shall escape scot free, he will discontinue his own worship. More
plainly men know that so long as they keep the worship of God and the pure
outward profession of true religion, no great nor general change of state or
judgment of God shall ouerturne them; therefore the Lord will take away his
word, his worship, his truth from among them, which are the charets of Israel,
and the guard of the church, that he may more freely take vengeance of our
sins. Thus may we read he dealt with Israel. Psalm. 78. 60. Lam. 2. 16. Now
consider I beseech you, what refuge can we have against the Lord, or what
shield to cover our sins: why? you will say the Lords mercy; but how if
mercy have been offered, and be refused? and so the date thereof for our good
be expired. Yet you will say his mercy endures for ever: but I may answer
you that he so little regards mercy to men, and service to himself at
sometimes, that he takes away all sign of his favor, all tokens of his
presence, all comfort of his word, and commodity by his worship, and so let us
fear in England, least we be so served, and rather ruled: and least the time
come that we may say, here stood a church, there was the Gospel preached,
once we might safely profess the word of God, but now we are excluded. The
reasons of this may be these: first, because the people Reason 1.
so long as they say, the temple of the Lord, the Gospel of the Lord, so long
they are obstinate in their sins, and wilful in all manner of wickedness,
Iere. 7. 4, 3. And for this cause to take away their shroude, that they might
cast away their vain confidence, the Lord spares not his own worship, to
show unto us, that he also will not spare our lives. This might be urged to the
uttermost for these our times, wherein there are few that will cry, the temple
or the Gospel, but amongst those few which urge the bare name of religion and
reformation, how many are there that live riotously, and walk licentiously,
pitifully tronbling the world with their lusts, and the church of God with
their works: but let us beware least both they and others cannot say the
temple, but that we had religion in England. Secondly, another reason may be
this, because 2
we take not the true course and lawful way, to keep the worship of God among
us. Romans 9. 32. The Jews (says the Apostle) have stumbled, and lost the law
of righteousness, because they sought it not by faith: so when the Gospel
shall be offered, as to the Jews, being not rightly received it is again
withdrawn, that they may say it was once among us. I fear me my beloved, that
we have resisted the law of righteousness this way, as much or worse then
the Jews, for we have entreaties of peace, every one speaks and writes what
he pleases, whereby some are stumbled, many are hindered, and others are
discouraged; and what remains but that all should be utterly turned out of
the way. Now let us come to some use of this doctrine: will the Lord so punish
us to take away his word, his worship, Use 1.
and his Gospel from among us? Verily some will say, that is our desire; we
shall follow our pleasures more freely, delight in our sins more sweetly,
and save much money which we impart to religion. Stay a little, I pray you, how
if a famine come and remove it, as here it was? or how if the sword come and
drive it from you, as it has in other places? think you then to be so well
eased of the Gospel, when you shall go from a sweet church to a stinking
prison, and in steed of a preachers reproof, you shall endure an executioners
rod. Nay but take this with you, whenever the Lords worship is intermitted,
your lives shall not last; and if they do, you shall wish rather to die.
Ierem. 6. 21. I will says the Lord, lay stumbling blocks before you, the
father and the son shall fall, the neighbor and the friend shall perish.
Here is the calamity which comes by the remoouing of the Lords worship: it
costeth much blood, it brings much woe, it curses many souls, it shakes
the world, darkeneth the sun, it troubles the waters, it makes God
merciless, it makes men helpless, it makes the church comfortless: the
present times smart for it, the next age weepeth for it, but the last days
shall answer for it: the living shall be troubled, the dead shall be defiled,
and they which are unborn shall repent it; and to conclude, if ever we live
to see the Lords word and worship taken from us, we shall have a hell of the
world, a wilderness of the church, cruelty in steed of courtesy,
beastliness in steed of humanity, and all impiety in steed of
christianity. From the house of God. That is, from the public place appointed
for the worship of God. What then, might some say? if we cannot in the church,
then we will in our houses, and we can serve God as heartily in our parlors, as
we can in the temples: yet for all this (if it could be so) the prophet
complains that it is so, I mean that the Lords house is unfrequented. From
hence note this, A great judgment to see the public use of religion violated.
that it is a grievous judgment of God, when the place dedicated to his
service is not used thereto, but lies either waste, or else otherwise applied.
If men come not to the churches, as the Lord appointed, being in prosperity,
it calls for vengeance; but in adversity it betokens a judgment. Psalm.
74. 8. Revel. 2. 5. The Lord threateneth the church of Ephesus, to take away
the candlestick from them, whereby he shows the last and greatest plague
that can come upon a city, which is the laying waste their congregations. The
which thing I would to God I could drive into their hearts, which make as much
account of the churches as they do of the tauernes, and are as diligent to
come unto them, as the thieves to the prisons. Alas my brethren, what harm
have you received by following the Lords courts, and assemblies of the
saints? that your presence forsakes them; your souls forsweareth them, and
your lives are more strangers therein then David was at Achis, or the Pope now
in England: is it a judgment to come and not to find them, and not a plague
neither to come nor to find them? Think you not being gentlemen and wealthy
men, whose devotion will not abide a shower of rain, that if you missed but a
child of your own in your house, that you could endure it, and not be
sorrowful? how then shall the Lord endure your obstinate and rebellious
absence? seeing he loves it more dearly then a woman does her son, and
therefore tendereth our presence most fatherly: Beware least it be said of
you, they went out from us, because they were not of us, and they that gather
not with us scatter abroad. The reasons Reason 1.
of this doctrine may be these: because then the name of the Lord is forgotten,
Deuteronomy. 32. 18. It cannot be, but out of sight out of mind, as the common
proverb goes, and therefore when the churches are not frequented, and there
is no public remembrance of the Lords works, the Lords name must needs be
forgotten. We have (I grant) some profit by our private assemblies, our
families; but if once the public places be neglected, then farewell all
religion. Praiest thou in thy family, do so in the church; instruct thou thy
family, bring them also to the preachers: have thou a little church in thy
household? join them also to the great church in the congregation, that there
they may learn the wonderful works of God: for when preachers are banished,
churches are emptied, congregations rased, hearing despised, the places
dedicated to the Lords worship violate, keep what order thou can in thy
family, yet will religion and christianity be soon forgotten. Another reason
of this doctrine may be this, because when these public 2
meetings and places be barred up, then there appears no church of God, Deuteronomy.
12. 5. 1. King 8. 29. What a calamity is it to see the sun darkened, the
earth covered with water, and the moon with clouds? So is it when the face of
the church cannot be seen in the congregation, whereby men may learn how
odious is their sin which keep away themselves, and their servants from
public praying and preaching: What do they else but obscure, and put out the
very church of God: they disgrace their own mother, and forsake their fellow
members, by putting out themselves from our meetings? How shall we account them
of the church which com not to the church, or rather how shall we say that they
are God his children, when they darken the spouse of Christ, and give occasion
to the common enemy of salvation to rejoice against the godly, and advance his
banners above our castles. The uses which Use 1.
we must make of this doctrine are these: First, seeing it is a most grievous
plague of God to have the churches void of his service, then let us run and
flock with all diligence, unto the congregation of the saints, the meetings of
the godly, Isa. 2. 2, 3. This is the most assured token of the church of God,
when the people come together to hear the word: and this is a comfortable
argument to a man's own soul, that in this life he was joined to the church
militant; and therefore they shall be of the church triumphant. Oh how can they
look ever to come into the heavens, which in this life never come into the
temples, nor outwardly obey the Gospel! Therefore if ever you will come into
joy, and enter into everlasting pleasures, ascend up to the house of God, there
dwells the Lord, you may see him; there sounds his word, you may hear it;
there is given the spirit, you may receive it; there are gathered the godly,
you may be with them; and there begins salvation, you may obtain it. If you
be high, stoop down to it; if you be base, arise up to it; if you be rich,
ride to it; if you be strong, walk to it; if you be lame, be carried to it; if
you be blind, be lead to it; if you be sick, long to be in it; and if you be
old, even there desire to die. Run (I beseech you) with speed, go with joy,
labor with pleasure, and desire with zeal to be joined to your Savior. They
which forsake it, God will forsake them; they which despise it, God will
despise them; they which embrace it, God will receive them. Let not any thing
(I beseech you) keep you from the churches, seeing you would have nothing
keep you from heaven. Live with the church, pray with the church, suffer with
the church, and die with the church. As all the angels appear before God in
heaven; so must all the saints appear before him in earth: they which are
missed, are excluded; they which are present, shall be blessed. Another use
which we must make of this 2
doctrine, may be this, that it shall be good for us, not only to visit the
church; but to continue in the assemblies with all diligence. Everlasting is
the commendation of Anna, Luke 2. 37. which continued in the temple serving God
day and night: and so we read Act. 20. 7. that the church continued hearing of
Paul till midnight. It is a thing most strange to see men, not only negligent
to come to the church; but also being present, they are impudent to depart out
of the church: and who are these, but those which come seldom there; for by
reason thereof they have least taste of spiritual hunger, and so are soon
weary of spiritual food. Abide therefore in the congregation, for there is
always something behind worth the learning; and when all is done, yet tarry
for the blessing, as the people did for Zachary, Luke 1. 21. Come (I say) with
a continued diligence, and omit not one time, especially unto that church
whereof thou art a member, whenever prayer or preaching calls for thee. Be
assured of this, the oftener thou come, the more thou delightest: and the
more thou art absent, the less shall be thy comfort. If thou would say with
David, O Lord, how sweet is thy word unto my mouth; thou must also first sing
with him, all the day long is my study therein. If woe belong to the Pastor
that preaches not the word, then also damnation belongs to the people that
hear not the word. By use thou shall think a day too little for a sermon,
and a year too little for a prayer. By continuance thy hard heart will be
softened, and thy wicked life converted. A woman married to a stranger by
familiar and daily conversation, grows into great love, where was great
dislike: so shall thy soul being married to our assemblies which it abhors,
in time to come delight in them most cheerfully, which it loathed most
wickedly. The priests the Lords ministers mourn. The better to persuade the
people to lamentation, he brings in the ministers to moan them; showing
that their pastors and spiritual fathers were already in tears, for this
calamity; and therefore also they must follow them. By this we may note, that
the ministers are always the first that come into danger. If there be
afflictions, they are The ministers are the first in any danger.
first apprehended; if there be famines, they are first oppressed; and if there
be wars, they are most spitefully handeled. There were seven thousand good
men in Israel: but the prophets they were slain, and Eliah being left above
all other, was most of all endangered, 1. King 19. 10. 11. There were many
faithful souls in Iewrie, at Christ's passion; but him alone and his Apostles
did the Jews persecute and crucify. So that hereby we may appear to be of
all men most miserable. The world does much envy our honor, our living, and
our estimation, and our names; insomuch as there is not any which has not
been, either enriched by our demesnes, or converted by our sermons: but they
hold us in exceeding hatred. Well in this we will say with Jeremy, This is
our portion and we will bear it. By this then let them know which are entered
into our calling, or purpose to put on a preachers gown, that his life must be
full of danger; his danger full of cruelty, and he always the foremost in any
trouble: I will (said the Lord) make you to be hated of all men for my names
sake. Would thou be a minister of the Gospel, thou desire a worthy
work: Know then, if thou live in peace, thou shall be envied; if in war,
thou shall be derided; if thou be rich, the world will murmr at thee; but if
thou be poor, then it will tread upon thee: Think thou to live easily,
thou deceiuest thy self; think thou to live in men's favor, thou deceiuest
thy soul: hopest thou for maintenance, beware of flattery; look thou for
friendship, thou shall receive enimitie. Thou must be a servant to servants,
thou must be a slave to base minds, and an open mark for wicked toongs. Thy
own shall be withholden; thy doctrine vpbraided; and thy life, live thou never
so warily shall be endited. Will thou please men, thou shall displease God;
will thou please God, thou must displease men; if thou speak, thou shall be
controuled; if thou be silent, thou must be reproched; if the world laugh on
thee, the Lord will laugh at thee; if it frown, then thou art first in danger.
The reasons why this should be so, are these: first, because in them the Lord
does punish the whole people, Zech. Reason 1.
13. 7. I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered: If the
pastors be good, they are troubled for their people; if they be evil, they
are troubled for themselves. A good man was wont to say, that of all creatures
a good minister was the best, and a bad minister the woorst: Therefore they are
sometime troubled for the peoples cause, yea sometime by the people, as Christ
died for the people, and yet was put to death by the people: And the cause is
good, for if the pastor let any people perish, their souls must be required
at his hand; so if a good pastor be molested of a bad people, not his word
but his blood shall be revenged on them. So then we are not always sued for our
own debts, and imprisoned for our own obligations, but being pledges and
hostages, or rather sureties for other, for their cause, that is, for our
peoples cause are we tormented. Again, how fearful are those places to be
considered, where it may be said as it was of Rachels children: that
preachers and good pastors were and are not: you shall have some gentleman or
ruffian, or carnal companion, reioicing that he was the means to send their
priest packing, and to deprive their pastor of his living: So did Rabsakeh
brag of his cruelty, as these wicked and damnable wretches of their
impiety: they have brought the blood of the Lords prophets upon their own
heads, and the head of their neighbors, and let them assure themselves it
will be revenged. Another reason of this doctrine may be this, because if there
be any perplexity, God does want his honor, and then the ministers are filled
with danger. If 2
men be sick, for us they send, whereby contagion we are infected; if men be
imprisoned they come not at us; if they be soldiers they serve the camp and
not the Lord; so that as Augustine said, they cannot be the ouerthrowers of a
city, except first they overthrow all civility: So that when the Lord is
abridged of his right, we must not account it strange to be abridged of our
liberty; we are not better then our fathers, yea then our Savior, who being
best of al was taken before his disciples, as we must be before our flock.
The uses which come from this doctrine are these; first that we think not
that they alone which bear the Use 1.
place of God before his people, to inform them in the way of godliness shall
live in this danger, or that those poople are most miserable which endure most
adversities: but as the prophet speaks Ier. 25. 29. If God plague the city
or person by whom his name is called upon, how shall other men think to go
free? nay, rather then that should be so, his sword (says the prophet) shall
destroy all the inhabitants of the earth. Think not that your estate who are
gentlemen or rich men, or secular men, or peradventure carnal men for all
this, is better then the spiritual man's calling; if it go not well with us,
how can it ever long continue well with you? no verily; no more then when the
captain wants his pay, the soldiers are well satisfied. Look upon the
whole course of the world, and you shall find them to be most wretched that are
most secure; and most damnable that live in smallest danger. Most wicked
Iulianistes scoff at the ministry because they are contemned of the greater
sort, and they say, they must lay load on the clergy, because they teach
other men to be patient: but if this were a good reason, then might servants
set their masters to labor because they exhort them to diligence. How unjust
is it that we which are borne to misery for the peoples sake, and for the
Lords sake, should have our misery to be increased as it were by our own
children whom we have fostered in the church? Go on you scoffers and most
accursed Atheists, when we are in sorrow, ye live in joy; when we are
reviled, you are regarded; when we are impouerished, you are enriched; and
therefore when we are in danger, you shall be in damnation. Another use which
we must make hereof is this, that we must not avoid the ministry because it
is full of danger, no more then men avoid the sea 2
because it is full of rocks; or else abandon husbandry because it is full of
labor. The crown of a good minister is inestimable, as Paul shows 2.
Timoth. 4. 8. From hence forth there is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness, which the Lord the just judge will give unto me: If men will
wear and win this crown, they must first fight that good fight which the
Apostle speaks of in the former verses. So that now let us reason our case
in this manner; we are of all men most miserable, our bodies are weak, our
studies are tedious, our labors are grievous, our lives are odious, our
welfare is dangerous, and before all we go to the wall: Who would be a
minister to endure all these? Nobles will scorn him, the gentry will abase
him, rich men will envy him, and the poor must speak against them: he must
eat their leauings, he must wear that they refuse, he must abide that which
they offer, and he must mourn when they are joyful. Oh be not discouraged,
but come into the Lords harvest speedily, thy health shall be increased, thy
pains shall be well paid, thy poverty shall be enriched, and thy reproachful
ignominy shall be turned into crowns of glory: thy tears shall be sweeter
then wine, thy want shall be more tolerable then wealth, thy labor shall be
more easy then pleasure, and thy death shall be more acceptable then life:
fear not to take upon thee a ministers calling, evil words are but wind,
evil men are but chafe, evil wealth is but rust, evil joy is but sin, and
another calling is but base. Christ triumphs in thee, 2. Cor. 2. 14. thou
shall rejoice in thy flock, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 19. and the world shall be subdued by
thy word, Ierem. 1. 19, 20. the acts of God shall be in our mouth, and a two
edged sword in our hands, to pronounce sentence against kings, and judgment
against angels.

The tenth Sermon.
Verse. 10. The field is wasted: the land mourns: for the corn is destroyed:
the new wine is dried up, and the oil is decayed.
NOw the prophet shows the cause of that doctrine in the former verse, why
the worship of God was laid waste, because the field is wasted, and the land
mourns that it is barren; the corn, wine, and oil are all destroyed. The
which thing being so, out of this verse we first of all note, that God gives
us these fruits of the earth to worship his majesty therewithal, Psalm. 67.
6, 7. So that God gives fruits of the earth for his worship.
men must turn themselves, and look upon all the creatures of God, which will
tell them to their face they must serve God the better for them: what grows
in thy field which sings not this song, the natural herb, the planted
corn, grass growing, food for cattle, and all other things teach us more
earnestly to serve the Lord. And for this cause ought we only to possess
them, for assuredly if men do covet after much land and many fields, and
plant much corn and many fruits, only that themselves may have much to serve
them being alive, and leave much for their children being dead, they are those
that the Lord threateneth a woe unto by the prophet. They have not these
things for the Lord, but these things have seized on their hearts for the
devil: use therefore thy wealth not to live in pleasure, but in religion; not
in pride, but in godliness; not in honor of men, but in the cross of Christ.
And as an old man has his staff to stay him from falling, because he is
weak: so do thou possess those to put thee in mind of the maker: Because
thou art forgetful, let thine inheritance remember thee of heaven; let thy
purchase remember thee of regeneration; let thy fruits remember thee of thy
life; let thy harvest remember thee of thy death; let thy store remember thy
soul, and let all remember thy poor brother. The reasons of this doctrine are
these: first, because the most profane and wicked Reason 1.
idolaters, Iere. 4. 17, 18, 19. think that the only cause of multiplying the
fruits of the earth, is for the worship of God; and therefore who but Atheists
can deny the same unto him, for he only it is that makes them to grow, and
blesses all our stores: and therefore most unthankful wretches are we, if
for all we should render him none again. And this is much to be feared, that
the little regard which is had hereof in our land, is the only cause why our
former years have brought forth no greater plenty: for if we generally
regard the multitude, we shall find that those which have the greatest
fields, the largest barnes, the widest patrimonies, and most store of riches,
have and do make most bold with the Lord, and come least into his presence.
Another reason of this doctrine may be this: because these benefits are the
promised blessings to them 2
that love him, Deuteronomy. 28. 1, 2, 3. which ought evermore to put us in mind of
our love to God, that we might love him more and more, and so receive of him
more and more abundantly: let us I beseech you, consider our estate, and not
fall away from our first love; for seeing we have had in former times greater
plenty then now we have, let us know for certainty, that our store is less,
because our love is less. When the Gospel came first among us, how joyfully
did we follow it, and how diligently hear it, in so much as the preachers
being but few, we would have given them our own eyes (if it had been
possible) to do them good; but now we are as weary of them as the Israelites
were of Moses, when they would have stoned him: and therefore then were we
filled with love, and with plenty; but now we are emptied of godly care, and
plagued with mortal want. The uses which arise from the consideration Use 1.
of this point are these: first, that we desire of the Lord to have pity and
care for our land which is wasted, and to cast his eyes to our poor and
penurious time offamine and dearth. Deuteronomy. 11. 12. For alas our misery grows
so great and incurable every day more and more, that we have great cause to
fear least his long suffering turn into wrath, and our pinching famine into
death. Who has been cast down thoroughly not for a day, but for a year in
this occasion? surely few or none, and therefore is the Lord as a stranger
among us, and as one that tarrieth but for a night. O my dear brethren, let us
at the length yet learn the true and right way to remedy our evil, and to
increase again the fruits of the earth; how have our pastures been drowned,
our meadows ouerflowed, our corn blasted, and our tilled land made barren,
insomuch as we may see, or might not long since have seen, how the hills and
mountains wept forth whole streams of water for their barrenness: Let us
follow their example, and be ruled by their line to do the like for it, as it
has done for us. It is not we see in the planter or in the waterer, but in the
Lord that gives increase of him; let us entreat this blessing that his hand
may be stayed in time before all be left destitute, and the face of our
country like the land of Sodom; let us labor in prayer as we have done in
tillage; let us bestow as much cost in supplication to pacify our glorious
God, as we have done in husbandry to amend our barren land: if he say but
the word, all shall be remedied. Oh, let us power forth words, and lives,
and hearts, and souls, that this may be removed. Another use hereof: seeing
these creatures, as great crops of corn, large fields, and other 2
things, must only serve us that we may serve God, then how fearful a thing
is it to abuse any of these, whereby both the worship and workmanship of God
are defaced, therefore the holy Ghost admonishes Romans 14. 20. that we destroy
not the work of God for meats sake. Some surfeit in their abundance to their
death, other disfigure the good shape of their bodies through pride and
vanity, such as are young gallants and gentlewomen, and the more they have
received, the more they have abused; some in their ease and idleness are grown
like tons in compass, being unfit for labor, unprofitable to any goodness,
and unworthy of any blessings. The laboring man's estate is much to be
commended, though it be poor yet it is happy: he is an image of Adam created
to work, he is an image of God created in righteousness, and the image of
Christ created for calamity, his health is maintained by labor, his body is
refreshed with rest, his mind is renewed with religion, and his life is
studious of the Lords worship: his hungry morsels make him more thankful to
God then the great delicates of the rich; his bare bread and water or small
drink give him more healthie nourishment, then the fowls and dainties of the
other; his life is wearied with labor, his mind is prepared for God, and his
soul is ready for rest: Let us all live in this travail that we may die in
this manner, let us keep under our bodies and lusts, as we refrain a young
colte, and let more bridles of abstinencie and sincerity curb shorter all our
pleasure and vanity. Another doctrine which we may gather out of this verse,
may be this, that seeing the creatures of God We cannot perfectly without sin
serve God in this life.
do call upon us to worship him, and therefore they be helpers unto us therein,
we gather that our worship of God in this life cannot possibly be absolute
and perfect: that we should be always like affected and observe time, place,
order and zeal in our religion; for here we see that the worship of God was
violated, because the fruits of the earth ceased; our knowledge is obscured by
natural ignorance, our time is omitted through sorrow, sickness, care, and
worldly business; our hearts are hindered through fear, love, joy, pleasure,
vanity, and temptation, and a thousand other ways shall we find that all we
can do in the Lords service is but in part as Paul proves, 1. Cor. 13. 9,
10. How wicked are the bragges of them that boast of their vprightnes, whereby
they serve the Lord, thinking that there is nothing but of themselves they be
able to perform it. But we must know that the greatest doctor, the learnedest
preacher, and the painfullest hearer cannot comprehend, or teach, or learn
whatsoever is requisite to our salvation, no not the whole church of God
together: so that if you look upon all that is to be done of a faithful man,
you shall find many unwilling and inevitable slippes and falls in the purest
obedience of all men. The church of God has felt and complained of this
misery in all ages: that she could neither do as she would, nor perform
what she ought to the Lords obedience. For if we be rich and never so godly,
then wealth hinders us; if we be poor, want oppresses us; if we be
magistrates, government does let us; and if we be servants, worldly obedience
does stay us. So that as it cannot be, but that in the purest corn there will
grow some weeds, so in our holiest worship of God, there will appear some
wantes: David could not worship when he was at Gath, and the saints of God
although they have willing minds, want power and means to accomplish their
desire. And therefore let us not brag, but confess as our Savior says in
the Gospel: when we have preached our whole life long, and prayed with never so
entire affection, and labored with never so great diligence in the kingdom,
that we are unprofitable servants, having left more things behind which we
ought to have done. The reasons of this doctrine are these: first, because that
we should never leave of labor Reason 1.
more, and to increase farther and farther so long as we live in this world,
as the Apostle said of himself, Phil. 3. 13. The which lesson I would to God
were oftener learned, and better followed in our days, wherein men think if
they have done a little service on the Sabbath day, they hold themselves
contented for the whole week following; and having gotten a little knowledge
of the common profession, they are satisfied and travail for no more. Oh how
strange is it that men are never satisfied, and have their fill of any thing,
save only of religion, the which presently cloyeth them, because they think
it is no part of their duty to bestow their daily labor in some part of
godliness. I know this doctrine will please them well; that no man can
worship God perfectly, and therefore they will worship him sparingly and
coldly: But they must know that there is not any man, which has his perfect
health, and yet he lives and moves and grows in stature; so there is not
any man's religion absolute, yet it must strive and labor for perfection, as a
sick man does for health. Another reason of this doctrine is this, that
considering 2
our imperfection, through the sin of our natures, we should more earnestly
desire to be with Christ, Philip. 1. 23. for he that is weary and cannot go
as he would, yet he has this in his wish, to desire the perfection of the
worship of God. Whereby we may note that there is not any thing that may move
us to love the being in the world, the world it self will hate thee, if thou be
a Christian why should thou desire to live therein? thou can not know the
majesty of God, thou shall not feel the love of Christ, and thou can not
enjoy the end of the faith. If thou would have the wish of David, to live
and to declare the works of God, yet it shall be better to die that thou may
live in the glory of God. In this life thou art sometimes sick, careful,
heavy, hated, oppressed, envied, and have but a little comfort of God, because
thou can not profess him but a little, therefore desire the other, where
friends and ioies, and health, and love, and peace, and comfort shall be
everlasting, and they worship most absolute without sin or ceasing. The uses
which arise of this doctrine are these: Use 1.
first, that although we can never be absolute in this life in God his worship,
but we shall have as many lets as we have hours, yet let us not cease to lament
them, and to desire their absence: when David had been long absent from the
place of the Lords service, he cried out, saying: How long shall I dwell with
Mesech, and be constrained to abide in the tents of Kedar? why might not David
think that it was not his fault but his enemies rage, that did constrain him
to that neglect, because he was banished from his people? Indeed it is
apparent, he knew it well enough, yet least he should be contented with his
misery, he calls to God for a remedy: so although we dwell in sin, and
live in a thousand wants of bodies and souls, because they cannot be removed
in this life, yet let us not rest contented herewith, but lament this
mischief: that we must so do, and desire a speedy release. Art thou lodged
in thy chamber through sickness, or banished from the company of the
faithful through persecution, or kept away by imprisonment, or hindered by
hard parents or masters, or molested through pinching poverty? all which thou
can not avoid, yet that the Lord may know, and that thy soul may live,
desire to be eased of this burden. Think not that thou shall be excused, if
thou can not come and worship as thou ought, but will the thing thou can
not perform, and think it long till thy bondage be at liberty, thy want be
supplied, and thy soul removed from thy body, that thou may see God, and
love him, and live with him, and praise him for ever and ever. Art thou a
Christian, and have thou not greater cause to wish for heaven, then David had
for Jerusalem? and if you have, then pray with as great zeal, that thy will
may be turned into action, thy lets into helps, thy wants into supplies, thy
soul into piety, and all thy worship into sincerity. Another 2
use may be this, that men do not any thing the less esteem of the worship
of God, because they have heard that it is but temporal. O this were accursed
that a sick man should be less regarded because he is sick, and not rather
be the more attended! shall a son despise his own father because he is
poor? this were iniquity; and so is it a greater abomination, that men
should less serve the Lord, because the greatest measure is imperfect.
Although David might not build the temple, yet he provided wherewithal to do
it: and so although thou can not love God as thou would, and as thou
ought; yet love him as thou can, and as far as thou art able: be not
discouraged, because thou art not able to go through with religion; for if
thou have any religion, know thou that the least things of God are greater
then the greatest of the world; and the weakest things of God are stronger then
the strongest of men. Honor them that have the gifts of God in them, although
they be imperfect; for who despises a crased piece of gold? or who throws
out of doors a broken silver pot? and therefore who but a mad man would
lightly regard the small graces of God in men? But alas, it is the misery of
our time, wherein religion is measured by wealth, and devotion by outward
shows, and the gifts of the spirit by worldly professions; so that if men
live never so uprightly, and yet be poor; or teach never so diligently, and
yet be not famous; and pray never so fervently, and yet be not a flatterer; or
write never so excellently, and yet reprove sin: he is no more accounted
then a base and common professor. Men will not study religion, because they
say the doctors can never know all things, and therefore they will know
nothing: but if none should study physic, but he that would cure all
diseases; sickness would quickly overthrow us: and if men follow not
religion, because they cannot know every mystery, the devil will speedily
overcome their souls.

Be ye ashamed O ye husbandmen: howl O ye vine dressers, for the wheat and
for the barley, because the harvest of the field Verse. 11.
is perished. Now he comes to the particular persons that dresseth the earth,
and the fruits thereof, bidding them to be ashamed to see their cunning
fail, their labor lost, their price received in vain, because all was
destroyed whereabout they were employed. From hence we may The ministers must
exhort all men.
note, that seeing the prophet calls to these husbandmen, it is our duty
that are of the ministry to speak the word and rebuke sin, and exhort
every kind of profession unto religion: The princes, the nobles, the rich, the
poor, the husbandmen, the artificers, and the seruingmen, and the gentlemen
must all be exhorted, and rebuked by the voice of a preacher. And this was the
most singular comfort that Paul received by his labor, Acts 20. 31. That they
all could bear him witness, that he had not ceased day nor night, to
admonish every man of life eternal: wherein we see that the pains of a
minister are infinite, that must not fear any man's person, nor spare any man's
profession, nor love any man's sins, nor be silent at any man's injuries, nor
be controuled for any just offense by him rebuked. Look I say, to the labors
of watchmen in the Lords house, he warns them by chiding says Aug. he
instructs them by preaching, he prepares them by admonition, he has a
calling from God to warrant him, from the word to enconrage him, from the
spirit to inflame him, and from his conscience to comfort him. He must rebuke
the rage of great men, the folly of old men, the vanity of young men, the
deceit of crafts men, the trade of husbandmen, the idleness of seruingmen, the
wantonness of women, and the sins of all men, that by wounding them with the
word of God, both they and he might escape the judgment of God.

The reasons of this doctrine may be these, First because Reason 1.
as Paul says in the forenamed place, ver. 26. 27. that by this means they are
free from the blood of all men: And we know that the blood of a poor
husbandman, will stain as much as the blood of the greatest prince in the
world. But evermore when I have occasion to talk of the blood of men which is
committed to the preachers, and shall be again required at our hands: me
thinks that the blood and life, and hearts and souls should tremble hereat:
the minister for his charge, the people for their danger. The captain does
answer for the body of a man, the factor for his masters wealth, the scholar
for his learning, the man for his service, and the noble man for his princes
affairs: but the minister must answer for the peoples sins. Again, what is
the danger to keep thy soul? is it not committed to a man? has it not all
the devils in hell to lay siege unto it? and yet will not men come to their
pastors to have their souls fed being hungry; nor yet cured being sick; nor
yet salued, being wounded; nor yet defended, being besieged; nor yet to be
saved, although they be like to be damned. Another reason of this is because
our commission must stretch it self as far as Christ's redemption, who is an
advocate for all men, that is, for all sorts of men: and therefore it is most
requisite that we speak to all kinds of men, that so they may come to the
knowledge of redemption. Would thou then be exempted from coming to
sermons? then thou must also be exempted from coming to salvation. Is it hard
unto thee and intolerable, that the word of God shall restrain thy pleasures?
then shall it be harder for thee to have the blood of Christ to anoint thy
soul from hell. Would not all men come to the kingdom of heaven? then will I
open unto them the gate of the Lord, and tell you that obedience to the
ministry is the way, and the righteous will enter therein. The uses which
come of this doctrine are these: First, seeing that all men Use 1.
must receive the word of the minister, that the ministers flatter not the
people, and conceal not the judgments of God from their sins, Prou. 24. 24.
25. The Lord promised pleasure to them that rebuked the sin of the wicked,
and the blessing of goodness shall be upon them. What is the hope of the Lords
workman, we have already declared. But now let me exhort and be exhorted unto
this necessary doctrine: I know that since the world grew to a multitude, and
the church to a monarchy, the great men have ever envied the rebukers of
sin, I mean the ministry, because they lived in greater sins themselves:
and this is the cause why reproves are so hardly endured; that although we
speak but generally against a particular sin, yet some or other who is
gauled with the conscience thereof, will accuse us for aiming at him, and
peradventure threaten us mortal hatred: this was not so in the primitive
church, 1. Cor. 14. 24. 25. but rather men obeyed gladly, then threatened
maliciously; but so it is in our church, and therefore are the ministry afraid
in many places to preach the word, least they should offend. But harken my
dear brethren, fear them not, for it shall come on us that the Lord threatened
Jeremy: If we spare his word, he will confound us in their presence. What is
there in them that we should fear? they are but men in nature, so are we; they
are many in number, so are we; they have the world, we have the word: they
touch but our names or our bodies, our souls are the Lords: they cannot accuse
us justly of sin, but themselves; they cannot work their will, but the Lords
will; their wrath is nothing to the Lords wrath; shall we silence the word,
because they love it not? Beloved, have not men's persons in admiration: the
word of God is not bound though we be imprisoned; that cannot be hurt, though
we be blamed; our souls cannot be touched, though our bodies be martyred. Let
us wish with Luther that God would make us worthy to die for his word.
Another use of this doctrine, is that the people 2
of all sorts must hear the word of the minister: let them take heed that
they bear the rebukes of sin for the Lord. Hos. 4. 4. co^plaineth of the
desperate estate of the people; for he said, they rebuked the prophet. This is
the sin of England, for there are among us that will teach wise men, and
themselves being fools; they will control learned men, themselves being
ignorant; they will sohoole preachers, yet they cannot hear; they will rule
magistrates, themselves being subjects; and they will seem to do all things,
being able to do nothing. But this is the point worthy to be stood upon,
they will reprove the minister of the Gospel: If they suspect us, they
condemn us; if there be but an uncertain rumor, they make it a certain
sclander; so that our life, our livings, our doctrine, our calling, and all our
preaching is contemned by them: Our life to be idle, our livings to be too
great, our doctrine to be suspicious, our calling to be burdensome, and our
preaching to be only for a worldly respect. Oh incurable, vndurable mischief!
why do men at once set Christ to school, teach God to be wise, refuse the
Gospels government, and choose the tyranny of sin? Why do they rebuke us? and
yet think they do well: if the rod of magistrates light on us for our sins,
let us abide it; but to let every drunkard and ruffian, and seruingman, and
every base companion to crow against the Gospel and our calling, let us never
abide. They hate us because they love sin; they love liberty, because they
abhor discipline; they regard not the ministry, because they regard not God;
and therefore look for a present and speedy calamity: for since that base
fellows became ministers, base fellows have regarded none: so that now we may
preach out our hearts, and pray out our souls, and weep out our eyes; yet we
shall receive nothing but scoffs and scorns, rebuke and scander, for our
labor. Weep and howl: having bidden them to be ashamed, now he bids them
to be sorrowful: for well he knew that their hope and health was lost when
their corn and fruits were destroyed, wherein they trusted more then in GOD.
And from The outward worship of God does good unto all.
hence we may observe, that if the worship of God be once decayed, there is
not any so desperately wicked or dissolute, but he shall smart for them; we may
say, Esaias 9. 10, 11, 12. That the wicked make great bragges, if they were
deprived of preaching the word: they say they would turn brickes into hewn
stone, and timber into Cedar trees: but the Lord tells them that their
enemies shall beset them, and he will cut off both honorable and tail. So is
the course of his judgment, that when he has taken away his worship, which
is a helmet of proof to keep his wrath from us, then he sends greatest
calamity, when we think we shall live in greatest security. The filthy
Sodomites thought that they were well when Lot was gone from among them, but
there followed presently fire and brimstone from heaven. By this our gallants
may perceive, that if the Gospel be in the wrath of God translated from our
country, their bravery and pride, and wealth, and prosperity shall be
ouerturned into perpetual misery. They think it a burden intolerable to
live under the check hereof: but let them know that the little finger of
humane tyranny, shall be heavier on them then the loins and body of all
christianity. Oh, how do men deceive themselves with sweet promises of great
and incredible ease, which they shall reap by the abasing of the ministry,
by the decay of good men, and the abandoning of all goodness, when they shall
have liberty to commit any kind of sin. O miserable wretches (says one) to
whom it is lawful to do wickedly! surely you shall come out of a little brook
and run headlong into the maine sea. The reason of this doctrine is Reason 1.
this, because the wicked should know that all goodness which they receive,
is for the Gospels and godly men's sake, Prou. 11. 11. there is not any thing in
the world which the godly have not a title unto, insomuch as all the wicked
men are but usurpers of the goods and lands, and wealth and dignities they
enjoy, so long as a godly man is living. The world is a body, religion is the
soul thereof, which being removed is dead and fit for nothing. The world is
a building, and the worship is the pillar and posts thereof, which being
removed it must needs fall, as the house wherein Sampson slew the
Philistines: So that it is most plain, that when our knowledge is turned to
ignorance, and the preachers of the word of God cease to speak in the name of
God, and when the Gospel is banished from our land, and there be a free
liberty to do what they list: then I say will the heavens threaten
destruction, the minds of men shall be made blind, their understanding shall
be taken from them, and they shall live as other people do without God his
word, to be slaves to their enemies, drudges to their labors, beasts in their
lives, enemies to God, haters of good things, and devils by their death. The
uses which comes from this doctrine, is first of all, that we labor with
speed to amend Use 1.
those things which are amiss among us: for else that judgment which the
Lord once threatened to the Ephesian church, Revel. 2. 5. shall take hold,
namely, that the Lord will take away his candlestick from us: if the light be
gone, we shall live in darkness; if the word be gone, we shall live in blindness;
if God his worship be taken from us, we shall die in misery. This only is
the meat, which if we want will consume us: it is a sword, and if it be not
in our hands it will wound us; it is a scepter, which if the king of heaven
hold not forth, we shall be condemned: Fear the want of the Lords worship,
for if it go from us, then he will depart; if he depart, then our prosperity
will cease, and there shall not be a man alive which will not desire to die.
Consider I beseech you, if you have enjoyed great possessions, and goodly
lands, fair houses, and many friends, delicate lives, and many children; but
in one night thy adversary steals away thy evidence whereby thou hold thy
land, and then thou art turned out of possession, thy lands are taken from
thee, thy friends forsake thee, thy children cry on thee, and thou be
constrained either to hard labor or unlawful beggerie; how would thou
take it, but wish for a thousand deaths to be delivered from this shame: So
shall it be with thee in the Gospel, which is the evidence of thy peace, thy
health, thy lands, thy joy, and the kingdom of heaven; the which being taken
from thee, thou can never enjoy any of these: then thou shall weep without
comfort, sorrow without hope, live without joy, die without peace, and be
damned without mercy. Oh, whose heart is not cleaued asunder to think upon
the danger of his soul? Love the Gospel, that it may tarry with us; believe
it, that we may live in it; receive it, that we may rejoice in it; profess it,
that we may die in it, profess I say, for his own sake and for nothing else:
let thy eyes see it, thy ear hear it, thy tongue speak it, thy heart regard
it, thy feet walk in it, that thy hand may work in it thy own salvation.
Let us amend that which is amiss, and repent least all be taken from us,
least our enemies rejoice in our houses, least our women lament in the streets,
our children cry in the fields, our old men lie in the graves, and all men die
in desperation. Let us therefore to avoid all this mischief receive that
exhortation, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 12. that every one that now lives in our English
dominion, in the days of our most peaceable Solomon: Walk worthy of this
vocation whereunto they are called. If the Lord should require any great
thing of us, ought we not to do it, seeing we owe unto him our own selves,
much more ought we to walk like christians, seeing we profess christianity.
Walk we must, and not stand still as the idle do, we must be worthy of our
places, and not only fill the room as an image does at a feast, as our
carnal Gospellers do: and called we must be, and not refuse to come, as the
greatest part in our age does. The Gospel is the sun, let us look on it; it
is the wedding garment, let us wear it; it is the day, let us work in it; it
is the salt of the world, let us taste it; it is the way to salvation, let us
travail in it; it is the life of all things, let us live in it. Oh therefore
you which are called, refuse not to come; you which are living, lengthen your
days: you which can see, behold the miseries of your joy; and you which have
legs to walk withal, bodies to live withal; space to return; time to
repent; leisure to practice; souls to save, or any grace of God within you;
walk worthy of salvation. You must not walk as other do, for Christ is our
pattern: you must not walk as the most do, for the flock of God is little;
you must not walk as you have done, for you must be new creatures: Walk in
knowledge, for that will make you wise; walk in faith, for that will make you
zealous; walk in love, that will make you Christians; walk in cleanness,
that will make you saints; and walk in patience, for that will give you the
Lords kingdom. Be shod with preparation of the Gospel of peace, and let your
strength be increased to go on, from step to step, from virtue to virtue,
from tear to tear, from trouble to trouble, from day to day, and from the
death of this life, to the life of this death, for the Lords praise in his
truth to our joy in his kingdom.

The eleventh Sermon.
Verse. 12. The vine is dried up, and the fig tree is decayed: the pomegranate
tree, and the apple tree, even all the trees of the field are withered: surely
the joy is withered away from the sons of men.
THe prophet oftentimes, as we may see, tells them one thing, the destruction
and overthrow of the fruits of their land, in the same words: and therefore
groundeth still the same exhortation, bidding them weep and howl, mourn and
lament, as if either he took pleasure to sing such mournful songs, or else
to show unto them that the sorrows of their hearts must recover the plenty of
the land. And in dwelling thus long in the Lords judgments, and their
repentance, he teaches us how necessary a thing it is to stand long on a good
text, and never to be weary of a good matter, although it be bitter to the
taste of our hearts. It is a common thing in the word of God to repeat one
thing often; and therefore Paul desires of the Corinthians, that it should not
be grievous to hear the same things often: for we are of this nature, that
many things we understand not, many things we remember not, sometimes we give
that to a natural cause, which belongs to a divine judgment, and most times
we little regard the heavenly oracles; for all these often repetitions are
most necessary. And let us with often repetition, join some show of earnest
affection, as Paul does Phil. 3. 18. where he says, of those things I have
told you often, and now tell you weeping, etc. Many words, and many
repetitions without notes of singular passion, are or at least may seem to be
frivolous; and therefore let this be the exercise of religious minds, when they
are driven to use again those admonitions which they once used, that their
words show their meaning, their iterations testify their earnestness, and
signs of grief and sorrow express their affection: thus this prophet has
told his mind by word, and urged the matter by repetition, and confirmed the
thing by outward tokens. In this 12. verse he brings in all other things which
grows on the earth, when he names all the trees of the field, and more
especially the apple tree, the pomegranate tree, and the palm tree: whereby
he notes, that not only those creatures which were good for nourishment were
taken away, that the people should have no refuge in worldly confidence; but
also that the outward ornaments of the earth, as the ground-growinggrasse, the
tall springing-trees, which served for comfort only were destroyed. Whereby in
general we observe: that there is not any thing so glorious or so comfortable,
which the Lord has created in the world, but for the sin of man he will
destroy the same, as the prophet shows at No creature but for same it shall
be destroyed.
large, Zeph. 1. 13, 17. If the earth were all gold, and the grass were all
pearl, and the trees were all silver, the fields were full of corn; yet
would not the Lord spare any for all this. Oh my dear brethren, it is not the
growing corn, nor the springing grass, nor the goodly trees, nor the stately
towers, nor the walled cities, nor the pleasant apples, or the beautiful
abundance of the world, that can stay the wrath of God from falling on us; the
horse saves not in battle, the armor defends not in fight, and riches
cannot redeem a soul: God which made all is not moved with any thing save
only with righteousness and obedience, and to take vengeance of our
disobedience he ouerturneth and overthrows all. The reasons of this doctrine
are these: first, because he sets more by his Reason 1.
word then by all the works of his hands, Matt. 24. 35. the works of God can
but show him, but the word of God teaches us to come to him: and therefore
seeing he cares for our salvation more then for the preservation of any of his
creatures, he will not spare them because they show his glory, or give us
nourishment, but all things shall be confounded for the sin of man. Another
reason is, because for sin he spared not the angels, 2. Pet. 2. 4. and
therefore 2
he will not spare the lesser creatures: for the angels are the most glorious
creatures of the world, who sinning against God in the beginning, were cast
down from heaven into eternal torments. Oh this should much terrify us,
which are lower then the angels, viler then the creatures, and more worthy of
death then all the works of God are of corruption: that all the world for our
sin and sake should be every day in danger of destruction. And seeing the
angels being in heaven, found no place of mercy but present banishment and
everlasting fire, how should we come into heaven with our sins, or think to
escape on the earth? seeing the Lord is as powerful and wrathful beneath
among men, as he is above among angels. The uses which arise from this doctrine
are these: first, as we might hereby Use 1.
gather an excellent argument to enforce the irefull wrath of God: so may we
also learn by this, how miserable is the estate of worldy men, which trust in
the things of this life, which shall be all destroyed. Deuteronomy. 28. 52, 63. What
do men that satisfy their lusts, that gather their wealth, that enlarge their
dominions, and other worldly things, as building of fair houses, leaving
monuments of their names to posterity? but heap up a great deal of dry wood
for the wrath of God to consume them. Take them from their desire, you take
them from their god; pull them from their profits, and you pull them from
heaven: but the wealth which they have gained should serve their turns, and
their posterities in this life, and afterward be consumed. This were but a
tolerable estate, and to be endured: but alas the rust of that which they
hoorded, the cry of that they misgayned, the riot of that which they have
wickedly consumed shall torment their lives in another world. Why do thou
worship thy goods in loving them more then God, because thou think on the^
more then on him? and why do thou travail for this world and the things
thereof, with so insatiable and greedy desire? for if thou gain them, thou
gainest more burdens to thy life, and more woe to thy soul; if thou have
them, thou can not long keep them; for death will part them and thee in
sunder, or vengeance will take them out of thy hands. Oh tell me I beseech
you, which care for your parts and portions in this life, what benefit have
you by loving them? nothing but fear to loose them: what profit comes by
enjoying them? nothing but labor to keep the^: what hurt is there by wanting
them? nothing but a poor life and a peaceable death: the love of these is the
loss of heaven, and the lack of these is the love of God. Another use 2
which every one even the wicked must make hereof, is the same which the
Lord exhorts the Edomites unto, Esaias 21. 14. Seeing their vines, and fruits,
and corn, and all other things shall come to an end, and be taken away with
the wrath of God: therefore let every one that has them, give them to the
thirsty for drink, to the hungry for meat, to the naked for cloth, and to
the poor for maintenance. Oh, consider what is our duty, while as yet there
is a little corn, and comfort to our land; and deal with it as one would
deal with his own body, for anon it shall be taken by violence: therefore
now bestow for devotion, if we tarry but a little, vengeance will take them
and us: therefore let charity dispende them, what what are they but earth? if
we deliver not them, to earth shall they come again: Now they have force to
succor our lives, and if we spend them not well, anon they will have power
to subvert and condemn our souls.

How is joy withered from the sons of men: Now he complains what this
want has wrought, when he says; that joy is withered away as mowen grass
does from his greenenesse; so this from the sons of men, that is, the people
of the land: For we cannot be ignorant that of all times of the year, there
was most sweet singing and pleasant sporting at the time of harvest, as we
read Esaias 9. 5. because that then were the fruits reaped, and comfort received
of men; but when these were destroyed, their vines had no grapes, their trees
had no apples, and their fields had no corn: then I say was their mirth laid
aside into most solitary and sorrowful mourning. By these words Worldly
sorrow a fearful thing.
note that the want of worldly comfort, and the feeling of worldly and carnal
sorrow is a great and fearful judgment of God, Deuteronomy. 28. 63. If men see no
joy in their children, or comfort in their possessions, or profit by their
labor, but in all these they are made more heavy and solitary; and the Lord
takes from them a cheerful countenance; nay, if the fruits of the earth be
destroyed, (as here they were) so that there be none, even then I say,
although there be none occasion of joy but all of sorrow to be tormented with
grief, because we have not to supply our lives, is fearful in the sight of
God. We cannot (I grant) but sorrow, when we have none occasion ofioy: but yet
we ought to make our grief a godly sorrow, and the fear of famine to be the
fear of condemnation: for this should we weep, that howsoever these things
go with us in this life, the other may be certain in the life to come. The
reasons of this doctrine are these; First, because it causes death. 2. Cor. 7.
7. 10. Worldly sorrow causes death: Reason 1.
for as the fire wastes the wood, and the sun consumes the frost, so does
carnal care eat up the life of man. Sometimes these sorrowful worldlings are
raging with envy, sometimes overcome with malice, and many times at their wits
end through covetousness: so that the beautiful wax pale therewith, the
lusty and strong man is weakened, they which were pleasant are heavy, and they
which seemed godly are made wicked. This worldly sorrow made Achitophell that
wise man to hang himself; and Saul that strong man to kill himself; and
Zimrie that wicked king to burn himself: for the Lord suffered many to fall
into it, that they might despair of his mercy, and be excluded from his
kingdom. Oh therefore, whosoever will show any care of his own soul, or any
account of Christ's wounds, let him meddle little in worldly business: keep
in the bounds of thy vocation, and range not into much dealing, and many
trades and occupations, for thou do but thrust thy soul into danger: and a
thousand to one but thou will repent in tears and blood, thy ouerreaching
policy. Another reason of this doctrine 2
is, because it is a dear, and not the least blessing of God, to rejoice in
thy possessions, be they small or great, Eccle. 5. 8. and therefore, it is not
the least curse of God to be troubled and tormoiled therewith. What beast being
in a good pasture does not rejoice in it; or what bird having but a twigge to
sit on, does not sing in the sunny mornings of the spring? and will thou being
a man or woman be worse then bird or beast? not to rejoice in the blessings
of God toward thee. Augustine tells of one Paulinus, that when he had lost
all his goods, he was so far from being sorrowful, that this was his
prayer, O Lord thou know where all my goods are treasured: Take not then to
heart every worldly cross; art thou a husbandman, and have lost thy corn? art
thou a merchant, and have suffered shipwreck? art thou a trauailer, and have
been spoiled by robbers? art thou a widow, and have lost both husband and
wealth? yet take not sorrow to thy heart, sleep from thy eyes, peace from thy
life, beauty from thy face, nor comfort from thy soul. From hence we learn
to make many profitable uses, whereof this may be one, that seeing Ves 1.
worldly and carnal sorrow is such a woeful judgment of God, therefore most
miserable is the estate of worldly wicked men: if they pray in it they cannot
be heard, Esaias 16. 12. If they will embrace the Gospel, the world will not
let them, and therefore this sorrow does torment them, Luke 18. 23. Oh, where
will they now become? Good men being sorrowful are comforted by prayer, Lamen.
5. but evil men although they use the same words, and lift up their voices
and weep, and would tear their hearts out of their breasts, and give as
much to God for joy, as the devil would have given Christ for worship; yet
their worm shall ever gnaw them, and joy shall never come at the^: though they
change their minds as Laban did Jacobs wages, to increase his flock; yet
shall they still decrease, and not prevail as Labans did; if they think as
the Syrians did, that the hills be not for them, and therefore they will
descend into the valleys, there even there also shall they be destroyed.
Consider this I beseech you, who in this world mind nothing but joy, and fear
nothing but sorrow, and think that your fear shall come upon you. Do you
imagine that your wealth shall continue your mirth? no, no, said Solomon, that
is but vanity and vexation of spirit: or do you suppose that your hearts are
Stoicall, made of stones, and therefore nothing shall dismay you, but you will
take all things without grief? oh consider that God shall bring this judgment
upon you for other sins: there is no counsel against the almighty. What
will you now do? and where can you hide your selves, that God may not find
you? cannot he which made a hard rock a running stream, strike also your
hard hearts, and make your lives and eyes as full of tears and sorrows, as
the wilderness flows full of water? Yes, yes, with no labor shall he, and
will he plague your lives, increase your pangs, multiply your sorrows, cast
down your comforts: and therefore cast away your evil conditions. Another use
may be this, that we take no thought or vexing care for the things of this
life. Luc. 12. 23, 34. Our Savior Christ which was the richest that ever was,
became the poorest that ever could be; and therefore gives this counsel,
that we take not thought for food or raiment: who should take care if the
poor take not care? and yet our Savior a poor man, bids both poor and
rich, not to vex themselves for these earthly commodities. Rely therefore
upon the word of our Savior, I am sure thou will trust him, when he said, I
came to save sinners: and thou will believe him when he said, he was the son
of God; therefore do not distrust him in his promise, but take no thought for
thy life, especially such a care as should be a hinderance unto thee in thy
spiritual duties. Why do thou labor when thou should pray? why do thou
travel when thou should hear? why do thou weary thy body, when thou
should rest thy soul in the sweet arms and wounds of a merciful
Savior? If God do but breath on thy labor, it consumes it; if he curse the
work of thy hands it vanishes; and when it is gone, where is thy labor and
travel, and work and joy, and comfort and hope, but all in the fire. Follow
therefore thy labor with godliness, and follow godliness with labor, join
these two together, as Simeon and Judah joined to drive the Canaanites out of
the land, Judge. 1. 7, 8. and so shall not Canaan but heaven be thy sure
resting rode and ever abiding inheritance. Let not rich men lay up too much,
and buy and sell all for gains: why you have learned a mean in religion, and
will you never learn a mean in riches? oh that your riches were godliness,
and godliness your riches, that your labor which is now but lost, might be
bestowed on that food and wealth, and land and life which never shall end.
Another doctrine which arises out of these words, when he says that joy is
parted or withered from the sons of men is this, whereby he gives them to
understand, that those which will not humble themselves, shall be humbled
whether they will or no. The nature of man If we humble not our wills, God will
humble them against our will.
being plentifully stored with all manner of benefits, never thinks of a day
of vengeance, but imagines that his peaceable estate shall be for ever:
therefore the Lord willing to show us our vain hope, and transitory fading
pleasures, takes away from us those comfortes which we were wont to receive
by the use of his blessings, and changes our merry days into sorrowful
destinies. We have a notable example hereof in Dan. 5. 3, 6, 22, 23. Belshazzar
that proud Babylonian king, cared not for the miserable captivity wherein he
detained the people of Israel, there was no conscience of his sin, no pity
on his prisoners, no fear of the Lords majesty, no thought of true
humility, but all to maintain the pride of a prince; and therefore harken
what befell him. At that time when he was at his banquet, in the midst of his
ruff with all earthly delights, the hand of God appeered, and wrote on the
wall the sentence of his deprivation; and this was because he had not humbled
himself before in the time of his prosperity; and then followed a fearful
heart, a sorrowful soul, an unquiet mind, and a miserable end: Even so if we
cast not down our selves before adversity come, trouble shall come and cast
down us. Harken unto this you rich men and women, in this world; say not to
your selves, that you will be merry while you may; but rather be sorry while
you may be joyful: now fast while you have abundance; now pray while you are
in health; now weep while God may be entreated; and now afflict your souls
while your comfort remains: for surely if you continue in your pleasant
possessions and worldly disports, will you nill you the Lord will humble you.
And were you not better to weep for your sins in your prosperity, then to
weep in adversity for the loss of children, of goods, or health, or houses,
or wives, or husbands, or friends, or liberty, or food, or raiment, or
death, and not be comforted: remember what the prophet here says, that joy
shall be withered from you in the days of worldly adversity. The reasons of
this doctrine may be these: Reason 1.
first, because they are not moved at the troubles of others, Amos. 6. 6. If
men look to themselves they shall see that their estate is never so secure,
but that there is left unto them one just cause or other to lament bitterly;
yet if they find none in themselves, let them look on other, and mourn for
the affliction of Joseph: The church of God is never freed from inward and
outward troubles, and therefore ever has occasion of inward or outward
lamentation. Now seeing that we should mourn with them that mourn, let us
weep with the saints of God that suffer (although we suffer not,) that being
made partakers of their afflictions, we may also be made partakers of their
glory. It is a token of an unmerciful heart, that does not look on the cry
of a beast, and help an unreasonable creature from his oppressor: how much
more unmerciful are wicked men, which will not be moved at the lamentable
tears of godly men? He that stops his ear at the cry of the poor, shall
cry himself and not be heard: In like manner those which will not be humbled
for their own sins and dangers belonging to them, nor for the pitiful
oppression of good and godly men, they shall come into unavoidable mischiefs,
because they were not moved in prosperity: for the righteous (says Solomon)
shall come out of trouble; but the wicked shall come in his stead. Another
reason is because men which 2
have fat and hard hearts, do not only live in their pride; but also desire to
draw other into misery, Psalm. 137. 2. 8. The Edomites that rejoiced, and
increased the calamity of the people of God, are destinated to eternal and
most assured adversities: wherein we may see that if men do not win
themselves to the church, they join themselves to the enemies: if they take
not part with the repentant, they take part with the unrepentant: For if we be
not possessed with goodness, of necessity we must be professed in evil. Oh
therefore seeing we cannot walk in any mean betwixt faith and infidelity,
religion and Atheism; let us speedily resort to the band and army of Jesus
Christ: for if he find us not among his soldiers, he will take us for his
enemies, although we fight not against him; and if we join not with the army
of God, the devil will take us up for to be of the company of accursed
creatures. The uses which arise from this doctrine are these, first let us
judge our selves, that we Use 1.
be not judged of the Lord, 1. Cor. 11. 31. If our estate be so miserable that
we cannot avoid judgment; yet the Lord has showed us a mean to mitigate our
extremity: if we be but our own judges. Abigaijl by condemning her husbands
hardness, pacified David's wrath, and saved her whole family from the sword of
vengeance: And the Syrians by putting halters on their necks, and coming
willingly to the king of Israel, saved all their lives. Oh with whom have we
to do, with meek king David, or with merciful Ahab? No, no, but with the
father of us all, who is king of heaven and earth, whose love toward us is
more tender then the love of a mother, and more sure then the faith of a
friend, and more kind then the band of the married. Let us therefore be
Abigaijles, by offering our lives and our wealth, accusing our selves and our
natures unto the Lord of hosts: and then will he bless us as David blessed
Abigaile, yea and marry us to his own self. Arise out of your resting
places, and go with full store to appease the wrath of God: if you stay till he
come unto you, what shall be your end? Oh what shall be your destruction? Now
accuse your birth (though it be noble) as stained with sin, accuse your life
(though it be christian) as defiled with the devil, accuse your words (though
they be humble) as sauouring of evil, and condemn your works (though they
have been charitable) as desiring death eternal. Judge your selves worthy of
all shame, because of pride; account your selves worthy of all sorrow,
because of mirth: esteem your selves less then all creatures, because of
death; and profess your selves worse then all men, because of sin. Say of
your nature that it is Satan's bondslaue: say of your beauty, that it is the
glass of iniquity: say of your strength, that it is the power to evil: say
of your youth, that it is the time of sorrow: say of your wealth, they are the
prouokers of licentiousnes; and say of the world, it is the bed of danger. What
shall I say more unto you? Was not Christ made accursed for us? that we might
know that we are cursed for our selves. Then think how your eyes are cursed
beholding vanity; your ears are cursed, hearing falsehood; your toongs are
cursed, speaking lies; your legs are cursed, running to evil; your arms
cursed, touching pleasures; your children cursed, borne in sin: yea think
all accursed, that your souls be not cursed in another world. Another use of
this doctrine may 2
serve to reprove their security, that think it is lawful for them to be
merry while they may, and never to enter into the house of mourning, till their
mirth and joy departs from them; and from hence it comes, that they put far
away from them the day of wrath. Amo. 6. 3. Children are suffered to be wanton
because their years are tender: youth is permitted to be licentious, because
their age is lusty: rich men are moved with vanity, because it is their
portion: poor men accustomed with folly, because they live in want; and old
men drowned in one kind of superstition or other, because they are near their
graves. Oh would not this grieve the heart of man, to see so many, so great, so
aged, so wealthy, so tender to abhor all mortification, and the sorrowful
way to life; but to embrance all condemnation, and the joyful high way to hell
fire. Know you not that ease slays the foolish, and the restie ox is
prepared for the slaughter? why then do you thirst still for more pleasure, and
hunger after more vanity? Man must not live by bread only, which makes him
full fed, and thorough fat; but by the word of God which makes him many
times to fast, being sweeter then his meat, and many times to be lean, being
safer then his health. Who is he that accounts not abstinence a God
preservative for health, and labor an earnest procurer of a good life: even so
there is none, but must think that it is most necessary for health, and most
wholesome for life many times; yea, (if it can be) most times to cast away joy,
to put away pastime, to depart from mirth, to stop thy ears from music, and
thy heart from laughter, giving over foolish and unlawful jesting, merry and
pleasant friends and companions, and so enter into a deep consideration of thy
sins, and dangers and troubles, and life and death, that it may work an
exceeding lamentation for all thy sins. Remember Moses, which forsook the
court of all Pharaohs disports, to live among his poor brethren, which daily
labored in making brick, gathering staw, and bearing many a heavy burden:
and so if we should be exercised in a voluntary and willing submission unto
tears and weeping, sorrows and lamenting crosses, and enduring afflictions;
we shall kill the hearts of many sins, and stop the breath of many evils, and
avoid the danger of many troubles. Better it is, says Peter, to suffer for
well doings, then for evil: now when in the fear of God we chastise our
selves, we suffer for well doing; but if we tarry till famine, or war, or
sickness, or poverty, or age, or death, then we suffer for our sins; as a
thief, or murderer for his robbing and killing.

The twelfth Sermon.
Verse. 13. Girde your selves and lament, ye priests: howl ye ministers of
the altar, etc.
THe exhortations to the people being finished, the prophet goes on to the
priests and gives them a special direction, how to behave themselves in this
time of dearth and famine. And this part as has bin already declared, is
contained in this chap. and in the second wherein he puts the^ in mind of
their duties, which may be reduced to these general heads, and particular
members. First, he exhorts them to a farther humiliation, and gives reason
for the same, verse. 13. as that they should be girded with sackcloth unto
lamentation: Secondly, that they should be all night long in sorrowing for the
same, afterward in this chapter he bids them sanctify a fast, verse. 14. and
in the second chapter, verse. 1. he bids them show the people their woeful
danger. For the fast he tells them how it should be solemnized, namely with
all the people in the house of God: Secondly, with prayer, and the form or
example to pray by, is described, verse. 15. and so to the end of the chapter.
First, when he calls unto the priests to be farther humbled, whom already he
had said to be mourning and lamenting for this matter, verse. 9. he thereby
gives us to understand, that there are none so forward in any good action, but
they have need of a farther None so for ward in religion, but they may be
exhorted farther.
provocation, and may receive good instruction, to proceed in their godly
enterprise. For this cause the Apostle, 2. Peter 1. 12. tells the faithful
in his time, that he would never be negligent to put them in mind of their
duty, although they had knowledge and were confirmed in the truth. The which
thing may reprove many in our days, which will not abide any wholesome word
of exhortation: especially there are in the ministry, those which having rare
gifts and great learning, and therefore despise both men and means, which
shall any way put them in mind of their duty; thinking it a disgrace to
their persons if any of the inferior sort shall note unto them their slips and
infirmities. But Peter had more modesty which easily yielded to the reproof
of Paul. Would God that men were as much ashamed to commit evil or omit
goodness, as they are to be blamed for any default: and it were to be wished
that they would as hardly abide the temptation of their enemy the devil; as
they will the reprehension of their most christian friends. Again, we have
many which have a little show of religion, and an unprofitable form of serving
God, the which think all knowledge is lapped in their brains, and all holiness
practiced in their lives; and therefore they despise sermons and preachers,
reading and hearing, conversion and repentance, and will say flatly they have
enough already, and therefore will receive no more. Against those let the
exhortation of this Prophet, and the example of these priests prevail; that
they may both either shame them for their folly, or reclaim them for their
stubbornnes. The reasons of this doctrine are these, First Reason 1.
because it is a true token, that we are the Lords when we are exhorted to
farther righteousness, Ioh. 15. 3. so that on the other side it is a fearful
sign that we are none of his, when we stop our ears and harden our hearts,
against the exhortations of the godly ministers: wherefore let them which with
Peter and John would have heaven to be on the earth, and make a dwelling for
their faith on a worldly mount, instead of heavenly Sion: let them I say, know
that as the desire of the apostles could not be performed in this life so in
this life although they have clymed up never so great hills of knowledge, and
secret hidden mysteries, and have seen the graces of God as plainly, as they
saw Elias and Moses: yet must they come down again, and labor to go
further before they come to heaven. But me thinks the earnest consideration of
this point, should make us all more earnestly to thirst after our spiritual
gain of godliness, and never to give over till all our vices are removed, all
our uncleanness purged, and all our wickedness forgotten. Do we not see how the
earth after one shower of rain, thirsts for another? and so following every
year; even so exhortations and reprehensions are like showers of rain, to
make our hearts to bear fruit: the which we should desire for the love of
more holiness, as the earth desires for the increase of more fruitfulnes.
Another reason 2
is, because it is a notable assurance unto a man's soul when he bears
exhortation, and increases in knowledge, that he has tasted of the goodness
and grace of God, 1. Pet. 2. 3. A young child tasting his mothers milk,
grows thereby: a sick man tasting his physicians potion, is strengthened
thereby, and desires more physic, and more meat; and therefore if we can
desire to be more righteous, more holy, more faithful, more zealous, and more
careful of good things: we may be assured that our souls are in good and
perfect health. But alas how many fail herein which taste, but find no relish
in the graces of God, and suffer the most wholesome food of their souls to
perish in their stomachs: they had rather eat the grass of their own
gathering, then the meat of the Lords providing. Stolen bread is sweet unto
them, that is, that which is forbidden them they delight in; but that which is
commanded and allowed them, they cannot away with: they love better to live in
one forbidden sin, then to live in a thousand commanded and authorized
virtues. From this doctrine we may make these uses, First seeing there is none
so holy and so good in this world, but he has need of more holiness and
goodness: then it follows that it is a most Use 1.
wretched thing to go backward, and to cease from being righteous; for this
cause the blessed servant of God exhorted, Revel. 22, 11. Let him which is
righteous be righteous still; show therefore if thou have ever obtained any
mercy of God in the knowledge of the Gospel, retain the same for evermore.
If ever thou had any dislike of prophannesse, any hatred of evil, any
conscience of goodness, and any desire of mortification; that thou did ever
abhor vain sports, foolish words, wicked works, unprofitable members, godles
companions, and truthlesse superstitions, continue so minded for evermore: but
as thou have been just, so abide righteous. The sheep once black or white,
never changes color; the vessel once seasoned, never loses sweetness; and
the soul once sanctified, never forsakes holiness. Be not unsavory salt, be
not unsteadfast wind, be not a foolish builder, and be not a cursed
backeslider. Call not the truth once beloved, into question, but fight for it
as for life: receive not the filthiness once banished, but fly from it as from
death. Love not that sin which once thou hatedst, least all other sins
become suitors for thy soul. Go out of vanity and ignorance, and hypocrisy,
and security, as Lot went out of Sodom, and never look so much as back upon
them. Destroy utterly the city and dwelling of Satan in thy soul, as Joshua
destroyed Ierico, and curse them that build it again: follow all the examples
of all the godly; Paul once converted, never revoked; Peter once strengthened,
never more halted; Onesimus once reconciled to his master, never ran from him
any more. And so seeing thou can say I have heard sermons, I have loved
prayer, I have harbored the saints, I have hated dancing, tabling, carding,
usuring, swearing, lying, stealing, and all other abominations: oh wallow not
again in that filthy mire but continue righteous to the end. Alas, alas, as
the eyes of man cannot weep enough, for the backesliders; so the tongue of man
cannot speak enough of their accursed apostasy: some fall to poverty, some
to security, some to vanity, some to open impiety, some into heresy, some
into schism, some into the world, some into the flesh, and all of these into
hell: and thus they go away as Gedeons soldiers which were at the first 21000.
but in the end they were but 300. Might Rahel weep because Herod kilde her
children, and may not the church weep because the devil kills her children?
Well, woe be to him for his malice, and woe be to them for their backsliding.
Secondly, seeing we all 2
need encouragement unto good things, let us not only be exhorted but
assured, that the presence of God shall assist us. When Zerubabel and Iehoshua
were stirred by the prophet to finish the temple of God, the Lord promised his
presence to assist them, Hag. 2. 5. and his spirit to remain with them: Now
mark who are exhorted, but the prince or chief governor, and the priest or
chief bishop, and all the people of the land: let us not therefore fear to
enter into a farther reformation of our selves, and doubt nothing but the Lord
shall finish our buildings. We are not Babel and the builders thereof, what
need we fear confusion? we are not Saul, what need we despair of victory?
we are not Achitophel, we will not distrust our counsel: we are not Judas, why
should we undo our selves for our sins? If we have deferred our repentance
and amendment, and ran away from God as Jonah did, yet being called again, let
us go boldly to the Nineveh of our own souls, and preach the fearful curse
of God against sin. The Lord came to Abraham in the plain of Mamre sitting
in his tent, and there promised him a son: why should we not be persuaded,
that when we are in meditating on any goodness, and loving any rightcousnesse,
and aduenturing any holy business, but the Lord will come unto us and promise
us life eternal. Therefore my dear brethren and sisters, adventure far for
the religion of your souls, and know that he shall go with you to help you
to your wish: fear not any power, for he is omnipotent; nor any enemy, for he
is your shield; nor any subtlety, for he is your wisdom; nor any want, for
he is your sufficiency; nor any constancy, for he never changes; nor any
death, for he is your life. Believe that you cannot conceive, understand that
you cannot see, bear that burden which he gives you, abide that sorrow that
he sends you, and practice that gospel which he has taught you. Pray for
repentance, and faith, and knowledge, and zeal, and obedience, and holiness,
and life eternal: for the Lord is in thine own soul, and fear not, he will
give it thee. Girde your selves. Again out of these words, wherein the
prophet bids the priests to be girded to lamentation, that is, to be
thoroughly prepared, and to put on sackcloth, that is, all outward and inward
testimony of sorrow, and to lie all night before the Lord, that is, to endure
any pain and labor to be reconciled to God. Out of the which I might note as
many doctrines as words: as first that upon good counsel and godly meditation,
men must come to lament their miseries before God; not rashly nor rauingly, nor
furiously, but with a godly preparation. Again, that the ministers in any
common danger must more earnestly be humbled then any other. Again, seeing he
calls for such sorrow and such continuance thereof, he thereby notes, that
if God be once angry, we must use all means that can be found to appease
him, though it cost our sweetest health, and our dearest blood. But I will
specially All must be thoroughly humbled in a common prayer for a common misery.
observe this doctrine, that all both minister and people when they come to
entreat for the remoouing of the Lord hand, must be sure that they be
thoroughly humbled, Nehem. 1. 4. their cause must be well pondered and weighed,
their minds must be well prepared and persuaded, their lives must be most
zealously reformed, and their continuance in their humiliation must be most
instantly and inuiolably observed. I have observed a great defect in the
humiliation of many in the time of our late calamities of famine, and war,
and plague, when we were cast down before the Lord. For men would come to
these exercises, from tauernes and alehouses, from shops and other business, no
otherwise prepared then at another common time: again, the notes of their
pride in apparel, and all bravery and fond expenses they brought with them,
and came more like plaiers then mourners into the Lords house; and also they
were quickly weary, for some would never tarry till the end: and other if
they once came, they never came more. And surely these were too evident signs,
that we were not thoroughly humbled; and therefore no marvel though the plague
prevailed on so many, and the famine has continued so long. Oh that therefore
this exhortation of the prophet might work a new and often remembrance of
unfeigned humility before the Lord, when we ever meet again about the like
occasion: and this I would have practiced both in private and public
humiliation. The reasons that may move us unto this duty to be thoroughly
humbled, are these: first, because the Lord Reason 1.
will not look on our adversity, without this perfect and absolute
contrition. Isa. 58. 3. for he then especially looks to the inward
disposition of every soul, to see who they be which tremble at his word and
judgments; and they which then will not nor cannot, there is little hope of
grace and goodness in them. The heathen king of Nineveh and all his subjects
had that conscience, when the Lord sounded their destruction by the prophet
Jonah; Ahab mourned when he heard the words of Elijah the prophet; and when God
speaks to the Assyrians and Moabites, he bids them come down into the
dust and ashes to lament their miseries. Alas why do I rehearse either
precepts or examples to move men unto this which they would not do, for if
their own lives and blood, and souls will not provoke them hereunto, other
men's ways will not persuade them: yet let them thus consider, that it will
grieve them more to loose this their counterfeite humility, as the Jews do
in the forenamed place, when they shall say, we fasted, we prayed, we
traveled, and we desired to justify our souls; and yet their fast shall be
as vanity, their prayer abomination, and their coming into the Lords
presence, like his which had no wedding garment, and therefore was he, and so
shall they be cast into utter darkness. Another reason is this, because that
those judgments which call for this humiliation, must teach us righteousness,
2
Esa. 26. 9. and so we increase in righteousness, as we exceed in humility;
and for this cause we must know, that the more religion a man has, the more
humble he is, and the more he says he increases in goodness, the more he
must study to show it outwardly. As for those which think they serve God well
enough, when they neither pray with their toongs, nor bend with their knees,
nor uncover their heads, nor move out of their houses, I leave them to their
fancies, and let every beast and bird of the air confute their fancies: for
the Lord which has assigned every member his office, will have every one to
execute it himself. The uses which offer themselves by the Use 1.
consideration of this point, are these, seeing we must be thoroughly humbled,
therefore let us avoid all manner of idleness in this worship of God, Iam. 2.
19. when we are once persuaded of this point, we shall not only lend an ear
to this business, but think all time too little that we spend not herein. The
poor saints of God in that forenamed place, cry in the night watches, as
these priests which lay all night in lamentation: and so when the fear of the
Lords wrath and the conscience of our own dangers do once meet together,
then there is not any thing that will be so acceptable to us as prayer. This
fear will drive from us our sleep, as the winds drive away the clouds, the
sick man will sit up, the old man will hold up his hands, the weak man will
stand for his life, the woman will weep without ceasing, and every one so
touched will avoid all worldly actions; then will, or rather then must the
rich man forsake his counting house, the farmer leave his plough, the servant
avoid his rest, the labourer neglect his meat, and the drowsy person hold up
his eyes. All the Apostles slept till the high priests servants came to take
our Savior, but then they awaked and fled for their lives; but why did they
not wake before in prayer, that the^ they might have slept without danger? oh
let us therefore come both great and small, to appear in the Lords presence
with all diligence: let not any long journey, any lack of provision, any love of
ease, any loss of health make us idle. Rise early to prayer, watch late to
lament, sleep little, that thou may spend the more time to gain thy souls
health. In the day we labor for our bodies, in the night let us labor for our
souls. My soul (says David) thinks on thee in the night watches: and so
let our souls think on the Lord, when other think on their rest and their
pleasure. Another use which comes by this consideration is this, that 2
seeing we must be thoroughly humbled, or not at all, let us take for our
example the pattern of them that mourn for the dead, as the prophet exhorts,
Ierem. 6. 26. How many are the tears of them which loose their loving
husbands, their tender children, and their loyal friends; Jacob for fear of
this said before hand, it would make his hoare head go down into the grave.
But so slight is the mourning of many among us, that they neither wette their
cheeks for their sins, nor yet would willingly depart with this life, for
the enjoying of the life to come. Surely this is worthy to be noted in them
which earnestly lament the dead, that they desire to be with them; so let us
desire to be free of this fear of death and sin, with the death of our
sins and lives: let us so bitterly bewail our time, as we may be most
willing to change our life, for no other cause then to cease from sin. The
Israelites bewailed Moses thirty days together, and let us with great and
long continuance, mourn not for Moses who is in heaven, but for our selves who
would be in heaven. When Naomy bid her daughters Ruth and Orpah go back into
Moab, they wept at her words: if they were so unwilling to live in Moab, and to
depart with Naomi; why are not we as unwilling to live in this world, and to
depart with Christ, seeing he is our head, and we his members; we must go to
him, and he may not come to us? let us therefore by his example endure many
sorrows and great dangers, that we may be more willing to leave this life. The
thief enclosed in the prison cease from stealing; and when we are closed in
iaile of many griefs, and clogged with the irons of many crosses, then let us
know that we cease from many external and internal abominations. Ye
ministers of my God. In this that he calls the priests which served at the
altar, the ministers of God: he thereby gives Ministers are only the Lords
servants.
us to understand whose possession are the ministers, namely and only the
Lords, Number. 3. 12. The Lord challenges the tribe of Leui to himself, to be
his peculiar and royal priesthood: and the Apostle wills the Corinthians
that they should so think of him, as of the minister of God, and disposer of
the secrets of his kingdom: and therefore writing to the Galathians, he
tells them he is not by man, nor by the will of man, but of God. Once in
steed of the appointed ministry were the first borne of every family, and
they sacrificed and none else; but they altered, and it came to one tribe, and
they also were abrogated; and so it came to men approved in the church, who
are deemed the special portion of the Lord in this world. And surely if the
servants of Solomon, were blessed that heard his wisdom, and waited in his
court, they are much more blessed which wait in the Lords house, and hear and
see the secrets of the kingdom of heaven. It is therefore a most fearful
thing to advance any unto this to be the Lords servant, who is not worthy to
sit in the chair of Moses; and there is no reason why they should minister in
the church which are not worthy to be the porters of the door. Surely the
prophanenes of many in these places is so great and so damnable, that besides
the injuries done to Christ, many run headlong into hell, thorough the evil
example of their pastors. The Lords servants follow their master in
holiness, and not the world in lewdness; they look to the souls, but these
wait for the fleeces; they preach upon conscience, these do it for fashion;
they preach only the truth, but these bring the fire of poetry, philosophy,
and such like to the altar of God: to conclude, they be the helpers unto
faith, but these quench their own gifts, and keep other from pure knowledge.
The Reason 1.
reasons are these, because the whole life of the minister must be only
exercised in spiritual and heavenly matters, Act. 6. 2. 4. The apostles would
consent to nothing which was not consonant to their ministry, or that might
any ways hinder the same: And for this cause the Lord has so provided, that
they should be exempted from all worldly business, and receive their
maintenance from other, not only for themselves, but for their children and
families. The which thing considered would advertise a number of us, that we
which war should not entangle our selves with the things of this life; we
should never give over our service, for that is nothing else but to forsake
God; we must never cause our sins to make us be thrust out of the
ministry, for that will exclude us from heaven: we must never be idle and
unprofitable servants in our ministry, for that will work our curse; and we
must never be weary of our places, for that will weaken and lessen our gifts.
But alas once there might come no rasor on the ministers heads, but now adays
heads and beards and all are powled: if we should not now look to our own
maintenance, we might soon want sustenaunce, and our children are easily
suffered to beg, though their parents have well deserved of the Church of
God. Another reason is, because none may offer them any violence, 2
but the Lord accounts it his own, Exodus 16. 8. and he says by the
prophet David, Touch not mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm. How
desperate is the case of all men, who are daily by words and deeds reuiling
the ministers of the gospel, and think themselves happy if they can give a
priest a deadly blow by their enuenomed tongue. Truly I will say our own
sins were the cause of all this; yet if the kiss of Judas was so mortally
punished, these men's (not kisses, but wounds, not with lips but with toongs and
hands) shall never escape unrewarded: for as by their toongs they have killed
us, so the Lord with his tongue shall condemn them. From hence let us of the
ministry learn our duty, which Use 1.
is, seeing we are the Lords own servants, let us labor to present every
man perfect in Jesus Christ, Col. 1. 28. there is no servant, but he desires
not only to do much work, but that he may present it fair and beautiful to
his masters view: this is our labor to bring many souls and saints to the
Lord of glory. Abraham sending his servant to fetch a wife for Isaac his
son, he brought him godly and beautiful Rebecah: we are the Lords
servants, and we are sent to fetch a wife for Jesus Christ the son of God;
oh let us be as faithful unto God the father, and to Jesus Christ, as that
servant was to Abraham and Isaac; let us do our message with diligence, let us
execute our charge with prayer, let us give them the golden bracelets of God
his truth, and let us with all speed and haste return again to him that sent
us. When Jacobs sons went into Egypt, Judah promised him to bring Benjamin
again, if he would let him go, or else he should slaie his own two sons;
and so if we bring not again to the Lord his beloved children, he will slaie
our bodies and souls for ever and ever, for at our hands will he require them.
Come on therefore my dear and holy anointed brethren, we have the leading of
God his children, we have the keeping of Christ's Queen, we have the tillage
of the Lords corn, we have the use of the Lords treasure, and we have the
price of our Saviors blood: if we loose his children, he will slay ours; if we
defile his wife, he will curse us; if we neglect his husba^dry, he will spoil
ours; if we waste his treasure, he will sell us to perpetual bondage; and if we
spill our Saviors blood, he shall condemn our blood, body, and soul. Oh
therefore let us be instant in preaching, holy in living, earnest in prayer,
zealous in exhortation, and careful in admonition; instructing the children,
correcting the youth, and comforting the aged: that as Jacob returned with many
more souls out of Syria into Canaan, then he brought; so may we come with
many souls out of this world into the world to come. Another use shall be for
the people, that considering we 2
be the Lords own servants, and therefore open and shut the privy chamber
door which leads unto him, and to us is committed the building of the
church: then as the Apostle exhorts you Ephesians. 4. 11, 14. that ye give heed
to them whom the Lord sends you for spiritual guides: direct not your
prayers to Angels and saints in heaven, for they have not the keeping of the
Lords works; but the ministers which be alive are the privy counselors to
the Lords majesty, whom if you will not believe, neither can you believe,
though an angel come from heaven unto you. And therefore as all the people
were wont to wait for the coming out of the priest, that he might bless
them; so do you all evermore, wait for the blessing, and mercy, and grace, and
counsel, and love of God to come from them to you. As the Lord turns the
blood of a woman into milk for the nourishment of her child, so does he
turn our words, and gifts, and knowledge, and learning, and study, and life
to be the nourishment of you his church. Come to us for comfort and
instruction, and edification, and salvation; you are the Lords household, we
are his stewards, come to us for your meat of soul, and wages of life. When
Adam came again to God he received the promise of life; when the creatures
came to Noah's arc, he kept them from the floude; when the Egyptians came to
Joseph, he saved them from famine; and when the people came to hear Christ
preach, he relieved their fainting: Come you likewise to the ministry, they
will give you the promises, open unto you the kingdom, deliver you the corn,
and satisfy your souls most plentifully, that you shall never faint till you
come to the everlasting abiding place. Except the priests had stood in the
river of Jorden, the children of Israel could never have passed over: even so
we stand in the troubles of this world, to keep them from you, else you
should never come into Canaan: Oh therefore come while we stand and bear
the Lord's ark, or else the waters of heresy and Atheism will come again:
and then farewell your hope, your health, and your salvation.

The xiij. Sermon.
Verse. 14. Sanctify a fast: call a solemn assembly: gather the elders and
all the inhabitants of the land into the house of the Lord your God, and cry
unto the Lord.
THat is, call and prepare a fast, to the which some may say; that they might
well enough fast, seeing their meat and corn was already withered, and they
had more need to seek to save their lives, then to go to fast and to endanger
themselves farther. Unto which I answer, that the forenamed calamity was but
prophetically foretold: and therefore as yet there was not such want, but only
it should be if they repented not. He bids them prepare a fast, that is,
a general humiliation for all the people, wherein should be nothing but
mourning and abstinence, and this kind of fast is a great and good part of the
worship of God. Esaias 58. 13. Therefore from hence we observe that God takes
occasion by threatening of his wrath against us, to move us to worship him more
earnestly, so we may see Judge. 20. 26, 27. when the Israelites God by
threatening wrath moves us to his worship.
in a good cause, had been overcome of the Beniamites, and lost the lives of
many brave men, it moved them again to go to humble themselves before the
Lord, with fasting and bitter weeping, and lamentation. And surely this
seems to be the continual course of the Lords doing in the church, that as
the ground is plowed that it might yield more fruit: so the church is
afflicted that it may give him more worship. We are for the most part like the
disciples which knew not how to fast, or to afflict themselves till Christ was
taken from them, and then they fasted, Mark. 2. 20. So when we are either
generally molested, or particularly endangered; how do we cleave to the
churches, and turn over the bibles, and run over the word? but in times of
more ease we are more idle, and take liberty of sinning, when we feel the
greatest liberality of our Savior. If we have no other cause to rejoice in
our poverty, and sickness, and infamy, and danger, and hunger, and famme,
and all our tribulation, then this that we are by them better fitted for the
Lords service; yet let this make us clap our hearts and hands that we may any
way glorify our creator. And as the Israelites were as willing to fight with
the Canaanites, as to possess their land: so let us be as willing to fight
with many troubles, as to possess many pleasures. The reasons of Reason 1.
this doctrine are these, because such kind of miseries lamented by such kind
of worship, does turn away our captivity, and appease the Lords wrath,
Lament. 2. 14. and therefore we may take great comfort in the forewarning of
our miseries, seeing we may be prepared thereby against all danger to avoid all
wrath; if the Lord did not by the ministry of his word humble us, we
should ever be subject to mortal confusion, and immortal condemnation. But
so he orders all things in his church, that as the ouerflowing Nilus makes
the earth more fertile; so the floudes of troubles going over the bodies and
lives of his members, makes them more peaceable: once the disease purged, the
body is well quieted, and once the pride of our sin and natures scoured and
rubbed away, the soul is more strengthened. Another reason is because 2
that the Lord will have that thing work the good of his church, which
works the desperation of infidels, for wicked men in their troubles are at
their wits end, as we may see Mich. 4. 5. so was it in Cain and Edom, and the
Egyptians, and Saul, and Herod, which all perished through affliction. The
nature of the wicked is like iron which will never swim though it be never so
little, except it be nailed to some wood or other substance: so the wicked
being banished from the godly they fall down and stick fast in an
irresistable mire of afflictions: so that we may see, as the cross of Christ
was the life of the church, but the death of the devil; so are many other
crosses the life of the Lords dear children, but the death of his despitefull
enemies. The uses which come from this Use 1.
doctrine are these: First, seeing we are by our affections stirred up to
serve the Lord, let us keep our souls in continual chastisement, that we
may continually be mindful of the Lords service, 1. Peter 4. 7. Those which
lie in garrisons although they seldom fight, yet every day they discipline and
train their soldiers; so although we seldom lie under great danger of
exceeding slaughter, yet let us continue our souls in correction and
obedience. If David had always used this, he had not so easily forgotten
himself, and brought Vrijah to death, and himself into filthy adultery:
Even so the want of this private chastisement, and continual afflicting of our
souls for our sins makes us wanton in wealth, proud in prosperity,
presumptuous in health, and often subject to satan's temptations. Afflictions
may rightly be compared to a hedge, which has thorns on both sides, so that
that which is within cannot come out, and that which is without cannot come in:
in like manner when our lives are hedged with troubles, the good things which
are in our souls cannot go out of us, and the evil things which are without
us cannot come into us. Weep often for thy sins that thou may always be
sorrowful, pray often for thy amendment, that thou may still be penitent.
Think many times on thy later end, that thou may never be arrogant, so
shall thou save thy self from many evils, and gain thy conscience great
peace, and procure thy soul everlasting blessedness: for if this life be
contrary to the life to come, then it follows that as there shall be never
ceasing joy, for the ceasing of sin; so here ought to be a never ending
sorrow for the continuance of sin. Another use which comes of this doctrine
is, seeing our evils make us more fit to serve God, then is it a miserable
thing to be made more unfit to serve him through tribulations, when men's hearts
die in them for fear of the Lords hand, as Nabals did when he feared David's
coming: or when men grow desperate seeking unlawful means to be rid of
their miseries, as the Jews did, Esaias 30. 16. and therefore the Lord
threatens them that they shall fly as they determined, and they shall ride on
horses as they appointed, but their enemies should ride faster to overtake and
overthrow them. I have observed the constitution of many men, and I found
them like the seafaring mariners, whose life is a continual death; and yet
they are more open contemners, and more obstinate enemies to all manner of
goodness then are other men: and so those whose estate is poorest, whose lives
are most slavish, having the prisons for their dwellings, and continually
destitute of meat and all kind of necessaries, none more wicked then these,
or more careless of any good thing. But to let those pass, there are many
that have escaped dangerous sickness, pyning famine, the fearful hand of
war and cruel death, which seemed before their eyes unavoidable; and yet
remain desperately wicked still, and run to their own vomit and wallow in
their loathsome mire of sin; these are they which are at a league with death
and covenant with hell, they hope to escape as well as other, and while they be
in the world why should they not live merrily, although they go to hell for it
afterward. Seeing they are so careless of their own welfare, who should
take care for them; and seeing the fearful hand of God will not win them,
the labor of us his ministers shall never persuade them. Out of this verse. I
might observe unto you that the pastors are not to proclaim fastings without
singular warrant either from God himself, or else from them that ought to
direct them herein. Again, I might observe that the people must come at the
voice or call of their spiritual fathers, and pastors; also that public
fasting ought to be done in the public congregation, for that time being. But
we will proceed to the next words, where the prophet tells them what they
should do now when they were assembled together in the fast, that is, they
must cry on the Lord, meaning they should humble themselves by prayer. And
from hence observe that fasting is nothing Fasting nothing worth without prayer.
worth without prayer, Esaias 58. 3. Luke 18. 11. The common people do imagine
that when they cease from eating, and punish their bodies with a days
abstinence, that they do unto God high service. Indeed it is lawful for the
preservation of their health so to do, but for a divine service or work of
religion, they must not account it. But this custom sprang up from the
persuasion of popery, which do not only account this kind of abstinence a
meritorious work; but also if men eat not flesh, although they abou^d in all
other delicates, with great store of dainty wines and strong drink; yet do
they observe a druine fast to the Lord, although they never make any
conscience of prayer, and do not so much as bless their meat and drink they
receive. Therefore let all good Christians be careful to avoid in their
fasts, ignorance and superstition, and let them either join prayer with their
fasting, or else never reckon it for a work of religion. The reasons of this
doctrine are these: First, because God does not except us for meat, 1. Cor. 8.
8. that is, with the Reason 1.
Lord if we eat or eat not, we have neither the more or less, and
therefore bare abstinence is not any part of religion. But if the ordinary
taking of our meats and drink must be sanctified by prayer, which is a mere
civil thing, then much more the not receiving either of meat and drink for a
religious cause must be consecrated by prayer. One said well, that those which
place any part of God his service in their meat, they do very near make
their belly their God: Yet though meat and drink does not make us either the
better or the worse to God ward; yet we must remember that heerby is not
given us any liberty to live in gluttony or drunkenness, no more then to sterue
and pine up our souls voluntarily, but he means in the moderate use or
neglect heer^^f. Another reason is, 2
because God never commanded any such fast, nor allowed it, as we may see in
all the course of the Scriptures: where evermore there was joined with fasting
public and most earnest prayer and lamentation, why then should we use that
in the Lords service which he never spoke of; and why should we frame that of
our selves, which he reprobateth? truly every plant which he has not planted,
shall be pulled up by the roots, and therefore in vain should we worship him,
following the traditions of men: live in the obedience of the Gospel, for that
shall bring us to life; and whatsoever we do more we either perform for
curiosity, to find fault with that which is done; or else for vanity to
search into that which is forbidden. From hence let us learn to lead most
christian lives which Use 1.
is to serve the Lord with fastings and prayers, after the example of the
ancient godly beloved saints of God, as Anna, Luke 2. 37. and the Apostle Paul,
2. Cor. 11. 27 both men and women have lived in this kind of abstinence, and
religious service of God. But alas we have among us thousands which would
think they received great injury, if they be not accounted as good christians
as Paul and Anna, which never in all their life did so much as fast and pray
one whole day together in their private houses. I cannot tell what nimblenes
and ioyfulnes, they find in themselves to the service of God: but I am sure
that there have been, and now are others of another judgment, which without
this exercise of prayer and fasting, grow many times heavy and so dull in the
practice of their profession, that they think that the spirit of God is
departed from them. And when they have renewed this exercise, they find
themselves again more ripe and sharp and ready in any kind of goodness.
Alas, what practice of repentance is there in them, that are strangers in this
action? it is a simple sorrow for sin, that takes not away one days
stomach from meat, and causes not the soul to hunger more after
reconciliation, then after a worldly recreation. Therefore fast often and pray
much, so shall thou be like the godly, never be weary of this practice, except
thou be weary of christianity: and as thy sins increase, so let thy
mortification be enlarged, that thou may make more castles in thy soul to
defend thee, then the devil does engines to annoy thee. Another use is, that
we absent not our selves from those solemn and appointed kind of fasts, 1. 2 Samuel 7. 6. all Israel came to observe this before the Lord in Mizpeh, and so
continued till Samuel sent them home again. If ever it be needful that the
congregation should be great, then it is most requisite to be enlarged, when
occasion of lamentation is offered: that as many men's voices made the Lord to
spare the Ninevites; so many may cause him to reuerse his judgments from us.
For truly as in war against an enemy having muaded our country, we are
ingenerall to lift up our hands against him to drive him from us: so ought we
being endangered by the hand of God to put on every one his complete armor
of righteousness, that every man's heart and voice may be lifted up to stay his
heavy hand from us. How do men neglect this thing which think it in vain to
serve God, and therefore though they know other men to be most busy in
lamenting for their calamities; yet they forsake not their tauerns, their
shops, their counting houses, their husbandries, their marriages, and other
their paltries: when as the sword is as near them as their garments, yet they
dread not the same: and so as before they neglected the graces of God; so now
they abuse the long suffering of God, making their latter end worse then
their beginning, like the old world which would not believe, though they saw
Noah enter into the arc, and so the flood came and destroyed them all: and so
shall it do with those except God enlarge his mercies and they cast away their
stubburnnes.

Alas, alas, for the day of the Lord is at hand, and it comes Verse. 15.
as a destruction from the Almighty. Now are we come to the prayer, which by
the merciful assistance of God his heavenly spirit we will most briefly and
effectually handle: First therefore, the method which the holy prophet uses,
is to be observed; wherein he lamenteth generally, verse 15. and then
particularly the means or causes of their destruction. In this verse he
generally touches all the calamity, when he calls it the day of the Lord,
the dread and conscience whereof makes him most yearnefully and pitifully to
cry out, Alas, alas. Where first of all comes to our consideration this
doctrine, that good men do sorrow and Good men mourn before judgment comes.
mourn for the Lords judgment before it comes: as this Prophet which says
the cause of his tears to be this, because the day of the Lord is at hand: so
we may read did Elishah, 2. King 8. 10. when Hazael came unto him and he had
anointed him king of Syria, it is said that he wept; and Hazael asked him why
he wept: to whom he answered, because it grieved him to think what he should
do to Israel; for he should set their strong cities on fire, and slay their
young men with the sword, and dash their infants against the stones, and rende
in pieces their women with child. Was not this a sufficient medicine to look
on, and to make a heart of brass to burst forth into many tears? For I
think none considering such a destruction in his country, but he will weep
for it bitterly. It is enough many think, to sigh when they be sore, and then
to weep when they be in pain; and why should they torment themselves before
they feel the misery? Yea rather why do thou reason thus against thy God?
Think on the days of misery that are coming, and do as these prophets,
break forth into abundance of lamentation: to think how our towers shall be
plough lands; our treasures shall be in other men's coffers; our coastly
buildings be razed in an instant; our rivers shall run with blood; our
children shall be the pray of soldiers, and our wives be most cruelly
murdered. Oh that men before these days could lament for the same; yea
although their eyes should never see it, yet let them weep for them that shall
feel it. The reasons of this doctrine are these: first, because they Reason 1.
reap this profit by the forewarning of God, Iere. 4. 18 19. if God of his
great goodness open the destruction of any people or city to any of his
well-beloved sons; they are presently astonished men and swallowed up in many
sorrows: but wicked men although they be never so often admonished, yet they
remain wicked and obstinate still. Oh what a blessing is a soft and believing
heart, which does not only receive the words of God for truth, but is
presently affected as if they felt the judgments! When Elijah had told Ahab of
God his vengeance against him; then Ahab wept and fasted, and the Lord spared
him his time: so I doubt not but there be many which having heard the trumpe of
God his judgment in the mouths of the Lords preachers, they have wept
bitterly, and I think the Lord will spare us for their time: but take heed
least the godly be deminished, and no man consider it, least our destruction be
the more sudden; and lift up more voices of weepings at the voices of
preachers, that more time may be granted us to be freed from vengeance.
Another reason is, because good men although they be assured of themselves; 2
yet it grieueth them to think how the wicked shall be destroyed, Luke 19. 41.
Our Savior there weepeth for Jerusalem, which should be laid even with the
ground. A good man is ever merciful even to the most vile and wretchedst
creatures in the world; and therefore it goes to their hearts to hear and see,
consider and think upon, how heaps and multitudes of men shall go to
confusion. Some would think that it is no reason to sorrow for other men, but
rather let other men sorrow for themselves. But Samuel, whose tears and prayers
came many times before the Lord for Saul, will answer them, and instruct
them to be careful for other men's salvation: as Ioab appointed his army, that
if he were too weak, Abishai should help him; and if Abishai were too weak,
Ioab would help him: so must we labor to help one another which seem
weak, although we know some shall go to wrack. The uses that Use 1.
offer themselves to our consideration out of this doctrine are these: First,
seeing that it is the part of a good man to sorrow at the foreknowledge of any
calamity, let us receive that exhortation of the Lord, Ier. 6. 8. that we be
instructed when the Lord threateneth us, or else as he there says; His soul
shall depart from us and leave us desolate as a land that none inhabiteth. And I
would to God my country men of England would learn this instruction at the
mouth of God, that whereas there is none of grave or green years but they
have had many tokens, and heard many thunderbolts of wrath drawn from the never
uncertain word of God, and from the extraordinary course of manifold
judgments which we have felt these late years, that now we being invited to
this mourning feast, we al com, and not one stay behind. Oh therefore receive
this instruction, before the lords soul go away from our nation: I bid you not
leave of your callings, nor cast away your garments, nor put away your wealth,
nor forsake your life; but cast away vain mirth, idle talk, wicked hope, and
wretched behavior: leave your sins to the devil from whence they came; and
give thy soul to the Lord from whence it came. Elisha did but require of
Naaman to go into the river seven times and he should be clean, which his
servants told him was but a small thing: so we require you but to wash your
souls with the water of your eyes, and you shall be as free from death as Naaman
was from the leprosy. But why should I need to instruct you, are you not
minded like Jeremy, that of himself desired rivers of tears to weep for his
people: so be you not backward, but of your own accord, so that you may plese
the lord, desire that you were al tears to lament thoroughly the miseries of
the world. Oh lament with speed and tarry not, or else it will be too late when
you shall see before your eyes the little infants quartred; the aged persons
mangled; the cruel heathens advanced; the poor christians dying; the air
thundering; the earth quaking under you; and the clouds rayning down fire and
vengeance. Another use is this, that we be so minded 2
at the hearing of the Lords judgments, as if they were presently to be
executed: It was a great fault in the Israelites, that whenever the prophet
spoke any thing to them, they presently thought and said; this shall not be
yet, it will be a good while before it come to pass, and we need not care,
for we may be dead and gone out of the way ere this be fulfilled, Ezech. 12.
27. 28. but the Lord rebukes that folly, and bids the prophet tell them
that it shall be shortly performed. And so the like rage possesses the heads
and brains of many in our days, which although they know that it is true
that is told them of a destruction; yet every one thinks it shall not be
this year, nor in our Queens days, nor so long as the Gospel remains, and
therefore they will possess al their vanity, rather then be humbled. But this
ought not to beso; yea rather hasten out of this security as Lot out of Sodom,
and the Israelites out of Egypt: that thou may escape it whenever it
comes. It is better with the wise virgins to be ready an hour or two, or
three too soon, then with the foolish to tarry a quarter of an hour too
late. Therefore admit the danger be not as yet, yet because we are now
warned, let us now be prepared: shall we not make as great account of the Lords
loving mercy, as of our own health? yes, yes, my beloved, and therefore let
us arise to lamentation, because the Lord calls for it, although there were
no danger following after. But we are like the disciples which could not
watch but sleep, even then when Christ was in most danger, although our
Savior did many times awake them, till at length the enemy came upon them,
and they were all driven to forsake Christ: so I pray God our like security
be not with the like danger awakened; for I fear if the merciful voice of a
Savior will not move us, the terrible cry, and swords of enemies will amaze
us. As a destruction: In these words is the general cause of the lamentation
described, because the Lords wrath is kindled to make a destruction: Wherein
there is to be noted, that nothing does so much fear and terrify good men,
as the anger of God, Deuter. 9. 17, 18. When Moses perceived that God was
angry, he fell Nothing fears good men so much as the wrath of God.
down flat on his face and besought God, neither eating nor drinking for
forty days and nights together: was not their fear great that made this good
man to adventure his life by so long fasting, and his soul by desiring to be
razed out of the book of life? yes verily, for the anger of the Lord moved
him more, then if he had seen all the world on fire about his ears. But
carnal Gospellers and careless Atheists, as they think it a far more less
matter to please God then to please man: so they deem it a less matter to
have God angry with them, then the prince or some great rich men that may
hinder their worldly estimation. Alas, alas, if Saul were fearful to a
thousand, David was to ten thousand; and if worldly men may a little
terrify the flesh, the God of the world may infinitely plague the spirit.
Therefore put on this affection, that we may know what to think of the wrath
of God: if the anger of a prince be the messenger of death, much more is the
wrath of God the herald of condemnation. When Assuerus was angry, presently
Hamans face was covered, and he carried to execution; would not Haman give all
his possessions to have retained the favor of the king: so likewise, adventure
any thing rather then to stir up the coals of the Lords wrath, by which
thou thy self and all thy neighbors shall be burned without mercy. Oh
therefore study to know how to avoid his displeasure, and to retain his
loving countenance, and let not the love of any sin so bewitch thee, that
thou procure his vengeance in working thy desire. The reasons of this doctrine
are these: Reason 1.
First, because none can be an intercessour or a friend to God being angry.
1. Sam. 2. 25. that is, there is not any mortal man that can do any such a
pleasure as to stay the Lords wrath from falling on him, or that may be able
to stand in the gap of the Lords wrath. The which consideration might most
effectually admonish all our presumptuous companions, which think that the
Lord is pinned to their sleeves; imagining him to be such a child as might be
lost with an apple and won with a trifle again: but they shall find it a
far more heavy matter, when no offers of gold, no entreaties offriends, no
tears of grief; no nor yet the fruit or blood of their bodies shall pacify or
recompense him for their sins. This ought to make us account highly of the
mediation and intercession of Christ, and not to tread under our feet his
glorious blood shedding, after we be once reconciled. Another reason is,
because it is a most fearful thing to fall into the hands of 2
the living God, Heb. 10. 31. such a fearful thing as passes all
understanding, and therefore who but mad men will run too far into this
danger. Although David chose rather to fall into the hands of God then men,
because he was well assured, the judgment was but a fatherly correction, and
not a revenging punishment; yet we must know that he knew that it would be but
a corporal or bodily death: but we are not assured of half so much, yea
happy were we if the wrath of God did but reach to our bodies, and that he
would be satisfied for our sins; if we lost our children, and wealth, and
friends, and health, and life; or that if we could endure all worldly tortures
to bring us to death, therewith he would be contented: but it is yet a more
fearful thing, when we are subject to all these; and more also to lead an
endless and easelesse life, in the ever burning and never dying flames of
hell. The uses which we must make of this doctrine are these: first, that we
Use 1.
learn to fear none of them that kill the body, but only him that is able to
cast both body and soul into the fire of hell, Mat. 10. 28. But I know every
one will subscribe unto me, and say that they fear him above all, when as this
fear is such a weak dampe, that it puts not forth any sins; and it
holds as much godliness in their hearts, as a sieue will hold water in the
open air. Moses was afraid of a serpent, and it made him run away: what fear
is this that possesses our gospellers minds, that will not cause them to be
as much afraid of the sting of sin, as Moses was of the sting of the
serpent? Joseph said, for the fear of God he could not commit folly with his
lady: and if the fear of God had any rooting in your hearts, you could not
lead such licentious lives as you do. The Israelites were afraid to
sacrifice a sheep in Egypt, because it was abomination to the Egyptians: but
you are not afraid to offer your filthy, deadly, and abominable lusts to the
Lord, although they be abomination to his majesty; yea although there be an
unmeasurable judgment hanging over your heads. Therefore fear the Lord that
must rule you, and the judge that must try you, and the savior that must
keep you; or else you shall feel the deadly pain that shall torment you. The
poor woman that came before Solomon, would rather depart with her child to
her neighbor, then suffer it to be divided in sunder: but how much more dear
it is to have your souls cut in sunder, and fear you not this? Therefore with
all speed look unto the Lord as humbly as petitioners; pray unto him, as
mournfully as prisoners; tremble at him, as fearfully as the hill of Sinai;
fall down before him, as low as Daniel; melt at his anger, as the wax before
the sun. Another use is, that we always keep our confidence in the Lord, for
if his wrath be but a little kindled, then are they blessed that put their
trust in him, Psalm. 2. 11. Balaam feared God, yet because his faith and
confidence was not in the Lord, he was slain among the other enemies of God:
therefore let me now take occasion to exhort all your hearts to a sure
confidence in the Lord, because his wrath shall never touch those which put
their trust in him. It is said, Psalm. 99. 4. that Moses and Aaron and Samuel
put their trust in God, and he delivered them. This was such a trust as was
exercised with all Christian virtues, the which you must join with them, or
else you cannot enjoy it: Forsake your selves, embrace the Lord, love not the
world, and desire Christ's kingdom, and then you trust in the Lord; confirm
your hearts with patience, beautify your minds with knowledge, reform your
affections by repentance, and amend your lives by the whole Gospel of God;
and then shall the Lord say you have trusted in him. Oh then blessed shall you
be, for although the world be drowned, you shall be saved; although the city
be burned, you shall be delivered; although the people be captiuated, you
shall be enlarged; and although the earth be cursed, yet you shall be blessed.
If sickness wear thy body, and anguish vex thy soul, and trouble oppress
thy life, and losses catch away thy goods, and enemies spoil thy children,
and death do end thy days: yet shall not the wrath of God consume thy joys.
What would thou have more? if God hate thee not, he loves thee; if he
love thee, he will keep thee; if he keep thee, danger shall not oppress
thee; if thou be not oppressed, then art thou blessed; and if thou be blessed,
be sure thou shall be saved.

The xiiij. Sermon.
Verse. 16. And joy and gladness is cut off from the house of our God.
COncerning the former words of this verse we have spoken in the verse before:
and now to the next following, where the prophet tells them, or rather the
Lord, that now men could take no delight, nor joy in the outward service of his
majesty: which was a most lamentable thing when one should come into the house
of God, where was wont to be most sweet melody in the hearts and voices of
men, like unto another paradise: now he should find it full of tears, and
cries, and yelling, and sorrows, and every one ashamed to show his face for
grief, this does the prophet offer to the consideration of God. Whereby we
will note this, that the service of God must be performed with joy and delight,
Deuteronomy. 16. 11. I mean the ordinary service and worship of God: But in The
service of God to be performed with joy.
our days we may almost complain as this prophet does, that joy is parted
from the house of our God, men come almost as willingly to the churches, as
some go to execution, and tarry as joyfully before the preacher to hear the
sermon, as other do before the judge to hear the sentence. When we are at our
prayer, they are at their books; when we are at our preaching, they are at
their sleep; when we are at our psalms, they are in the tauernes. Marvel you
not to see the joy of these men in the worship of God, unto whom the church is
a iaile, the minister is a keeper, the Lord is a judge, themselves are the
prisoners, and their zeales are as joyful to them as little ease: yet for all
this we will rejoice in the Lord our God, and account one day spent in his
courts better then a thousand spent else where. And as David rejoiced to see
other men go, so will we rejoice when our number is increased, when our voices
are advanced, and our Lord Jesus magnified. The Reason 1.
reasons of this doctrine are these: first, because this joy in the service of
God is a token of the presence of God his spirit in the hearts of men, Romans 14.
17. so on the other side when men are lumpish and heavy in this worship and
heavenly business, it is a token they like not the matter, but are hindered
and blinded by the spirit of malice. Shall we then say that they are all given
to the devil, who have not been baptized into the Lords spirit, and possessed
with a delight in the Lords service? then must we say that all hard hearted
misers, wicked minded ruffians, fickle brained yoonglings, and wind-wauering
women, which had rather be playing with their loves, or their children, or else
be disporting in bravery and wantonness, or be mumbling a few Paternosters
of old angels, or new stuffed barnes, then yield their ears, their heart, their
soul, their mind, and their whole man to the Lords most needful and
blessed business: oh wretched men thus possessed by those that rather ought to
be possessed by them! Another reason is, because this delight in this work is
the very end and 2
fruit of the gospel. 1. John. 1. 4. My brethren (says John) I write unto
you that your joy may be full: that is, that you may rejoice in all things, as
in meat, for there is the Lords hand; in apparel, for there is his
providence; in health, for there is his goodness; in sickness, for there is
his mercy; in your houses, for they are his tabernacles; and in his church,
for there is his service. A pagan, a heathen, an infidel, a Jew, a papist, or
any other enemy of Christ, can come to our assemblies, and with a mind ready
to vomit up whatsoever they hear, attend to their grief, what is there
done, as many among us do, and yet be never the better: therefore be you
better then these, and let your righteousnesses exceed theirs, or else you
shall never rejoice in his everlasting kingdom. The uses which come of this
doctrine are these: first, that whatsoever we do in Use 1.
the Lords house, let us do it cheerfully, and of an upright and peaceable
mind, that we say of our selves, as David, and Christ of them, Psalm. 69. 9.
The zeal of thy house has eaten me up: so of zeal let us do every thing
that we do; for as reason must measure all matters in humane and worldly
affairs, so must zeal season all things in spiritual and divine matters.
Zeal is like the love of Jacob to Rahel; it thinks no frost too cold, nor
any rain too dangerous, nor any snow too great, nor any heat so vehement,
nor any sun so parching, but he endures it for the love of a woman. What,
shall Jacob love a fair face, better then a Christian loves a glorious
Savior? oh no, no, but let our love be deerer then the love of a woman: and
let us all say, and that all with Marie the mother of Christ, My soul
reioiceth in God my Savior. But oh where and of whom shall I complain, that
have not been eaten up with zeal, no nor bitten therewith, or that which is
less, it has not licked their souls, nor kissed their lives: that is, they
have neither been jealous nor zealous for the Lord of hosts sake? for
themselves, they care not what God is; for other, they care not what their
souls be; and for all, they care not what hell shall be; they are not
earnestly righteous, nor obstinately wicked, but openly indifferent, and that
is no body in religion: they mourn not when other sorrow; they rejoice not
when other laugh; they stir not when other are moved, and they feel not
when other are afflicted. How zealous I beseech you, are they, when they have
been cold in the heat of the day, and never sweat one drop in the work of
Christ, or wept one tear in the cause of Christ. Another use is this, that
seeing we must be 2
careful to worship God with joy, let us then pray for the peace of the
church, whereby there may be no mourning within our palaces, Psalm. 122. 6. I
grant our sacrifices to God are as acceptable when our reioicing is banished
in any common adversity, when we humble our selves by prayer and fasting, as
when in times of greater prosperity and security, we are lifted up with
thanksgiving; yet this is better for the church, and equal to the Lord.
Therefore let us most carefully commend Ierusalems peace, and every member
thereof to the Lords tuition: pray for it with an earnest desire (I say) to
obtain, and an unwearied labor till thou have achieved. To abate but David's
thirst, three of his men adventured their lives, being but only to satisfy
the kings mind: who was David, but a member of the church? and therefore if
they would do so much for one, let us do more for all the church together,
that her thirst may be satified, and her ease be procured. Oh therefore how
happy is our age wherein we live! for the church has peace abundantly, and
our basest things are become very honorable: the blood which other have shed
for the same, do we enjoy, and they by filthy prisons have purchased for us,
most pleasant houses: O England, be not weary of thy well doing, least the
Lord be weary of thee; be not unthankful for thy peace, least the bond there
of be struck in sunder; be not proud of thy benefits, least thou be stripped
of thy ornaments; be not secure in thy glory, least thou be stirred up to
greater labor: but pray, the father with the son, the mother with the
daughter, the lord with the servant, the mistress with the maid, the master
with the family, the rich with the poor, and men with women and little
children, peace be within our walls, and prosperity within our dwellings.

The seed is rotten under the clods: the garners are destroyed: the barnes are
broken down, for the corn is withered. It seems Verse. 17.
that these men being somewhat touched with want one ^eere, yet they comforted
up themselves with their husbandry and tillage, thinking the next year would
make amends for all: like as we have seen in our land these times of dearth,
for men have year by year sowed and plowed, loosing both seed and crop
notwithstanding all their labor, as these husbandmen here do, thinking that
whether God will or not, they will make things cheaper and plenty again, but
all is in vain: For if they sow, it rotteth in the ground, if they keep, the
houses fall upon it; if they eat, they spend their store; and if they spend,
then will shortly their lives be ended. By these words we may observe, that it
is in vain by any natural means to No natural means to resist the Lords
power.
seek to do away the Lords hand. Hag. 1. 6. The people of Israel being in
some perplexity, they sowed, and eared, and planted, and labored to be
relieved, but alas the prophet tells them, that he wasted their seed, he
blows on their store, and the labourer puts his wages into a broken bag.
What, had he no pity on the poor laboring man, that works for a groate
or six pence a day? but he must consume that also, yea verily: for the Lord
must be served as well by the poor country man as the rich citizen: and
therefore curses as well the gettings of the one, as the gains of the other.
But what shall I say unto you, shall I bid you not till the earth, or not sow
your corn? no verily, but plow up your hearts, and cast in the seed of
regeneration; and then plow up your land, and cast in your seed of
sustentation. How shall the corn grow in your fields, when virtue will not
grow in your souls? Therefore labor not in vain, it is not in all our
plowing or planting, or sowing, or reaping, or working, to help our selves,
but in the Lords blessings: who will then bless the earth, when we have washed
away the curse of our souls by repentance; for nature cannot help no more
then Balaam could curse. The reasons of this doctrine are Reason 1.
these: because nature it self, as a creature of God is subject to the curse
of God, as we may see in all the story of Egypt, and also Isay 28. 22. where
the Lord threatens to bring a consumption upon the whole earth; meaning the
whole course of nature: that he can as easily curse them as it were by
sickness, as men are undone by consumption. And verily I think, when I look
into the specials, I see as David says; All things come to an end, but the
law of God is exceeding large: The heavens wax old, the earth grows
barren, the gold is but dust; the pearls come to nothing; and all creatures
says Paul are subject to vanity. What is then the study of nature, but the
study of vanity? Yea how vainly are their days spent which are always in
the belly of Philosophy and Poetry, and humanity, not thinking divinity to
be worthy of their fine wits, which they say is the refuge of fools? but if
their study be vain, then are their wits vain: and therefore of them it may
be said; in seeking to become wise they are made fools, Romans 1. Another
reason is, because 2
there is no other way to life, but conversion to the Lord, Hos. 5. 15. Here
is the remedy for our lands, to make the earth furitfull; not in dunging and
compassing it, but if we can turn our selves to God, then let us cast from us
our pleasant sins to rot in the earth, and water our new sowed corn with
tears of our eyes: Then shall the earth yield her increase, and God even our
God shall give us his blessing. Balaams ass would not go for all his
beating, til Balaam had spoken with God and promised more obedience: even so
the earth will not be fruitful for all our cutting of it, and mending it,
and poking it, until we be returned un to the Lord, and confess our follies,
and promise a new life. Oh, let husbandmen hear this, and learn to live
hereafter; or else their worship is like to the sacrifice of Cain, which the
Lord refused. The uses which we must make of this doctrine are these; First,
that we put no trust or confidence in any earthly or worldly things: for seeing
these cannot deliver us from any little judgment, then let us learn to trust
in the Lords power, Esaias 31. 1. It is but folly to trust in kings, for they
are but men; it is but sin to trust in castles, for they are but earth and
stones; it is but madness to trust in multitudes, for they are but flesh; and it
is but idolatry to trust in wealth, for it is but vanity: therefore it must
needs be best to trust in the Lord. Art thou afflicted, pray unto him; art
thou distressed, run unto him; art thou in danger, look unto him; and art
thou a living soul, let him be thy strength and thy defender? The heavens
cannot bend to help, the earth cannot rise to succor thee; the waters cannot
flow to receive, and the clouds cannot fall to cover thee. But here is thy
help, the Lord can bow the heavens and com to thee, and exalt the earth to
rescue thee; open the way for the waters to save thee, and let the clouds come
down to take thee into heaven, as once he did Christ, and at the latter day
shall do all his elect. Oh therefore cast not away the hope of your calling,
thy christian profession, thy holy religion, and thy hope of salvation, for
prince or magistrate, friend or father, heaven or earth, man or angel; much
less be not terrified by any enemies which come with fire and sword to work
thy desolation: Crave not their help, trust not in their strength, fear not
their rage, and distrust not thy God: but in war let him fight for thee; in
sickness let him heal thee; in famine let him feed thee; and in death he shall
receive thee; for it is better to trust in God, then to put confidence in
princes. Another use is this, seeing we cannot avoid any of the 2
Lords judgments by nature or natural means, then it also follows that
we cannot escape out of that great judgment of condemnation by any natural
virtue or worldly means: but we must all by nature remain the children of
wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3. Whereby we must take occasion to lament not only the
weakness, but also the filthiness of our nature; which brings into the
world that evil which it cannot avoid. Oh how much are we bound to our
blessed Savior that has delivered us from the wrath to come! I might also out
of this verse note unto you, that God his wrath shall not only extend to the
lives of men, or those things which concern their necessary maintenance in
this world, but also to every part of their possessions as this prophet
speaks, even their barns and houses, as we may see Esaias. 6. 11. Luke 21. 4.
5. And good reason, for as worldly men for their own pleasures do pull down
many times both houses and barnes, as we may see of the worldly man in the
Gospel, Luke 12. so may the Lord for his pleasure do the like. Again, these
things do make us to be proud, even our buildings and aedifices, as we may
see in Nebuchadnezzar, and also Iehoijakim, Ierem. 21. 16. And therefore let us
know that the Lord in his just judgment will cast down all these as he
says, Amos 3. 14. 15. And if he left not one stone upon another where the
temple stood; much less will he suffer houses of extortion and oppression,
and gaming, and whooring, and other filthiness to have any place to stand in.
Again, seeing we may here see what are our worldly buildinges; let us learn
to lay up our treasures in heaven, which shall never be destroyed, and lay a
good foundation against the world to come.

How did the beasts mourn? the heardes of cattle pine away, because they have
no pastures, and the flocks of sheep are destroyed. Verse. 18.
Now he comes to the most pitiful out cry of other creatures, for as the
corn could not grow, no more could the grass, and one misery does not
commonly come alone; and if we well look unto this matter, we shall find
great matter lie hid here in. For it cannot be that beasts should be faulty
or sinful before the Lord, why then (although guiltles) are they thus
tormented? and why did not the people make a hand with them, to eat them? and
so to save their lives that ways. Vvnto which I answer, that the people would
not kill all their tame beasts, because some they must keep for store, other
for their labor, and many for offering; which although it now ceased, by
reason of the want of corn, yet they hoped would shortly come to pass
again as appears by their tillage. As for the other, the beasts are
punished for man's cause which is the doctrine of this verse, 1. Sam. 15. 3.
Zep. 1. 3. even for our sakes are they pined, and fatted, beaten and bruised,
because of the sins which we have committed: All the The beasts punished for
our sakes.
men in the world could not bear their own plague; but the innocent and
harmless beasts must help out with the matter. The consideration of this
may show unto us, the very original of the rebellion of some beasts. For
there was not always eminitie betwixt man serpents, and lions and bears, and
wolfes and tigers, and such like; for at the first they were all subject: but
now in revenge of their miseries which for our sakes they endure, they kill and
spoil, and tear us in pieces where ever they meet us; yea the bear as we
know will especially aim at the woman with child, that they may rende the
young babe out of the mothers womb, and so slay it before it be able to hurt:
and I would God we could use the same wisdom in the slaughter of our sins
to cut them off while they be young. The reasons of this doctrine are these,
because Reason 1.
they are subject to vanity, Romans 8. 20. under hope for the deliverance: for
the which they all have a certain voice in their kind known to the Lord,
whereby they desire a final restitution. And verily if this be a reason why
they should desire a deliverance, because some of them shall remain immortal:
it ought much more to stir up the minds of christians, because (not some) but
all of them shall for ever live with God: And surely if the children of tho
bride chamber desire the marriage day; much more ought the bridegroom and
bride themselves. Again, seeing beasts lament their vanity because of
corruption: how much more worse then beasts are wicked and profane men,
which will not lament their iniquity, because of condemnation: and also how
vily are some bewitched by the craft of the devil which forget, and call into
question another life, when as the very bruit beasts by nature acknowledge the
same. Another reason is, because this does most 2
notably aggrauate the sin of man, and might humble them thoroughly for the
same, Ios. 6. 17. 21. for would not I pray you, this strike any man to the
heart, to hear all the beasts of the field together, as the bulls bellowing,
the oxen lowing, the calves bleating, the lions roaring, the wolfes howling,
the dogs barking, the horses neighing, the Asses braying, the bears crying,
and so all other in their kind and out of kind, calling in the ears of God
for vengeance against man? This will surely amaze the strongest, and dismay the
mightiest; and therefore it will drive men to weigh their sins diligently: for
God knowing that our deafnes wuld be so great, that the voice of man should not
be heard, has made every beast and bird, yea the very thunder to awake us. The
uses which come of this doctrine are these, Use 1.
first, that we fall into a particular cause why this mutiny of creatures and
outcries of all beasts should be sent, which the prophet teaches us, Hose. 4.
2. 3. to be swearing, and lying, and stealing, and killing, and whooring, and
such like: for which things, he says, shall come a general mourning of man
and beasts. Surely we have as great cause to fear this hellish yelling, and
confusion, as ever had any nation in the world: for swearing is counted
bravery; lying, policy; stealing, honest shifting; killing, manhood and
valor; and whooring a pleasant pastime. And thus blood touches blood: for the
poor have mourned at home and abroad, by famine and war; and the rich shall
follow after, when all the confusion shall follow them. Again, let us learn
to pity the poor creatures of God, which for our sakes are 2
thus endangered, living under tedious labor, and dying under the cruel
butcher, Ion. 4. 11. The Lord spared them and Nineveh for their sakes. Mercy
is a thing much loved of the Lord: and surely we are to use it, not only
toward our beasts in their labor, that we tire not them too much; but also in
their meat that we feed them sufficiently: for in this place we see they will
complain. Yea moreover let us not be too unmerciful in their slaughter, and
kill not for wantonness, the old and young. And also I cannot see how it should
be lawful to set them together by the ears, as bears, and bulls, and dogs,
and such like, seeing they rent one another for our sins: and therefore none
can make sport of their fighting, but they also make sport of sinning. Again
out of this verse, where the cattle are said to mourn, we may note that
famine is the greatest punishment of sin in this life; for other calamities
they feel not and care not for: and for this do the godly so confess Lam. 4.
9. that better is the estate of them that die by the Famine the greatest
punishment. Reason 1.
sword, then of those that perish by famine: and they give reasons thereof.
First because all other punishments are not so tedious, but they are dispatched
in an instant: only famine is like hell, where every part is pained, a man
being always dying and yet never dead. Again by famine God 2
strikes and takes away the fruits of the earth, which he does not in other
things although men and cattle perish; yet who rages against other creatures?
The uses which we Use 1.
might make of this if we would stand in it, are these: First that we learn
how near we are to a famine, for the Lord threatens Ezch. 4. 16. that he will
bring a famine, and make them eat their bread by weight, and drink their
water by measure, and do both in grief: and surely this is the very case of
the poor, for they have day by day had an ounce or two, or three of bread, and
men remain unmerciful. Again, let us at the very beginning of our dearth
turn unto the Lord, or else the Lord shall withhold 2
all things from us, Amos. 4. 6. Let him not complain of us as he did of that
people; that notwithstanding many judgments, yet they would not turn unto him:
for if famine be so extreme, that men and beasts and all creatures perish
thereat; oh turn thy soul unto the Lord thy God, for why should we work the
death of men, the destruction of beasts and the desolation of all the fruits of
the earth?

The xv. Sermon.
Verse. 19. O Lord to thee will I cry: for the fire has devoured the pastures
of the wilderness, and the flame has burnt up all the trees of the fields.
NOw the Prophet comes to his particular complaint and prayer grounded upon
good reasons and calling upon the name of God: for in the former verse we heard
only a complaint without mention of the Lords name, and now seeing he
brings in a prayer also: we must note that we ever add prayers to our
complaints, Ios. 7. 7, 8, 9. Mich. 7. 6, 7. art thou grieved for the Ad de
prayer to our complaints.
sins of other men, or for the miseries of the world, and do break forth
into words for the same? Then turn thy complaint into prayer, or else it is
but a murmuring against God, as we may see in Moses and Aaron: for it is by
prayer we make our sorrowful hearts known to God, and can enter into the
Lords privy chamber. This duty also we may see neglected in our time, for men
were never more apt to complain of the hardness of the time; of the wickedness
of the world; of the want of corn; of the fear of war; of the power of the
rich; and of the prosperity of the proud: but they are but words, for they
turn not themselves to prayer, to show God of the matter as they ought to do.
Know therefore my dear brethren, that God has left us in this world, as he
left Jobs servants, for still one of them came to tell his master what had
happened: so we must often use to pray and to complain on our selves, and on
other men: for if we confess our sins God is faithful, that he will pardon
them; but if we judge not our selves, we shall be judged of GOD. The reasons
Reason 1.
of this doctrine are these: first, because God forgets not the complaints
of the poor, Psalm. 9. 11. 12. meaning of them that pray unto him, otherwise
he remembers no more the poor man's envy, then the rich man's quarrel;
therefore let this stir us up, to make our complaint in prayer, as we read
Ezechiah did, Isa. 37. when Rabsakeh had blasphemed on the name of God. Oh that
men were as ready to pray as they be to complain, for they can easily
multiply many words to accuse other men, and they might as easily find words
and matter to complain unto God: for as an inferior subject must always sue to
his prince by petition, so must we always make known all our desires unto God
by supplication. Again, when men do only complain of this or that want
without 2
prayer, they tempt God, as we may see Number. 11. 4. Therefore if we will
obtain any thing at the Lords hand to our good, let us ask by prayer: for
although we murmur for rain and drouth, and peace and wealth, and such like,
and God give it to us as he gave the Israelites quails; yet we were better
want it, for it shall in the end turn to our discomfort, as theirs did. Let us
from hence learn to ask of God without murmuring or grudging at our own Use
1.
estate, or the Lords hand, Hos. 7. 14, 15. for the Lord will complain as
fast on us, as we complain to him. Have thou any suite to the Lord, that thou
would obtain of him? say not, oh that I had such a thing; or thus, thou O
God, may give me such a benefit; or thus, surely if God do not hear me, I
would I had never been borne; or thus, if God be able let him do this for
me: for all this is but tempting and mocking of the Lords power and mercy:
But go to the Lord with all humility, cast down thy knees and heart, tell
him of thy unworthiness, and accuse thy self thoroughly; remember him of his
promises in the gospel, for that must be the foundation of prayer; then open
thy wants, and desire such a remedy as God himself shall like of; and lastly,
praise him for all thy former benefits, and then if thou want thy will, it
shall be most good for thee: if thou obtain thy will, thank him heartily
again; and use it for the Lords glory. Another use is this, that if 2
complainers without praying be odious in the Lords sight, although the cause
be indifferent, then much more are those that never pray but for unlawful and
filthy things, that they might bestow them on their lusts, as the Apostle
says, Iam. 4. 2, 3. They desire health of body, to wallowe in vanity; they
crave many children, to hoorde up evil gotten goods, and to rob the poor;
they pray for riches, that they may reign over other men at their pleasure,
and live in sin without controllment; they ask for marriages to abuse them
in lust, and finally they pollute all things that come in their hands or hearts:
in their outward profession they do but serve the time, and therefore their
inward constitution cannot be very holy. I am persuaded that a great sort
would be ashamed, to let men hear those things that they continually and
immodestly desire in the presence of God. Ask therefore but with wisdom,
enjoy thine own with thanksgiving; praise God for all things, and think thy
self happy whether thou live or die. Again, I might also note out of this
verse, how afflictions and sorrows do teach men to pray most seruently, as we
may see in Abimelech, Genesis 21. 17. and in David, Psalm. 119. 67. and the reason
is, first, because then men begin to feel their sins, 1. Sam. 7. 6. for in
truth our consciences are all so guilty, that if we have but our finger ache,
we presently conceive it was for some notable sin or other. And for the truth
of this we may find it in many wicked rebels justified; which will then most
lamentably bewail their sins, when indeed they feel the heavy hand of
God upon them, and be either in trouble of life, or in danger of death: but
this is with them but momentanie, and like a summer deaw; but with the godly it
is perpetual, for they being once spurred, will travel the better all the day
following. Again, as our afflictions are increased, so are our sorrows, for
the heart seems to be pearsed with them, Lam. 1. 22. let us therefore in our
afflictions not only pray for our selves in our own persons, but also
entreat of other to pray for us, as we see the Israelites did, 1. Sam. 7. 8.
for if we be once persuaded of the benefit of prayer, we will never cease to
stir up our selves and others thereunto: we shall be minded as Paul was, that
would have the whole church of Thessalonica to pray for him, 2. These. 5. 2. for
prayer will make men more greedy then gold will. Again, let us think that
afflictions shall not only make the humble and gentle minded man to yield,
but also the most stubborn and strongest in the world. Boast not your selves
against the least affliction that can be, for as the soft rain will lay along
the rankest corn, so slender troubles will bring to the earth the most
obstinate sinners. O Lord, to thee will I cry. When the prophet says, that he
will cry unto God, he notes unto us, that in prayer we must use the most
earnest and ardent affection that may be; for crying is the voice of children
or young creatures, whereby all All our affections must be pitifully affected
in prayer.
men are moved to pity them. Therefore when we come into the Lords presence,
we are to stir and move affections to the uttermost, not with childe-like
behavior, but with childe-like sincerity and feeling, as we may see in the
godly, Lam. 1. 20. where they desire God to behold them, because they be
troubled, their bowels are swelled, and their heart is turned vpside down,
meaning that they were so passionate, that their inward parts were
woonderfully moved. And this condemns the cold affection of thousands in
our days, which have as much feeling in their prayer, as they have in their
dreams, and know as well how to remove a mountain, as how to move the
Lords mind toward them, so cold are their thoughts, so weak are their
desires, so wild are their words, and so many be their wants in prayer, that
I think verily when they have prayed, they find themselves as much fitter for
the Lords service, as a stone is for building being rubbed over with a little
oil: I warrant you their hearts are not turned vpside down, yea I would their
lives were turned, but I fear they will first be ouerturned. They will make
more suite in better words for a dinner, they being hungry, then for the Lords
spirit, or any other means for salvation. Their voices in prayer are like
unborn children, cry they cannot, much less speak any thing, no not so much
as to say Amen when others have prayed before them. The reasons of Reason 1.
this doctrine are these: because he cares not for mean and weak words,
but for strong and fearful passions, Isa. 29. 13. for the Lord being highly
to be feared, will especially be then feared ardently, when men speak unto him
by prayer. Moses fell on his face when he prayed to him, and so did Elijah,
for it is impossible but a man of flesh and blood should tremble when he
thinks on God, much more when he prays to God; for then does the spirit
help a man more to see into the secret of his majesty then at other times.
Yet fearful is it to see how men in our days think to carry away the
matter with words, persuading themselves that their bare presence and outward
dwelling among the church, where now and then they hear God spoken of, and
hear a few prayers in the public place, although their hearts honor not the
one, nor confess the other; yet are they as good religious men as any in the
world: but let them know that they be as good Christians as the Samaritanes
were right Israelites. Another reason is, because that an acceptable sacrifice
to God is a broken and contrite heart, Psalm. 51. 17. and therefore when we offer
to the Lord our prayers, let us be sure that our hearts be broken asunder,
for as there was no beast sacrificed but his body and shoulders were parted; so
no man can be offered to God but his heart must be divided in sunder, that is,
he must be most passionately affected at the Lords house, and most lamentably
tormented for his own sins, and most pitifully opened for the Lords mercy,
and most earnestly desire the building up again of the same. The uses which we
must make of this thing are these; First, Use 1.
let us not judge evil or rashly of them that are moved earnestly, and labor
effectually in prayer, 1. Sam. 1. 14. 16. When Annah prayed before the Lord,
because her lips went and not her voice, Eli told her she was drunk: but she
answered, no, for she was a woman of a bitter soul. In like manner, the power
and working of the spirit in the prayer of many, through their continuance,
words and gestures, is most wickedly mocked, and most shamefully blasphemed of
the malicious sort, who are able to say as much in their prayers as the old
masse-priestes could when they wanted their own books. And for this cause
without the spirit of God they speak evil of the things of the spirit,
terming our earnestnes in prayer to be rauing, our zeal to be folly, our
continuance to be a heap of idle desires, our tears to be hypocrisy, our
sweat to be chafing, and our forwardnes and willingness thereunto to be pride
and ambition, with a number the like, as I have heard, which are now opened in
the stages, where all good gestures are most wickedly derided. Well, well, Eli
was not so rash nor profane, but blessed Annah when she had told him her
mind, and yet for all that he ended his life with the breach of his neck.
How can it be but the Lord shall more mercileslie bring these to confusion?
we may ask this kind of monsters as Esaias did some in his days: upon whom
have you iested, and against whom have you opened your mouths? surclie against
him that made both tongue and mouth, and shall try it out. As there are many
gifts in the spirit of God; so are there many ways to express the power of
them, and as every one has his gift, so has he his gesture to open and
unfold the same. Another use of this doctrine is for our singular 2
comfort, that seeing according to our feeling in prayer, so is the Lord
affected toward us: when we are bitter he makes us sweet; when we are
heavy he makes us joyful; when we are cast down, he raises us up; and
when we are most destitute and desperate, he comes with all speed as a
mother to her child when it cries loudest. What are our sorrows but many
voices to cry unto God, and as a godly martyr having received many wounds in
his body whereby the blood issued forth abundantly, thanked his tormentors
because he had as many mouths more to praise his God, as he had wounds in
his flesh: much more occasion have we to thank our Savior, that by sending
so many sorrows into our hearts, has provided for us many friends to entreat
his mercy for us. Therefore fear not my dear brethren and sisters for any
adversity, as when the battle is hottest, the victory is nearest; so when
your miseries are greatest, your deliverance is at hand. Of this we have often
spoken before, and so also of the other part of the verse following where the
prophet yields the reason of his prayer, because the green pastures were
devoured, and the greattrees were burned up: teaching us that which before we
touched, that when famine comes, there is nothing free from the same, but it
feels the smart if it have any life at all. And again, the unmercifulness
of it is noted when he compares it to fire and flame; the fire burns low,
that is the grass of the earth, and the flame reaches high even to the trees
of the field.

The beasts of the field cry also unto thee: for the rivers of waters are
dried up: and the fire has devoured the pastures of Verse. 20.
the wilderness. Now once again the prophet rehearses the cry and
lamentation of the beasts, where I might note, that seeing the beasts cry
unto God and to none else: how much worse are those then beasts which either
never cry, or else cry to other then God. But this is worthy our
consideration, that he says, the beasts cry unto him: noting unto us that
God regards the very cry and voice of dumb and brutish creatures, and
therefore the Scripture says Psalm. 104. 27. That God opens his hand and
gives them meat in due season: And surely as God is most wonderful in all
his works, so is he most humble and gentle to all his creatures, not
disdaining with his own hand to feed the basest swine or beast in the
world. But how unlike are they to God which do not hear the voice of (dumb
beasts) no not of speaking souls, and living men; and if they do, yet their
hands must not come near them, but either they must take it up on the ground,
or God hears the voice of beasts. Reason 1.
else receive of their abridgers, I mean their servants. The reasons of this
doctrine are these; First, because God has created them, Genesis 2. 2. And for
this cause before that ever he made beasts, he made all the grass and herbs
of the field to be ready for them, so kind and constante is their nature,
that they never forget their creator; but we shall find more men then are
beasts that have long ago lost all their knowledge and grace, and image of
God, calling into question whether there be a god or not. Oh cursed creatures,
oh fearful times, that brings forth some men like men, and some men like
beasts, and some men like monsters: which are in bodies men, in manners
beasts, and in minds worse then any creatures, yea then devils, for they
acknowledge and fear God. Another reason is, because men should have a taste
of the excellency of the 2
Lords mercy which saves both man and beast. Psalm. 36. 6. 7. As for man's sake
they were subject to vanity; so for man's sake they are received into tuitio^
again, the one was don for his sin, the other was for his instruction, that as
the hainousnes of his sin did bring mo into danger beside himself, whereby he
might despair: so the greatness of the Lords mercy might bring mo into favor
again beside himself, whereby he might be comforted. And thus we may see how
for our sakes is the rod of vengeance, and the staff of mercy: for our
example some are killed, some are burned, some are hewed, and some are damned:
and for us again, we may see the angels are maintained, the world is
lengthened, many good men have been preserved, and many bruit beasts are
continually maintained. The uses which Use 1.
come from hence are these, First that we fall not into any despair of God his
goodness toward us, either for our souls or bodies, Mat. 6. 25, 26. where our
Savior bids us to look to the lyllies and to the young ravens, for whom
the Lord takes care: and verily every hair on a good man's head, is more
worth then all the beasts of the world; therefore let us persuade our selves,
that seeing God hears their cry, he will not deny our prayer: and seeing
he looks on their mourning, he will not despise our tears: and seeing he
regards their life, he will not cast away our souls: he that commands us
to be merciful unto them, has also bound himself to be merciful unto us:
therefore let us be assured that we are more worth then the beasts in the
arc, or all the creatures in the world. But alas why do I tell men of their
worth? for they know it too well, or of the Lords mercy, for they are too
proud of it? Surely because as Bathsheba teaches Solomon, Prou. 31. 4, 5. not
to be given to excess, or to be won with vanity because he was a king, that
is a worthy man in the world: so I would teach men by telling them their
worth to avoid from their filthy abominations. What shall gold do in the
dirt, or pearl in a swines trough, or money in a mad^ans pu^se, or authority
in the hand of fools? o(...) that we have all under us, and yet be (...) honor
is it to us to be more worth then al creatures, to have the Lord for our
creator, and his mercies when we entreat them, if in the mean season we be not
godly? then shall the best become woorst, and at the latter end, we shall wish
we had been woorst of all. In the next words he tells us how the rivers of
waters are dried, and how the little country cottages wherein poor men and
cattle were fostered, were burnt up; both very wonderful (that the one) I
mean the waters should loose their spring, which seem to have an everlasting
assurance of perpetuity: But alas what can be perpetual when God alters;
what can continue when he dissolueth it? surely nothing, for he be^deth the
heavens, melts the earth, emptieth the sea; and therefore may easily dry up
the little land-brookes. Therefore as on the earth is the safest going, because
it is lowest; so in poverty is the best estate, because it has nothing. Once
there were no rivers, and so sometimes are not, and one day shall cease to be
again; so once men had nothing, now in their richest estate they have but
little, and one day they must forgo all. But when he says that the little
cottages are burned up, we may note, that there is not any thing so small or
so vile, but the hand of God will find it out, Amos. 9. Poor men think
because they be poor, that God neither regards their well doing, nor
thinks on their evil: but they must be of another mind; for as fire burns
up all that stands against it, so does the wrath of God meet with all that
is against his law. God is in the city, and in the wood, and in the village,
and in the corne-field, and in the wilderness, and on the sea: he notes thy
doings in thy palace, and in thy house, and in thy barn, and in thy labor,
and in thy cottage, and in thy ship; even as Christ saw Nathaniel when he was
under the figtree. Surely the buildings of stone are too high to stand long,
the buildings of wood are too weak; for the little low tabernacle with cords
tied together shall come to an end. And thus we see that fire shall be the end
of all: as it was the end of Sodom, so was it of Zeboijm; and as of them, so
was it of the poor shepherds tents; and as of these tents, so shall it be of
heaven and earth. Thus much for this first chapter.

The xvj. Sermon.
Chap. 2. V. 1. Blow the trumpet in Zion, and showt in my holy mountain: let
all the inhabitants of the land tremble: for the day of the Lord is come, for
it is at hand.
IT has been showed, that the beginning of this chapter unto the end of the
11. verse, was the continuance of the former judgments spoken of in the first
chapter: so that this verse belongs to the charge of the ministers and
people, wherein the ministers are first exhorted to sound the trumpet; and
secondly the people are bid to tremble, because the day of the Lords wrath is
at hand. Concerning this blowing of the trumpet, we may read the right use
and first institution thereof, Numb. 10. First it was The use of the trumpets
in old time.
used for assembling the congregation; secondly, for the removing of the camp;
and lastly, when they went forth to war, because the people might be had in
remembrance before God. Although it be hard to show whether in this discourse
following the prophet means the coming of the beasts before named, or the
coming of the Assyrians their enemies; yet the matter is not so necessary, as
that we should spend much time therein, nor so difficult, but it may be
decided: and therefore I think that here is only meant the coming of the
noisome beasts, because the description following is set forth by similitudes
taken from war, and not by flat and evident propositions; the which course
the Lord does take in other places, when he notes an invasion, as in Ierem.
50. In this place we must first of all handle the blowing of the trumpet,
which was the priests office; and the cause thereof was, to put them in mind
of a danger; for the people were now assembled, and had need to be terrified
to the uttermost to make them humble, as we may see the effect, Amos. 3. 6. for
the trumpet might be heard far and near, as an alarm among us. Wherefore
we may gather I The ministers must show all dangers.
from hence, that it is the ministers duty to show the people of the Lords
wrath, and the danger which they are subject unto for the same, Ezech. 33. 2,
3, 4. if they sound not the trumpet, the people cannot be prepared, and then
shall they endure a double condemnation: they bear the Lord's ark, when they
stand, al must stand; and when they go, all must go: and if they sound the
trumpet, and tell the dangers, only the disobedient come to destruction. And
thus we may see how the hardest burdens and most dangerous, are laid on the
ministers backs, for if they preach men will not believe them, and then they
are persecuted: if they preach not, God will forsake them, and then they are
damned: being also subject to all those dangers which themselves do threaten,
the which thing might discourage men from that holy function; but that the
Lord commands us and enforces us thereunto. And I would God that all the
crosses and dangers which wait like pages or rather like iailers upon the
ministers office, could be sufficient to deny a passage or entrance unto the
unlearned and vain headed persons, whereby for ever they might be excluded
from our callings: but of this matter sufficient has been said already. The
reasons are these; First, because God opens to them either ordinarily or
extraordinarily his purpose Reason 1.
which he will do in his church: for there has not been any great calamity
in the world, but the Lord gives knowledge thereof before it comes, so that
his preachers might be believed, and destruction avoided. Secondly, they are
the mouth of God to the church, and of the church to God, Matthew. 18. 20. and
therefore what they sound, God sounds; what they bind, God binds; and
what they discharge, God sets at liberty: yet so, as their actions must be
guided by the Scriptures, if they will have God to confirm them. The uses
which we are Use 1.
to make of this doctrine are these; First, that we do not only teach the
judgments; but join with our doctrine an outward testimony of their fear,
and a practice, that may serve as a pattern for the people to repent by:
Ministers must move affections.
so the Lord teaches Ezech. 21. 6. 7. where the prophet is commanded to
mourn bitterly, as a man that mourns for the pain of the raines. And the
cause follows, that when the people should ask him, he might tell them
that he mourned, because every heart should melt, and every mind should
fainte, and every hand should be weak, and every knee should fall away
like water: and what heart of stone or desperate mind could see his tears,
and hear his words, and yet refrain from weeping? It has been already
showed that the example of the pastor is the best way to persuade the people,
and we know by lamentable experience, that where the preacher lives ill, his
life does more hurt, then his preaching does good. Therefore my dear brethren,
when we have cause to threaten any judgment of God, let us so temper our
bodies as if we felt it within us, as Jeremy did, when he cried out, My
belly, my belly; as if the calamity had already seized upon us. Let us
preach earnestly; let us live zealouslie; and let our words and tears be
heard in the pulpet, and our prayers and fear in private communication; and
full often let us urge and constrain our affections, that by many passions as
it were by many water drops, the hardest heart of stone may be pierced
thorough. But it greeueth our heart that many preachers in many places, when
they have taught most singularly on the Sabbath day, so soon as the door is
shut, some go to tabling, some to carding, some to shooting, some to bowling,
and some to banqueting; which makes the people think, they did but mock
them in the pulpit. Another use which comes by this doctrine is this, that
Use 2.
when we have so preached, and so lived, then may we assure our souls of
most excellent comfort, as the Apostle does Act. 18. 6. say, now are we free
from the blood of all men; so that a good conscience is the reward of a good
preacher, which is a greater benefit then any Bishopric or preferment of the
world, when a man may rejoice of his labors. So that let every preacher keep
this joy, and defile not his conscience: for the conscience of a learned man
once stained and corrupted, seldom or never is quieted again. Look upon Eli
his conscience, and upon the prophet which came to Jeroboam, who was slain by
a lion; and upon Jonah when he was cast into the sea; and upon Judas the most
wretch that ever was borne, when he had betrayed innocent blood. I could
bring many examples out of other writers, if I should not be tedious: but of
my own knowledge I speak, that I have seen some in the ministry endued
with rare gifts, and excellent learning, using great diligence in their
places; yet being given over through natural infirmity, their days have
been very few and very bitter: therefore maintain thy conscience with loss
of life and living; for it is an easier matter to bear all the reproaches of
the world, then one of thy own heart: for it will turn the sword of God in
thy own hand, and cause it to wound thy self; neither shall thou be able
to avoid it. I grant that men of other callings have no such dangerous slips:
therefore look to thy soul, for the devil in dazeling thy light darkneth al
thy people, and by making thy own conscience to accuse thee, he will make good
men to forsake thee, the world to wonder at thee, and the spirit of God to
depart from thee. Sion my holy mountain. Sion was the hill whereupon the
temple was builded; for the which cause it is called the Holy mountain of God,
because thither came all the tribes to do service and sacrifice to the Lord:
and therefore sometime it signifies the church of God and all the members
thereof, as Psalm. 51. By these words I might note, that although the ministers
have a private and a public charge to warn the people: yet they must have a
more special regard to the public place, Col. 4. 16. Isa. 66. 6. The reasons
are, First, because Christ is always present in the congregation, Reasons. The
public ministry to be regarded principally
Mat. 18. 20. and therefore if they have any love to their Savior, there they
must hear and see him. Again in the public ministry of the word is given
the holy Ghost, Gal. 3. 2. so that if men would have the pledge of their
eternal inheritance, thither they must resort where he is freely offered
without money: yea, let them come from strength to strength, that is, be thy
strength little or much, use the same to come to the church of God, there is no
more dispensation for weakness then for health; and therefore if thou will show
thy obedience and thy zeal to salvation, then come when thy health and
strength is most endangered, for then will it be like the poor widows mite,
most acceptable to God. If thou be a gentleman? use the help of thy horses and
men: if a woman? take the help of thy husband: if thou be poor? crave thy
neighbors hand, as he did which was sick of the palsy, Mat. 9. 2. If thou be
a servant? take so much the less pleasure, to hear a sermon; for in so doing
thou shall please the Lord, and not disprofit thy master. Again despise not
the voice of him that speaks, Heb. 12. 25. for God which speaks in us is a
consuming fire: there was never angel that spoke, but the contempt of his
words was severely punished; and Zachary because he did a little doubt of the
angels message, lost his tongue till his child was circumcised. The ministers of
God are called angels, Revel. 2. 1. and therefore if thou believe them not,
then fear the loss of thy ears, or thy tongue, or thy hands, or thy heart:
but if thou contemn them and dally with them wantonly or despitefully: oh,
fear the loss of body and soul for ever and ever! but of these things we
have often times before spoken. Again, if the voice of a trumpet could awake
the Jews and turn them to the Lord, how is it that men, and voices, and
Christ, and Gospel cannot awake the men of our times? the trumpet was blown
very seldom, but the word is every day and every where preached, and yet are
not men prepared. Nay verily, a trumpet in the streets shall have more followers
then a sermon in the temples, and as Michab says, cap. 2. 11. new wine and
strong drink do make men rise early, and go late to bed that they may be
filled therewith: but yet the wine of the Lords truth cannot prevail; and
therefore the wine of his wrath must make them drunken unto death. But in this
that he bids the inhabitants to tremble at the sound of a trumpet, we are
taught, that we must stand before the Lord with fear and trembling, Ier. 6.
10. Ezr. 10. 9, but in our days How we must behave our selves in churches.
men quake in the congregation, as steeples in the sea: they are ready to laugh
at that which should make them sorrow, and to loath that which they should long
after. He is now accounted a milke-sop that will weep when he hears sin
reproved, and a very coward that fears any evil, yea though it be eternal
condemnation. It is fearful to consider, that the presence of God shakes the
whole world and the power of his word makes the deserts to tremble, and yet
silly men (and in comparison of those, like corns of sand) will not shake nor
tremble, nor fear for any of all these. And above all, this mischief is to be
considered, that the longer we live in the world, the less fear of God, or
terror of judgment increases: old men grow careless through age: young men
grow dissolute through pleasure: children wax wanton through evil education:
and almost all men wax worse and worse. What is the church more regarded,
then an alehouse? or a preacher more esteemed then an idol? or a saint more
honored then a devil? or religion more loved then Atheisine? or the kingdom
of heaven more longed after, then an earthly inheritance? No, no, truth
yields to falsehood, charity to envy, quietness to contention, sobriety to
intemperancie, law to unrighteousness, faith to policy, and christianity to
infidelity. Help O you saints of the Lord to lament this mischief, although
we cannot amend it. Put to your tears and your prayers, that they may sound
before God, seeing GOD cannot any longer be heard among men. The reasons of
this doctrine are these: first, because God Reason 1.
dwells in them that tremble at his word, Isa. 66. 2. And again, this fear
and trembling is a most manifest sign 2
of the power of the word, Heb. 4. 12. so that where this trembling is
wanting, there can be no true devotion, whatsoever diligence be used, because
the word cannot have any free passage in our souls: For as a child cares not
for his master whom he fears not, so a man cares not for the gospel when
he trembles not: Yea on the other side, we rebel against the wisdom of
God, and spurn his word with our feet, when we suffer it not to go through
our hearts. We read that Og and Sihon two great kings, would not suffer the
people of Israel to go through their countries; the which discurtesie cost
them their lives, their land and their subjects, and all because they would
not grant a pathway: even so, if we let not the word of God pearse clean
thorough us, and quietly with courtesy give it entertainment in our hearts, he
will take them by force, and give us to be a miserable spoil to devils. If
Judas had had any grace, when he heard our Savior curse that man that should
betray him, he would never have gone farther, but let his action fall: but
he did as our hearers do, hear his own condemnation, and not believe it;
and therefore they shall do as he did, repent when it is too late, giving
their lives in stead of their ears, and their blood in stead of obedience: and
yet alas, alas, all will not serve their turn. The uses hereof are these:
first, seeing Use 1.
we must fear and tremble at the ministry of the word, then it follows,
that we shall be comforted thereby, for it is written, Blessed are they that
mourn, for they shall be comforted: and thus the Lord assures his people,
Isa. 66. 5. that for their fear he would give them safety, and for their
trembling he would give them joy, and their enemies should be ashamed at it.
Therefore if you would feel the sweet taste of the word of God, and receive
the joyful news of your salvation, then learn to tremble at the hearing
thereof, and you shall like of it better, love it deerer, hear it oftener, and
lean to it more safer then ever you did. Again, seeing we must hear the
word of God with fear and trembling, let us also make an end of our
salvation 2
with fear and trembling, Philip. 2. 12. that is, fear not only in the
church, or when thou art near unto danger, but all thy life long, until thou
have made an end of thy salvation. For so long as thou fear, so long thou
art in safety; but when the world shall say peace, peace, and there be no
fear of judgment, then shall come their destruction: for as when he in the
gospel promised to himself greatest safety in his riches, that night did
they fetch away his soul; so when we say we have done, it is finished, I have
sorrowed long enough, I have endured the cross of Christ thus many years, and
therefore now I will take my pleasure; then shall our danger be nearest, and
our woe be greatest: therefore let us never cease fearing till we be in
heaven, as the shipmen never cease watching till they be in harbor. Oh, here
is a Christians trial, if other men vex him, let him bear it; if he be free
from other men, let him chastise himself: Fear the Lord, least he be thy
judge; fear thy Savior, least he prove thy enemy; fear thy sins, least
they ouermatch thee; and tremble at the word of God, least it condemn thee.

A day of darkness and obscurity, a day of clouds and of Verse. 2.
blacknes, as the morning spread upon the mountains, so is there a great
people and a mighty: there was none like it from the beginning, neither shall
be any more after it unto the years of many generations. A day of darkness.
Now the prophet proceeds to describe the great wrath of God in the fury of
these small beasts, which he does first by consideration of the quality of
the day or time when they should come: and secondly by the manner of their
coming, taken from many resemblances and similitudes. For the time he
describes it after the usual manner of the scriptures, which sets forth a
sorrowful day of indgement, by darkness, clouds, and mistes: secondly, he
shows the cause hereofto be the great and mighty people, meaning the locusts
and the residue; for he calls them a people, as Solomon calls the ants and
the conies, Prou. 30. 25. and he says they shall obscure the light as the
morning darkness, because their company should be so many, as we may read they
did in Egypt, Exo. 10. 15. And therefore he says there was not the like from
the beginning, meaning for a long season, nor yet should be again to many
generations following. So that he tells them that this was a fearful time,
when all the heavens should be covered with clouds, and the earth be darkened
with an innumerable swarm of noisome beasts. Concerning the multiplying of
these beasts, we have spoken in the former chapter. First, when he shows
them that the day of their trouble should be cloudie, gloomie, and full of
darkness: we may learn that these Clouds and darkness admonish us of
judgment.
things do put us in mind of the great wrath of God, Psalm. 18. 11. For in
truth thus the Lord will have it, that we should be feared from the heavens
above us, and from the earth beneath us. It is reported for a great wonder,
that we in England seldom have any days wherein we see not many clouds;
whereas in other countries they see not any clouds for many months
together. Let us therefore make this advantage of our countries situation,
that on the day time when we behold the clouds, we think upon the great
judgment of God, whereby from the clouds he once rained down a great floude
that destroyed the world; and how one day in a cloud Christ shall come to
judge both quick and dead: Again, by night let us meditate on the light of
heaven, that we may escape that utter darkness where shall be nothing but
weeping and gnashing of teeth. The reasons of this doctrine Reason 1.
are these; First, because this want of light was the first punishment that God
inflicted on the Jews for the death of Christ, Matthew. 27. 45. the which thing
made them much afraid: for they had darkness instead of light, to show them that
Christ which should have been their light, was now made darkness unto them,
from whom they could receive no sight to walk to heaven. And surely if this
outward and carnal darkness be so terrible especially in the day time, then
what is the inward and spiritual darkness in the minds of men, whereby they
are deprived of all light of God, all partaking of the spirit, and all the
hope of the world to come? Oh would God this their perplexity could provoke
their hard and unbelieving hearts to forsake their damnable security: this
their darkness is so gross, that other men feel it, yet they are so blinded
that they cannot see it. Let us therefore my dear brethen know, that God will
leave none without excuse, but either the word or the world shall tell them
their duties: and let us learn to praise the Lord for covering the heavens
with clouds, Psalm. 147. 8. that by this means not only waters the earth,
and makes it fruitful; but also admonishes the minds of his children of a
continual preparation to judgment. But in our times all these are nothing
regarded, for signs and tokens, and remembrances of righteousness; yea, some
know not so much as the use of the rainbowe in the clouds: nevertheless in
the right use of God his creatures consists one great part of religion; so
that this is the best kind of Astrology or Prophecy to be made of the
stars, that they may direct us to a holy life, and prepare us for a blessed
end. Moreover, by this that the Prophet says, The like has not been seen,
nor shall not 2
be in many generations, We may observe that God does very seldom change the
course of nature, and turn light into darkness; for nature being a rare work
of God, he seldom Nature seldom changed. Reason 1.
uses his omnipotency to alter and change the same since the foundations of
the world were laid. The reasons are these; First, in regard of the Lords
own promise, Genesis 8. 21. For after the flood, he determines never to
drown the world again, and therefore he gave the rainebowe to be a pledge
thereof; and also that the continual course of nature should remain for
ever: Now the Lord is faithful and will remember his promise, or else we
know that the world might many times since have been destroyed, for there
has been more sin since the floude then ever was before: Since the floude
have sprung idolatry, the poison of the world, and many other abominations,
not known of in the first age, as wars, and Sodometrie, and such other like;
yet for his promise sake he forbeareth destruction. Another reason may be the
same that David uses, Psalm. 119. 90. 91. That the continuance 2
of the earth and all things created do witness the perpetuity of his
word. Therefore let us by considering of this same know of a certainty, that
rather than any jot or title of the Lords word should be brought to nothing,
not only the earth and all the course of nature shall be altered, but also
the heavens so high and so immutable be utterly changed and pass away as
nothing: then also will not God spare his workmanship in the body of man, but
to verify and justify his word, he will bring many to condemnation. Let us
not now think to escape the better or the longer, because nature shall
continue, for without changing of nature can God easily bring us to
destruction, as he could without breach of promise destroy all the Jews; and
of the stones of the street make new children for Abraham: He can destroy as
well in light as in darkness, as well in drought as in waters; as well by meat,
as by poison; as well by our own hands, as by the mouths of lions and tigers.
All the earth was not parted when Corah was punished; all the world was not
afflicted when Samaria was famished: but the Lord will here and there pick
out the men that transgress his law, as he found out Achan and the posterity
of Saul committing the guilty to death, and reserving the guiltless for life.
Again, let us fear how we endanger our selves to God, for in his wrath he
forgets 2
that we be his work, and will cast us off, although we were as near unto him
as the signet on his right hand: Say not thou have been a professor, or a
preacher, or a hearer, or a martyr, or a miracle-worker, through the power of
God, for notwithstanding this he will say unto thee, I know thee not, if thou be
not converted. He casts much gold into the sea; he brings great kings into
slavery; he takes away plenty from whole countries, and dasheth in pieces
many young infants: therefore think not thou, but he will be revenged on thee
for thy presumption. Yea to punish the Jews, he destroyed his own temple; and
therefore he wi spare neither house, nor building, nor nation, nor person, but
in his wrath he will bring all to confusion.

The xvij. Sermon.
Verse. 3. A fire deuoureth before him, and behind him a flame burns up: the
land is as the garden of Eden before him, and behind him as a desolate
wilderness, so that nothing shall escape him.
IN this verse is contained the first similitude, whereby the force of these
beasts are described, comparing their biting of the fruits to a fire: for
after an herb has been bitten with a locust, it will look black like a
cole. Again, he compares the land before he touched it, to the garden of Eden,
meaning the fruitfullest place in the world: but after the beasts had ouerrun
it, it was like the most barren and forsaken wilderness. Concerning the
comparison of fire it has been spoken already, and it notes the
unmercifulness of the destroier. But in this that he says, before him the
land is as Eden, and behind him a wilderness: we may observe, that there is
not any 1
land so fruitful, so fertile, and so pleasant, but it is subject to the curse
of God and to barrenness. Genesis 3. 17. It is apparent in all the creatures of
the world, what the sin of man has wrought, how it destroyed themselves,
corrupted their souls, annoied the beasts, defiled the air, and brought the
earth which was all good, and no part there of but very fruitful, into
brambles, and briers, and thistles, and thorns, and weakness and
barrenness, to be tilled without ease, kept with all labor, and reaped with
little profit. And as we see in the best ground, so we may know it is in the
best man, that he is also subject to vanity, curse, and destruction, when the
Lord shall in judgment weigh their disposition. And thus may every husbandman
that tilleth the earth, and every other man that treads thereon, behold every
day with his bodily eyes, how sin is punished: and let us fear, that as the
unfruitful land is not only cursed, but near unto burning; so their souls
more unfruitful, are not only cursed, but near unto condemnation. The
reasons hereof are manifest: first, because the Lord in cursing the land
destroieth the sinners, Isa. 15. 9, Reason 1.
Again, he will destroy the fruits of the earth, because men do break his
covenant: for when men do break 2
bargain with God, the Lord will make the earth to deceive man; and look
what authority man has over the earth, to plow, to cut, to drown, to harrow,
to dress, and to burn it; so has the Lord over man, to kill, to vex, to
trouble, to save, and to condemn him at his pleasure. Therefore look as the
earth does loose her fruitfulness, so shall thy soul her blessedness: and
when thou see thy good land become barren, beware least thy life be already
made wicked: and know that the Lord sets as little by a wicked man, although
a man, as thou do by a barren field, although it be a piece of land.
Wherefore let Use 1.
us make that use that God teaches Adam, Genesis 3. 9. that seeing the earth is
become unfruitful, in the sweat of our faces let us get our living, that is,
as every man's sin is a cause why the earth is cursed, and so become barren;
so let every man's hand be a means whereby her fruit may be increased, that
she and we may be both blessed. They are not worthy of land, that labor not
to amend it, and to make it fruitful: for we may see that it is one part of
our obedience since the fall of Adam, to labor in the earth for our living. It
is a fault in many men which keep the earth in barrenness, and only suck
out the sweet from that land which is good by nature; but we must know, as
God tilleth every man's heart to bring it to goodness: so ought man to try
every kind of ground, to bring it to fruitfulness, like that good gardener
in the gospel, which two or three years together dug about his unfruitful
tree. Again, seeing the earth is cursed for our sakes, let us lament the
barrenness thereof, Isa. 16. 9. for in so doing 2
we sorrow most justly for the punishment of our own sins.

The beholding of him is like the sight of horses, and like the horsemen, so
shall they run. In this next place he compares Verse. 4.
them to horses, because in battle they are most fierce as we may see, Job 39.
20. Again, he compares them to horses for speed, because as these are most
swift in running, so are the other most speedy in executing the Lords wrath,
Aba. 1. 8. Again, the horse is most terrible in battle, Reu. 9. 7. and so
shall these be. Hereby we may observe that A guilty conscience fears
punishment.
the only sight of punishment before it be felt does wonderfully perplexe a
guilty conscience, Reu. 1. 7. where it is said, that when the world shall
behold Christ coming to judgment, all the kindreds of the earth shall wail
before him. The reasons are; First, because it is the reward Reason 1.
of obstinacy, Ierem. 15. 8. A guilty conscience quaketh at the wagging of a
leaf, and every little danger does amaze him. Again, it is a most wicked
thing to rejoice at the 2
hurt of other men, either in word or thought, Ezec. 26. 2. Therefore although
we find ourselves clear, yet we cannot choose but sorrow when it approaches
to other. Therefore let us observe the times and to kensof evil, Matt. Use 1.
24. 33. that we may always live in mourning, but especially knowing ourfeare,
we may then sorrow most when danger is nearest, that so we may be ready to
end our sins by repentance, and to go to heaven by affiictions. Again,
when we see wicked men taken away and going 2
to destruction, let us fear the searching justice of God, Psalm 52. 6. and
say, Behold the man that would not believe the Gospel, nor be joined to our
congregation, nor forsake his pleasures, but persecute good men, and flatter
evil men, and therefore now has he received his recompense. Oh, let the
death of so many traitors, so many thieves and murderers, so many swearers
and drunkardes, teach us to fear as a little bird flying from the
sparrow-hauke; and rather let us cover our selves in weeds and grass, or in
some thin and open tabernacle then to take the air of the sun or sin,
and to abide in the carved and walled cities of the multitude.

Like the noise of chariots in the tops of the mountains, so Verse. 5.
shall they leap: like the noise of a flame of fire that deuoureth the
stubble, and as a mighty people prepared to the battle. Now he proceeds to
other similitudes, wherein I will be short because they all touch one thing,
and the general is already delivered. In this verse he compares the voice of
their coming to the noise of chariots in the mountains, which keep a mighty
rattling in time of war; for chariots were used for great men going to war,
as we may see in the history of Sisera, Ahab, and Iehu. Again, he says,
They are like the flame that deuoureth the stubble: which makes a kind of
sudden, hollow, and fearful noise. Again, like a people prepared for
war, which come with all kind of warlike instruments, and woeful
acclamations, the which I leave to every man's several consideration: whereby
they may note how the Lord can cloth his smallest and basest creatures, with
infinite power and terror, to discomfort every people in the world: Oh, how
much more are the angels of wrath terrible, seeing the worms of the earth are
so fearful! wherefore let us not only fear the invasion of Spaniardes or
other enemies, nor yet serpents, lions, wolves, or wild dogs: but also the
seely flies and grasshoppers, and filthy lice, which in time of God his wrath
shall have power to destroy us, Exodus 10. and 11.

Before his face shall the people tremble: all faces shall gather blacknes. The
meaning ofthese words are, that in the Verse. 6.
presence of these beasts shall be much trembling and fear: yea, they shall
be very near death: for blacknes betokens death. From hence we may
observe how God makes men at their wits end before destruction, Ezech. 26.
16. They go not to their ruins like sheep, but like swine; not like lambs,
but like lions; not peaceably but furiously. The reasons are, because the
fear of the wicked shall come upon them, Prou. 10. 24. Secondly, Reason 1.
God by this fear and trembling calls them to repentance, Deuteronomy. 32. 21. So
that if then they could be as angry 2
with their sins, as they are with their enemies, and fight as christianly
with the devil, as they do manfully against men; although they loose the
life of the body, yet they may keep the life of the soul. Learn therefore
to Use 1.
fear God, and so thou shall never fear evil, Psalm. 112. 1, 6. but thy mind
shall be peaceable in death, and not distracted. Again, use thy self to
mourning before hand, Ezechiel 21. 12. that when they come thou may 2
more easily endure them, and more happily avoid them. Secondly, when he
says all faces shall gather blackenes: we may not only see that the greatest
and strongest man in the world can do nothing against the judgment of God; but
offer himself to death, and his heart dies within him as a stone: but we may
also see how wicked men in adversity Wicked men desperate in adversity.
become altogether desperate, Isa. 2. 19. they cry to the hills to save them, to
the mountains to cover them, and to the rocks to hide them. And this will be
then the boldness, and courage of our gallant youths, who in their pride
threaten to fight with the devil, and with their oaths will tear the Lord out
of heaven, who think by their worshipful pedegrees to shame the kirks of
Christ; and by their golden and silken bravery to dazzle the glory of God: then,
then, will these things little comfort them. But as all the Midianites ran away
for the dream of a barley-cake; so shall these run, if they knew whither;
and take, if they knew what; and trust, if they wist in whom; and fly from the
great wrath of God, if there were any refuge; but seeing none, they shall fall
to the earth as the snow comes from the clouds. Oh, cannot you think of this
to put away your sins? for if you bear them with you, they will serve you as
Iael served Sisera, and strike into your brains and heart the nails of deadly
poison: there can be no resisting; for they have won the fort. Yet in time,
crave the help of some other to besiege them, and to regaine a quiet
conscience; or else whenever any danger comes, they will do with you, as
the citizens of Samaria did with Achabs children, deliver you to your enemies,
and with their own hands be your butchers, and so commend you to the devils
custody. The reasons of this doctrine are these, because Reason: 1.
then they have no hearts to remember what God has done for them, Deuteronomy. 7. 18,
19. but think evermore this is for the sin, this for such an adultery, this
is for my pride, this for my covetousness, this for my swearing, this for my
contempt of preaching, and all shall be for my damnation. Again, then shall
they be overwhelmed with destruction, 2
1. Sam. 31. 4, 5. as Saul was, for knowing that his sin had made God depart
from him, he slew himself in the battle. If he had gone to a prophet when he
went to a witch, or had believed Samuel as well being alive, as he did the devil
when Samuel was dead, his life had then been spared; or if he had put off his
sins when he put on his armor to go to the battle; or then fell to prayer,
when he fell upon his sword, then had Saul escaped that day. But what could
the body of Saul do when his soul was so laden with sin? for he knew that
the Philistines must needs have his life and the devil his soul: in like
manner will the enemy bewitch you when you are in adversity; Therefore cast
Use 1.
down your castles and defenses for sin as the Lord exhorts, Hos. 10. 14.
before the devil make them invincible. For as the reign of Abimelech was the
slaughter of Gedeons sons, and the reign of Athaliah was the overthrow of
all the kings seed: so is it betwixt us and our sins, if they reign, we
must die; if we put them down, we shall live. Let us therefore cast them down
betimes; for as the Israelites did at the first spare the Canaanites,
afterward they could never destroy them: so if at the first we dally with our
sins, in the end they will grow irresistable. Oh that we might live to say of
our sins, as Christ said of the temple, that there might not one sin be
left upon another. Let us bury our sins as Jeremy said Iehoijakim should be
buried Ierm. 22. 18, 19. that their deaths be not lamented, but let them be
cast out of our souls, as a dead ass is cast out of a city: for as a dead
corpse procures nothing but worms and stink, and feeds fowls: so our
sins cause nothing but woe and sorrow, and feed devils. Again, let us not
only cast away our sins in heart as many say 2
they have done, but in words and works profess and show the same, Hos. 14. 3.
for by our words we shall be saved, and by our words we shall be condemned. A
repentant man is known by his confession, as Rahabs house was known by the
thread that was tied in her window, which caused her and all her kindred to be
spared: and so if we would be spared at the great day of the Lord, let us
confess our selves to be of his family. Many I know there be which think it
sufficient to leave sin, and never to make confession thereof; so also there be
many that think it sufficient to believe the Gospel, although they never
profess it: but in my opinion the one and the other are both deceived. For we
must not be of Abraham's heart, and of Belials life; we may not bear the
soul of David, and the show of Pharisees. Good king Iehoshaphat being in
show like wicked Ahab, was in danger to be slain for Ahab: so are all those
in danger of death who have inwardly good hearts, and outwardly evil lives.
Confess thy sins, thy faith, thy God: thy sins to thy brethren, thy faith
to the church, and thy God to the whole world, that thou may be as far
from note of evil, as ever is light from the show of darkness.

The xviij. Sermon.
Verse. 7. They shall run like strong men, and go up to the wall like men of
war, and every one shall go forward in his way, and they shall not stay in
their paths.
Now the Prophet comes to the last similitude, wherein he compares these
deuourers to soldiers; for in truth there is not any mischief like to the
mischief of war, which is well termed the slaughter house of mankind, and
the hell of this world. And in this treatise following, I must enter into
martial affairs, that as I have hitherto taught you to be christians; so now
I must instruct you to be soldiers, and learn you the art of war. Wherein
this Prophet touches two things: The first is the order of an army, verse. 7.
8. Secondly, the overthrow or sacking of the conquered. For the first, he
notes 1 The condition of soldiers.
what manner of men soldiers should be, namely, Strong men, Exodus 17. 10. For
God has so ordained that all men have their crosses and callings to humble
them. If thou be be wise, thou art employed in government; if thou be strong,
thou art busied in war; if thou be weak, thou art tormented in want; if thou
be a woman, thou art under subjection; if thou be a fool, thou live in
contempt. Therefore thou which art a soldier, make this use of this point,
that thou increase thy strength, and cast away fear, 1
Deuter. 31. 8, Undo not thy strength by quarrelling or drinking, or watching,
or fasting, or feasting, or whooring; but keep thy body in strength to
benefit thy country. Again, make another use which the Lord taught Iosuah, 2
the most noble captain and soldier of the world, who had the leading of
six hundred thousand men, and overcame The exercise of a soldier.
thirty and one several kings in a little time; this exhortation is set
down, Ios. 1 8. That always in war thou look to the word of God: whether
thy cause be just, thy heart be willing, and thy calling be lawful; whether
thy hands strike when God bids, and thy foot stand when God calls:
Look to this I say, and rob not, kill not, and fight not but against a
lawful enemy. But alas, Iosuah is dead, and al those which saw his doings:
now in wars, there is gain in stead of godliness, courage in stead of
equity, bloudthirstines in stead of valor, policy in stead of justice, and
you seldom see a soldier of any religion, and never prays till he be in
danger of death. Another instruction arises out of this verse, when 2
Institution in martial affairs.
the prophet says, Like men of war: whereby we observe, that soldiers
should be disciplined and instructed before they be sent into wars, or else
they cannot be like men of war. This benefit David acknowledged that he
received of God, Psalm. 18. 34. it is a dangerous matter to adventure a whole
army upon young soldiers, and more dangerous it is to undo any through want
of skill. The reason is, because men must not only have strength, but wisdom
and cunning in their weapons, and sometime use the stratagems of war, where
policy and experience is worth ten thousand men's hands, as we may see in
Iosuah, cap. 8, 4, 5, 6. and in the Israelites, Judge. 20. Wherefore make this
use in thy warfare of this doctrine, howsoever thy cause be good, thy strength
be great, and thy experience much; yet never fight til thou have commended the
victory to God, 2. Sam. 10. 12. for God is the warrior which daunteth every
enemy, and directs every dart to the person appointed. Be not too bold as
the Israelites were, Deuteronomy. 1. and were chased back again by the Amorites; but
use devotion to God and discretion in thy business: remember well that the sword
cannot cut except the Lord whet it; that thy arm cannot strike, except God
enable it; that the enemy will not fly except he discomfort him; and that
victory will not follow thee, except God be on thy side. Again, if thou be
an able man for the war both in strength and skill, come willingly when thou
art called, and refuse not to fight in a good cause, although it be against
thy own brother: Yield obedience to them that shall teach thee: and as the
captain in the Gospel said, that his soldiers did as he bid them; so do
thou perform what thy general or captain commands, if it be lawful and
possible. Thirdly, he notes another duty of martial men, 3 Celeritie in a
soldier.
which is this, that they perform their business with all celeritie and speed,
Ios. 8. 19. The reason is, because it is the greatest commendation of a
soldier that can be, to be swift and of a ready dispatch, Psalm. 19. 5. 2.
Sam. 2. 18. for as a sluggish servant, a heavy ox, and a tyring horse are
very discommendable: so a slow and heavy soldier is not tolerable. Gedeons
army was but three hundred, and their dexterity was such, that they overthrew
an innumerable rabble of Midianites; and so shall soldiers prove it very
aduantagious to surprise their enemy on a sudden. But yet for all this trust
not too much in thy legs, or in the strength of an horse, Psalm. 147. 10. for
they are but vain things to save a man. Asahell could run well, yet Abner
slew him: and therefore beware least thou make thy own agilitie to overthrow
thee.

Neither shall one thrust another, but every one shall walk in Verse. 8.
his path: and when they fall on the sword, they shall not be wounded. In this
verse he expresses other duties of soldiers, which they must observe in their
array, which are, first of all 1 Order in battle.
that they keep their places, and be not one hurtful to an other. Judge. 7.
16. 22. Achans gadding out of place was the loss of his own life and of many
more. And therefore let them learn that exhortation of Moses, Deuteronomy. 23. 19. to
abstain from evil, especially when they go to war. Secondly, let them, as
it is here expressed, keep themselves 2 Soldiers must look to themselves.
from wounding, although they fall on their enemies sword, that is, let them
look to the matter, that they be not only careful to annoy the enemy, but
also to defend themselves: for it is an evil victory which is purchased with
the loss of many men's lives, and we know that all Canaan was won with the
loss of a very few men. It is a great butcherie of men, to press still on the
enemy, where there is no hope but of death: Therefore it is good for a
soldier sometime to look to his safety, as well by an unwilling retire, as
by a desperate and a voluntary march.

They shall run to and fro in the city: they shall run upon the wall: they
shall climb up upon the houses, and enter in at the Verse. 9.
windows like a thief. Now we are come to the last part of this similitude,
wherein the victory is reported, and the manner how the poor conquered are
oppressed, showing unto us, that as it is when a city or town is sacked, so
shall it be when this judgment shall be executed: for some shall flee to go
forth, and some shall fight to come in; every man's house shall be sacked;
great booties shall be obtained, and no spare shall be made of any thing that
can be found. Where we might note, that in the conquest or winning of 1
Confusion in victory.
any city or town, there is a mighty confusion, every one running to and
fro for themselves, they tread upon the aged, upon the women, upon the
children, and no eye does so much as pity them. But when he says, they shall
climb over the walls, and creep in at the windows like a thief, we are
taught that in war they account not any thing unlawful All villainy made
lawful in war.
that is done to an enemy: the robbing of houses, the rauishing of women, the
killing of old men, the braining of children, the burning of cities, the
spoiling of corn, and the rasing down of dwelling houses, are accounted
virtues: whereupon a Father said well, Bellum malis videtur voluptas, bonis
necessitas, evil men make a pastime of war, but good men account it a hard
necessity. Wherein we may see one sin punished by another; neglect of law in
peace, is punished by contempt of law in war, for there is no law to bridle
the conquerours. Oh, how happy is England! which never for these many years
has heard so much as a trumpet sounded unto wars; we have not seen the
shaking of a spear; we have had no leading into captivity, no complaining
nor lamentation in our streets: But yet unhappy, which in these peaceable
times has laid the foundation of her own woe, and scattered the seed of her
own destruction. Let us therefore Use 1.
learn to continue our peace, if by any conditions of equity and reason it
may be obtained, Numb. 6. 26. were we not better in these times to buy our
peace with gold and silver, or other possessions, then to adventure all that
we have by giving nothing? If the enemy come home to us it is not ten
subsidies that will satisfy him: and why are men so wretched as to pinch at one
or two? were you not better keep them in doing abroad with your armor and
money, then suffer them to come home and take away your wives and children:
what do I say? take away: they will ravish them and you shall behold it; they
will slaie your children before your face; your houses and lands they will
either give to strangers, or set them on fire over your heads, and if any
remain alive, they shall be made drudges and slaves, or prisoners and
captives. Therefore pray for the peace of England: use the means to keep
it; refuse the way to loose it; let them prosper that love it. For the keeping
of our peace let God be our governor; let the Gospel be our law; let the
saints dwell among us; let the churches be our courts; let the preachers be
our counselors; let religion be our exercise; let prayers be our weapons; let
holiness be our armor, and then shall the angels be our walls. Let us build our
cities with love; let us plant our fields with truth, and then shall peace
flourish in our land. For the avoiding of the things that will break off our
peace, let us banish Atheism and all manner of carnal profession; let us
root out all the weeds of sin from our hearts; let us wash off all the spots
of evil from our lives; let us cast down all the castles of the devil in our
land; let us drive away whosoever works unrighteousness; let us abrogate all
the counsels of wickedness; let us avoid sedition, rebellion, and confusion,
and come from the sea of infidelity; and then shall all be peace, because the
God of peace dwells among us.

Then shall the earth tremble before him, the heavens shall shake, the sun
and moon shall be dark, and the stars shall Verse. 10.
withdraw their shining. After the former description of the terrible
calamity, which these beasts should bring to that nation, now he adds these
heavy tidings for their greater daunting and farther astonishment: for least
they should think that all the former came to pass by natural means, the
Lord not directing it, or not regarding it; the prophet joins these tokens of
the Lords peculiar power to all the former judgments: that they might know that
as none but God could be the author of these, so none but his majesty could
be the sender of them. These heavenly signs, or rather signs in heaven, are
described in the two next verses; first, the shaking of the world; secondly,
the darkening of the lights; and thirdly, the great and terrible thunders which
should then be heard: all which is supported by a strong reason, verse. 11. By
this verse we may first of all learn, that the extraordinary signs of heaven
are 1 Signs show judgments.
the forerunners and most evident prophets of calamity and destruction
following. Isa. 29. 6. God which would have all his judgments not only felt
but feared, does not let them come stealing on the world, as if he could not
do them against our will, or not hinder them against their nature, but
proclaims them by manifold fearful signs in heaven. The reasons are,
first, because we should know Reason 1.
that the evil only proceeds from him, 2. Sam. 5. 24. it does not any whit
distaine the Lords honor to be a revenger of sin upon the bodies and souls
of many thousands, but rather it makes for his glory; for he must judge the
world in righteousness. Another reason is, because by this 2
means the Lord does most earnestly affect good men's hearts, and afflict the
wicked, Ezech. 32. 9. for the sight of terrible signs cannot choose but move
the brute beasts of the earth, much more reasonable men, who are more given to
fear, because they are more given to sin: and our Savior says in the
gospel, that men's hearts shall fail them, because of the signs of heaven. The
uses are these: Use 1.
first, let us not be superstitious or heathenish in fearing the signs of
heaven above the rule of faith, Ier. 10. 2. For alas what can any planet or any
sign do but by the Lords assignement? and therefore in fearing it
superstitiously we fear not God, we distrust his providence, we restrain his
power, and we cast away our own confidence and faith. It was a great sign in
heaven when fire came down and destroyed Sodom and Gomor, and all cities,
cattle and pastures of the plain, Genesis 19. yet little Zoar was saved standing
among them, when all the residue were burning about it: therefore beware of the
slavish fear of the signs of heaven, for it is the Lord that governs the
stars. Another use, as we are not to fear them too much, so we 2
are not to regard them too little, but use them as promptors and furtherances
to another life, Luke 21. 28. when you see these (says Christ) then lift up
your heads, and know that your redemption draws near. Be it therefore that
the heavens be burning, the lights be darkening, the stars be falling, the
earth be shaking, and the air be thundering: yet fear it no more then the
Israelites did in Egypt; but rather now think that the Lord will amaze
sinners, and erect his throne of righteousness to stand for evermore. This must
much encourage us in these our later days, where in every hour we look for
the accomplishing of all the signs before Christ's coming, and let us watch
for the appearing of our Savior, that we be not comfortles when other shall
be both witless and faithles: but know that good men shall stand in the
midst of all these terrors and fires, as the men did walk in the midst of
the Babilonish furnace, and not have one hair of our head diminished. When he
says that the earth shall tremble, he notes that earth -- quakes are notable
tokens of the Lords 2
wrath, Psalm. 18. 7. we are not only to impute it to the air shut up in the
furrows of the earth, as in philosophy Earthquakes betoken God his anger.
they do, but we must go to the principal cause, which is the hand of God;
and the final cause which is to show his wrath: for in his wrath says the
scripture, he casts down whole mountains. Oh, how terrible is this to
consider that the whole earth should be shaken at the chiding of God? and yet
man which is made of earth, and stands on earth, and lives on earth, and
shall return to earth again, will not shake or tremble for the same. I think
there is more terror in the dead bones in the graves, then in living bodies in
their houses. The reasons hereofare these, because the Reason 1.
law of wrath was given in fire and earthquakes, Exodus 19. 18. Heb. 12. 18.
for God did then show himself most terrible when the mountain seemed to
burn, and there was nothing but cursing and death: for the law that then was
given did condemn many millions, which now do know the same. Again,
earthquakes do commonly proceed 2
and go before the alteration of religion, Revel. 6. 12. for as when Iehu
altered the idolatry of Baal, the prophets and the God were both displaced: so
when religion is altered, God is as it were displaced, and all his servants
persecuted, which must of necessity show the heavy indignation of God; for he
will not have his image defaced nor endure that his glory should be given to
another. Let us therefore learn, that if the strong earth be not able to abide
Use 1.
the wrath of God, then much less shall weak and sinful men, Number. 16. 1.
Again, let us learn to preach the word more earnestly by the consideration of
earthquakes. We 2
may read Amos 1. 2. that two year before the earthquake, the Lord sent him
to prophecy, as it were to plant the minds of his church that they might have
lived without wavering. Now it is well known that we have had one great and
terrible earth -- quake in our times: would God it might so work that the
preachers would for that cause preach more diligently, and the people hear
more attentively, least it prove unto us a token of the decay of religion.
Truly as yet (blessed be God) religion is not altered, but it is much defaced;
and God grant that as the earthquake at the death of Christ was the decrease
of Iudaisme and Paganism, but the increase of christianity: so, that in our
time may work the like effect, and may seal unto us the decay of Popery and
heresy, but may assure us of the continuance of verity and pure religion. We
might also note out of this verse, that seeing the heavens and earth are
afraid of him: therefore the most guiltles creatures of God cannot abide his
anger. But this we will defer unto the next chapter. Again, in that the
sun and moon are darkened: we may observe not only, that God is the author
of light and darkness; but also that he will not let sinners in his anger have
any benefit of them, Isa. 13. 9, 10. The reasons are, First, because they are
enemies to good men and good things, Exodus 10. 22. Secondly, because they are
ashamed of the sins of men, as we may see at Christ's death, Matthew. 27 45. Let
us therefore so glorify God in our places, as these creatures do in theirs:
for they are dark at his chiding, and they shine at his bidding; so let us live
to praise him while he gives life, and die to honor him when he sends death.

And the Lord shall utter his voice before his host: for his host is very
great: for he is strong that does his word: for the Verse. 11.
day of the Lord is great and very terrible, and who can abide it? Having
spoken of the darkning of the lights, and the shaking of the earth: now it
follows that we proceed to the uttering of the Lords voice, which signifies
thunder, Psalm. 29. 3. and most plainly, Psalm. 18. 14. The Lord thundered out
of heaven, and the highest gave his voice. By the consideration of which phrase
we are given to understand the infinite and unspeakable power of God, which
has so wonderful and powerful a voice; the which when the Israelites heard
Exodus 19. 20. they were not able to abide, and so desired that Moses should
speak unto them: even so are we unable to endure the same if the Lord should
so speak unto us; as we should have had no benefit by Christ except he had
taken upon him the nature of man: so we could not endure the powerful word
of God if it were not offered by the tongue of man. As the ways of God are not
like the ways of men; so the voice of God is not like the voice of men: that
is strong, but this is weak; that is high, but this is low; that is
fearful, this is simple; that is terrible, this is easy. The people that
could not abide Salomons government, had a worse then was Salomons, for they
lost their kings and their God: even so, when we can no longer abide the
voice of man, then let us look for the fearful thunderclaps of heaven:
wherefore hear the words of God in the mouths of men, or else you shall
fear and tremble, and melt at it in the stroke of the air. Again, the
prophet David Psalm. 29. 11. makes another use of thunder, telling us that for
the power thereof, every one in his temple do speak his praise. It is a
wicked and damnable opinion of the multitude that the devil can raise thunder:
whereas we are to account it only in the Lords power, Job 38. 25. although
the devil can do much, yet is he but weak, and his power restrained:
therefore we need no more fear his power in the time of thunder then in the
cleerest sun -- shine day; but rather let us praise the Lord for his power,
who is so wonderful in all his works. Again, if thunder be the voice of God,
why do the papists in the time of thunder ring their bells to stay it, as if it
were an unholy thing? surely it well be comes them, for seeing they will not
hear God in the Scriptures, they will not hear him in the clouds: if we
oppose Scripture to them, they say we speak as heretics; if the Lord send
thunder, then they say there is a devil abroad. Oh blasphemous mouths and
hearts! that are so simple, and yet so great; great in blasphemous heresy, and
simple in true divinity. Again, when the prophet says that he will utter his
voice before his host, for his host is very great: he means the noisome
beasts that he should send like an host of men, as has been already
showed. Whereby 1 Creatures enemies one to another.
we are taught that every creature since sin entered into the world is become
an enemy one to another, like to the enemies in war, Psalm. 105. 34. The
great birds are enemies to the small, the great fishes to the little, the
great beasts to the inferior; and so are the great men to the little ones:
the ox cannot abide the lion; the sheep cannot endure the woolfe; the fox
will not tarry with the goat; the horse will not dwell with the Bear; the
Heart will not attend the hounde; and many more live in hatred one with another,
but most of them al are enemies to man. The reasons are these; First, as man
destroyed his own nature, Reason 1.
so God destroieth or rather alters the nature of all other things. Secondly,
God will surely be known that he gives power to the spoil, Amos 5. 9. What
can an enemy do in war, or a thief by the high way side, or a beast that
deuoureth man, surely nothing but by the working hand of God? for the devils
themselves are under his correction. One lion destroyed a prophet, 1. Kings
13. yet we know that Daniel was cast among a den of lions, and had no hurt at
all; surely it was the Lord that opened the mouth of the one, and muzled the
jaws of the other. Let us therefore know that whenever either man or beast
Use 1.
shall annoy us, that it comes of God, Job. 1. 4. When Shemei cursed David,
David would not have him punished, because said he, The Lord has bid him
curse: and so if we be bitten by any beasts, or stung by any serpent, or
haunted by any fowls, or oppressed by any enemies, let us then think with our
selves, this has the Lord done to us, and pray for the remission of sins.
This doctrine will take away al revenge against man for any injury, when we
shall be persuaded, that God by them does fatherly correct us. Again, let us
think with our selves how many ways the Lord has to correct us for our
sins: the angels 2
are about us, when God bids them they strike, the beasts are among us,
when he commands they discomfort us, the flies and worms overcome us, we
are enemies one to another, and one wound and kill another as Cain did Abel;
yea we cannot trust our own hands, for fear they destroy us, as we see in
Saul, Achitophel, and Judas: and when all this is done, there are ready all the
devils in hell to torment us. Now who would love his life? nay, who would love
his sins? that bring with them upon him such an everlasting and intolerable
hatred. Again, when he says, that he is strong that does his word, he means
him that does his commandment: whereby we are taught, that every creature has
power given him to do that which God assigns him, 1. King. 17. 4. The ravens
at the commandment of God fed Elijah morning and evening with bread and meat,
and so every one when he bids them go, they go; when he bids them
come, they come. The reason is: first, because they wait upon Reason 1.
God, Psalm. 145. 15. secondly, they worship their creator, Reu. 5. 14. and so
we may learn that God never aduaunceth any, but he gives them gifts to
perform their callings. When he says that the day of God is great, and who
can The wrath of God intolerable. Reason 1.
abide it? he thereby teaches us, that the wrath of God is intolerable, Deuteronomy.
9. 18. 19. The reasons are, because there is no way to fly from his presence,
Amos 5. 18, 19. Secondly, there can be no mediator in wrath, Ier. 15. 1, 2. By
which we are taught, how inestimable is the benefit of redemption 2
by Jesus Christ, who has delivered us from wrath to come. 1. These. 1. 10.
Christ has delivered us from that wrath that condemned the angels, that shook
the heavens, that rendeth the earth, that kills the beasts, and that
tormenteth the wicked. Oh, what had our estate been without a Savior? but
this, to undergo the intolerable wrath of God, which burns more then any
fire, which paineth more the^ any death, which smarteth more the^ any torture,
which tastes worse then any bitterness, and smells worse then any
filthiness, where a man and a devil should for evermore be yoked together:
this wrath has Christ pacified, and from this damnation has he redeemed us:
But now if thou sin again, and make no account of the blood of Christ, the
wrath shall be seven times hotter, and thou seven times more the child of
hell. Again, seeing this is the estate of the damned, ^.
how wretched is their estate, which live in danger thereof every hour of life;
being alive they have no peace, and being dead they have no ease: they are
borne in filthiness, they live in wickedness, they die in wretchedness, and
damnation is their grave; where the fire is their cradle, the devils are their
nurses, the Lord is their enemy, endless torments are their rest, and wrath
without remedy is their meat. Oh let this make good men desire to forsake
this life; and let it make evil men long to forsake their sins: for their
pleasurable life shall end in insufferable woes.

The xix. Sermon.
Verse. 12. Therefore also now says the Lord, Turn you unto me with all your
hearts, with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning.
NOw at the length by the merciful assistance of the holy Ghost have we
finished the first part of our first division, and are come unto the last;
wherein the people are exhorted to repentance. In this treatise following,
first of all the prophet shows them the manner of their repentance, 12. 13.
verses: and secondly, sets down certain reasons to persuade them
thereunto. The manner of their repentance is either in action or in affection,
and it respects both the people and the priests: In affection, as conversion
in heart, and renting thereof: in action, as weeping, fasting, and mourning. The
reasons to move them hereunto are two: first, in respect of his nature, verse.
13. then of his works, verse. 14. That part which concerns the priests does
show us first, how they should stir up the people: and secondly, how they
should pray, verse. 15, 16, 17, thus much for the division.

In this, that after all the before expressed judgments, the prophet now at
the length comes with the flat 1 No judgment without the word works
repentance.
commandment and word of God, to cause them to be converted: We are first
of all taught, that except God give the preaching of his word with his heavy
judgments, men can never be amended by them, Amos 4. 6, 7, 8. Let him thunder
omnipotently, let him shake the earth terribly, let him darken the light
fearfully, let him curse the world justly, and multiply his punishments
abundantly; yet all this without the word of God cannot convert a soul. All
this is plain in the forenamed place of Amos, wherein God tells the people,
that he had given them scarceness of bread and no rain, insomuch as two or
three cities wandered up and down to drink water: he sent blastings, and
mildeawes, and great store of pestilence, the young men lay murdered, their
horses were taken away, and noisome stinks and smells infected them, and yet
still God complained that they had not turned unto him: and then he bids
them be prepared to meet their maker: So that it is evident that no cross or
judgment can work repentance. The experience hereof is to be seen in our
times, wherein have been as great signs and as many woonders as in any place
of the world beside: great thunders, fearful earthquakes, terrible darkness,
mortal pestilence, pining famines, and yet who is converted by the^? great men
are made richer, mean men are made poorer, poor men are made beggars, and yet
who considers this? The waters have drowned us, the wars have devoured us,
and want has afflicted us: and yet still we are as heard hearted, as wickedly
affected, and as stiffenecked as ever we were; insomuch as, if the whole world
were in an uproar, and our whole land upon her death bed, well we might
complain, but hardly repent. The reasons Reason 1.
of this doctrine may be these; First, because the Lord sends judgments to
take revenge, and not to work repentance, Deuter. 32. 41. The halter is not
put on the the eues neck to convert him, but to punish him, as Agar was
expelled out of Abraham's house, not to reclaim her, The end of Gods judgments.
but to torment her. And here we may learn the end of all the Lords
judgments, which is to take vengeance on our evil lives: what is our estate?
seeing we are under the revenging hand of God; one while our desires are
plagued, another while our appetites are molested, and continually is our life
threatened with a longer calamity. But some will say, shall we not be
repentant during our crosses and adversity? Oh, yes my dear brethren, for we
have the word as well as the rod, and therefore we must be instructed by the
one as we are corrected by the other: our punishment is a light vengeance; but
our profession is a great comfort: yet we are but as it were led to execution,
and therefore we must repent with speed before death catch our souls, as
dearth has done our bodies. Another reason is, because the word is of more
force then any judgment 2
whatsoever, for the conversion of a sinner is a work of more value then the
destruction of a world: man was lost by an apple, but it cost more to redeem
their souls. Is not my word like fire and like a hammer that breaks the
stone? Ierem. 23. 29. and the word of God is life, and lively in operation,
Heb. 4. 10. sharper then a sword, lighter then the sun, and heavier then the
earth. The which thing does mightily magnify the word preached, and the
public ministry thereof, being attended by the angels, accompanied with the
spirit, and reverenced in the church. The angel was honorable that slew so
many thousands of Saneheribs army, Esaias 37. for it was a great judgment; but
the ministry of the word has drove more devils out of the world then it
slew or drove Assyrians out of Israel. And hereby let us learn what account
we are to Use 1.
make of the word of God: We fear drowning in the seas, burning on the
land, robbing in our iourneies, and every joint in our body is subject to many
easelesse pains: but let us more earnestly fear the word of God; for those
hurt us when we feel them and see them, but this will harm us when we,
neither feel norsee it; they afflict us, but this instructs us; they punish
us, but this does acquit us; they bring us the heavy news of condemnation,
but this brings the glad news of life everlasting. By judgments we are
blinded, but by the Gospel we are enlightened; by judgments we are
endangered, by the Gospel we are defended: and to conclude, they threaten our
lives, but the word threatens our souls. Make much of the word in thy
health, for believe me, sickness cannot so prepare thee for the Lord as the
word can: be converted by it, for thou see all other means fail, for
miracles do make us wonder, and this makes us repent: therefore either make
this thy joy, or God shall make them thy sorrow. What then? will some say,
this is a strange doctrine, do not sorrows and earthquakes and other fearful
2
things turn us to the Lord? then we will not make any account of these
things. To whom I answer, that if they do so, they do that which will undo
them: shall the scholar neuercare for the rod because it cannot teach him but
correct him, and shall we set light by the Lords judgments because they
cannot convert us? no, no, they must keep us in obedience although they cannot
beget us to obedience; they must reform us, although they cannot turn us.
David said Psalm. 119. when I see thy judgments, I am astonished and afraid; and
so must all the elect children of God use the judgments of God, to continue
them in the fear of God, and to keep their natures from being ouerproude: Yea
let us tremble and quake as the earth does, let us weep and mourn as the air
does, when we see the wrath of God; the sun cannot then show her face, she
is so dazeled with his brightness, how shall men far inferior to her in
glory, be careless of his anger? And although I have said, that we are but
yet leading unto execution, let us yet fear most grievously least the wrath of
God be increased on us; for we know not how soon we shall be consumed, with
what calamities we shall be troubled, and with what manner of death we shall be
crucified. Therefore let us fear the works of God, that we need not feel
them; let us be warned by them, that we be not confounded by them; and above
all things, let us cast away that prophanenes that calls for heaven and earth
to take vengeance on us. Secondly, we may observe in 2
this verse, when he says, thus says the Lord: that if the Lord work not
repentance in us we shall never have it while the world stands: we may weep
out our eyes, rip up our breasts, rend asunder our hearts, and satisfy for our
injuries; but if the Lord work not repentance in us, then all is lost. For
this cause 2. Tim. 2. 25. Paul instructs him with meekenes, to instruct those
which were contrary minded, waiting if at any time God would give them
repentance unto life. Indeed I grant that men may have a kind of repentance
as Judas had, Matt. 27. 6. when he saw Christ condemned, he repented, and
went and hung up himself; but to have repentance unto life, Act. 11. 18. as
the church speaks, it is a special and worthy work of God. And in these
days may this point be very profitably urged, wherein men are so careless in
living, and so wretched in sinning, as if repentance were pinned on their
sleeves, or lay in their pockets to pull out and in at their pleasure: but let
them beware and be warned, that if they will be saved, they must seek it at the
hands of God. Is repentance so easy, that you can have it at your wish?
indeed you may have it, but you cannot do it. Imagine in thy presence a man
or woman possessed with a devil; try thy cunning, and cast him forth. I know
your answer; you will say you cannot, because you can work no miracles: and so
agame say I, that you cannot have repentance of your selves; for it is a
casting of the devil out of your souls, the which none can do but by the finger
of God. Repentance is not to wring out a tear, or to breath out a sigh, or to
lift up an ey unto heaven, or to say, I am sorry for my sins; but it must fill
all a man's life with weeping, and sighing, and praying, and confessing, and
amending, the which comes from God only. The first reason of this doctrine
is, because with repentance goes remission of Reason 1.
sins, Act. 5. 31. and therefore we may as well say, that they can pardon their
own sins, as they say they can repent when they list. And this must needs
mightily discourage us from sinning, seeing we may commit that in one minute,
which we can never claw off so long as we live. Again, how sweet is this
consideration, that remission of sins is joined with repentance. We know what
great and vile sins we have committed; but we know not will some say, how,
or when they were pardoned. Unto whom I answer, that they have been so long
pardoned as they have repented: and they have as many witnesses and seals of
their remission, as they have weeping tears, sighing sobs, and wounded
affections for them in the presence of God. Another reason is, as it is the
work of God to harden men's hearts, John. 12. 40. so it 2
must needs be the work of God to soften the heart: But some will say, how can
the Lord punish men for not repenting, when he denies them repentance? and how
can he damn them for hard hearts, when he has hardened them? I answer, an
hard heart and an ill life do not simply condemn a man, but delight in them
and negligence to be delivered from them: good men are tormented with
hardness of heart, but they lament it; evil men are perplexed with it, and
they rejoice in it. God is said to make hard hearts, but not evil hearts, and
so to make hard hearts, that men may know and acknowledge, that soft hearts come
from his workehouse; so then, God hardens, but men delight in it, and they
are condemned not for sin, but for delight in sin. Would thou then know
whether thy heart has been new wrought in the Lords moulde? then look and
see how thou love sin: but thou find thy heart hard; then look again
how thou art pleased with this hardness; if thou like it, thy heart is damnable,
but if thou loath it, thy state is tolerable. The first use we are Use 1
to make of this doctrine is this, seeing the Lord has the working of
repentance in us, then let us pray every day to his majesty for the same,
Lament. 5. 21. So do the faithful when they say, Turn us unto thee O Lord,
and we shall be turned, return us as of old. This is the duty of all those
that have any care of their souls health. Art thou heavy in thy heart, and
feel a dulnes in thy soul unto goodness, but a nimblenes unto evil? when
thou know thou do those things which displease the Lord, and trouble thy
conscience, then enter into thy soul and humble thy self by prayer, lift up
thy voice to heaven, and speak for thy conversion. See thou not the danger
of life worse then death, so long as thou live in an unrepentant state? there
is but a little air twixt thee and death, there is but a little time twixt
thee and hell. Repentance is the Lords gift, and he gives it to them that
ask it. I dare be bold to say, that of all suites commenced before God, this
was never denied: and if thou have any mind to be saved, pray that thou
may be converted. Art thou dissolute in life, and resolute in vanity, yet
hearing some sermons of death, and fearing some judgments for thy sins,
would willingly wish that thou could do better? and do thou sometime
wring out tears to see the preacher so earnest, and yet by no means thou
can reform thy life? then commune with thy soul, and pray to the Lord,
that thou may so live as he has taught, and so die as thou shall wish.
Pray I say, not only in company, but secretly, not for a season, but
continually, not with an indifferent mind, but with an earnest affection; and
then I assure thee, drunkenness shall not drown thee, covetousness shall not
prevail with thee, pride shall not deface thee, whoredom shall not undo thee,
stealing shall not shame thee, the world shall not deceive thee, nor the flesh
shall ever condemn thee. Another use is this, seeing we must ask repentance
of God, we must needs know our sins before 2
we can repent them, Ierem, 3. 13. So then, if thou would pray most
earnestly for thy conversion, and bring all thy evidence into the Lords sight
that he might pronounce sentence on thy side, thou must not come with general
words and say, I am a sinner as other men are, I have lived sinfully as my
neighbors have done, and I know I have offended thy majesty grievously: But
thou must know thy sins, thou must account them to know the number so near
as thou can possible; thou must weigh them uprightly, and fee which were
directly against God, and which were against thy neighbor; thou must aggrauate
them mightily, and make them as heinous as the greatest; thou must condemn
thy self, open thy whole soul, and abhor thy own life. Then shall thou know
thy sins, that their number is infinite, their reward is damnation, that
their power is execrable, that their presence is intolerable: Tell them as a
couetousma^ does his silver; look on them as the husbandman does his furrowe,
consider them as the carrier does his load, condemn them as the judge does
the thief, pray against them as a mariner against a storm, fight against
them as a soldier against an enemy, accuse them as a lawyer does his
adversary, and forsake them as a lamb does a lion. Then shall thou know that
one sin is worth a soul, that one drop of mercy is worth a world, and that
true repentance has wings to bear thee up to heaven. If the preacher tell
thee thy sins, then know them; if the law tell thee them, then remember
them; if thy conscience accuse them, then repent them; if thy brother rebuke
them, then ever after love him; if the church reprove, then yield unto it;
and if thy enemy cast them at thee, yet receive it, for this will make thee
know them: and if thou know them, thou will pray against them; and if thou
pray against them, thou will repent them. Turn you unto me. By this sentence
we may observe that God never regards any of our sufferings or crosses till
we be repentant: Or more plainly, be it that our houses are burned, our
children murdered, our inheritances removed, and our own lives tormented;
yet all this does not appease his wrath except we add contrition, the which
thing the prophet insinuates when he makes this conclusion upon all the
former judgments; Therefore now says the Lord, turn unto me, etc. As if
he had used more words saying: you O people have had your land wasted with
beasts, your lives pined with famine, your cattle mourning for food, the
heavens obscured with darkness, God regards no sorrow but repentance.
the earth quaking to trouble you, and terrible thunders roaring to disquiet
you; yet for all this is not the Lord contented with you, except you be
repentant. The selfsame thing may we see Esaias 57, 3, 4, 5. where the Lord
tells them that it was not their fasting and sorrows that he regarded, but
their unfeigned conversion. As a father having an evil son is not pleased
with him because he is whipped openly in the streets, or imprisoned, and so
arraigned for his folly, except he be repentant: even so is it with the
Lord, he regards not the punishment (says Augustine) but the person that
suffers. It is not our sufferings voluntary or inuoluntarie, our sickness,
war, famine, poverty, or blood that can satisfy the Lord or save our
souls; insomuch as after thou have endured hard fits, wicked slanders,
wrongful oppressions, many hungry days, many sharp stripes, and many
dangers of death: yet for all this without the ornaments of a christian, thou
are never the nearer to God. Some will say this is hard meat to be digested,
that the Lord is not pleased nor pacified although he punish us: why? are not
all these sufferinges the punishments of sin? and when we are punished
here, is not the Lord too rigorous to punish us also hereafter? I answer,
we suffer for our sins, but not to satisfy for our sins: for the reward
of sin is death everlasting, and all miseries which may bring us to our end.
Therefore excuse not your selves for poverty or sickness, or famine, or labor,
or slavery, or service, or any other cross, for a man may have all this, and
yet be a cast away. The first reason hereof is, Matthew. 24. 8. That all the
sufferinges of this life are but the beginning of Reason 1.
sorrows, they are not one quarter of that vengeance which the Lord will take
for our sins except we repent. Oh, consider the intolerable hand of the
Lords wrath, which regards not our blood, nor would look on a burnt
sacrifice made of a whole nation, and yet regards the broken hearts, and cast
down souls: what are the plagues in the world to come, and the wages of sin
in another life, if here we may have a pining sickness, a despised life, an
easelesse heart, and an endless fear; one man never lies in bed, another
never eats bread, another never lives merry day, some lie tormented in a
burning fire, some bed-redden with the gout, some tormented with a collicke,
some scalded to death, some cut in pieces inchmeale, some are put into furnaces
of burning lead, and yet all these are but the beginning of sorrows and
without repentance: if it were possible for one man to endure all, yet
afterward he might go to hell fire. Another reason is, because the sufferings
of this life are alike, common to 2
good and bad, uncircumcised and the people of God, Ezec. 32. 28. Although God
chasten every one that he loves, yet he loves not every one that he
chasteneth. Christ his best beloved was crucified, and yet beloved: but Herod
was eaten with worms, and yet hated: shall we think that the estate of Herod was
any whit better in another life, because his misery was begun in this life? no
verily: no more may we extol or accuse those which live long or miserable
days in this life. Josiah a good king, of whom God pronounces that he should
be gathered to his fathers in peace, but yet he was slain in wars; and Ahab
an evil king died also in wars, was his estate the better because he ended
his life as a good man did? no, no, it had bin better for him he had never bin.
Yet despair not in thy afflictions, and presume not to advance worldly sorrow
into the place of godly sorrow, and make not thy calamities thy Christ to lift
thee up to heaven. Having learned that our Use 1.
calamities will not commend us to God, let us do as the prophet here
exhorts, Turn unto the Lord our God, Ier. 3. 1. Blood cannot pacify him,
but water can; death cannot satisfy him, yet tears can; bodily plagues will
not move him, but spiritual sorrows will; vengeance staieth him not, but
repentance will alter him: Therefore turn unto the Lord. Shall not we think
my dear brethren, that all these judgments which we for these many years
have endured, have wrought mightily in them, and on them which were taken by
them, and is there yet an end of them, either in sight or in hope? Have not
many soldiers fighting, and dying in their own blood cried alowde in the
ears of God? Have not many houses been suddenly swept away with the
pestilence? Did not the Lord see it? and if he saw it, why did he not pity
it? and if he pitied it, why did he not stay it? have not many hundreds in
the first year of famine perished most miserably for want of bread, whose
cries must needs pearse the heavens, and whose last gaspes might move him to
pity; yet it has continued some years since? Then may we see and say, if
sufferings could have satisfied the Lord, the blood of soldiers, the lives
of citizens, the cry of poor men, and the fear of all men might already long
ago have pleased him: but he will never be altered till we be altered.
Therefore now let me remember you with Joel, Turn unto me says the Lord, etc.
Alas, alas, our health is turned into sickness, our lives into death, our
plenty into famine, our peace into wars, our mirth into mourning, our store
into want, our people into perishing, and our poor are turned into their
graves; and yet we have not turned unto the Lord: oh let us turn before all
be ouerturned. Let us fill our chambers with mourning, rather then all our land
be filled with howling; let us pray for repentance; let us sue for repentance;
let us work for repentance, and bestow all that we have upon repentance, or
else vengeance will come and take all away. Another use is this, Romans 8. 18.
seeing God regards not our miseries, 2
then it follows that all our sufferings are not worthy of the life to
come. Art thou good? then despise these worldly sorrows, and hope for heavenly
joys: art thou an evil man? then repent with speed, least thy intolerable
evils be turned into intolerable woe. Would thou by pain seek
advancement? they deserve it not: would thou by pain be amended? then
pray for repentance. Oh, how are we punished in this life? nay rather how shall
we be blessed in another life? Could thou which lie in some strange
torments, be content to end thy life in sorrow, to spend thy good for ease,
or to become any base servant, that thou might be released? are thy pains
so great, so comfortless, and so continual? yet for all this be not
disquieted, be not discouraged, for anon thy joys may be far more pleasant
and continual. But why do I spend time in vain? fear thou any of those
evils which happen in the world; for thou can not but fear all: wherefore a
Father said, it is better to suffer one death, and so to die, then by living to
fear all manner of deaths. Then I say, consider with thy self whether is
greater, thy sorrows, or thy comforts, thy body or the heavens, thy
sufferings, or the joys of the world to come; there shall famine be banished,
wars shall be conquered, sickness shall be cured, labor shall be ceased,
poverty be forgotten, enmity shall be cooled, pains shall be removed,
tears shall be dried up, and death it self be everlastingly destroyed:
therefore suffer much to live so, labor much to die so, and die in despite of
death to reign so. All the miseries of this life are not worthy of this
blessedness, but there is not any man living that can endure the one half of
them: therefore precious is the bounty of God, who gives us this glory for
his promise, not for our crosses, nor yet for our virtues; for our crosses are
the deserts of sins, and our virtues are imperfect goodness. Thirdly, in
these 3
words we may observe the definition of repentance, namely, that it is a
turning unto the Lord: so that, so long as we are unrepentant, so long we go
from the Lord. I might also make many words on the metaphor, turn, and not
without profit, to show you how our life is a journey, our faith the legs
whereon we walk, the scripture our guide, the church our companion, and heaven
our ways end; seeing all is done elsewhere, I will not now stand upon it.
Only in these words I will urge this, that there is no repentance, Repentance
is the conversion of the whole heart.
except the whole heart be changed; it is not in good words, nor yet in an
outward good practice, but in the motions and affections of the heart, 1. King.
8. 47, 48. for this cause our Savior bids first cleanse that which is
within, and then that which is without: As men do first cleanse the inside of
a vessel (not the outside) and then put goodness therein; so must the heart,
which is a vessel, be first cleansed, or else all is vain which the hand
does, the mouth speaks, and the mind believes. Thy memory must be turned,
thy understanding, will, and affections must be changed; thy memory, by
remembering God and his truth; thy understanding, by knowing God and his
Gospel; thy will, by believing God and his promises; and thy affections, by
loving, desiring, meditating, and rejoicing in and on heavenly things; and then
is thy whole heart converted. Some have knowledge and understanding, but no
sound faith, or sweet love; some again love, but they want knowledge: and so
some have a good will to the Gospel, but they want memory. For the amending
of all this, follow my direction: confer, and you shall have memory: read,
and you shall have knowledge: hear, and you shall have faith: pray often, and
you shall have al good affections, all which must be done before you can be
saved. The first reason hereofmay be this, because no man can have a perfect
faith, without the total Reason 1.
conversion of the heart, Romans 10. 9. and men can never live well that believe
not well, says Augustine. If thou have one part of thy heart with the Lord,
because thou know the truth, thou have another part with the world in loving
thy life; so in part thou beleeuest God, and beleeuest the devil. Can thou
brag of faith, when thy heart is distracted? loving and liking two contrary
masters: no verily, thou deceiuest thy self, thou can not love gold and
believe in God: thou can not haunt thy pleasures, and yet delight in the
Gospel: Therefore if thou would have a sound faith, thou must first have a
sound heart, convert thy heart, and then thy faith will follow: if it be
thoroughly, thou shall have a perfect faith; but if thou do it in part, then
is it but a painted body, which can neither go nor see. Another reason,
because regeneration makes 2
the heart to be one, Ierem. 32. 39. Indeed they which wander in wickedness,
have a heart and a heart; but when we come to the Lord, we must have but one
heart: for the heart is the man, wherein are treasured all kind of understanding
and knowledge: therefore it must not be half of flesh, and half of stone,
Ezech. 11. 19. but either all flesh, or all stone: for he that is in part
profane, and in part a christian, in very deed is no man. And for this cause
is hypocrisy of all sins most abominable, which makes a man no man
dissembling with God, the world and himself: with God, in his heart; with the
world, in his life; and with himself, in that he dissembleth. Of all sinners
fewest hypocrites are converted, and of all persons are they most odious; and
therefore hell is called the lake burning with fire and brimstone prepared for
hypocrites: unless then, we will live as they live, and die as they die, we
must turn our whole hearts to the Lord. The uses are these, First that we draw
Use 1.
near unto the Lord with a pure heart, Heb. 10. 22. Purity is joined with
integrity: therefore when our hearts be purest, then are they fittest for the
Lord. In old time there strait steps to our feet, least that which is
halting be turned out of the way, Heb. 12. 12. 13. we are in great danger by
prolonging our amendment to have all marred and turned out of the way:
therefore let us awake over our souls that we may save those parts which are
unsound; for there is not any man but he has some wounds and maymes in his
soul, which must be speedily cured; or else the longer they run, the more
miserable they grow. It is a lamentable thing to see men to defer their
conversion, saying one year they will do it next year, and the next season
they will plowe their hearts, and sow it with the word. It is also a thing
dangerous to lodge but one night in a known sin, and therefore as the
Apostle said of anger, so we must of every other transgression, Let not the
Sun go down thereon. Make speed I beseech you to amend your lives, to
reclaim your hearts, to forsake your vanities, to renounce your errors, and
to put away your pleasures: for if your heart delight in any thing beside God,
it denies God; if it keep her natural corruption, and cast it not forth, it
blasphemeth God; if it delay to return, it abuses his mercy, it despises
his grace, and condemns it self. Say not says Solomon, I will give thee to
morrow, when thou may to day. The whole time of this life is a time of
repentance, and therefore look how much thereof we spend not in repentance,
so much we shall want to do it in, which must every day make us nearer to the
Lord, or nearer to hell.

The xx. Sermon.
Having handled the exhortation unto repentance, now let us proceed to the
manner thereof; With weepings, fastings, and mournings: the which Outward
signs with inward repentance.
words require a several treatise. And first, in that they are commanded to
weep, we may observe, that with inward repentance, there must be joined
outward signs thereof, and in occasion of greater and more forcible feeling
of our sins, we shall wring out sorrows more abundantly. This thing is
taught by the prophet Hos. 14. 3, 4. where having exhorted the Israelites to a
new life, he bids them to take the words of repentance, and to make a
public profession thereof. Peter repented, and it was with tears, for the
Scripture says, he wept bitterly. The self same thing do good men find in
themselves at this day: for as where the body is wounded, there issues forth
some blood; so where repentance has wounded the soul, there will follow some
blood, I mean the tears thereof. Carnal men think they have repented, if
they say (God forgive me, or I am sorry for it) although afterward they live
never so lewdly. Look upon thy life and see what gutters the tears have made
in thy face, which have distilled from thy eyes for thy sins: look also upon
the sacrifices of thy lips, how lamentable thy prayers have been before the
Lord: account with thy self where and when thou did offer them; for without
prayer thou could never be converted. It may be thou have not wept, by
reason of some natural infirmity; but it must be, that thou have prayed, or
else it cannot be that thou have repented: Therefore let not any man deceive
himself, and think that he has repented, till his life be turned from the
world, his mind from pleasure, his face from joy, and his body from desire
of sinning. The first reason hereof may be this, because Reason 1.
the Lord has redeemed us, Isa. 44. 22. that is, as the Lord has showed open
tokens of his favor toward us: so we must show open tokens of our repentance
toward him. The which reason well considered will teach us that there ought to
be as great love in us for our salvation, as was in Christ for our redemption:
He cared not for his life that he might save us, why then should we care for
our own lives, and spare our sins? he shed his blood, and we sent our
follies: he gave himself for our sins, and yet we will not let him have
them. There is none that is ignorant of this, except he had repented, he must
have perished: and therefore if thou repent not, thou must be damned. The Lord
has not been careful for thy soul that thou should be secure, but his
love must be a pattern for thee to love thy self. All that he did was for thy
soul, he was reproched, he was empouerished, he was condemned, and crucified
for it; that thou might endure all shame to repent them, all poverty to
prevent them, all injuries to lament them, and all deaths to mortify them. He
walked many miles, watched many nights, fasted many days, and endured many
afflictions, that thou might labor much, watch carefully, abstain
continually, and endure all sorrows to put away thy sins. Another reason,
because unto outward tokens of repentance the Lord is ready 2
to give remission, Dan. 4. 23. when men satisfy their for injuries,
distribute their goods, weep for their evils, and pray for pardon, then is the
Lord most willing to seal a release in the blood of his son. For in truth
there must be a change in all the parts of a man's life and possessions. When a
sick man is recovered, he wears not the same clothes, he uses not his old
diet or apparel and rest: so when our souls are recovered by repentance; then
we cannot eat stolen bread, nor wear gorgeous apparel, nor *yet rest in that
wealth which we unlawfully gained, but all must be turned into charity and
piety. The first use of this doctrine is this, Isa. 31. 6. seeing we have
sunk Use 1.
deep in rebellion, let us turn again unto the Lord from whom we are
fallen: as we were not ashamed to sin, so let us not be ashamed to be
converted. As covetous men care not for their names, so they may get wealth;
and unclean persons little esteem their infamy, so they may fulfill their
lusts; and as thieves make but a pastime to rob and steal, if they may escape
the gallows: so let us account it a far less discredit to confess our
faults in goodness, then they do to commit them in wickedness. Turn
therefore as we have sinned: we have many sins, let us shed many tears; we
have great sins, let us sigh many sorrows; we have long dwelt in them, let
us speedily forsake them; we have watched in sin, now let us watch in prayer;
we have loved sin, let us embrace correction; we have delighted in vanities,
let us rejoice in tears. How can a man rejoice in tears? verily unto a good
soul tears are more welcome then joys, and it reioiceth in tribulation,
finding it more safe to be washed with weeping, then to be delighted in
music. There is not any man that has felt the power of godliness, that will
deny this; and if he do, let David teach him, when he protests that tears
were his repast, when the enemies of God reproched him. Look on thy soul
weeping, as thou wast wont to behold thy pleasure reioicing, and think that
this is the Lords great mercy toward thee, which has yet knocked at thy
heart for amendment; love the means which will make thee tender hearted; delight
in those sorrows which will procure thy endless joys; shed thy tears here,
that hereafter thou may be freed; lament in sorrows this life, that in
another thou may rejoice in comforts. Secondly, let us not always lie in
sorrows, and 2
live unreformed, but follow the counsel of the prophet, Ier. 26. 13. to make
our ways of evil good. When men are repentant, they enter into a new journey*
for as before they were joyfully sailing to hell, so now they are painfully
traveling to heaven: and seeing a good way is the wish of a traveler, let us
amend our ways, that we may hasten to our iourneyes end. When thou have well
drenched thy soul in sorrows, then proceed to reformation, and remove those
blocks out of thy life, which would have hindered thy passage into heaven. If
thou have been a drunkard, be now temperate; have thou been an Atheist? now
fear God; if thou have been a swearer? use his name more reverently: and as
Paul said of thieves, Let him that stole, steal no more; so say I of all
notorious sinners, let them be so no more, but rather labor to do good unto
other. By this we may see that repentance is not in show, but in heart; not in
heart, but in works; not in works, but in affections; not in affections, but in
conversation. Some think they have well repented, if they be a little
sorrowful; other think they are well reformed, if they be a little reclaimed,
and weary of theirvanities: but these men must know, that if good lives be
not joined with godly minds, and reformed ways with weeping hearts, neither
the one nor the other shall profit them. Therefore now my dear brethren, let
us win the field from our sins, and overthrow the troops of our pleasures;
let us now conquer our desires, and reform all the abuses of our lives, that
we may yield to the gospel, live in the church, eat at the Lords table, and
work out our own salvation with fear and trembling.

In the second place the Lord bids them to fast, that is, to abstain from
all delights and desire of meats, that 2
as they have already pined their souls with sinning; so now they should
punish their bodies with fasting. And in In great calamities we must fast
privately.
this place the prophet speaks of private fasting: for as yet he is not come
to the public fasts, which must be directed by the cleargie-men, who only had
authority to proclaim them: of the which we have spoken in the first chapter.
In this place we may observe, that heinous offenses and general, must have
grievous and general lamentation. It is most requisite, that when we have any
graund cause to crave at the Lords hand, we use most humble tokens of an
instant and longing desire, Judge. 20. 26. The Israelites overcome by the
Beniamites, fast and pray all the day till evening, and the day following they
get the victory, the which is a warrant for us to do the like, that we may
so slay our sins, as they did their enemies. The which must instruct every
man in his family, during these times of vengeance, (wherein we have no more
power to be delivered, then a woman in travel to cast forth her child) that
they abstain from glutting and devouring the Lords benefits: For the Lord
will not redress our want, till we have generally lamented our misery: and
we can no way better punish our bodies then by fasting, that the Lord may be
moved to pity us, as he did Abraham, being willing to sacrifice his son,
yet he restrained him. The first reason is this, because fasting makes us
pray with more Reason 1.
feeling affection, which our Savior insinuated, Matthew. 17. 21. when he said
that fasting and prayer would heal the falling evil, and nothing else.
Indeed, to show you how men are affected in the time of their fasting, I can
hardly do it except youfelt it: how sweet are their sorrows, how earnest
are their prayers, how strong are their groans, and how acceptable are their
hearts unto the Lord: their tears are their drink, their cares are their
meat, their nakedness their bravery, ashes their beauty, humility their
health: their eyes are not drouzie, their minds are not weary, their hands
are not filthy, and their cries are not easy. The Lord accepts their
obedience, in doing that they are not able; and their faith, in believing that
they have not in them; and their prayers, in desiring that which is above them:
then can men affoorde to die for God, that they may live for ever for
themselves. Another reason is, because fastes do mightily move the 2
Lord, and bless the mourners, Ezra 8. 23. There was never any man that was
thus humbled, and was not comforted: We our selves have had the trial hereof
not long ago, that great matters have bin by this means effected: And surely,
if it were more orderly practiced, neither should the Lords cause be so
coldly professed, nor our lives so fearfully plagued. Oh, this fulness of bread
has wrought all manner of mischief among us; it makes men's lives licentious,
their manners monstrous, their minds wicked, and their names odious: The
tauernes are fuller then the churches, the pantries better furnished then the
chapples; the markets more adorned then any place is with religion; men forget
not the shambles, but their maker; and a steward or purueior, or cater, is
more thought upon then the minister. The first use hereof is this, that when
the Use 1.
Lord is about to punish us, we can never be humbled sufficiently, no though
we lay open our sins, setting our lives to shame, our health to sickness,
our friends to hatred, our wealth to poverty, or our brute beasts to mourn
with us, Ion. 3. 8. How will thou now humble thy self to show thy penitent
heart? when thou see that all means to increase thy sorrow are little
enough. Do not think that this is sufficient humility to come into the
Lords house, and there to uncover thy head, and so sit down, rather as a
judge of repentance then a dooer of repentance, or falling down on thy knee,
speaking a few cold prayers, or rather with a lukewarm desire, do thou
rest therewithal contented, but God is not contented with it: nay rather
uncover thy heart with thy head, and let thy mind fall down as low as thy
knee. Strange is it to see, that men are not half so humble to God as they be
to their superiors. If I might teach thee to live penitently, I would tell
thee that thy life must be filled with fear, thy heart with sorrow, thy
labors with grief, thy comforts with mourning, and thy mind must ever be
considering the Lords presence. Thou must suspect thy meat, least thou
delight too much in it; thou must fear thy expenses, least thou offend
charity; thou must doubt of thy actions, least they prove hurtful; thou must
hinder thy natural affection, least it exceed measure; and look that thy
marriage-loue be not too much, least you be both endangered; thy labor must
not be continual, thy sleep must not be too ordinary; thy talk must not be
too merry, neither may thou think thy self holy. Let the word be as a
cock to awak thee; let prayer be as darkness to hinder thee; let the cogitation
of thy sins be as sorrowful news in thy ears to trouble thee; and then
let wisdom rule in thy worldly actions. A second use is this, that 2
if we account our selves of the Lords bride-chamber, let us fast when time and
occasion calls us thereunto, Mat. 9. 15. for if we fast not, either we are no
children, or no obedient children: If Vrijah would not rest in his bed nor in
his house, till Ioab and the Lords hosts were at rest; then let us my beloved
(except we be worse then Hittites) fast in want, and not rest in trouble in
these dangerous times, wherein there has not bin a creature of God but it
cries, nor a child of God but he weepeth. I am afraid to say, that the
bridegroom is taken from us, although I am assured we have deserved it, and
good men suspect it. We have as yet more practice of joy then of sorrow,
although we have more cause to weep then to rejoice: and thus we are merry in
our woe, and sorry in our joy. Alas, alas, hard hearted men (if men, or rather
unreasonable beasts) which gather the wood, and blow the fire to burn
themselves withal. All time is become too little for pleasure, and no time is
little enough for holiness: all costs go to the kitchen, none to religion; so
much eating and drinking, and so little fasting and praying, must needs drown
up that little goodness that men had gained by living among christians, and til
men can leave their meat to serve the Lord, they can never leave their sins to
save their souls. Fast I beseech you, great men in their palaces, rich men in
their houses, and poor men in their cottages: men with their servants, women
with their maids, and parents with their children; for this kind of evil
will not be cast out but by prayer and fasting. The third 3
circumstance of their repentance is mourning, whereby the Prophet teaches us
that a sorrowful spirit does accompany a penitent heart, 2. Corint. 9. 10.
for this cause Paul tells us that godly sorrow works repentance not to be
repented of, and Solomon, 1. King. 8. 35. calls repentance the tribulation of
the spirit. Men in our days wonder at this tribulation, because it is so
seldom: for in deed if it were common, then it would cease to be a wonder;
but yet it is a greater wonder, that we have repentance so much preached, and
so little practiced. But seeing repentance brings so much sorrow with it, it
may notably comfort those which are distressed in mind, living in torments of
conscience for the burden of sin: surely happy is their estate which are
corrected with this rod, whereby they are freed from sin, delivered from
wrath, and reconciled to God. The medicine that works most forcibly causes
greatest pain, and speediest remedy; in like manner those saving wounds of
Christ, do then most sweetly wipe away our sins, when our minds are most
roughly gawled with a pricking conscience. And therefore they cannot be said
to have repented, which affect nothing but pleasure, and never in their life
wept one tear for their sins, or prayed secretly for the distemper of their
minds. This is a grounded and infallible rule, Without repentance there is no
salvation; without sorrow there is no repentance; without earnest prayer there
is no godly sorrow; and without feeling of the Lords wrath, there is no prayer
that pearseth the sky, or moves the Lord. The first reason of this doctrine
is this, because there is no coming Reason 1.
to our Savior till we be oppressed, Matt. 11. 28. Christ calls not merry
hearts, or those that love pleasure and mirth; for this suiteth not with
contrition: but then is our way open to our Savior, when our hearts are as
heavy as lead, and our affections like the voices of mourning women. And thus
the Lord tempereth our estate, that when we are lost in ourselves, he finds
us; when we are weak, he strengthens us; and when we are castawaies, he
receives us. Oh how happy are our oppressions which drive us to God, as the
shipwreck drove Paul and his companions into Melitum: where by that means
many souls were won to God. Harken my dear brother, do thou sorrow that
it is thy hap to endure grief? nay rejoice in thy sorrow, that brings thee
to Christ. Sorrow is a guide to lead thee; a broom to sweep thy passage,
that nothing hinder thee: it is the key that opens the gate of Christ's
mercy, and a sure friend to sue out thy pardon. Another reason is, because
Christ will not come but to such 2
spirits, Luc. 19. 10. so that if thou would go up to Christ, thy sorrow
will lend thee wings; if thou would have Christ to descend to thee, thy
sorrow will persuade him: Christ is the physician of the mind, and he will
not come till thy mind be sick. As in winter the most rain falls; so in
distress of conscience most comforts come down: this doctrine brings great
joy of glad tidings which shall be to all hearts, where godly sorrow dwells.
But let us not Use 1.
always lament these sorrows, or rest in the graves of our easelesse cares; but
let our prayers be multiplied as our dangers are increased, so do the godly
Hos. 6. 1. Fly therefore to the Lord when thou feel any smart in thy soul;
and let not musical delights or pleasant companions entise with conceits to
banish this grief; but let thy grief be thy meat and drink, and the means
to stir thee up to prayer. It is to be feared, that many have been either
utterly condemned, or desperately endangered by using worldly medicines for
these heavenly sores: for so soon as their hearts wax heavy by reason of
their sin, they call for worldly delights, which either drive them to
desperation, or harden them to condemnation. Drink is good to the thirsty,
but it is dangerous to them that are sick of burning feauers; in like sort
unto them that have eaten poison: so mirth is good, but use it not to drive
away godly sorrow, but abide it patiently with prayer and fasting. As thou
see thy sins, so let the Lord hear thy prayers; and as thy grief for them
is increased, so let thy cries against them be multiplied. Think whom thou
have offended, wherewithal thou art grieved, and how thou can be pacified.
If thou be rich, let thy closet be thy sanctuary; if thou be poor, let the
woods and secret places be thy temple; if thou have little knowledge, resort to
them that have more; if thou be heavy and feel no comfort, yet pray still,
and give not over; for the end shall be blessed, although the beginning be
desolate. Again, as Hoseah Use 2.
teaches chap. 14. 5. let us in our mourning take with us the hope of pardon;
or else a Christian soul should have no more feeling then a desperate wretch:
for we may lawfully persuade our selves, how sharp soever we feel our pangs
and soule-fits, yet there is never taken from us the hope of pardon; yea, if
faith be not utterly covered, we may be bold to assure ourselves of
victory. What then? how if hope and faith be buried, and we yield unto death,
denying the sweet promises of Christ; is not this desperation? no verily: for
as there may be life in the body, although men cannot perceive it; so there
may be in the soul, although none discern it: for although David said, This
is my death; yet he recovered both life and peace of conscience. Therefore a
contrite spirit is always regarded of God; and if he evermore love it in other,
he does also like it in thee. Be patient, the same hand which made the wound
shall heal the grief; and if thou feel a decay of grace, stir up thy self
more earnestly by calling on God, and hold fast till the Lord come: Receive
good comfort in the midst of thy sorrows, as a watchman espying the dawning
long before it be light; although it be bitter in thy mouth, it shall be
sweet after digestion, (and say) I will abide the Lords leisure, I will drink
his potion; it is a cup, but not of deadly wine; I will receive it for the
purgation of my sin, although it make me sick.

The xxj. Sermon.
Verse. 13. And rent your hearts and not your garments, and turn to the Lord
your God: for he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great
kindness, and repents him of the evil.
THese words are another part of the Prophets exhortation unto repentance,
wherein he notes the greatest measure of Repentance, under this metaphor,
Rent your hearts. Meaning the most extreme and comfortless pains in the action
thereof: not that indeed men should rip up their breasts, and rend in twain
their hearts; no more then when our Savior bids us cut off the arm, or
pluck out the eye that offends us, we should dismember our bodies for every
fall or oversight: But by the rending of the hearts, we are taught that the
pains of true repentance, exceed all other pains (death The pains of true
repentance exceeds the pains of the flesh.
excepted) neither whipping of the body as the Jesuits do, nor launcing it
with knives as the priests of Baal did, or pricking it with bodkins, or
sickness, or famine, or travail, are comparable to repentance: for these may
be quickly eased by man, but the other cannot be redressed but by God. Upon
this the godly Israelites pray, Judge. 10. 15. that God would deliver them
(meaning from the terrors of their sin) and lay whatsoever pleased him upon
them besides. The insufferable wounds of a tormented mind are the only pains
which are like to the pains of hell; so that neither brimstone nor fire
comes any thing so near unto it as this does. Whereupon it was said, that good
men have their hell in this life; meaning that the pains of repentance are so
smart unto them, that it differs many times very little from the plagues of
the other life. Now (I beseech you) that are godly, that have long rested in
this restles harbor, to acknowledge with me the truth hereof: and you that
have persuaded your selves, that not only tears; but easy sighing groans do
go for payment of your sins: Learn of me this one lesson, that your minds
must be more perplexed, and your hearts more inwardly vexed; not only for a
day, but for a longer time, yea, peradventure a whole life, that you may sing
with all the godly, The pains of hell came about me. The first reason, because
Reason 1.
that repentance is the dressing of the souls wound: so that as the soul is
more dangerous than the body; so the wound therein must needs be more
painful, then a wound in the flesh: And for this cause are the ministers
charged with the souls of men, Heb. 13. 17. because they dress not their
wounds, and show not their sins that lie secret in their souls. The which
account is now a days little regarded of many ministers', and less of many
people: one cares not for their sin, and the other regards not their
soul; but the more they be, the more is the pity, or rather the more shall be
their judgment: Neither let us be amazed to hear of these unspeakable gripes
of mind, for they cry continually in the ears of God for mercy, as a wound
calls for a salve. Another reason, because in repentance men feel the wrath
of God against sin, which 2
they do not in other corporal plagues, Psalm. 74. 1. The wrath of God made
our Savior to sweat water and blood, which coming upon men, although they
cannot sweat as he did, because they cannot resist as he did; yet they feel
in themselves such terrible horrors, as amaze the strong, and confound the
weak: From hence it comes that some in this extremity, think that all that
they do is for their condemnation, their meat, drink, apparel, health, and
liberty, are unto many weak minds tokens of the Lords wrath. Indeed they
which are burned with this iron, think that every house will ouerwhelme them,
and every leaf that falls on the ground will hurt them; the noise of any
thing does trouble them, and a sharp word almost kills them. Terrible is a
life lead under such conflicts; for every hour threatens a thousand deaths:
the heart ever accuses; the memory witnesses against it self; his own
reason condemns him; and his continual fear is his cruel tormentor. The
first use. Let us not be discouraged in these woeful torments; but take
example by our Use 1.
Savior Christ, who for the glory that was set before him most patiently
endured the greatest cross. A hell thou must needs have, thou can not eschew
it: therefore choose it in this world, where thou shall find mercy with God,
comfort in his word, and solace in his church; in the world to come thou shall
have none of these. Make here thy apprentiship unto sorrows, where thy friends
may accompany thee, thy prayers may quiet thee, and thy joys may recompense
thee. Why? art thou afraid that thou can not abide such pains; then look
unto God the author and finisher of thy faith. Art thou in doubt to suffer
shippewracke and despair? then know that GOD tempts none beyond their
power? Are thy friends against thee? yet the Angels are with thee. Love
thou not sorrows? then shall thou never gain joys: if thou would have
learning, thou must endure the rod; if thou will have gold, thou must cross
the seas; if thou will be famous, thou must take much pains; and if thou will
have heaven, thou must win it by repentance. Art thou yet afraid of thy
self, and can not willingly undergo it? set before thee the pains of this
life, and the plagues of the other life: these are temporal, those are
eternal; these are sufferable, those are intolerable; these are among men,
those among devils; these come of love, those of wrath: and to conclude, God
shall mittigate these, but he will augment and aggrauate them. How can thou
avoid death? no more can thou avoid hell: If thou would never die, thou
must never be borne; and if thou would never repent, thou must never live.
Let repentance be thy purgatory; sins, thy pains; sorrows thy tormentors,
and say with Elijah, Pour on more water, that God may the more be glorified
in thy salvation. The second use, is the same that David makes Psalm. 31. 2
23. after he had told of this great extremity, and how the Lord did set
him at liberty, he calls upon all the godly saying, Love ye the Lord, ye
his saints: for he preserves the faithful, and rewards abundantly the evil
dooers. Hearken unto this you sorrowful doves of the Lord: your cause is not
wicked, your case is not desperate, and your hope shall not be frustrate: for
the Lord will deliver you. Is it not as easy for him to free you from sin,
as from hell; and from sorrow, as from damnation? Yes verily, and therefore
love the Lord if you be his saints. Love him I say, and he shall love you;
nay, he loved you first, and therefore love him again: He loves you, for
he looks still upon you; and do you love him by looking still unto him; he
loves you and watches for your safety; do you love him and watch in his
praises. Which of us living that were born in his church, cannot say that the
Lord has wrought wonders for his anointed? Tell thy soul what the Lord has
done for it; how he cast out the devil, and planted his spirit; how he
freede it from wrath, and gave it grace; how he gained it from vengeance, and
gave it repentance: Repentance I say, with waterie eyes, lean body,
mournful mind, and miserable wounded heart; and now for all this, thou
live in greater peace. Therefore love ye the Lord ye his saints: love him
as your husband, you are his wife; love him as your father, you are his
children: love him as your God, you are his creatures; and love him as your
life, you are his offspring. Labor for him you love, pray to him you love,
think upon him you love, rejoice in him you love; and then die to live with
him you love: think it long till you see him; think it little that you give
him; count it woe to forsake him; and count it blessedness to love him. After
he had told them what they should do, now he tells them what they 2
should not do, namely, Not cut their garments. Wherein he rebukes the
folly reigning in their, and our times, when they used to rent their clothes:
what cares the Lord for a new garment, agaie cloak, or a costly pearl: All
these shall perish, but he endures for ever. And therefore rent not your
garments only: not meaning it to be unlawful to show an outward token of
sorrow, but he blames curiosity and hypocrisy without inward sincerity;
such as was in the high priest when he heard Christ say he was the son of
God, he rent his garments. From hence we may gather, that outward holiness is
abominable: Outward holiness abominable.
All such religion as is only for fashion, praying, and receiving the
Sacraments, hearing of sermons, and such like for mere show and company,
Esaias 57. 3, 4. And if it be lawful to say that men are only ciphers in
religion, when they know little or nothing, and practice evil; then may we
say that there are more ciphers then figures in our days. You shall know
them, because they come but now and then to church, where they fetch many a
fained sigh, and speak many ignorant Amen: thinking that the worship of the
Sabbath lies in putting on their best apparel; and yet simple souls, they
are persuaded they be as good christians as can be of flesh and blood, and so
they be as Christ's disciples were, when he said unto them, O ye of little
faith, how long shall I be with you, how long shall I suffer you? and so we
may say to them, how long shall this simplicity be called christianity?
and how long shall faith give place to opinion? and how long shall every
base person extol vain profession against true Religion? Oh, I would they
could be brought unto us, that we might cast out this devil from them. The
reasons of this doctrine are these: because the Lord Reason 1.
trying the secret disposition of every heart, pronounces, that he is weary of
such fained worship, and that his soul abhors it, Isai. 12. 13. what a
matter is this? that our knee-praiers, our lip-labours, our
Easter-communicants, our time-seruing hearers, and all of that brood, whose
devotion is as hot as Jacobs stone, should weary the Lord with their vain
petitions, their idle presence, their outward reverence, and their temporal
obedience, that he abhors both them and theirs. Whose tongue shall persuade
them of the truth hereof; verily if the prophet Isay should come from the
immediate presence of God, with his tongue purified by a Seraphim; yet they
would no more believe him then they do us, except they feel the smart of
their idleness. Another reason, because God does not regard 2
temporal sorrow for sin, as we may see in Esau and Ahab; and therefore
much less that service which is but temporal, and outward also. And although
Ahab was spared for his fained repentance, yet it was but respited, and the
judgment came notwithstanding: whereby we may see how unwilling is our
merciful father to take vengeance of our sins, if there appear in us any
small sparkles of grace, or any remorse for punishment. Let us therefore learn
that no visor can deceive God, and that there is no halting before him: it is
not our lifted up eyes, our knocking of breasts, our sighing, our whipping,
our launcing, fasting and pining that can satisfy the Lords expectation, or
minister any comfort unto us at the day of judgment. Let us learn from hence
that exhortation Use 1.
of the Apostle, Gal.. 6. 7. that we be not deceived. The maine point of
religion is this, that we be assured of life everlasting. What shall we be,
if we be deceived? if we have ghesses in steed of knowledge; wavering in
steed of constancy; weakness in steed of faith; darkness in steed of light,
and vanity in steed of divinity, what are we but deceived? If we make Christ
in our mouths, religion in our eyes, and mortification in a friday fast, or
Christianity to continue no longer then while we be in the churches: if we be
not deceived in this, then were never any deceived. We deceive our brethren
with shadows, our God with shows, and our selves with sin; we deceive our
hearts of knowledge, our lives of holiness, and our souls of meat, and life
everlasting. Oh how do men deceive themselves, and deceive other! when in the
mean season the Lord cries out, Be not deceived. What fools are men to be
so besotted with follies, making hypocrisy their heaven, Satan their God, and
counterfeite religion their souls worship. The Lord has sent strong delusion
among men that they might be damned, which received not the love of the truth:
yea it is most equal that they should be damned by falsehood, which would not
be ruled by truth. Yet let us take heed to our souls, that we deceive them
not, and mock the Lord: for the case is dangerous if we consider it, and
desperate if we fall into it. We will sing in voice, and we will sing in
spirit; even so we will repent in heart, and repent in tears: let us profess
with the mouth that we may be saved, and believe in the soul that we may be
justified. Let us also receive the exhortation of the Lord, 2
Isa. 1. chap. that we wash our selves from dissimulation, and have the evil
thereof removed from us. The filth of this sin is so odious in the eyes of
God, that until it be scowred off, there is not any thing in us that may
satisfy his wrath, or pacify his displeasure: Therefore if either the fear
of his highness, or the regard of our own souls may any way move us to
amendment, let us wash away this abominable filthiness. It is but a painted
hew, the water will purge it; it is like snow, the water will melt it; and it
resembles hoare frost which the water dissolueth: but I mean not the water of
the earth, but the blood of Christ; for that is the only medicine against
hypocrisy: Pray for it and thou shall have it, wherewithal if it be once
washed, it shall never be defiled again: Flatter not thy self, and rest not in
the show of holiness, but reform thy soul thoroughly. Of all sickness the
falling evil is the worst, for it makes one seem without life; and so of all
evil hypocrisy is the worst, for it makes men live as if there were no God:
it defaceth good things, it denies religion; for it makes it to have a
harlots face: men's lives it defiles, and men's minds it corrupts; therefore
bring not such a monster into the Lords sight, which alters all thy
proportion and lineaments, and disfigureth the glorious gifts of God. But of
this thing we have elsewhere spoken, and now it suffices to touch it lightly.
Lord your God. Now the prophet tells 3
them to whom this conversion must be made, that is to God, for whose sake
only men must repent. From hence observe, that so long as we are unrepentant,
we err and run away from God, Psalm. 119. 67. Until God called Adam, and
so wrought repentance in him, he hid himself from the sight of God; and so do
all the posterity of Adam fly from the Lord, as Jonah did, until we are
Till we turn to God, we go from God.
repentant: We abhor his Gospel, we deny his truth, we renounce all goodness:
so long as we are unregenerate, we speak evil of the things we know not, and
corrupt our selves in the things we know, Iud. 10. we eat in riot, we sleep
in pride, we walk in pleasure, and live in unthankfulness. Rich men advance
themselves above other: poor men murmur against God: young men live in open
sin, and old men die in wicked ignorance; and all because they are not
repentant: Thus men wander, some one way, and some another, and few or none the
right way. What marvel is it? to see so many abominations arise in the world,
seeing men run from the truth, that is Christ: forsake the light, that is the
spirit; and die in miserable death, because they have departed from the life,
that is God. Oh, miserable men that cast themselves into such a sea of evils!
wherein the farther they wade, the deeper they are plunged, and the longer they
go the harder they are reclaimed: and if at any time they strain at any evil,
it is not for love of God, for him they have forsaken; but it is for shame of
the world, which they fear more then death. The first Reason 1.
reason is, because of our selves we have no knowledge of salvation, neither
can we inherit the kingdom of God, Matthew. 18. 17. whereby it is evident how
little we are able to do in any good thing, but every day wax worse and
worse: And this may serve us for a notable and lamentable spectacle to behold
our vile nature which draws us the farther from God, that it might drown us
the deeper in condemnation. If we have nothing in us but good nature, there is
nothing in us of God his grace: we are not building timber, but fire wood: it
is repentance that chooses us and squareth us, and joins us to God. The Lord
in this work is the builder; the ministers are the carpenters; the word is
the axe; the grief of heart is the stroke; and regeneration makes us the
frame: otherwise we are stones refused of the builder. Another reason, because 2
in our unrepentant estate we cannot please God, Romans 8. 8. and seeing we
cannot please him, we run from him, we forsake and deny him: This would make
ones heart to melt, to consider that all actions not grounded on a new life do
swerve from God. Some object, if God did not like them, they could not do
them: So may a thief, an adulterer, or rauisher of women defend his iniquity,
but it will not go for payment: for God suffers you to follow your pleasures
against his pleasure, that your pleasures may taste of everlasting pains.
Therefore labor for repentance, that you may be brought into the Lords
sheepefold, and be incorporated into his congregation, and saved by his dearly
beloved son: then shall your ways be altered, and your pleasures ouerturned,
and you shall pray with Christ; Not our will, but thy will O heavenly father be
done. Being in an unrepentant estate we run away Use 1.
from God; yet let us look back on God, as Isay exhorts, Isa. 45. 22. and
then we shall be saved. If thou be running from God through a lewd life, giving
over thy self unto liberty, yet look back upon him often: the children of
Israel if they were stoong by serpe^ts, by looking on the brazen serpent
recovered presently: And although the sting of thy sin is greater then the
sting of adders; yet the Lord is mightier and wholesomer then the brazen
serpent: therefore look unto him if thou will be healed. Old Simeon so soon
as he had seen Christ, presently desired to die for joy: and Zacheus having
but a mind to see him, was made that day a notable christian. Look often on
the Lord, for by beholding him thou may grow in love with him: wish
continually to be with him, as the Jews which being captives in Babell, yet
made their prayers toward Jerusalem. Esau at the sight of Jacob fell to
weeping, and loved him the better ever after: so if thou will cast thy eyes to
heaven and behold his glory; and then look upon the world, and see his
government; then behold the earth, and consider his benefits; learn his
Gospel, and note his truth; and life thy eyes to Christ to mark his mercy:
thou will surely turn the sail of thy wicked life, and come with the Sabaean
Queen to worship in his church. Consider his works, for they defend thee:
think upon his judgments, for they threaten thee: mark well his kindness, for
it maintains thee: and believe his word, for it shall convert thee: cast but
one of thy eyes upon the Lord, and thou shall win him: look often upon him,
least mind and eyes be both blinded, and never see him more. Another 2
use, we must lament the plague of our sins reigning among us, Isa. 59. 9.
10. when the Prophet had showed them their danger, he brings them in mourning
on this wise: Therefore is judgment far from us, neither does justice come
near us: we wait for light, but lo it is darkness: we grope for the wall
like the blind, and grope as one without eyes: we stumble at the noone day, as
in the twilight: we are in solitary places, as dead men: we roar allike
bears, and mourn like doves, etc. Thus must men that are not yet regenerate re
count their miseries, after they hear them condemned by the word, saying unto
themselves; How blind are our eyes that we cannot see the glorious light of
the Gospel; we are quite forsaken of the Lord, who keeps us from believing
of his truth; we have no power to perform the least part of that Gospel, to
walk in any tolerable obedience, sanctification goes against the hair, and
though we like it, yet we cannot do it; we see that he that refraineth from
evil makes himself a pray: therefore let the Lord come and reform our
lives, and adorn our minds with righteousness, that we may be delivered from
this slavery of sin, let him turn the hearts of children to their fathers,
and turn our course unto himself. Moreover think what deadnes is in your
soul, what sinfulness is in your life, and what wrath of God hangs over
your heads; for assuredly except you confess in this sort, you shall be
confounded before you be converted. Let your hearts be awaked betimes, that
wrath overtake you not, and let whatsoever may further you to God, (although it
be shame or judgment, or nakedness, or poverty, or death) be most speedily
received.

The xxij. Sermon.
YOur God. After all this preaching of repentance: now he begins to
comfort their distressed minds, which could not but be grieved grieuouslie,
and therefore he puts them in mind that the Lord is their Lord and God.
How may this be? if he be theirs, then they are his: and will he suffer them
to be made a pray unto brute beasts, and to make the heavens to thunder their
destruction? what comfort have they by his service? or what pleasure has he in
their cries? very much; for sometimes a tender nurse and loving mother will
make her child weep bitterly, that it may love her the better: so the Lord
to try his own, casts them into a bed of sorrows. From hence we must
gather, that in our greatest calamity and adversity, God is our merciful
God. Artthou tormented with sorrow that it is bitter to thee In our greatest
misery we must account God very merciful
to live, and better for thee to die? or, art thou vexed with sore sickness, and
intolerable imprisonment? have thou no meat for thy self and thy tender
babes? and see thou a whole nation in an uproar? yet for all this acknowledge
with David, Psalm. 22. 1. that God is thy God although thou seem forsaken. Oh,
sweet mercy of a father, and glorious condition of a son! whom no poverty,
no misery, no iniquity can part in sunder: though he chasten us, yet he
loves us; though we be helpelesse, yet he remembers us; though we be in
death, yet he saves us. God is evermore the father of his church, and of every
member therein; he scorneth not their parentage; he refuses not their poverty;
he regards their sufferings, and desweth their salvation: Let us then say
with Job, that although he slaie us, yet we will trust in him; death shall not
drive us in sunder, but conioyne us together. The reasons are; First, because
in prosperity he will be known to maintain us, Reason 1.
and in adversity to comfort us, Esaias 51. 12. If men would or could undergo
all the former evils without comfort, then might they have some color torefuse
and distrust God, but they are not able: never is any man at one time
distressed in body, and distracted in mind; or oppressed outwardly and not
comforted inwardly. If thy mind be heavy, think on the comforts of this
life; if thy body be vexed, then confider the quietness of thy mind; if both
be grauelled together, then comfort thy self because thou live: And so thou
shall see one staff to beat thee, and another to defend thee; one cause to
punish thee, but a greater to comfort thee. Then deny not God although thy
comfort seem small, for that beggar were worthy of stripes which would rail
on a gentleman, giving him a grote which was able to give him a crown. Another
reason: God hates them that cry out against him, Ier. 12. 8. 2
Now how can we more blasphemously cry against him, then when we traitorously
deny him? for if we acknowledge not him to be ours, then we deny our selves
to be his, wherein we shake off all obedience, and spit in his face. O
consider what a thing it is to make the Lord to hate us, the world will laugh
at us, the church will defy us, the angels will not defend us, but the devil
will have us; for he watches for the Lords hatred as a raven does for a
bullockes death or the butchers slaughter day. We cannot prevail by
complaining against God, for to whom shall we appeal? therefore if we would
prevail, let us complain of our selves, that he may be justified and we
acquitted. Let us take heed that we tempt not God in our miseries, for he
will take vengeance of the sins we Use 1.
commit in adversity, Ezech. 20. 15. The Israelites being in the wilderness
without drink, having the whole world to be their enemies, their number being
great and their miseries being many; yet the Lord made their own blood to wash
away their murmuring. And let not us tempt the Lords power as they did; nor yet
lightly esteem these mercies we enjoy, being weary of patience, and grudging
at our poor estate: neither let our weak wits or sick bodies excuse our
follies; for we see the Lord will plague us with one misery after another.
Some are of this mind that they think they may be borne withal, if they go
awrie in adversity: as to lie, to swear, to steal, to be absent willingly
from sermons, because they be poor, or lame, or sick, or light-witted; but
they are far deceived, for it is not lawful to do evil, that they may be
well. If a stubborn son feeling his fathers rod shall revile him, he will
punish him the more; so God will punish us the more if we abuse him in our
adversity. Job was more blamed for his unadvised speeches in the time of his
trouble, then for all the vanities of his former life. Therefore my dear
brethren, let us be advised how we murmur against the Lord, notwithstanding our
adversity: for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that presumes on his
mercy, or despaireth of his goodness: let not our words be stout against
him, that we defy him, or too base that we should forget him. Another use: we
know the Lord does multiply our miseries, 2
to the intent that we should more earnestly seek after him, Hos. 5. 15. He
gives us the more stripes, that we should give him the more prayers: he
increases our sharp sufferings, that we should increase our bitter weepings,
and for this cause he punishes us that he might be known to be our God. What
then? will some say, has he no other means to manifest his jurisdiction, and
to challenge our lives to himself, then by laying on a load on our backs of
intolerable miseries. To whom I answer, that he has more means to work it
then any living are able to show it; but this means likes him best,
especially after men have forsaken him. It is lawful for him to crush their
bones into powder, their flesh into pieces, their blood into dung, and their
lives into death, if it please him; and most blessed is their estate that are
thus advanced by him. Now then learn if thou have tasted of the sower cup of
sorrow, to fly to God more speedily, and to entreat him more earnestly. He
hides himself, that we should seek him; he runs from us, that we should
run after him; he casts us off, that we should make account of him; he it
is that brings us into danger, that we might know he will deliver us out of
danger: We are taught by experience, we are reclaimed by correction, we are
purged by his rod, and he takes from us our delight, that we might come to
him for delights. Let us therefore go out of our selves, much more out of our
houses to seek his presence which is every where, his benefits which are
general, and our own happiness in the valley of tears, never giving over
till we have found him whom our soul loves. For he is gracious. Now we are
come to the reasons which the prophet uses, to persuade him to repentance,
which are set down in this verse and in the next: in this verse taken from the
adjuncts or properties of God; in the next, they are taken from his effects or
works. His properties are described to be these four, gracious, merciful,
long suffering, and repenting him of the evil: whereof every one has a
singular weight to persuade men to repentance. By the first he means,
plentiful in gifts; by the second, ready to forgive sinners; by the third,
waiting for their conversion by repentance; by the fourth, the changing of his
judgments threatened. So that the prophet might thus reason with them, Repent,
O ye men of Judea, for the Lord has many blessings in store, do not loose
them; he is most ready to pardon you, do not refuse it; for he has and does
tarry long for your amendment, abuse not his patience; and it may be if you
will repent, these lamentable miseries shall be all revoked. Again, can you
not repent? the Lord is gracious, he will help you with his spirit. Are you
afraid it will be in vain? noe, he is evermore entreated. Think you it is
too late? that cannot be, for he is long suffering. Fear you that your land
and lives shall be yet destroyed, his promises notwithstanding? I tell you
plainly, you shall no sooner repent of your sins, but he will change his
mind, and repent him of the evil.

By the first word, gracious, let us learn that all the spiritual 1
and temporal gifts of God do call us to repentance, Deuteronomy. 4. 33, 38, 40
Repentance being a thing so needful, as without it none can be saved, the
Lord has made as many preachers thereof, as he and all his creatures are. If
Al creatures do move us to repentance.
we look up to him, we see his grace, that puts us in mind of
repentance; if we look to his creatures, and mark for whom they were made,
that is, for us, then they overcome us; if how they were made, by the
unspeakable power of God, then they dismay us; if we consider their estate,
sometime seen, and sometime not seen, sometime pleasant, and sometime not
pleasant, sometime glorious, and anon troubled; all this will teach us to be
troubled for sin. Thou changest thy garments, then change thy life; thou
see the earth fruitful abounding with many a pleasant herb, let not thy
heart be barren, and stuffed with filthy and stinking sins. Come to the
spiritual gifts of God, and see how many preachers thou have to move thee to
repentance: it is the end of preaching, the fruit of hearing, and the motion of
prayer: the sacraments signify it; the Spirit works it; and the whole church
of God lives in it: the bishop watches for it; the doctor teaches for it;
the worker of miracles does witness it; and the poor man's box does prove
it. I cannot run over al, it is sufficient that every one do prove it, and I
would to God that any might prevail. The reason, because God would be near
unto all that call upon him, Reason
Psa. 145. 18. he will compass us about with a world of witnesses that they may
draw us to him, or else to accuse our disobedience, whom the heavens could not
win, or the earth admonish, or the church persuade, or the spirit instruct,
that all these which could not work our health, may further our death. And
seeing in every place these are manifest, in so much as we despise all warnings
of God and his creatures, it is most equal that we be pnnished with all
torments of hell fire. Seeing all things are notes unto us of the Lords Use 1.
favor, then assuredly if men will show any care to serve him, he will never
hide his face, or punish us extremely, 2. Chron. 30. 9. Oh what a comfort is
this to a troubled soul, to have all the creatures of the world to witness
the Lords favor! the birds flying, the beasts eating, the corn standing, the
grass growing, and the houses over our heads are pledges unto us of the grace
of God: Then turn thee and consider not two or three, but every one in their
kind, and thou shall find inestimable joy. Why do men complain for want of
grace? when all the world is full of grace; it pearseth the stones, it cleaves
the rocks, it shakes the trees, it quickens the beasts, and it descends
to the bottom of the earth; only the souls of men are not capable thereof.
Begin now with thy self; set these creatures as judge; arraigne thy soul as
guilty; bring forth thy guilty conscience, and wait for the sentence of
condemnation. Oh, no, save thy self from these froward inventions. Turn I
say a little, show a willing mind, bring a ready heart, pray for an ounce of
godly sorrow, and let the world and the gospel, the creatures and the spirit,
the earth and the church, the angels and the beasts increase the same; gather
thou the wood, they will blow the fire; thy care shall be augmented, as the
widows oil by Elishah, that thy debts shall be discharged, thy trouble shall
be eased, thy life shall be amended, and thy soul shall be blessed. Seeing all
the creatures of God do remember us of his grace, then let every creature be
dear and precious 2
unto us, Genesis 1. 31. as a pledge of his favor; for the Lord commends them
all to be good: And if he which wrought them do so, then much more ought we
for whose sake they were created. Let us then often meditate on the frame of
the world, the bodies of men, the proportion of beasts, and the little green
leaves shall minister unto us much instruction to reform our lives: we shall
find not one of them made for themselves, but all of them for one another, and
especially for us. Wherefore it cannot be, that we were borne for luxury,
riot, pleasure, profit, sorrow, love, joy, or hatred: no not for the
possession of our selves, but for the possession of the Lord. Consider these
things, and thou shall find all time too little not spent herein, and all joy
but vanity that is not applied to this. When thou can not hear the word,
read it; when thou can not read, then meditate on it; when thou art weary
of meditation, then turn to the creatures, and solace thy self in them, as in
a most pleasant garden of many sweet flowers; mark their diversity, in color
strange, in number infinite, in making contrary, and yet in use all one, even
for thy sake, that thou might be for the Lords glory. Mark their growth,
that thou may grow so; and their death, for thou shall die so; and their
spring, for thou shall arise in the summer of all pleasures with them in the
kingdom of heaven. Merciful. The second reason is taken from 2
the Lords mercy, and that therefore if they will repent, he will pardon.
Wherein I might tell you many things worth the learning, of the Lords
mercy, and show you by many arguments, how the scripture in many places does
express it, sometime naturally, as to men and beasts, Psalm. 36. 6. sometime to
good and bad, Mat. 5. to his church through Christ, Luc. 1. 78. and all these
he means in this place, when he says, that God is merciful, not simply
through Christ, whereby he saves his church; but also through himself,
whereby he loves al his creatures. From God his mercy must move us to
repentance.
hence observe, that the mercy of God must lead men to repentance, 1. Sam.
12. 24. The which is clean contrary to the course of the world, which take it
for a liberty of sin, and make it not a necessity to repentance: but a good
child is more afraid of a gentle and a kind father, then of a stern and
severe; and we if we be the children of God must be as much terrified from
sin with the sweet songs of Sion, as with the loud thunder claps of Sinai,
and be as subject to the Lords censure in his sweet mercies, as other in the
fearful curses of the Law. Therefore let not our time of peace, our healthie
bodies, our large possessions, our heaps of treasure, our sweet children, and
all other mercies of God, make our hearts fat; but let us use all these to awake
us from sinning, and to restrain us from offending him that defends us with
them: yea, let us weep more tears for having them, then for wanting them, that
we may enjoy the promises of this life and of the life to come. The first
reason, because they are merciful which love mercy, and therefore blessed,
Matt. 5. 7. If we would see a token of our Reason 1.
pitiful hearts, then let us think how the sweet promises of the Gospel have
pierced them. It is no wonder to see such bloody minds in Papists, because
they make small account of the Lords mercy, teaching us that men may satisfy
for their sin: and for this cause they thirst after blood for the breach of
their canons. But yet let us beware how we persuade men to rely on the mercy
of God; for they say we teach men to trust to mercy, and to live vily: but
let us exhort one another in the Lord that we walk worthy of his mercy, and
use his abundant clemency for a promptor unto repentance. Another reason,
because God is more delighted with his mercy, then with our sacrifice, 2
Hos. 6. 6. and therefore so ought we to be: sacrifice wins him, therefore
let mercy overcome us, even those mercies which we read in his word, and note
in our lives, that we may pull down more and more upon us. Oh I fear, seeing
of long time we have had so little regard of mercy, and all of judgment, now
the thing we were afraid of is come upon us, namely wrath; for we feel it in
our lives and in our times, making many men's hearts to tremble, and the bodies
of some to die: Yet for all this, the time of mercy is not all spent;
therefore let mercy draw us unto God, and the former and late received kindness
from him, be as bands of steel to keep us in obedience. Seeing the mercies
of Use 1.
God must move us to repentance; then (I beseech you) let not our ears be
deaf at his sweet promises, least the Lord complain of us, as he did of his
own time, Matthew. 11. 19. that we are like to children, neither dancing with
them that sing, nor weeping with them that mourn. Austeritie is too hard for
us, and mercy is too soft: if we preach the law, then men say we speak of
malice, of else give judgment upon them; if we show them liberty, that makes
them worse and worse; so that our times are like a thief, being in prison he
complains of cruelty, and being at liberty, runs to robbing again. The
mercy of God is much called for; and being obtained, is much abused: they make
it a charter to sin, and think if they have one pardon, all their villainy
afterward is forgiven. The deep wounds of Christ does not assuage their heat
of sin, but increases their desire. O my dear brethren, if gentleness will not
win, rigor most persuade. You are the Lords scholars, learn you must, the
rod is your tormentor, or else you shall be expelled his school. Make much of
mercy, while you may have mercy: for if the gate of mercy be shut, and the
date expired; your tears shall be drops of blood, and your wounds, as windows
for your bones to look thorough; your flesh shall feed the fowls of the
air, and your souls shall feel the torments of hell. Secondly, 2
seeing mercy must win us, let us be merciful as our heavenly father is
merciful, Luke 6. 36. which is needful to be urged in these hard times,
wherein are many poor and many complaints: for if we look to have mercy of
God when we pray unto him, let the poor find mercy in us when they cry upon
us. Be merciful as our heanenly father is merciful. His hand is ever giving;
his spirit is ever comforting; his mercy is ever pardoning, and his
liberality is ever feeding; therefore give thou to the poor, comfort the
sorrowful, forgive thy offenders, and let many hungry souls feed on thy
meat. Mercy is better then sacrifice; hotter, then coals of fire; softer,
then liquide oil; and sweeter then pleasant honey. Offer this sacrifice, kindle
this fire, touch this oil, and eat this honey: thou shall find mercy in
judgment, in thy deathbed, in thy grave, and in thy resurrection: it shall
cover thee, as a garment; comfort thee, as a guide; carry thee, as a mother;
and crown thee, as a king. God delights in it; Angels rejoice at it; men
look for it; and brute beasts love it: Therefore with mercy delight thy
creator; rejoice the Angels; and satisfy man and beast. And be merciful to
men, to beasts, and to thy self; to man, for God requires it; to beasts,
for nature craves it; and to thy self; for thy soul challenges it: the
first, is of charity; the second, of equity; and the last, of piety;
therefore practice mercy, that christian love, godly kindness, and glorious
religion, may evermore maintain thee. Of great kindness and long suffering.
This is another argument to persuade them to repentance. By the which we may
note, that God does not always take vengeance of God deferreth venge ance and
why?
sin so soon as it is committed, but winketh at it, and deferreth till we
repent or grow incurable. This thing the Apostle notes, Romans 2. 4. that God
by his bountifulness and long suffering leads us to repentance. Although for
example sake he slew Er, and Onan, and Vzzah, and Ananias, and Saphira, and
many other in the very act of sinning: yet he does not always take this course:
For four hundred years together did he bear with the abominations of
Canaan, Genesis 15. 18. Let not men think because they are not killed so soon as
they have blasphemed or denied God, or committed adultery, or profaned the
Sabbath or the like, that therefore their deeds shall go unpunished: no
verily, for the longer before they reckon, the greater shall be their account,
and the farther a man runs backwarde, the farther he leapeth forward: and
so the longer that God forbeareth our sins, the heavier shall be his stroke,
for we shall bear double blame, the one, for breaking his law; the other,
for abusing his patience. It were needful for us to consider in our souls
this singular favor of God, that we might use it as the prophet here does,
to further our repentance; for let us be well assured, if peace and long
suffering do not prepare us for God, it will anoint us for destruction. The
first reason; because God will be exalted in Reason 1.
sparing us, Esaias 36. 18. The Lord which is most excellent in all his works,
is most excellent in forbearing the malice of men; for who could endure to be
denied plainly, reviled openly, and blasphemed boldly, save only the Lord?
or who could abide to see his works reproched, his word rebuked, and his
liberality scorned, save only the Lord? who fills all in all, and bears
much with all, or else all would be confounded. But this is sufficient, that
the prophet says; he is exalted in sparing us, that is, it magnifieth his
honor, while he regards not his vengeance, nor his majesty, nor his wrath,
nor his power, but his mercy, that his chief glory might be through clemency.
Another reason; because his chief desire is, that not 2
one should perish, 1. Pet. 3. 9. So that, if men would or could lay hold
on repentance, they shall find sufficient time to amend after they have
sinned. So dear is the love of God toward us his creatures, that for his
part he omitteth not any duty to recall us: We have the word for the means,
his works for our helps, his mercies for our comfort, and his long suffering
for the time of our conversion, so that all things are discharged on the
Lords part, and nothing on ours. In this saying of Peter, we must not
understand, that any were damned contrary to the Lords will: but rather that
he is unwilling thereunto; for a man may do that unwillingly, which is not
contrary to his will. Let us not abuse the long suffering of God, Use 1.
and although he be willing to spare, yet let not us be willing to sin, Luke
12. 46. If the evil servant shall say in his heart, my master deferreth his
coming, and shall begin to strike his fellows, and to eat and drink with
the drunken: the Lord of that servant shall come in a day that he knows not,
and give him his portion with unbelievers. O my beloved, we are those servants
that have secured our selves from wrath, and think still it will not come yet.
Look on our manners, are they not drunken? look on our faith, is it not idle?
look on our care, is it not unprofitable? look on our lives, and see if we
bite not oneanother; from the throne to the footestoole none can escape us. Do
we not abuse the patience of God, which should make us resolute in repentance,
and it makes us dissolute in religion? We say with the wicked priests, To
morrow shall be as to day; and much more: and with the heathen, Psalm. 10.
Truly the Lord regards not, neither is there knowledge in the most high. O
miserable souls thus plagued that turn all things against themselves! O let
nothing delight us, but the presence of the Lord of hosts! who is come down
into our land, and waits for our repentance: Let us give him our sins we
have committed, and our lives we have to spend, and our souls we have to
save, that he may spare our blood and take our lamentation. Again, let us
seek the Lord while he may be 2
found, and call upon him while he is near at hand, Esaias 55. 6. seeing he
dwells among us; and this is the time of long suffering: now let us run
after him day and night as Obadiah did after Eliah, and never cease seeking
till we have found him. In seeking for the Lord we ought to have a single eye,
a simple heart, a clean hand, and a swift foot, that we may easily see
him, earnestly desire him, speedily run after him, and reverently lay
hold on him. Alas, alas, we live in an age wherein men will not travail to
find either God or grace, except it fall into their mouths: if the Lord
lack but one of his sheep, he never cease till he have found him again;
but we could abide to want him, if we might enjoy our pleasures all the
days of our life. Seek for him in his temple; go to him in thy soul, and
pray to him in heaven; for he calls unto thee, saying, Open unto me, for the
night has watered my locks, etc. Seek him as the Lord does his sheep, as
the merchant did his pearl, as the woman did her grote, as the sick man does
his physician, and as the disciples did Christ. He is in thy house, there
seek him; he is in thy field, there seek him; he is in thy closet, there
seek him; and he is in thy heart, there keep him. His time is but short; his
departure will be sudden; his patience will be weary, and he will be gone;
only he tarrieth a little: therefore if ever, now run out to follow him. And
repents him of the evil. This is the last argument, whereby the prophet
persuades them to repent, because God will repent the evil that he
threatened: not that God indeed repents, by correcting of himself; for that
cannot be, seeing all his works are yea and Amen, 2. Cor. 1. 20. he is also
unchangeable, and with him is no shadow of turning, Iam. 1. 17. although the
world change, and the heavens wax old as a garment, yet the Lord abides the
same for ever, Psalm. 102. 18. but this is a phrase according to our capacity:
for when we change our minds, we repent in a sort; so when the Lord seems
to alter his purpose, he shows as if he repented. Why then some will say? if
the Lord alter his purpose, then he changes; and why did he here tell the
people that all this misery should come upon them? and yet if they will, it
shall not. Unto which I answer, that the first purpose of God shall ever
stand; for he foreseeth and decrees the end: but many times to try our
faith, and to show his love, he propounds prophetically, that is, with
condition of repentance, the same which he will never do. How then will you
say, shall we know his pleasure? verily if two things be propounded, the one
certain, the other uncertain, as here was repentance and judgment; let us
take the first, and abide the last, that is, let us embrace that which is
certain, and let the uncertain go free: Neither let us be less careful to
please God, because his judgments be conditional, but rather more careful to
perform the condition, least we feel the obligation. God will repent him of
the evil, that is, he will stay the evil that shall come upon you. From hence
let us observe, that the Lord is unwilling to take vengeance of our sins.
Ezech. 33. 11. As I live, says the Lord, I will not the death of a sinner: he
wills it not; but he says not, I decree it not, and if he decree it, I dare
not say, he does it against his will: and if he both will and decree it, I
cannot say he deals unjustly; for we may see in the scriptures, that none can
tell the reasons of his will, or the cause of his decree, or excuse the fall of
man by the ordinance of God: this I only touch by the way, for other have more
effectually labored therein, to whom I refer you. And in this we may see a
notable testimony of the love of God, that he will rather silence his justice
then his mercy: and although we be at the very brinke of destruction, if we
repent, he will repent. If the Lord did take any pleasure in our harms, why
then did he crucify his son? sending abroad the ministers with his
scriptures, and warning us before hand of our end. These do show us that he is
as unwilling to punish our faults, as a father is to punish his son. All
this granted, let us not dream of an immunitie, that we are utterly exempted,
and be at liberty to do whatsoever pleases us: for although he be a tender
father, yet he is a wise father, and knows that correction is as needful
as instruction. It is no matter to us if we be condemned either with the will,
or without the will of God: for it comes all to one end, our plagues and
pains are never the less. The reason hereof, because God has a natural love
to all his creatures, Psalm. 38. 6. the Reason.
works of his hands are dear unto him, and for the work of creation, he
loves and spares them. By this we may see as Ezech. 33. 12. if ye turn, all
your transgressions shall Use 1.
never remove his favor from you. What can be more general? then that all
shall be forgotten: or more comfortable? then that not one sin shall be
remembered? and if they be not remembered (says Austen) they are not imputed;
and if they be not imputed, they are pardoned. Be not afraid to come to the
Lord; for thou see he will lay nothing to thy charge; his communing is for
peace, and not for wrath, and his call is more for thy good then for his: be
not discomforted, because thou have a guilty crying conscience, for thou see
that the Lord is as unwilling to strike, as thou art to bear. But thou will
say, that he has already witnessed thy destruction: yea, but I say, he will
repent him of the evil seeing thou repentest of thy sins: his judgments are
conditional, he which gave the word can recall it, and who can say? he does
not his word. Fear not I say, though thou be as near to death as Isaac was to
be sacrificed, for the Lord has an angel in heaven to save thy life; and the
godly shall come out of trouble, but the wicked shall come in his stead.
Seeing the Lord is unwilling to take vengeance of our sins, let us be as
unwilling to grieve 2
him with our sins, that so we may be the children of the most high. For it
cannot be, but that he is mightily grieved when we fall into new follies,
in that he is enforced to open once again to us the wounds of Christ, and
let more blood issue forth out of the side of his mercy. Jacob was much
offended with his two sons, Simeon and Leui, Genesis 34. when they slew the
Sichemites, for said he, you have made my presence to stink in the sight of
this people: much more must the Lord be offended with us his sons, being a
more tender father then ever was Jacob, when we grieve him with our sins: for
we bring his glorious name into contempt, and religion into hatred. Once be
thus affected and assured that thou art the child of God, then take part of
the godly nature; love all as he does, do good to all as he does, repent of
evil as he does, and be as much afraid to sin, as he is unwilling to
punish thee. He ever thinks on thee, do thou so on him; he ever watches for
thy sake, do thou so for his; and he ever works for thy profit, do thou
ever live for his praise: He would forgive thee, if thou offend; and therefore
although thou can offend, yet do not: he endures grief to save thy health,
and do thou endure tentation to save his truth: he could revenge, yet does
not, that thou might learn not to follow what thy heart suggesteth, and thy
flesh allureth.

The xxiij. Sermon.
Verse. 14. Who knows, whether he will return and repent, and leave a
blessing behind him, even a meat offering and a drink offering unto the Lord
your God;
THis verse. contains another reason taken from the works of God to move them
to repentance, which is this, that God will spare them, and leave something for
his own service, although it be but a little. For I take not this question for
a simple affirmation, as in other places; but rather, if it please him, he may
leave an offering, and for any thing they knew to the contrary he would. From
hence we learn, that God concealeth from us the Why we know not the end of
our sorrows.
issue of our sorrows, and the end of our lives, that we may be kept in a
continual practice of repentance; as appears by David, 2. Sam. 12. 23. Some
are desperate in their miseries, because they know not how or by what means
they shall be delivered from it: But good men, and good minds must take
another course, seeing they cannot know in these things the mind of the
Lord: nor as Solomon says, who shall be after them therefore; their watch
and care over their lives must be more continual. This is a good lesson for
us to mark, because our case is the very same with the case of the Jews; we
are threatened as they were, and we know no more then they did: Let us
therefore watch in repentance, that if our calamity increase, we may be
ready for the grave; and if it be reuersed, we may be ready for praise. Art
thou desirous to make profit of the thing thou know not? then be repentant;
for death and life, joy and sorrow, pain and ease, riches and poverty,
freedom and danger are both alike to a repentant man. The first reason;
because by this means Reason 1.
we are taught humility, Romans 9. 20. because we are not able to reason with
God, or to plead against him; for we are in his hand, as clay in the hand of
the potter. Where are all our gallant youths, and lusty minded persons, whose
heads are so full of knowledge, that they are able to teach the Apostles, and
no marvel, for it appears by their lives, bearing themselves like Gods in
the world. But look on your minds again, you shall find them stuffed with
vanity, and not filled with knowledge: if you know one thing you are ignorant
of a thousand. Therefore let this teach you, that your minds are carnal,
your lives be sensual, and your souls endangered except you think better of
others, and baser of your selves: Learn humility of thy self, thy body is
earth, thy glory is earth, thy bravery is earth: and no marvel, for gold is
but earth. Why should thou be lifted so high? can thou number thy sins?
or save thy life, or tell when, or what death shall take thee away? cast thy
mind to the earth, for then it will look upward, for as yet it looks
downward and deceives it self. Another reason; No man can tell things to
come. Eccl. 7. 2. 2
no not so much as the work of an hour hence: therefore seeing we are assured
of nothing but death, let death be our life, that is, let the death of our sins
be the life of our souls. But we can never slay them, but by repentance; and
therefore every hour of our life to come, calls for it at our hands: we
know not when, therefore now is the time: we know not how, therefore this is
the mean: we know not where, therefore this is the place. Youth bids us
repent; age bids us repent; sickness bids us repent: and all that is to
come, calls us to amendment, because we know not what is to come. From hence
let us learn to be contented Use 1.
with that ordinary and certain knowledge which the Lord has showed us in
his word (I mean) to make us repentant. Paul tells of himself that he
regarded to know nothing save Jesus Christ and him crucified, 1. Cor. 2. 2. the
which he learned from the Lord himself. This was certain that Christ was
crucified, therefore oughtwe to learn the same: This is heavenly; this is
comfortable; and this is glorious: heavenly, for God did it; comfortable, for
it was for our sins; and glorious, for neither man nor angel could do the
like: and in this short sentence the Apostle has lapped up all religion.
Would thou know how to be saved? look to the death of Christ. Would
thou know how to live? look on the cross of Christ: and would thou know
what to profess? then consider the sorrows of Christ. This is heavenly
wisdom, not known of the angels: this is worthy learning, not known to
many learned kings and princes: and this is true felicity not felt of every
one; therefore Paul said, I esteem to know nothing, but Christ and him
crucified. It makes no matter to be ignorant of thy own death, if thou know
the death of Christ: it skilleth not to know what shall be, if thou know that
he died for thee: if thou know him, his death will mortify thee; his wounds
will wash thee, and his stripes will save thee. He died, wilt not thou repent?
He was condemned, wilt not thou be saved? He was crucified, wilt not thou be
sorrowful? Study not to live, but to be leeue: care not what shall be after thee
in this world, so thou be assured of the world to come. Thou know not what
shall be to morrow, therefore repent to day: thou know not whether God will
hereafter, therefore do it now; learn this lesson speedily: for as the
Israelites could not gather Manna after the sun was risen; so thou can not
have repentance after time is ouerpassed. Seeing God concealeth 2
many things from us, therefore let not us curiously enquire after secret and
hid things, the which fault our Savior reprooueth in his disciples, Act. 1. 7.
In our times there be many which busy themselves about idle and unprofitable
questions: as, whether they shall know one another in the next life: what God
did before he made the world: whether Christ should have been borne, if Adam
had stood in innocence, and when or what time of the year shall be the latter
day; of which questions the schoolmen abound. Again, there be other that
think themselves very christianly busied, if they let alone the study for
knowledge, the practice of prayer, and the keeping of the moral law: yea, they
are ignorant of the order of salvation: but they turn to and fro to find
plat-formes of government, to speak against authority, to erect new states,
and to pry and enquire into the secret lives and sins of men; unto whom I
say with our Savior, it is not for you to know these things. I might weary
you to tell the conceits of them, which take themselves for wise men, and the
dreams of the simpler sort; unto whom I say, you teach and learn the lighter
points of the law, but judgment, and knowledge, and sanctification, you let
alone. Amend this fault, for it is good to be ignorant of some things, and what
the Lord says not, believe not; what is not disclosed, enquire not; what
cannot be proved, receive not: and what the Lord has silenced, know thou not.
A meat offering: we have declared in the former chapter, that there was no
sacrifice, but there was a meat and drink offering annexed unto it: for as the
sacrifice was for God, so was this for man. And herein the Prophet teaches us
(seeing his desire is not for continuance of plenty or restitution of
abundance; but for a meat offering and a drink offering, which was a small
portion of meal, and oil, and wine used in the service of God:) that we must
rather impart our goods to the Lords worship, then to the maintenance of our
own lives, as David did with the water of Bethleem, All things must be applied
to religion.
2. Sam. 23. 16. 17. I say we must have more care to serve God, then to live
at ease; and we must rather want for our selves, then let religion go to the
wall. This I may teach, but I know there are few that have any wealth, but had
rather to depart with their profession, church, temple, ministry, sacrifice,
gospel, and God, then with the Sarephthian widow to give their little to
Elijah. I know what I speak; I see much taken from the Lord, but little given
to him. Woe worth these lamentable times! wherein already wise men may see,
that if want should increase, surely the name of God would be forgotten, unless
it were to be blasphemed. Do we not see that a feast has more guests then a
sermon? and a dinner more eaters then a church has hearers? Do you think
that they would desire but a meat offering for the Lords service? nay rather
they will weep if their bellies be not served before the Lord: would they,
which gain their meat by the life and sweat of other men, do as David did,
offer it to the Lord? no no, we have them among us, which care not what pain
and danger, and trouble they procure to other, so themselves may eat the flesh,
and drink the best. The first reason, because it is the Lords portion that is
allotted thereto, Numb. 18. 8. The Lord for the rent Reason 1.
of all our goods and lands, which we hold of him as our chief Lord, has
reserved but two parts, the one for the church, and the other for the poor;
and if we pay not these we forfeit all; yea, more then all into the hands of
his majesty. Grudge not therefore at the charges of the gospel; for thouseest
how good thy farm is, how small thy rent is, how large thy lease is, how few
are thy covenants, and how easy to be kept: depart with it willingly, it is
the Lords; shall not the master be served before the man? and shall not the
Lord be paid? though our cofers say nay. O my brethren, pay him cheerfully,
for you are bound by blood: you are in danger to loose all, and that woorthily,
if you give not that little. Another reason: because it is better to die in
misery, then to live in impiety; and therefore it is better to 2
live godly with want, then wickedly with abundance. Psalm. 37. 16. A little
thing that the righteous has, is better then the great riches of the ungodly:
Therefore serve the Lord before thy life, and prefer his worship before thy
appetite: let not distrust hinder it, the Lord has enough for thee; let not
poverty stay thee, for thou must live by the word as well as by bread: do
not refrain because thou have little, for if thou had much, he can scatter;
and having little, he can multiply it: Fear not want in age; doubt not of
help in sickness; and despair not of a supply, when all is spent, as God
commanded thee. The first use: we must know Use 1.
that God loves that most dearly which we offer to him, with the hazard of
our own want: for this cause did our Savior so much commend the action of the
poor widow Luc. 21. 4. before all the abundant offerings of the wealthy;
saying that her two mites were more then all theirs, because she did it of
mere love to the Lord; but the other of superfluity: And we, if we have any
mind to the like commendation, let us put on the like affection; although we
labor with our hands, watch above our hours, and fast above our ordinary, to
give the bread of our lives into the treasury of the Lord. Neither ought we
to think, but that the Lord does highly accept the willing and rich offerings
of the wealthy, especially if they reserve it from vain and proud expenses. Oh
how does this magnify religion, and the professors thereof? unto the which they
are more indebted then to their own lives: let us offer this sacrifice, for the
Lord will take any thing at our hand in good part: ifit be little, because we
have but little, he makes much thereof; if it be much, because we have much, he
makes more thereof: then say we all; If God doc thus accept, then will we give
it. Let us not reason with him, as the woman of Samaria did, John. 4. when he
asked for water, but let us speedily give him his request, as Rebecca did to
Abraham's servant, who asking but a little, yet she gave him more. Another use;
let us serve the Lord before our lives, for else 2
we make our selves gluttons, and feed our bellies: and the Apostle says of
this kind, 1. Cor. 6. 15. Meat for the belly, and the belly for meat: but
God shall destroy both it and them. Will thou spend all on thy belly, and
nothing on the Lord? think thou that thou possessest all for thy self, and
nothing for the Lord? do thou so live to thy meat, and with thy meat, as
if thou were only borne for it, and that were only made for thee? then surely
take thou heed, for God shall destroy both it and thee. Give therefore to him,
and to his uses in his church: if thou fail, thy store shall fail; and if
thou repent not, thy life shall perish. Who was ever famished for meat, that
gave it to the Lord? or begged for his bread, which spent it at the altar? or
was empouerished by maintaining religion? surely none, but with them was the
saying of Solomon performed, There is that give and have nothing the less.
Eat not I beseech you, your destruction in your meat: and drink not your
damnation in your abundance: if you will save your life, you shall lose it, but
if in this case for the Lords cause you will lay down your life, you shall
find it. If when we have but little we give from our selves to the Lord, we
do as poor Jacob did, which sent his store into Egypt with his sons, where
was more store: but through his little, he gained both his sons, he saved
his own life, and sustained all his family: so let not us doubt or fear to
bestow on the Lord, for look what we loose we sow for more increase; what we
give, we shall gain; and what in peasure we dispende, in pain we shall lament.

The xxiiij. Sermon.
Verse. 15. 16. Blow the trumpet in Sion, sanctify a fast, call a solemn
assembly: gather the people, sanctify the congregation: gather the elders,
assemble the children, and those that suck the breasts: let the bridegroom go
forth of his chamber, and the bride out of her bride chamber.
OF the blowing of the trumpet, we have spoken in the beginning of this
chapter: so also we have handled the proclaiming of a fast, the calling of an
assembly, both of the people and of their elders; al which to stand upon
again were but needless. Therefore we will to the next words, The young
children, and them that suck the breasts: That is, every one among you, from
the least to the most. Some will say unto me? what good can the sucking
children do in the Lords service? I grant in sight they cannot; but seeing
David says, that the brute beasts do seek their meat at God, which they do
not by praying or speaking; so may Joel assign the young sucking babes to want
their meat, that with their mothers they might pour forth most lamentable
tears and terrible cries into the ears of the Lord; and for this cause to
increase mourning does the prophet inuit them to the fast. From hence we may
observe, that the wrath of God must General lamentation.
be appeased with a general repentance: Old men and babes, young men and
maidens, rich and poor, prince and people must all be humbled at the Lords
anger: as we may read, Ion. 3. 8. Yea, the very cattle of the Ninevites were
covered, with a mourning weed: wherein we may see that it is no marvel if
the Lord were so long angry with us, because we were not generally humbled.
If parents have repented, yet children have not sorrowed; if children mourn,
parents have been dissolute; if the old men were humbled, the young men
rebelled: Therefore our misery remains, because some remain obstinate. The
reasons; Reason 1.
First, because the Lord has a quarrel against al sexes, ages, degrees, and
conditions of men, Ierem. 12. 12. the which ought to be a sufficient cause to
have every one to be humbled, and let not one escape. I muse much, that many
christian parents have so little regard to their children, that they care not
with what vanities and toies they delight and allure them, thinking they are
not bound to any exercise on Sabbath days: nor that any oath or foolish
talk does annoy them: But here we see not only those which can speak must
practice religion; but also if they be able to cry, let them feel the Lords
commandment. Some will think that these little children are innocent, and
therefore need no repentance: for it is a common saying, if it go not well
with children, how shall it go with old men? meaning that children are
without sin. Unto which I answer, that they are sinful by nature, even the
heirs of wrath, Ephesians. 2. 2. and if they were not, yet because God requires it,
who dare refuse it? and the rather because the brute beasts are invited
thereto, which neither can nor ever shall sin. Another reason; because
whosoever does not thus humble himself, 2
shall be judged of God, 1. Cor. 11. 31. We know it an usual thing in the
word of God, to spare neither man, woman, nor child; and to take the sucking
babes, and to dash their brains against the wall: If they be subject to
punishment, why not to religion? if to death, why not to the Lords service?
Therefore let all be humbled, children, because they are borne in sin; old
men, because they are weary of sin; young men, because they live in sin; and
striplings, because they grow in sin; or else shall every one die in
condemnation. Let us not therefore provoke the Lord, 1. Cor. 10. 22. but
consider how fearful it is to stir a lion Use 1.
from his den; or to meet a Bear robbed of her whelps; or to provoke a
prince to displeasure; of which it is said, That the anger of a king is the
messenger of death: but I say, if the Lord, more fierce then a lion, more
raging then a Bear, and more powerful then a prince, be stirred up to strike
us; we can hardely hurt him; he can easily destroy us; we can hardly
move him, but more hardly pacify him. See you not that the new borne babes
shall repent it, yea, sometime they feel it before they be borne? Oh think
upon it, the blood of old men, the strength of young men, the beauty of
women, and the love of children, do not always move him; and shall we then
tempt him, to our and others everlasting destruction? in his wrath he is an
unquenchable fire, an irresistable flood, an vnpacifiable judge, and a
destroyer of all that come in his way. But alas, with tears we may lament to
see him provoked every day: who is so sick, that sins not against him? who
is so weak, that strives not with him? who is so unwise, that pleads not
with him? Look with tears over all sorts of men: the poor despise him; the
lame run from him; the blind come not at him; the dumb speak against him;
the rich will not fear him, and the dead will not confess him. By all means
we provoke his wrath, by tempting, by murmuring, by denying, by abusing, and
abasing his glory: We tempt him, in thinking he will pardon whatsoever we
commit; we murmur, when we have not all our desires; we deny him, when we
esteem not his gospel; we abuse him, using our wealth to luxury, and our
meat to gluttony; and we abase him, when we more fear a mortal man's
displeasure, then the wrath of the highest. When 2
we see the Lord being angry, and so hardly pacified, let us use all means to
please him again, although it be with the hazard of our own lives, as Moses
did Deuteronomy. 9. 18, 19. perceiving the Lord to be moved to wrath, he fell down
on his face to entreat him for his people, tarrying with him forty days and
forty nights, neither eating nor drinking: yea he desired God to be pacified
with his people, although he rased his name out of the book of life. What
could be done with greater zeal or more earnest affection? the Lord was
angry, who could appease him but Moses? and how could he be satisfied, but
with offering his body to death through fasting, and his soul unto
condemnation? Mark it I beseech you, that we al learn with more zeal to
entreat the Lord to be turned toward us. Offer we must our bodies to pining,
our members to tortures, our health to sickness, our wealth to pouertic, our
pleasure to pain, and our life to death, rather then the wrath of God should
proceed upon us. Oh let us come unto the Lord, and offer him his whole man, to
satisfy his mercies; neither be afraid to do so, but put it in speedy
practice. Come to him, though thou be lame; run to him, though thou be blind;
pray to him, though thou be sick; and trust in him, though thou be poor.
Abide not one misery but all miseries, that thou may dwell with him: neither
care for the rage of man; the want of maintenance; the love of friends, or the
fear of death: for if thou love these more then him, thou art not worthy of
him.

Having willed the sucking babes to come to mourning, 2
he also inuiteth the new married folks, bridegroomes and brides to leave of
their usual dalliance, and come among their neighbors to this sorrowful
banquet. From whence No lawful action must hinder repentance.
we observe, that we must not in any thing, be it never so lawful, hinder
true repentance, or the profession of godliness. For there is nothing more
honaurable then marriage; more lawful then a wedding feast; more usual then
pleasant mirth; and more commendable then a joyful marriage day: but all these
being hindrances unto repentance, must be laid aside as a mourner does his
daily attire. We may read Luc. 14. 21. how they were cursed that came not to
the Lords feast, among whom there was one that had married a wife: it shall be
no excuse before the Lord, that they did but the course of the world, in using
these things; it were better for us to forsake our wives, then to loose our
souls; to renounce our mirth, then to relinquish our lives; to defer our
pleasure, then to depart from the Lord. Let this I beseech you, be your care in
the Lord, that you offend him not in the use of his creatures, neither let
those comforts which you receive in wedlock, in feasting, in riches, in
beauty, and the like, work your everlasting discomfort in another world.
Live not in mirth, for then thou can not repent; rejoice not in youth, for it
is but vanity; distrust thy joys, for they are deceitful; be not always
mourning, for thou can not be thankful; be ever repentant, that thou may
be faithful. One reason here of is given by the Lord himself, Ierem.
Reason 1.
7. 34 because a desolation shall come; and of all reasons there is none more
forcible then the rod of vengeance and desolation: so that in this sort might
Jeremy and Joel, and other the Lords ministers reason with the world. Lay
away your mirth, let not the voice of music, the day of marriage, the means
of ioyfulnesse, or the comfort of pleasure, be had, or heard among you; for a
desolation shall come: Draw the child from the breast; the elders from their
ease; the married from their love, and the people from their vanity; for a
desolation comes. Houses shall be desolate without inhabitants, parents shall
be desolate without children, cities shall be desolate without citizens, and
whole kingdoms shall be desolate without professors: Therefore put away this
joy like an unlawful wife, and come again to the Lord with much weeping, and
rejoice not in thy youth, or thy age, or thy wealth, or thy friends, or thy
marriage. Another reason; because by this kind of 2
mirth we grow to hardness of heart, and neglect the wrath of God, Amos 6. 1, 5.
It is much that men esteem not the fair promises and sweet blessings of God:
but yet it is more fearful when they make light account of his heavy
judgments. Now if you mark who they be that care not for judgment, you shall
see that they are those who eat in abundance, live in pleasure, enjoying
wealth and children at their will, and want is not known unto them. Again,
poor people living in continual scarsitie, and are content with simple
allowance, having learned the fear of God, a shower of rain, and a cloudie
day humbles their knees to the earth, and lifts their prayers to heaven. Let
us learn not to rejoice in any unlawful manner, all Use 1.
the time that the church of God is in adversity, Psalm. 137. 2, 3, 4. Good men
in captivity, commanded by their enemies to sing one of the songs of Sion,
refused it, because they were in a strange land: and so if we hope for mirth
and joy in another world, let us refuse it as much as may be in this life
present, for we be but strangers and pilgrims on the earth. And verily, if we
consider the matter well, we have as many causes to lament, old and young,
married and unmarried, as these people had to whom Ioell preached: Famine was
threatened to them, but felt of us; they were under the Babylonian government,
and we are subject to the tyranny of satan; they had abused many benefits
and prophets of God, and so have we; they had reioiced in many worldly
pleasures and wicked pastimes, and so have we; they were warned to turn all
into lamentation, and so must we be. Therefore if now you look on the misery
of our time, you shall find it high time for all to be humbled: Let the elders
begin, the yoonger will follow; yea, the little children will cry for
company. Let us all take us to the houses of mourning; old men, because they
have seen good days; young men, because they have lived ill lives; and
children, because they are appointed to fearful destinies; parents, because
they have begotten sin; children, because they were borne in sin; rich men,
because they have gathered much; married folk, because they have loved too
much; and poor men, because these days are but the beginning of sorrows.
Death calls for the old, let them weep; age calls for the young, let them
be sorrowful; correction calls for children, let them cry; wars call for
strong men, let them lament; and repentance calls for all men, therefore let
al mourn. But some will say, do you condemn all mirth that is used in our
times? and shall we live, eat, drink, marry, and die in continual sorrow?
then can we not account it any benefit to live in the world. To whom I
answer, that this is no where commanded, that men should so live in continual
sorrow, but rather Eccl. 2. 24. Solomon says, That it is the only portion of
a man to rejoice in the things that God gives him: for all men in health shall
conceive a natural joy by their eating and drinking, as Bohaz Ruth, 3. 7. and
Solomon said, That wine makes glad the heart of man: the which is lawefull
for Christians, and necessary for health. Again, there is another joy which
is spiritual and heavenly, which is called the joy of the holy Ghost, Romans
14 17. This makes all our afflictions seem light and little to be regarded,
Romans 5. 7. and without this inward joy, one can hardly be a christian; the
which is never lost, though we endure never so many torments; yet in repentance
it is darkened, and seems utterly gone; howbeit it returns again with
greater measure as the sun rising. But whether natural joy be lost in
repentance, it is hard to say: for sometime a heart that is humbled has no more
joy in meat and drink, then a sick person. As for carnal ioies which are
invented by iniquity, practiced with greedines, and loved with too much
affection; they are neither lawful or necessary for a christian: and
whosoever receives any comfort by them, he may justly suspect that his
sorrow was not godly, but some other heavy conceit, which is easily removed
by company or joy conceived of pleasure.

The xxv. Sermon.
Verse. 17. Let the priests, the ministers of the Lord, weep between the
porch and the altar: and let them say, Spare thy people o Lord, and give not
thine heritage into reproach, that the heathen should rule over them. Wherefore
should they say among the people, where is their God?
NOw the prophet shows unto the priests how they must behave themselves,
namely that they should weep: and he tells them the place, betwixt the
porch and the altar, that is, in the utter court where the people waited for
the blessing after the sacrifice. For the people must now be gathered as we
have heard, and it was not lawful for them to come within the precincts of the
priests; wherefore the priests must come forth to them, and in their place
and assembly make their lamentation. By the description of this place for the
priests to weep and pray in: we may note, that all the public exercises of
All the exercises of the ministry must be so done as they may be understood.
the ministry ought to be done in a place where the people may hear and see
them; and for this cause are they commanded to weep betwixt the porch and the
altar. So we may read did Iehoshaphat 2. Chro. 20. 5. when he made prayer for
the people against the children of Moab and Ammon. I think there is not any in
their right mind, but they will confess the necessity hereof; except those
which care not whether they pray for or against themselves, standing aloof in
the Church as if they were afraid to hear what the preacher says. Let men
therefore labor not only to pray, but to come with diligence into the Lords
house and public place of prayer, where they must bestow themselves with such
care, as they may pray when the pastor prays, and hear when the word is
preached, that there be not one in a congregation, but he may depart better
instructed and better edified. The first reason: because they can have no
knowledge of that which they hear not Reason 1.
and understand not, 1. Cor. 14, 15, 16. alas it is a marvel to see, that so
many have so little regard what is prayed or taught in the congregation,
especially the poorer sort, who are thrust behind the doors in the greater
assemblies; by which it comes to pass that all that is taught is little
regarded, and whatsoever is prayed for is coldly desired: it is your duty to
press into the midst of the assembly that you may hear and understand the
mysteries of salvation: modesty in choosing places is not to be regarded,
where danger follows too much courtesy. Another reason: in a convenient place
of hearing our hearts are more touched 2
and awaked by the word, Act. 1. 13, 14. there can be no zeal in them, that
cannot hear the voice of the preacher, neither any reverence to almighty God:
and it is much better that they come not at all, or depart out of the church,
then to sit there without obedience to God, attention to the word, or profit to
their own souls. Let us therefore so sort our selves in the congregation,
where our ears may be beaten with an understanding sound, and our hearts be
touched with a heavenly power, that the coals of zeal may be enflamed, and
the light of knowledge may be kindeled. Therefore let this Use 1.
be the form of a congregation, that the minister so speak and the people so
hear, that with one soul their prayer may ascend to heaven: and so we may
read Acts. 4. 24. that the Apostles with one consent lift up their voices to
God, and the place shook where they were assembled: one spoke and all agreed,
their ears were attentive to his words, and all their hearts were lifted up at
once to the Lord. The which honorable practice commends a congregation, when
as they being many, make but one man at prayer; as the wheate-cornes being
many, make but one loaf at table. Our Savior has taught us, that if two or
three shall agree on any thing in earth, the same shall be sealed and
confirmed in heaven. Agreement in battle gets victory; consent in a common
weal makes peace; unity in music makes harmony; and the fellowship in
prayer conquereth the devil; gets peace of conscience, and sounds
sweetly in the ears of God. Therefore if euerthou come into the place of any
godly exercise, join thy mouth and ears, and hand, and heart to theirs: when
they are humbled, fall thou down; when they are praying, pray with them; when
they are hearing, hear with them; when they are singing, sing with them; and
when they are mourning, lamenth with them: If they join in petition to God, oh
account it happiness for thee to subscribe thy name; for they are blessed that
are joined to the fellowship of the saints. Another use: if we must seat our
selves in most 2
convenient place to hear, then let us also frequent the places of prayer and
religion. When the church was compelled to a rivers side, in steed of a
cathedral church, Act. 16. 15. Lydia the purple woman resorted thither, and
once she had her heart opened, and converted to the Lord: In like manner let us
resort to the churches, for at one time or other we may boldly assure our
selves, that we shall receive the pledge of life eternal. But in our days men
are so affected to this doctrine, that the devil laugheth at it, and good men
lament it: for either they come not at all, as the ghestes which were bid to a
wedding; or else they come without conscience, as he did without a wedding
garment; or else they are present without attention, as Eutyches that fell on
sleep at Paul's preaching; or else they depart out of our assemblies, as Judas
did from Christ when he went to betray him. Standing times of prayer in the
church, some say are of Popery, and in the house they are of other condemned
for puritanisme; so that godly prayers being the sword of the spirit, are now
grown rustie and dull, that few men's sins, or lives, or hearts are parted
therewith. But my dear brethren, come to the times of prayer, and bind your
selves not only publicly, but also privately with severe vows, and pay them
to the Lord: for so shall the fire of the spirit be kindled in you, the holy
Ghost shall reign in you, the saints shall be comforted by you, and you shall
try that all things are possible to a Christian. Spare thy people. Now we are
come to the prayer which the prophet teaches the priests to make for the
people, which is thus 1
much in effect: We have no refuge, but to fly to thee O Lord; we are guilty
of the punishment, but yet thou may stay thy hand, and spare our lives. Give
us not over, we pray thee, that our enemies rejoice not over us, and blaspheme
thy blessed name; we are the fields of thine own inheritance, revenge our
cause from the hands of strangers; oh spare us that we may serve thee. First
out of the beginning of this prayer we may note, that petitioners, and those
which are suitors to the throne of grace, must always plead guilty in the
presence of God. Luc. 18. 12, 13. The example of the Publican proves this,
that the Lord loves Our prayers must begin with confession.
us better when we tell him of our follies, then when we show him our virtues.
The Lord which will seldom help, till there be no help but in his mercy,
bids us always to condemn our selves; so that when we think most basely of
our natures, and speak most vilely (yet truly) of our lives, and confess most
bitterly against our selves, then are we most nigh to the end of our prayers.
For this cause let us meditate before prayer, that we may sufficiently weigh
our miseries, and more lamentably bewail our wants, and more ardently pray for
his mercy, that we may more comfortably enjoy his favor. The reasons Reason 1.
hereof: because there is not one man living that can be justified before God,
Psalm. 143. 1, 2. but every man is an unprofitable servant: for which cause we
must always accuse our sins, and call for pardon at the Lords hand. This reason
being known of the baser and wickeder sort, they imagine that they have gained
a sufficient charter to continue in their evil: why (say they) the most
righteous are guilty in the Lords sight; and what are we more? Do what we
can, yet we shall sin; and we can but crave pardon of him for many as well as
for few: but this is a wicked and an accursed reason. For although the best
fall into many enormities, yet ought not you to sin; good men fall into
sin, but you dwell in sin; they are sorry for them, but you delight in
them. David sinned, was therefore Absalom or Achitophel unpunished? because
Peter denied his master, might therefore Judas betray him? or because one man
falls into debt by sickness, may you therefore fall into debt through riot?
if a sound body do now and then fall into sickness, then he which has a
crazie body had need to look to himself: so if men of sound souls do fall
into evils, you which have sick souls must be much more careful of your
health. Another reason our Savior 2
gives, Luc. 18. 14. for the Lord resists the proud, and gives grace to
the humble and meek; therefore ought we to increase in the numbering of our
sins, that the Lord may advance us to the beholding of his mercy: Let us be
assured, if we pray without sorrow, we do but mock the Lord; but if we sorrow
with earnest prayer, we prepare many joys for our souls. First, let us learn
that our prayers must be ardent and continual in the ears of the Use 1.
Lord, as the Israelites were, Judge. 10. 3. to 13. for as we have a continual
occasion of sinning, so we must take continual occasion of praying. Who is he,
that has been but a little while in the practice of christianity, and has
not learned this lesson, My sins are ever in my sight, too heavy a burden
for me to bear? therefore as he which is vexed with a continual want,
labors in a continual work; and he which has a continual sickness,
turns on every side to find ease: so must we which are evermore oppressed
with sin, be evermore praying for help. As the greatest burdens make the
porters sweat the greatest drops; so will our sins if we feel them, make us
sweat drops of blood to be released of them: therefore pray till thou be
heard, and take for thy example the poor widow, which would never give over
till the judge had righted her cause; neither do thou cease to pray til thy
soul do cease to sin. Many pray through want, but not with want; and for
grace, but not with grace; they are cold and not continual in their suites.
Who is so hard hearted, seeing a poor man with as many sores as his body can
bear, running after him a mile or twain, and begging but a penny, that could
deny him? in like manner if we show all our sores and sins and miseries
unto the Lord continually, that when our voice is weary, our hearts may speak;
and when our hearts are sleepie, our wounds may cry for mercy; so that we may
neither eat nor sleep, till we know our sins be pardoned. Let us never be
afraid to come to the Lord, 2
notwithstanding we find our selves never so sinful, Psalm. 9. 9, 10. although
we be never so poor in spirit, yet let us know that ours is the kingdom of
heaven. So that if thou reason with the devil himself, who will (if it be
possible) deceive thy soul, telling thee that thou art more vile then others,
and therefore it is but folly for thee to call on God for mercy; yet say to
thy soul, that the Lord never despises the sighings of the poor: although I
have sinned, yet I have sorrowed; although I have neglected grace, yet with the
Lord there is more grace; be it, that I have no goodness in me, the more need
have I to go to God the author of goodness. Men seek not to the physician in
health, but in sickness; and the more desperate is their disease, the more
speedily they solicit him, and a good physician comes quickly: so I want
the health of my soul, and I see death standing at the door and knocking for
me; therefore my prayer shall go to the Lord my physician, and I know that he
will speedily come unto me. He abhors not my weakness; he hates not my
person; he wills not my destruction; and therefore will I pray for salvation:
I am exceeding base, but he will bend to me; I am very poor, but he will give
me the riches of the spirit; I am a sinner, and he is a Savior, why should
I not go unto him, and fall down low upon his footestoole? for he never
despises the sighing of the contrite. Give not thine heritage. That is, the
people whom thou did take unto thy self above all the nations of the world:
and from hence we may observe as in a singular metaphor, how dear the church
is unto God, Deuteronomy. 4. 20. even as dear as any man's inheritance is to himself:
for indeed an inheritance does very fitly resemble and shadow out unto us the
nature and condition of the church. First, because it is not worth any thing,
except a man do plant and sow the same; and so is it in the church, wherein if
the Lord plow not and sow not, there can no good thing grow therein. Again, an
inheritance is sometimes sold away for the barrennes thereof; so when the
church grows secure and brings not forth good fruits, the Lord gives it
over for a season to be spoiled by strangers. Again, if an inheritance will no
way be amended, then is it accursed and burned, Heb. 6. 8. so if no means will
reclaim the world from their wicked life, then he accurseth them and gives
them over to the fire of hell. Also as a man takes singular comfort in his
inheritance, so the Lord does in his church: and as a man hedgeth and encloseth
his inheritance, to keep it from being wasted; even so the Lord has set a
brazen wall about his church, the which all the devils in hell shall never be
able to overthrow, but men and angels shall fight for their safegarde, and
maugre sin and hell they shall endure as the earth does, even for ever and
ever. The first reason: because he might power his blessing on it, Esa. 19.
25. for he having many Reason 1.
most excellent benefits in store has made choice of his church to power
forth all that he has thereupon: for whether we consider the blessings of
this life, or the benefits of the life to come, they are all ordained for the
good of them that be godly. He is wise to instruct us; he is mighty to defend
us; he is liberal to maintain us; and he is merciful to receive us: for our
sakes were the heavens created, the earth established; the waters removed, and
the fruits appointed: for our sakes were the angels condemned, the son of God
crucified, and the age and years of the world is plunged. Another reason:
because we should be holy unto him, Deuteronomy. 19. 2. Of all the creatures of this
world, 2
there is none that can be holy unto the Lord save only mankind, for they
are the image of God: and if the land whereupon Moses stood was holy, much
more is the land of our hearts holy, whereupon the Lord himself stands, for
he reigns in us. And this is the cause why the Lord has made us his
inheritance that we should serve him in holiness and righteousness all the days
of our life: for the heavens are holy, whither we are going: the angels are
holy, with whom we shall dwell: the church is holy, wherein we live: and
therefore we must be holy, or else we are accursed. Seeing we are the
inheritance of God purchased by his son, then let not any of us live to our
selves, but to him that redeemed us, 2. Cor. 5. 15. how many ways might I urge
this doctrine? that as the earth bears not fruit for it self, but for us; so
should not we eat the fruits of our own labors, but offer them to the Lord.
Our hearts are the grounds; our bodies, are the hedges; God his law, is the
plough; the word, is the seed; and himself, is the husbandman: Oh, let us
not be ploughed and planted in vain; let us not frustrate the Lords
expectation, and our souls salvation. If we were but servants, yet we ought to
work for our hire; but being his inheritance we must live and die day and
night to bear him fruit, we cannot put him away, but he may put us away: our
fruits do not profit him, and yet the want of them will curse us. Let us not be
for the weeds of sin, nor for pleasures to feed on, as bullockes do on
pasture-land: but let us be his garden of sweet flowers; his vineyard of
fruitful grapes; his field of fine planted wheat; and his possession, for an
everlasting inheritance. Let our words, be as gracious fruit; let our religion,
be as precious pearl; let our love, be as rocks of gold; and let our bodies,
be as fruitful garners; let us bring him all for first fruits and tenthes,
and offerings, and sacrifices, that we may be his blessed land unto the worlds
end. Another use; seeing we are the Lords inheritance, we may see that the
Lord will be very hardly driven to forsake us, for he gave a law, Numb. 27.
that none should sell away their inheritance, but at the end of fifty
years, every one should reclaim thereunto. So that, if the Lord shall give
over his inheritance as he did Israel, Hos. 5. 15. the case is very
desperate, but not perpetual. A man that has many barren fields does not
presently sell them away; no more the Lord, which has many barren souls in
the compass of his church, does presently forsake them: but rather dresseth
them by the ministry of the word, that they may be made fruitful. Oh,
hear this you that are in the Lords fold; although he bear for a season
with your barren hearts, and suffer you many years to lie in rest, thinking
at the last you will bring him some profit: bring it forth with speed, or
else know that the Lord which redeemed you from hell, will once again commit
and bequeath you to condemnation as the fruitles fig tree was. Think not your
selves happy that you live so long before you be called to bear; for verily,
long ago were you appointed and called to yield him his harvest. If therefore
you will not strive to yield it, think that God will reap where he did not
sow, and gather where he did not lend, and he will tarry no time; for the
fig tree bore no fruit because the time of fruits was not come, yet was it
reprobated: So if God come to thee, although thou never were able to yield him
any commodity; yet he will regard himself and not thee, his expectation and
not thine, his glory and not thy welfare; for he which is hardly provoked, is
more hardly pacified, neither sparing in his rage, man, woman, beast, or
angel. That the heathen. These words contain another ground of their
prayer, wherein they desire that the Lord would spare them, least that by
reason of famine they should be driven to the Lords enemies for succor: or
else, they feared that when their scarsitie should be noised abroad, the
heathen would come and conquer them. From hence we may observe, that Nothing
more grievous to good men then the regiment of the evil.
there is not any thing more odious to godly minds, then that the heathen,
idolatrous men without religion, should rule over them, Psalm. 74 4, 5. As it is
unnatural and dangerous, that men should be ruled by beasts; sheep by
woolues; and little birds by the great hawk; every minute threatening to
tear them in pieces: so is it when good men are driven through want or war,
or love or fear of life, to seek harbor among the enemies of God. Well they
know that their liberty is worse then imprisonment, and that the highest
place of dignity among the wicked, is inferior to the lowest in the church of
God, as David said: I had rather keep a door in the house of God, then to
dwell in the tents of wickedness. What pleasure have we of sight living in
darkness? or of health living in imprisonment; or of strength living in bondage;
or of meat living in sickness? and no more shall we have of all worldly
things, when we are in the land of heathens. The first Reason 1.
reason: because in the dominion of the wicked there is no conscience of
blood, or care of equity, Ezech. 22. 27. They turn their subjects to
slavery, their widows to destruction, their children to beggerie, and they
send heaps of dead carkeises at one time to the grave; they care not for
religion, neither respect the king of heaven and earth: Although the streets
flow with blood, and the living be not sufficient to bury the dead; yet if
they may reign they care not: Life, and living, and honesty is nothing worth
among them: They deny God, persecute his church, and burn his word most
wickedly; they regard not old men, ravish women, and murder children
villanouslie: They take away houses, lands, rentes, goods, patrimonies, and
wives from them that possess them: and therefore there is no greater cross
then to live under the government of a heathen. Another reason; because their 2
wickedness shall be a continual heart-burning unto them, 2. Pet. 2. 7. Psalm.
120. 5. Their ears shall hear their blasphemies; their eyes shall see their
idolatry; and their lives shall feel their treacheries. All things shall be
lawful among them save goodness, for nothing is lawful that tends to
godliness. Oh, how will this grieve a godly soul! to hear his Savior reviled,
true religion slandered, the godly to be hated, the world to be loved, the
devil to be worshipped, and heaven to be neglected. He must not speak for
fear of death; he must not pray but in secret; he shall not dare to disclose
himself; he shall find no neighbors, nor friends, nor followers, nor
comfort among them. The first use; Let us therefore forsake the fellowship Use
1.
of unbelievers, Esaias 52. 12. whose presence is damnable; whose lives are
abominable; whose profession is execrable; and whose end is condemnation: of
these the world is filled, and yet we must avoid them. Let us not be defiled
with their sins, nor corrupted with their manners, nor allured with their
pleasures, but go out from the midst of them: They are hated of God,
possessed of devils, bewitched with vanities, and professed miscreants. How
shall we love God and dwell among them? but either the anger of God, or the
love of the world, or the bait of lusts, or the enchantments of vanities
will draw us away. Oh, let us take our selves to desolate places, and rather
dwell with the brute beasts then with these godles persons: we cannot trust
them; we may not live with them; we must fly from them, or else be condemned
among the^: therefore put them from your houses, and from your tables, and from
your conference, and from your friendship. I know you would be ashamed to
be seen daily conuersing with an open and shameless harlot: therefore much
more be ashamed and forsake their company, whose lives are like beasts; whose
hearts are like heathens; whose faces are like harlots; and whose actions
proceed of evil. I tell you, their ways do lead unto death, and their
lodgings are chambers of hell. Where is now their God? That is, either they
are not the Lords people that are thus afflicted, or else their God is no God
that cannot deliver them. From hence we may gather, that it is the property
of wicked men, if they get advantage against a professor of religion, then
presently they turn it against God himself, and fall to reuiling his glorious
majesty, Psalm. 74. 10. So in our times, if any have any small profession of
religion, and do fall into the hands of the world, then presently they
scoff, and scorn, and laugh, and deride Christ, the Gospel, religion, and
all the followers thereof: If they happen to be poor, why? will an atheist say,
can thou not get thy living by hearing of Sermons? If they be rich men
Reason.
their faults shall be aggrauated. The reason hereof is; because they might be
known to be not so much enemies to the godly, as to God himself; like the
Jews that crucified Christ, Matthew. 27. Let us rather lament them that fall
into their enemies hands, then rejoice at their sins and overthrows; and
let us know that the Lord will surely take their cause into his own hand, and
severely punish such intolerable blasphemy as he did in Rabsakeh, and the
king of Syria, Esaias 37. although their words be great, their pride be
infinite, their power glorious, their minds ambitious, and their cruelty
extreme; yet will, and shall the Lord defend his name and truth, and children
from all their blasphemies; and this shall be a cause of their more speedy
destruction.

The xxvj. Sermon.
Verse. 18. Then will the Lord be jealous over his people, and spare his land.
NOw at the length by the merciful assistance of the Almighty, are we come to
the last part of this prophecy, wherein, as in the former we have heard the
wonderful troubles upon the afflicted Jews: so now we shall hear, the same
spirit assisting us, the singular comforts and promises which the prophet
makes unto them, unto the end of this prophecy. These comforts are either
the restitution of their own abundance, in this whole chapter following: or
the promise for the overthrow of their enemies in the last chapter: unto
themselves in this chapter he promises worldly benefits, unto the 27. verse.
and spiritual benefits or graces from the 27. to the end. The worldly
blessings are of two sorts: First, that he will spare them from farther
vengeance, verse. 18. Secondly, that he will heap on them many benefits. In
this verse. he promises to be jealous over his land and spare his people.
Meaning that he will watch over them with a revenging hand, to annoy and
destroy all those that rise against them: For jealousy signifies an
inordinate love, tending to revenge, Number. 25. 13. In this verse considering the
order which the prophet makes in that he first exhorts them to repentance
and to prayer, and so presently descends to these sweet promises following:
we may observe that so Repentance makes us fit for all benefits.
soon as a man has repented, so soon is he capable of the tender mercies of
God. All this while we have heard of no mercy but judgments, threatening and
thundering most fearful wrath: but now at length after some worthy
exhortations to repentance, comes this cheerful promise of mercy, to tell
us that we can no sooner repent on earth, but the Lord will seal our remission
in heaven, Job. 11. 14. 15. Naamans servant told him that the Prophet bad him
an easy thing, when he said, go wash and be clean; and therefore if he
would not wash he should not be clean: so is it but a short commandment that
we should be repentant, and then be saved; therefore if men will not repent,
it is no pity if they be not saved. Oh, I would to God that they might go out
of this life as free from sin, as Naaman went out of Israel free from
leprosy: but if the promises of God cannot be had without repentance, no more
then a cable roape can go through the eye of a needle, except it be spun as
fine as any thread; then are they like to lie on the Lords own hand, for there
are but few that will buy them so dearly: rather had they pass a short life
without promises in the possession of vanities, then lead a sorrowful life in
the fruition of godliness; so that the contrary shall be said to them, that
here the Prophet speaks: God will never be jealous over them and spare
their souls. The first reason: because in repentance we mitigate the
intolerable wrath of God, Ion 3. 3. that Reason 1.
thing which the everlasting pains of hell cannot perform may be redressed by
the sorrows of our hearts, and the tears of our lives: for no blood, no money,
no riches, no torments, nor any friends can appease the Lords wrath; but a
sorrowful perplexed spirit can do away all. For as the ground is fit for the
seed when it is ploughed; so a heart is fit for the Lord when it is broken. By
this we may see what is the folly of wicked men: for if by repentance good men
escape damnation; then without repentance evil men shall possess damnation.
Tell me, had thou leifer be drunk one meal, and then fast for ever after;
or fast at one meal, and then eat for all thy life following? Can thou not
abide two or three blows with a rod, to avoid ten thousand with an iron
scourage? or were thou not better have thy nails pared, then suffer thy
fingers to be cut off; and rather suffer a little blood to be taken from thee,
then let all thy life be lost? so endure here mourning for an hour, rather
then in hell for ever; and abide here the chastisement of God his word, rather
then in hell the punishment of devils: let thy life loose all her joy, rather
then thy soul should loose her salvation. Another reason: because it 2
works or brings life eternal, Act. 11. 28. now life eternal is all in
all: he that can have this, what matter is it? though his life be poor; his
body be starued; his name be odious; his miseries be tedious; his liberty be
closed up in irons; his health be laid up in sickness; and his friends be
turned into mortal foes: what are all these, if a man be assured of heaven?
surely lighter, then feathers; easier, then soft beds; and welcommer, then a
long life. Nay rather, what are all things without life eternal; great
livings, dainty fare, many friends, obedient servants, goodly houses, easy
days, soft beds and long life, but as the pleasant sting of a serpent? which a
while does so tickle the veins and sinews of the body, that it delights
every member; but in the end it swells the body, poysoneth the blood,
breaks the veins, and destroys the life: so are the goods of this life
without the goods of the world to come. Let us therefore make this use thereof,
that if it be but to dwell in our land, let us be repentant, Ierem. 25. 5. God
will Use 1.
not spare our land till we have repented. Oh, how fearful is it to think
that we should beg in Italy, or Spain, or France, when we may enjoy our
revenues in England? Let us weep at home, that we lament not in other lands:
let us sorrow in our houses, that we complain not in foreign prisons. Now
would the Lord feed us with the finest flower, the sweetest honey, the fattest
oxen, and the best lambs in the flock: Oh, why should we abuse all these? to
be carried where we shall want all sustenance for life. Some men hold their
lands by suite of law and continual danger: let us bestow as much for
repentance to hold ours, as they do to defend theirs. Let us repent for our
selves, for our possessions, for our wives and children, and for our bodies and
souls, or else all will be taken from us. Another 2
use. God will never withdraw his mercy from a repentant man, Zech. 1. 3. and
this was it that our Savior meant when he said, that all things are possible
to him that believes; namely, that he should begin, continue, and end well:
Fear not the assistance of God in any trouble, or trial, or death, or
affliction, if thou have repented; for thou shall hold out to the end.
Repentance made Abraham to travel longer and be well contented: it made the
Israelites to wait for Christ, and it encouraged the Martyrs to die for
Christ: therefore if thou have repented, thou may boldly assure thy self,
that thou shall have patience in every trouble, and zeal in all thy life, and
comfort in any distress, and ability for every temptation, with power to
abide death, and glory to reward thy soul: For although thou may slip after
thou have repented, yet thou can not finally perish; for all the sins done
after thy conversion, shall be everlastingly silenced. I might also note out of
this verse, that God is more ready and willing to pardon us, then we are to
ask pardon, Romans 10. 22. and therefore if we ask not, he will not only be
revenged for our sins, but also upon us for the sins of our fathers, Isa.
65. 7. Again, let us upon this ground be bold to pray in hope and assurance:
for as God 3
opened the iron gates for Peter to come forth out of prison; so has he
opened the gates of heaven, that our prayers without al let may come up before
him. I might also observe in this verse, that God does sometime cast off his
own people for a seaso, that he may for ever cast off the wicked, Ezec. 1. 15.
as a jealous husband puts off his wife, that he may for ever beware of his
enemies; for a friend cannot be hid in prosperity, nor an enemy in
adversity. The reasons, because the wicked blaspheme the just, Ier. 30. 17.
again, or else we should think that the wicked were happy, Psa. 37. 1, 2, 3.
therefore when once good men begin to cry, then shall wicked men begin to
fall, Isa. 35. 4. and we may boldly desire of God to turn his wrath from us to
them, Isa. 51. 22, 23. that his enemies may feel his heavy hand.

Yea the Lord will answer and say unto his people, Behold, I will send you
corn, and wine, and oil, and you shall be satisfied Verse. 19.
therewith; and I will no more make you a reproach among the heathen. In this
verse and so forward to the 27. the prophet does declare the special worldly
benefits, which God would give to his people upon their repentance: the first,
that he will hear their prayer, verse. 19. and herein he promises, first, to
answer them by word; secondly, to ease them. In this that the Lord says he
will answer them: 1
we may note that God has evermore a regard to the prayers of the penitent,
Ioh. 9. 31. howsoever he shuts his ears against sinners, accounting of
their prayers and God ever heard good men's prayers.
tears as of abomination, yet he makes great reckoning of their desires that
are in league with him. The faithful are as dear to the Lord as Esther was to
Assuerus, or Herodias daughter to Herod, who promised but one half of their
kingdom unto them; but the Lord has freely promised a whole kingdom, if we
will desire the same. This must mightily stir us up to prayer; for if the
Lord regard us when we pray, to bless us; then will he regard us when we
pray not, to curse us. Who lives in the world, but he has need of many
things: if he have need, he is blind, if he see it not; if he see it, he is
wilful if he ask not; if he ask, he is unfaithful, if he hope not to
receive. The reasons: first, because penitent men have felt poverty, Psalm.
Reason 1
79. 8. that is, they have been cast down enough, and therefore they shall be
raised up again. Again, they delight 2
in God, and therefore will God delight in them, Isa. 33. 6. for it cannot be
that God should love that man or that soul, that has no delight in his
majesty. Therefore hereby shall men try whether they be repentant, if so be
the meditation of God and his mercy, and their calling, and holiness, and his
word, be sweet and pleasant in their minds and mouths. First, as we tender
our own lives and welfare, so let us pray unto the Lord, Ier. 29. 12. for we
Use 1.
have great need to look to our selves in this distressed estate of the
world; and for so much as only the Lord is our keeper, how shall we commend
our lives unto him but by prayer. Pray always my dear brethren, as diligently
as you labor; as fervently as you thirst; as ordinarily as you eat; and as
joyfully as you sleep: pray I say, as a woman does in travel; as a sick man
does in his fits; as the mariners do in a storm; and as a condemned man at the
place of execution. Oh what would you not do, that you might live? and
therefore what ought you not to do, that you might pray. Unto prayer there
must be no comparison in worldly things; all earthly things must give place as
we see in Daniel; sleep must be put off, as we see in Christ; and ease must be
banished, as we see in David: and the Apostle wills for prayers sake, that
married folks become strangers one to another: and therefore so let us do for
prayer as we do for meat; for we never cease from hunger till we be satisfied:
so let us never cease from prayer till we be glorified. Secondly in this verse.
when he promises Corn, and wine, 2 All abundance to religion.
and oil: we may observe, that all abundance accompanies and as it were
waits upon religion. So long as the word reigns, the church stands, and
the Gospel is obeyed: so long we need not fear, for our fields shall
abound with corn, and our land shall flow with plenty, Psalm. 81. 16. We have
had best experience of this thing in England; for ever since the Gospel had
any footing among us, and was publicly preached, and generally professed, we
were never in any general distress: but we have forgotten all sorrow; and I
would God we had not forgotten our peace and plenty giver. But since we
began to be weary of the truth, that Divines fell to wrangling, professors to
carnalitie, and hypocrites into Atheism; since that time we have felt some
want of corn, and some terror of war. Oh, that we could so continue in
profession, that we might dwell in the Lords favor: so should we be ever
fed with the finest wheat, clothed with the warmest wool, and defended by
the greatest angels; but seeing we begin to be weary of our religion, God
begins to be weary of his liberality: so that I verily fear, till we
have all repented, our corn and plenty shall not be restored. The reasons;
First, because by such abundance Reason 1
the Lord breaks in pieces the fiery violence of wicked men, Psalm. 37. 17.
for they accuse religion for a base and poor profession: and therefore after a
calamity God gives to his church greatest plenty; as after a long rain, the
sun shines brightest. Another reason; because 2
by such plenty God cures and heals the misery of his people, Esaias 30. 28.
which being fearfully afflicted through famine, are again most joyfully
comforted through plenty: so that abundance is like a medicine or plaster,
which with good advise heals and cures; but through abuse corrupts and
makes the wound more incurable. First, then let us desire the spirit of God
to be Use 1.
powered on us, and then shall the wilderness become fruitful, and the barren
earth be amended, Esaias 32. 15. The same spirit that makes good hearts, makes
glad fields, that which gives store of righteousness, gives store of food and
corn: And thus God gives under one request two benefits. For when we ask for
grace, he gives more also, as Solomon asking for wisdom, obtained wisdom
and riches: or as Ruth desiring to gleane after the reapers; Boaz gave her
leave to gather among the sheaues; and at length made her lady and mistress
of all he had. Seek therefore the kingdom of God, and the righteousness
thereof, and all other things, as godly children, obedient families, plenty
of victuals, peace of life, length of days, and glory everlasting shall be
heaped on thee. Again, 2
if abundance follow the profession of religion, then it is manifest, that
when plenty fails, religion also fails, Ierem. 9. 12, 13. For as there can
be no preaching when there is no minister, so there can be no plenty when
there is no professing. Oh, this cutteth our nation to the quick, for the
Lord by this dearth, does avouch to our faces, that there is among us as great
decay of his church, as of corn, and the seed of the word has been as much
choked and drowned in the hearts of men, as the seed of the earth has been
choked and drowned in the fields of men: and what remains? but as the
Prophet says, that the Lord feed us with wormewoode, and give us the
bitterness of gall to drink. I fear greatly, if our misery continue, our
religion will be clean abolished; and if our want be now redressed, we shall
be shortly cast into a bed of comfortles troubles; for as yet I cannot see any
general or continual repentance in lamentation. Thirdly, when the Lord
promises them to deliver them from the reproach 3
of the heathen: we may note, that it is a great blessing of God to be
delivered from slander, Job 5. 21. To live without slander it is impossible,
except we could live without sin: And therefore if at any time thou be
suspected and defamed, pray unto the Lord to be delivered from it. The
reasons: First, because life and death are Reason 1.
in the power of the tongue, Prouer. 28. 21. So then who can continue life, or
bring death but God alone? Secondly, slanderous toongs do hate them that are
in affliction: that is, they will then more grieve them and belie them, because
they think then will every body believe them. Mark this thing well, and you
shall see that it is the common practice of this age. Let us not open our ears
to every Use 1.
tale, or take heed, or ask what other men say of us, Eccle. 7. 23. for that
will hurt us. And let us refrain our 2
toongs from slander, or else we have no religion, Iam. 1. 26.

The xxvij. Sermon.
Verse. 20. But I will remove far off from you the northren army, and I
will drive him into a land barren and desolate, with his face toward the east
sea, and his end to the utmost sea: and his stink shall come up, and his
corruption shall ascend, because he has exalted him self to do this.
AFter the promise of plenty, follows the remoouing away of the Northren
army, which are the Locusts, palmers, and the other noisome beasts, who came
by a northren wind, and therefore are called the Northren army, whom he will
drive away into the wilderness, where they shall all starve and never come
again, with their face or forefront to the east sea; that is, the dead sea,
which lay eastwarde; so called, because never any fish could live therein. And
this is that sea which now covers all the land of Sodom and Gomorhe, called
the lake Asphaltite. And his end to the utmost sea: That is, the great sea,
which is called the Mediterranean sea. And his stink shall ascend: Meaning,
there they should lie unburied, and their filthiness ascend, and remain odious
to God and men. From hence, when he says that he will drive away: God only
drives away hurtful things
we must note that it is only the Lord that must take away from us all
noisome and hurtful things, Deuteronomy. 32. 39. We have touched this doctrine
already, when we showed in the former chapter, that no judgment can be
removed by natural means. The first reason; because by this Reason 1.
means he is known to be the God of the world, Exodus 7. 17. Again, as his
hand sends evil, Amos 3. 7. so his 2
hand must remove evil, Esaias 49. 9. Let us therefore learn howsoever we
be annoied, to seek for help of Use 1.
God; and as we have been often admonished, let the afflictions of the body,
wring forth the tears and prayers of the soul. Again, seeing God will drive
from us all hurtful things, let us not fear the sting of death, nor the
power 2
of the grave, Hos. 13. 14. And if we believe that God shall raise us up from
death to life, why should we think that beasts or birds, or afflictions
shall ever prevail against us? It is the better for us, that God alone does
this thing, and not our selves, for our power is often weakened, but his hand
and strength is always mighty. Secondly, when he brings in the wilderness and
dead sea, to receive 2
these devouring beasts: He teaches us that there is as good use of the
barren as of the plowed land; and of the sea where nothing lives, as of the
sea where all engender; for these are made to destroy, as the other are made to
build up. Whereby we may see, that all the creatures of All things help God
to destroy his enemies.
the world do help God against his enemies to perform his wrath, Ios 10.
12. The clouds throw down stones, and the Sun stood still a whole day
till Iosuah had discomfited all his enemies. The first reason: because they will
not help them that God persecuteth, Esaias 15. 6. David would not spare the men
that slew Ishboseth his enemy: Reason 1.
and much more will not the creatures spare or help them that are enemies to
God. Again, the day of wrath is a day of affliction, Esaias 22. 5. and therefore
the creaatures 2
are afraid of judgment themselves: And as Iezabels messengers followed and
turned after Iehu her enemy: so all the creatures of God turn after him, when
he is in war to destroy sinners. Let us therefore learn to Use 1.
look upon our creator, Esaias 17. 7. and that in this time, when time of
repentance may be had. For as the inhabitants of Ceilah would have betrayed
David to Saul, that he might slaie him; so would all the creatures of the
Lord deliver and betraie us unto him (though more justly) that he may make an
end of us. God is almost forgotten among men to be their creator, for they
give more reverence to their parents then to him: therefore will the creatures
forget us, and deliver us up for spies and enemies, as Joseph gave Simeon his
brother into prison. Again, let this general 2
obedience of the creatures cause us to walk more righteouslie, Esaias 33. 15.
16. or else they will one day be revenged, because we have caused them to be
subjected unto vanity. What a grievous thing is it? that these dumb creatures
should receive when God gives, and give when God asks, and obey when God
commands; and yet we which have more reason, are not mollified by the gifts
of God, or warned by our works to him, or pierced by his commandments: but of
this enough else where. Because he has exalted. This is the reason why the
Lord will bring so sharp a punishment upon them, because they have been so
bold as to afflict his people. But some may say unto me, did not the Lord send
these creatures to destroy? and if he sent them, why does he punish them? and
if he sent them not, how could they come in such swarms? to whom I answer
that the Lord sent them, and yet they exalted themselves to do it. Whereby we
may gather, that men shall not always escape unpunished, although they perform
that which God commanded: for God willed A man may offend God, in doing that
which he willed.
that Christ should be crucified, but yet Judas was nevertheless eternally
plagued, Act. 1. 18. if one man murder another, God will have it so, or else
it could not be; yet shall the murderer suffer death justly. God will have good
men in his church to be persecuted, imprisoned, and martyred by the enemies:
yet woe be to those men and hands, that so handle and mangle their godly
members. The first Reason 1.
reason: because in these actions men serve not God, but their own will, Act.
13. 27. God decrees it for one cause, but they do it for another: as God
would have Christ delivered for the sins of the world, but Judas betrayed him
for thirty pieces of silver. God would have Christ dye for redemption, but the
Jews would put him to death for malice: and thus one and the same thing done
for diverse causes does not excuse their malice, as we may note in the story of
Joseph and his brethren. Again, as they do it for 2
their own pleasure, so they attribute it to their own power, Isa. 10. 13. so
we shall find many boasting of their wickedness; how they have played the tall
fellows in wounding, and killing, and whooring, and stealing, and endicting,
and condemning, and accusing other men, when themselves are as guilty of hell
as the other were of death. Oh fearful spectacle of humane infirmity! that
we may do that which God wills to be done; and yet we cannot will as God
would have it done. No marvel if our life be so separated from God, when our
will cannot agree with our hand. Seeing we may be transgressors in doing that
which God commands, especially when we have to do Use 1.
with the godly: let us follow the counsel of Pilates wife, which was this,
that we have nothing to do against just men, for God will surely plague us in
the end, Matthew. 27. 19. Speak not against them, for it shall be rewarded;
fight not against them, for thou shall be conquered; spoil them not, for thou
shall be spoiled; and accuse them not, for thou shall be condemned. They are
the eye of God, prick them not; they are the Lords anointed, touch them not;
they are Christ's members, hurt them not: for surely as Saul by striving against
David did spoil himself, and as Pharaoh by tyrannizing over the Israelites,
did undo himself and all his country; so shall thou bring both nations and
people, thy self, and all thy posterity into everlasting woe, if thou
oppress the professors of religion. Remember if thou chastise them, thou art
but the rod of God; which, when corrections be finished is thrown into the
fire: and even as now Pilate wishes (though it be too late) that he had obeyed
his wifes counsel; so shall thou wish (if not too late) that thou had
never meddled against religion. Again, let us learn to frame our wills to 2
God his will, and then shall our hands without trespass work that which God
commands: and therefore do nothing of malice, for that is of the devil; do
nothing of envy, for that is of sedition; do nothing rashly, for that is
folly; but do all things with love, for there is God. If thou can do anything
and not break the bond of love to God, or to thy neighbor, thou sinnest not;
yea, although it seem never so sinful in the sight of man, for love is the
fulfilling of the law: so then so long as thou workest in love, so long thou
do not offend God; and so long as thou do not offend God, so long thou
do not transgress the law.

Fear not o land, but be glad and rejoice, for the Lord will do Verse. 21.
mighty things. In this and in the verses following the Prophet gives them
very many exhortations, grounded on the never failing promise of God: First,
generally in this verse, and then more specially in the verses following. In
this verse, he bids them not to fear: some will think that this
exhortation is needles, for if they did not fear they could not believe his
former threatenings. To whom I answer, that he means they should not
distrust the promises of God, notwithstanding all the before named judgments;
and therefore presently in this verse he tells them, that the Lord will do
for them mighty things. By this then we gather, that in all good men the
promises of God must be more powerful then the fear of evil: more plainly
thus, Art thou feared with sickness, with poverty, with loss of children,
and such like dangers then? remember the promise of God which says, that all
shall work to thy best, and that I will not fail thee The promises of God
must ever prevail with good men.
nor thy seed, and such like; and so let these promises more comfort thee then
thy terrors do dismay thee: So our Savior comforted his disciples, and in
them all of us, Luc. 12. 32. Fear not little flock, it is your fathers will
to give you a kingdom; and David said well to this purpose, Though I walk in
the valley of death I will not fear, for thy rod and thy staff they comfort
me: so let us say with him, though we live in fear of war, and famine, and
pestilence, and devil, and death, and hell; yet we will not fear, because
God has said they shall not hurt us. Iosuah was never afraid to fight, because
God had said, that he would fight for him; so let not us be afraid to fight
with sin, to live in danger, to languish in prison, and to pine away in
famine; seeing we have the Lords own promise, that none of these shall
destroy us, but amend us. The first reason, because his everlasting Reason 1.
love is the cause of his promise, and therefore it will perform his mercy,
Ier. 31. 3 and if it be everlasting, then is the force thereof now as well, as
when it was first made; and seeing it never was nor ever shall be repealed,
therefore it shall as well strengthen thy soul, as the soul of Noah, or
Abraham, or Moses, or David, or Jeremy, or any other. Again, evil things are
always co^ditionally threatened, meaning, 2
if men repent not: as we may see in David, Ahab, Nineveh, and many other; and
therefore repentant men need not fear any danger; for they are always blessed,
having the angels to defend them against the force of men, and Christ to fight
for them against the rage of Satan. Let Use 1.
us therefore learn to give all diligence, that we may be sure of the favor
of God, Psa. 23. 6. And for this cause Peter bids us give all diligence to
make our election sure, meaning, that this is the greatest work of the world,
that men should be certain of the promises of God. When we have the promises,
and cannot certainly yield unto them, then are we like sick men, which have
good physic, but cannot be persuaded to take it, because they think it will
do them no good: so we think these promises uncertain, and some they have
help, but some they failed. But we must know that the promises never failed,
if the men were not unfaithful; for as men will not plant corrupt impes and
graftes, so God will not make unsteadfast promises: but as the ground does many
times alter a good plant that it grows not; so men do choke the promises
that they help not. Therefore if God bid thee not fear, then cast away fear;
if he bid thee not weep, then cease from tears; as when he bids thee not
kill, thou refrainest from murder. The assurance of the Lords favor must
grow by a continual practice of repentance, as the Apostle teaches, when he
says, Patience works experience, Romans 5. and therefore this benefit we may
reap by our often sorrows, that we may come with confidence to the throne of
grace. Another use: seeing the promises of God must 2
be so auailable in us, that they must expel all fear of evil, then let us
especially be armed with them against the fear of death, that every one of us
may say with Job. 13. 15. that although God slay us, yet will we trust in him.
What does more trouble all the world, then does the departure out of the
world? for it makes good men pray with David, I will not die but live; and it
makes evil men at their wits end, to think on the pains of death: therefore
blessed is the remedy of the sweet promises of God which enable us against
death. Daniel being once preserved among the lions alive, would never be
afraid to be cast among them again; so we which once were not and now are,
once were dead and now alive; once were under the devil, but now under Christ:
let us not, I say, fear the gates of death, or the sorrows of the grave. To
whom do I speak, but to them that shall pass under the hand of death?
therefore learn attentively what is delivered: when thou beginnest to draw
toward the sun setting of thy life, I mean, thy death; then look upon all the promises of God which ever thou heardest at Sermons, or did read in the
Scriptures, and lay them to thy soul, bidding it not to fear death, for the
Lord has commanded thee not to fear it. But peradventure it will reply unto
thee and say; the pain of death is intolerable, how can I but fear it? then
tell it again, that it is not so, for death has lost her sting, as the
apostle says, O death where is thy sting? what is an adder, a viper, or a
serpent, when they have lost their sting? Surely every young child may play
with them and handle them. And as the pains of a travailing woman, do bring
forth a man child; so thy pain shall work pleasure, thy life shall bring
death, thy sorrows shall gain joys; thy friends shall be turned into
saints; thy parents into angels; and thy governors into God himself: If thou
be a woman, he will be thy husband; if thou be a man he will be thy wife;
and if thou be a servant he will be thy Lord. Oh, fear not death, but
learn the promises of God, to comfort thee against it: and think what shall
be thy blessedness? to forsake the world to go to heaven; to forsake thy
poverty, to go to riches; to forsake thy sickness, to go to health; to forsake
thy friends, to go to God; and to forsake a living of house and land, for a
whole kingdom. Oh, trust in God in life, that thou may trust in God in
death; believe in Christ in health, that thou may believe in him in
sickness; pray unto him in thy joys, that thou may pray unto him in thy
sorrows. And be not afraid while thou art living of the power of man, that
thou may not be afraid when thou art dying of the power of death and
condemnation. For God shall. Now he gives them the reason of this
exhortation why they should not fear; because the Lord would do mighty
things for them: whereby we may note, that the unspeakable power of God
should make men to rejoice, Esaias 14. 27. For what can better assure us of his
promises then this, that he is able to perform them, and therefore as the
godly comfort themselves with this saying; The Lord is king be the earth
never so impatient: so let us lift up our selves in comfort, in the kingdom,
glory, majesty, power, and mercy of God that he can do what he will; and
will do what we pray for. The first reason: because for the godlies sake he
works miracles, Exodus 15. 12. and therefore we Reason 1.
ought to rejoice in his power. We may read Mark 2. that for one miracle all
the people gave praise unto God: We have many miracles and woonders done for
us, and who is able to tell what God has done for his soul; therefore yet let
thy heart rejoice when thy tongue is not able to express the power of God.
Another reason: because nothing 2
can stand against the salvation of his elect, Psalm. 107. 14. For the sea
shall be emptied, the earth shall be removed, the rocks shall be broken, and
the heavens shall bow themselves, that the power of God may be manifested, and
his saints be saved. Let us learn by consideration of his Use 1.
power to serve him more earnestly as David does, Psalm. 118. 27. when he had
told how mightily God destroyed his enemies as a fire of thorns; then he
presently adds, Bind the sacrifice with coardes unto the horns of the
altar. As God is powerful to save, so is he powerful to destroy; and
therefore be afraid, least, as he is able to bless thee, if thou do well;
so he curse thee if thou do evil. Pilate would have had Christ have
answered, because (he said) he had power to loose him or to deliver him; but
he was rebuked for his labor: let us much more answer the Lord, for he
has absolute power to do with us whatsoever he will. Again, let us learn by
consideration of the 2
power of God to believe in him more confidently as Abraham did, Romans 4. 21.
although he saw no reason how the promise of God should be fulfilled (if
Isaac were sacrificed) yet this did animate him that God was able to raise him
from death to life: and so let us be obedient to the Lords commandments when
they are contrary to al reason and nature. For God which sees more then we
see, can do more then we can do. Therefore fear not thy worldly joy which is
as dear to thee as ever was Isaac to Abraham, for God can raise it out of the
pits of deepest sorrow, into the throne of everlasting pleasure.

The xxviij. Sermon.
Verse. 22 Be not afraid ye beasts of the field: for the pastures of the
wilderness are green: for the tree bears her fruit, the fig tree and the vine
do give their force.
Having finished the general exhortation, now follows the special, whereof
this first is directed to the beasts of the field bidding them not be afraid:
for now the fruits are budded out of the earth; as they had already tasted of
man's punishment which comes by sin; so now they should taste of man's blessing
which comes by repentance. We must not so take this speech of the prophet as
if the beasts did or could understand, but by a usual figure of the scripture,
whereby a person is feigned to do a thing that it cannot do, as in that of
Jeremy, Hear o heavens, hearken o earth, etc. For as God calls things that
are not as if they were: so he speaks to things that understand not, as if
they did. From hence that the Prophet speaks to bruit beasts, we may note,
that it is the word of The word of God gladdeth man and beast.
God that gladdeth both man and beast, Genesis 1. 22. for when the word of comfort
is withdrawn, then they mourn as we heard in the former chapter: but when it
stands, then they rejoice; and when it waineth, then they fall away. The first
reason, because they do reverence thereunto; now their reverence proceeds
not of fear, but of nature, Reason 1.
whereby the creature reioiceth in his creator, Isa. 45. 21. Again, their
whole life does depend thereon, Psalm. 36. 6. and therefore their whole care,
or rather their natural incliation 2
is to glorify their creator. Let us also which are the creatures of God,
partakers of their natures; as we have a spirit, with the angels; sense and
flesh, with the beasts; life and motion, with trees; and solid substance, with
the stones: be glad and joyful with the earth, in much fruit; with the trees,
in a quick and growing obedience; with the beasts, in a lively sense of the
Lords grace; and with the angels, in an everlasting lauding of his majesty: or
else he will take his word from us, and give it to them which will bear more
fruit; for although we be all destroyed, yet is God able of the stones of the
street to make living souls to sit with angels in his kingdom: and let us
cast away all uncleanness, Iam. 1. 21. that with them we may be clear of sin
and ready for immortality. I might also in this verse take occasion to show
you how all the creatures of God rejoice in his benefits: the ox, for the
grass; the foul, for seeds; the fishes, for rain; the Be, for the dew; the
horse, for the pasture; and the angels, for the conversion of men: therefore
let man be converted that he abuse not that which these honor, and despise
not that which saves us all.

Be glad then ye children of Zion, and reioce in the Lord your Verse. 23.
God: for he has given you the rain of righteousness, and he will cause to
come down for you the first rain, and the latter rain in the first month.
This verse contains another special exhortation to the members of the church
under the name of Zion, as has been already declared, bidding them also to
rejoice; for as there is a time to mourn, so there is a time to reioise. And
the reasons of their joy are rehearsed: First, because as rain, so should
righteousness come down upon them, 23. Secondly, for fruitfulnes, which should
fill all their barnes: 24. and fully recompense their former losses: 25. and
lastly, that they should comfortably eat thereof, verse. 26. When he bids
the children of Zion to be glad; we may note, that it is only God that
reioiceth God only gives ioies.
our hearts, Eccl. 2. 24. for as before he had bid them rend in sunder their
hearts; so now he bids them to sow them together again, and he himself
does give a plaster to make them whole for evermore. Thus works repentance;
first, by tears, and then by joys; as a woman that first groneth, and
afterward laugheth with her child in her arms; and like to old Jacob who went
a long journey into Egypt, to see his son Joseph, and their first meeting was
nothing but tears. The reason: because God only takes away sin, Prou. 29.
6. therefore our sins make us Reason 1.
sorrowful when they are wantied to us, as a burden to a horses back, and
then they rejoice us, when they are taken from us: but sins are not only
burdens on our backs, but pricks in our sides, and thorns in our eyes,
which keep us from all rest, and hinder us from all sight of goodness. They
play with us for a season as the devil seems to play with witches: but alas,
in the end their mating faces are all turned into sorrowful woes.

Another reason, because God only humbles and raises 2 Use 1.
up, and therefore he only gives sorrow and joy, Psalm. 51. 10. Let us
therefore know when we are heavy, that God has laid his hand upon us, and
fear his name, Psalm. 86. 10. and not seek extraordinary means, as Saul did
by music, to remove from us that dumpish grief that presses us down: but
rather take the exhortation of James, when we be sorrowful to lift up our
selves in prayer: for as those which were stoong with serpents, must look on
the brazen serpent before they could be whole; so must we which are stoong
with sorrow, look to the Lord which wrought our sorrow, before we can
rejoice. Again, let us seek for those lawful means in the creatures of God,
2
which may any way cause us in the time of our sorrows, to lift up our selves
in praise to God, Psalm. 70. 5. There is not any creature, but it may put us in
mind of some benefit or other; so that so often as we behold the same, so
often we may rejoice in the workmanship of our creator: and truly as it is a
great fault not to mourn when God calls for lamentation; so is it no less
fault not to rejoice when God bids to rejoice. Let us therefore learn to be
so affected, that by the plentiful hand of God we may be stirred up to praise;
but by withdrawing his benefits, we may be moved to repentance. Again, when
he 3
speaks to the church under the name of the children of Zion, we are taught
that the members of the church must be as children, Matt. 18. 3. Children are
ever growing, so must we in grace; children often hunger, so ought we after the
food of our souls; they take no care, but their parents provide for them; no
more ought we, for God cares for us: their natures are pure, so must ours be;
they have seldom sickness, so ought we seldom to sin. The Reason 1.
reasons are: first, because children are without malice, 1. Cor. 14. 20. for
he is no member of the church that is malicious, but a murderer; again,
children honor their parents; so ought the members of the church to honor
their God, Mal. 1. 6. But alas malice has devoured the love of man, and the
honor of God, and we shall hardly find one among a thousand that is not
maliciously bent against one or other. But let us learn to lead our lives in
fear, seeing Use 1.
we are the children of God, 1. Pet. 1. 17. for else we may be children, but
stubborn children, and such as the Lord will never acknowledge. Again, let
us learn to do the 2
will of our heavenly father, Matt. 21. 28. For not every one that can say, Our
father which art in heaven; or, Lord, Lord, Christ our Savior, and our
redeemer, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven. Oh let us be sanctified; for
this is the will of God, even our sanctification; for except we do that which
he bids, and bring that which he calls for, we shall come to confusion as
Babel did; wherein, when the builders called for stone, they brought mortar;
and when they called for mortar, they brought brick: so when we should do one
thing, we do another; and when God calls for holiness, we run to
profaneness. Again, 3
when he bids them to rejoice in the Lord their God, we may note, that the
joy of good men is only in God and spiritual things, Psalm. 53. 7. it is not
in masking and mumming, Wherein good men rejoice.
piping and dancing, marrying or monkering, eating or drinking, hawking or
hunting, riding or running; but in this, that God is theirs, and they are his;
and this is the best part, which cannot be taken from them. The first reason:
because he looks on the estate of the poor abject, Reason 1.
Isa. 29. 19. but the world will not acknowledge a brother if he be in
poverty, or a friend if he be in danger. Again, God opens his most
secret goodness to his saints, 2
Cant. 1. 4. bringing them into his cellars of wine, who can but rejoice in
him, that reioiceth in them? and who can withholde his heart from him, that gave
him heart and soul and life and all? For one benefit or good turn, David
took Abigaijl for his wife, but if we having so much kindness from the Lord
do refuse him from being our husband; let us beware least the wrath of God
fall upon us, as the wrath of David should have fell on Nabal, that he would
not leave man, woman, or child alive of his posterity. Let us not rejoice in
our works, Luc. 10. 20. nor in the world which is but transitory; nor in riot
which is but labor; nor in riches, which are but vanity; nor in eating, which
is but necessity; nor in garments, which are but shadows of sin, nor in any
thing but in God, who has registered our names in the kingdom of heaven. Let
us also rejoice with John Baptist, Ioh. 3. 29. That we have heard the voice of
the bridegroom, that his Gospel has bin preached to us, his graces have bin
poured on us; his blood has been shed for us; his death has redeemed us;
and that he has bought us to serve him without fear all the days of our
life. The rain of righteousness. This is the first reason of his exhortation
to joy: for as before they had wanted fruits through want of rain; so they
had wanted goodness through want of grace: and now he promises both, namely
righteousness and fruitfulness, for this rain of righteousness, does
signify abundance of righteousness: wherein by the metaphor (rain) I might
tell you from whence comes grace, righteousness, justification and
sanctification; from above as the rain does, and many other ways I might urge
the figure; but I rest not in figures, I will go to the plain words. And
seeing in the first place he promises them the rain of righteousness; we
may note that religion and holiness Religion better for the church then riches.
is better for the church then any riches, Proverb. 28. 6. There is not any
thing more needful for a man then to live under the wings of God; and there
is not any thing more needful for him that lives under the wings of God,
that is, in his church, then the knowledge and practice of the pure worship of
God. The paradise where Adam was; the riches of Solomon; the peace of Augustus
Caesar; the glory of David; or the pomp of Agrippa, are nothing so needful
for the church, as is preaching and hearing, and praying and weeping. David was
never farther from God, then when he was most at ease: The rich man was never
so near distress as when his barnes were fullest: The Israelites were never
in more danger then when they were pampered with quails; and Noah was safer in
the arc, then on the dry land: And so are we all in better estate when the
world thinks us to be miserable, then when it judges us to be happy. The
reasons: First, because the Reason 1.
things of this life do drown us in miserable temptations, 1. Tim. 6. 9. but
religion quieteth the mind, establishes the conscience, drives away the
devil, cutteth off many sins, is ready for death, and is assured of
salvation. Again, all the good we receive by abundance is this; 2
that we shall have no consolation in the life to come, and therefore God has
better provided for us, that we should live here a little while in poverty and
ever after in glory, rather then here a little while in riches, and ever
after in hell fire. Let us therefore bestow all the labor we Use 1.
can that we may have religion, and grow in graces, 1. Cor. 1. 5. thereon
adventure thy money, for thy merchandise shall be warranted: If there be any
man that has religion, buy some of him; if there be any means to obtain it,
use them earnestly; if there be any fair or mart where it may be bought,
travail thither: The ministers are the men that have it; prayers are the
means to get it; and the church is the place where thou may buie it: the
persons are noted, thou may easily find them; the means are cheap, thou
may speedily use them; the place is near, thou may quickly and often go
for thy store. Oh, travail for righteousness, and grace, and holiness, for
all these are sold together. Be not poor in religion, but rich, that thou
may rather be able to give then to receive. As there be some very poor,
and make no spare, for age or sickness: so there be some which have little or
no religion, which only take so much as will save them from present danger of
law or infidelity, and never think what they shall do when they come to
their graves. Yet let these be also warned, that they labor to be rich in
religion, for a poor man may be rich in righteousness; and a rich man may be
poor in goodness. Again, let rich men 2
especially look to themselves, Iam. 5. 1. for they for the most part esteem
more of gain then of grace, and of a great gentleman though he be an infidel,
then of a poor and true member of Christ. Let them remember how few good rich
men are named in the Scriptures: and let them always set before their eyes that
most dreadful saying of our Savior; It is easier for agable to go thorough the
eye of a needle, then for a rich man to enter into heaven. Let them be
liberal to good uses, courteous to every christian, sparing in all expenses,
humble in all authority: not gorgeous, but clothed with Christ; not covetous,
but open handed; not ambitious, but content with their place, and not infidels,
but as far exceed other in faith as they do in wealth. He shall give you
the first rain. In those countries they had ordinarily two raines in the year
especially desired, whereof the first was most acceptable when they first sowed
their seed: and the latter rain was in the spring of the year, which is here
called the first month, answering in some part to our March and April,
because the world was made as it were in the spring of the year. But in this
that the Prophet promises them the first and the latter rain, we must observe
that it is the Lord that rules the clouds, giving all The Lord rules the
clouds.
seasonable and unseasonable weather, 1. King 18. 1. The reasons are, because
he will only be known to bless the works of our hands, Deuteronomy. 28. 1. Again,
it is only he which decketh the heavens with clouds, Psalm. 147. 8. Let us Use
1
therefore learn to fear the Lord by the consideration of rain, Ierem. 5.
24. for he reserueth for us the appointed weeks for harvest. Me thinks that
every creature of God do so admonish us of our duty, that not so much as the
little drops of rain, but they teach us to fear him. Oh, that our souls
could so thirst for the mercy of God as the earth thirsts for the water
drops, or the grace of God might so fall from heaven on our hearts, as the
rain does issue from the clouds on the ploughed land! Again, 2
let us seek for the testimony of the Lords favor toward us in them, Act.
14. 17. the Apostle shows the rain of the clouds, the spring of the earth,
and the increase of temporal things, to be a sufficient means, for the old
world to have searched for, and found out God; but yet they did not search into
it: and so is it now a good means for many ignorant souls to lead them to
God at the first; if they consider, the world continues, the grass grows,
the corn increases, and the rain falls down from heaven, that by these, as
it were by the crosse-row of letters, they might com to greater knowledge in
religion. When he says, that their barnes shall be full of wheat, and their
presses shall abound with oil and wine; he notes thereby, that their decayed
houses shall be builded again, and their full joy restored: And also that if
God do once begin to do good to his people, he never thinks any thing too
much that is bestowed on them, if they be repentant.

The xxix. Sermon.
Verse. 25. And I will render unto you the years that the grasshopper has
eaten, the caterpiller, and canker-woorme, and palmer-woorme, my great host
which I sent among you.
NOw he touches the restitution of their goods lost in famine, telling them
that all their former years devoured by the beasts shall be restored again.
By which we may note a woonderful example of the Lords kindness, that he will
give to the repentant whatsoever they have lost in trouble: It were enough for
him, yea, more then he owes us, if he did only ease our misery; yet is he We
have no loss by affliction.
not contented therewith, but gives us as much as we desire, and beyond our
desires as much as we lost; so he dealt with Job. cap. 42. 10. giving him a
thousand for five hundred, six for three, and fourteen for seven. The first
reason, Reason 1.
because he would have none to be like him in mercy and liberality, Mich. 7.
18. Secondly, that the wicked may note a difference betwixt the just and the
unjust, Mal. 3. 2
18. therefore let not any thing in the world hinder thy conversion, Ierem. 7.
14. for thy sins shall be changed into much holiness; thy poverty into
great wealth; thy sorrow into double joy; and thy short life into twice so many
days. If thou had little ease, now it shall be more; or little peace, it
shall be increased; or little grace, it shall be augmented; or little joy, it
shall be multiplied: and thus will God take away curse and change it into
blessing, and turn our punishment into pardon. Again, let us hereby Use.
be instructed, that there shall never be any hinderance to the joy of the
Lords saints, Isa. 40. 2, 3. the crooked shall be made straight; the high shall
be made low; the low shall be made high; the weak shall be made strong; the
sick shall be made whole; the lame shall be made well limmed; the sorrowful
heart shall be reioysed; and the contrite soul shall be glorified: the great
power of satan shall not hinder; the tyranny of sin shall not prevail; nor
the space twixt heaven and earth shall keep us from ascending to ioies. Oh
come on my brethren with hope and comfort, and bestow your labor in the word
more cheerfully, that our single sorrows may receive double joys.

So you shall eat and be satisfied, and praise the name of the Verse. 26.
Lord your God, that has dealt maruellouslie with you: and my people shall
never be ashamed. Having signified unto them their plenty, now he grants
unto them the free and lawful use of every creature, telling them they
should eat and drink them, and praise the name of God for them. When he
says, They shall eat and be satisfied: we may note a great blessing of God
upon meat temperately received, for it satisfies us, meaning it nourishes
and maintains life, Hag. 1. 6. but when it is riotously and gluttonously
devoured, then men fall into sickness in stead of health; into raging in
stead of quietness: and this is the very cause why our affraies and quarrels
are begun at tauernes and alehouses, and at great idol and glutton feasts,
because men receive them not in moderation, but in excess. The first reason:
because meat so Reason 1.
taken gives strength to the body, 1. Sam. 1427. Jonathan tasted but a drop of
honey and his wearied body was strengthened: and his eyes almost blind
recovered their sight. Another reason: because meat thus taken cheereth the 2
Use 1.
heart of man, Ruth 3. 7. Let us therefore learn what a singular benefit it is to
eat and be satisfied with the labors of our own hand, Eccle. 5. 16. 17. for
if the Lord should breath thereon, then were our travail in the dust: meat
has no life in it, and yet it keeps life in us; who is able to show the
cause hereof, but the Lord who knows all? and if this one blessing should
fail us, although our possessions were as great as Salomons, yet they would
not serve us. Again, let every man in his place gather this meat and ^
comfort for his life, Esaias 62. 3. that so we may perform the old
commandment of God to Adam, that we eat our meat in the sweat of our
faces. The Bees will not suffer one drone among them: and so let not us suffer
them that are careless to provide some thing whereby their duty may be
discharged to God, and their lives preserved in the world. Secondly, he
tells them with what affection they should receive their meat; With praise
and thanksgiving to God: Whereby we may see one principal token of a
temperate receiver, in that he can give thanks to God for his meat, 1. Cor.
10. 25. but gluttons and belligods take their meat as Swine do; although with
more manners, yet with as little reverence, sitting down to fill their
bellies, and rising up to fulfill their pleasures, and through immeasurable
fulness, their teeth put their mouth to silence, and sleep falls on them,
that their hearts do not only forget their feeder, but their maintainer also.
The first reason: because it is a token they love God, Deuteronomy. 12. 11. and they
that love never offend: for love is the fulfilling Reason 1.
of the law. Again, meat is only blessed unto them that join thanksgiving
with it, 1. Sam. 9. 13. So that 2
whatsoever is not thankfully received must needs be accursed. And surely if
Paul said, he had rather never eat meat as long as he lived, then eat to
the offense of his brother: we may more lawfully pine in famine, starve in
want, and perish in distress of meat, rather then God should be offended.
Thieves which steal for meat, coseners that deceive for meat; beggars that
counterfaite for meat; idle persons that work not for meat, and rich men
that pray not for meat, can never be thankful for that which they eat,
but all is accursed unto them. Let us therefore for fear of the curse, and
especially for conscience of death, live soberly in prayer, in our eating and
drinking, working and resting, sleeping and waking, because we know not
whether we eat our last morsel, as the Israelites which died with meat in
their mouths, or work our last day-worke, as the poor man that was stoned
for gathering sticks on the Sabbath; or sleep our last sleep, and never
wake again: Surely as Jacob ended his life when he had blessed his children;
so shall we be happy if we end our lives, when we have praised God. Again,
Use 2.
let us not tempt God for meat whatsoever distress we live in, but seek it
humbly in prayer, Psalm. 104. 27. that we may eat more cheerfully, and be
assured that God will continue his blessings: for what shall it profit to
feed our bodies to the full, and let our souls go starve and pine away to
death? That the Lord has. This clause is added unto their praises at meat,
because then they ought to remember the Lords benefits, the which thing ought
to drive away all vain and foolish tabletalke, wherein men silence the mercy
of God, and praise the taste of their meat, or the liberality of the
feast-maker, always thanking him, and never thinking on God; whereas they are
bound to do both. We may note in these words, that God does not only use his
ordinary God uses ordinary and extraordinary power to deliver his church.
power in the delivery of his church, but also his extraordinary, whereby he
works maruels and woonders, 1. Pet. 1. 5. for by the wonderful power of God
are we continued in our profession, contained in the church, and preserved to
life eternal. God told David, 2. Sam. 12. that if he had not done enough for
him, yet he would have done much more for him; so that he has not limited his
power nor his mercy toward the faithful. The reasons: first, because Reason 1.
we should know that we are saved through grace, and the great power of God,
1. Cor. 1. 18. as it is not a light matter to enjoy a kingdom; so is it not a
small matter to climb up into heaven, but the unspeakable power of God must be
used therein. Again, the more power he uses in 2
his church, the more must be his glory, Mark. 7. 17. and this is the cause,
why all good men think they can never praise God enough, although every day
they renew their thanksgiving: in heaven is the power of God most of all
seen, and therefore there the angels and saints do nothing but praise the
power of God. And therefore we Use 1.
may hereby learn, that all miracles which God does in the world, do call us
to be partakers of his kingdom, Matt. 12. 28. and if we refuse them, and do
not come, the same power shall be used in our condemnation that is promised in
our salvation. Neither let us ever forget the works 2
which God does for us, Psalm. 106. 21, 22. but remember them in our meat, in
our beds, in our labor, in our ease, in our watching, and in our reioicing,
that our God may still continue to do them, as we do still persevere to
remember them. Lastly, in this verse he promises, that they should never be
more ashamed of any reproaches. Whereby we may note, that religion does not
commit any thing that either we may be ashamed of, or repent, 1. Cor. 15. 58.
for our labor in religion is not in vain. If any thorough the fear or
commandment of God should slay their children as Abraham would, or deceive
their masters as Jacob did, or beguile their husbands as Rebecca did, or
disobey their princes as Moses did, or murder their enemies as Sampson did, or
loose their lives as Christ did; yet shall they never need to repent any of
them. Oh what a marvelous benefit has a man by religion, which he cannot
Religion never makes ashamed.
have by any other thing in the world! There is nothing in all the life of man,
but we may repent, except it be the fear of God: We repent our words, our
works, our expenses, our gettings, our wanderings, our negligence, our
diligence, our sleep, meat, and money and all: We are ashamed of our
thoughts, our to yes, trifles, plays, childishness, wantonness, love,
hatred, lust, poverty, nakedness, and the very parts of our body; but of no
part of religion. Thou shall never repent that thou forsookest the world,
beleeuedst in the Lord, mournedst for thy sins, studiedst in the scriptures,
heardest the preachers, was obedient to the gospel, praiedst many hours,
watched many nights, fasted many days, endured many troubles, and shall die
any death for the Lords sake, seeing heaven is thy rest: Nay rather we see many
men in their deathbeds wish with tears that they had hawked, and hunted, and
played, and labored, and loved, and hated much less; for now in their
sickness their sins come on them, as the Philistines came on Sampson when he
had lost his strength, and carry their poor souls into miserable captivity.
Oh would thou never weep, nor sorrow, nor wring thy hands for any worldly
thing? then be religious; and as peace was in Israel all Salomons reign, so
shall it be in thy soul all the while that religion reigns. The first
reason: because Reason 1.
religion is the wisdom of God, Matt. 11. 19. 1. Cor. 1. 30. now this is the
greatest point of wisdom to foresee that they do nothing which may hurt
them: for this is true repentance, not to commit sin which must be repented;
and it is religion that only awaketh us when we are sleepie, and rules us
when we are awaked: We never read that the children of Israel had any cause to
repent their obedience all the while that they were in the wilderness; no more
shall we have any cause to repent our obedience to the gospel, which is our
heavenly wisdom. Another 2
reason: it is the power of God unto salvation, Romans 1. 16. Let us therefore
say with David, 2. Sam. 6. 22. that for the Lord of hosts sake and for
religion, we will yet be more Use 1.
vain, that is, howsoever the world account of us and of our zeal in
religion, yet we will adventure their displeasure farther; for all their
mockes, and reproaches, and by names, and slanders shall not dismay us, but we
will go forward in our pretended course: And as Mical was cursed with
barrenness all her life long, because she mocked her husband David when he
daunced before the Arc; so I pray God they be not as barren and void of
goodness that mock at the professors of religion. Again, let us evermore 2
hearken to the Lord speaking in his word, Ierem. 38. 20. for then we shall
not be burned with heat, nor frozen with cold, nor be ashamed of our youth,
or be troubled with our age, or repent our birth, or curse the day that we
came into the world: for it shall shield us from all these mischiefs. Oh,
let us open our ears to his words, that he may open his ears to our
prayers: for as the Israelites were never blamed so long as they followed the
cloud, the pillar of smoke, and the Arc: so shall thou never be blamed if thou
look upward to the Lord, and join thy self to the maine pillar of truth, the
church of God, and follow the Arc which is the Gospel borne by the
ministers; or else thou shall weep and cry, howl and repent at the last,
when thou can not repent thoroughly.

Ye shall also know that I am in the mids of Israel, and that I am the
Lord your God and none other, and my people Verse. 27.
shall never be ashamed. Now he begins to follow the spiritual benefits
from this verse. to the end of the chapter; promising them first his presence,
verse. 27, 28, 29. then his power in the verses to the end. His presence is
promised, first in regard of the particular knowledge of his favor resting
among them, verse. 27. And in the two next verses, by the pouring out of his
spirit. And hereby we may first of all note, that the church of God which is
Israel, has the Lord in her continually, Matthew. 28. 19. Although by divine
power God be present every where; God evermore in the church.
yet is he most present in the church in heaven and earth, there does he
show more power, more mercy, more judgment, more favor, then in other
places, I mean in that place where his Gospel is professed. The first reason:
because in his church is his chief treasure, Esaias 33. 6. Reason 1.
And as Christ said to us, where our treasures are, there are our hearts: so
the Lords heart and soul is lodged in his church where are his treasures,
namely his fear, zeal, faith, knowledge, redemption, and the graces of the
spirit, and I would God men did not cast his treasure before the swine of
their filthy sins. Another reason; because the 2
power of darkness shall not prevail against it, Mat. 16. 18. For as the sun
does break away the clouds, and the north -- wind drive away the rain; so
does the presence of God in his church, break in pieces the strength of
devils, and drive away the rage of sin: And truly, as when Lot went out of
Sodom, the valley was destroyed; so when God shall forsake his church, it shall
come to ruin. Let us learn Use 1.
to glorify the Lord in the church, 1. Cor. 6. 20. for he is not far off,
but in the midst of us. Again, let us also by the consideration of his
dwelling among us, hold fast our hope of trust, Heb. 3: 6. that we be not
confounded at the last. The presence of Debora made Barac get the victory
against Sisera, and his nine hundred charets of iron; and let us, not by the
presence of a woman or man, but God Almighty, put to flight all our sins,
and lead our pleasures captives, that they may never more offend the church of
God. Secondly, 2
by this verse we must note, that it behooves every member of the church to
have a particular knowledge of Every one must know how he is in Gods favor.
the Lords favor toward him, not only that God is, or that Christ died for
the world; but that God is their God, and Christ is their redeemer, 2. Cor. 5.
11. So that as Elisha would not forsake Elijah because he was his master; nor
Ruth forsake Naomi because she was her stepmother; nor Peter forsake Christ
because he was his Savior; no more must we forsake the Lord, for he is our
master, our father, our Savior, and our God. In this one point is included all
religion, for this is the end of all profession, that God may be ours, and
we may be his. The first Reason 1.
reason; because without this assurance of faith we cannot please God, Heb.
11. 6. So that whatsoever we do for company or custom, or persuasion, or of
uncertainty, does not please almighty God. Again, if we know not that 2
GOD is in us, then are we reprobates, and then were it better for us that we
had never so much as lived under the time of the Gospel. Therefore let us
seek the Lord more ardently; for as the brethren of Joseph might not see his
face any more, except they brought little Benjamin with them; so may not we
appear before GOD except we bring this persuasion with us. Gedeon slew
forty two thousand, because they could not rightly pronounce one word; but
the Lord will slay many millions that cannot say, that he is theirs. Oh
learn to say unto God (my father) as Isaac did, that he may answer unto thee,
(my son) as Abraham did. Again, let us open the way, that other men may come
to the Lord as well as we, Isai. 26. 2. for God keeps 2
not his kingdom to himself, as Noah did not build his arc for himself, or
Solomon his houses for himself, nor the Apostles possessed the spirit for
themselves only; and so let us not conceal the Lords favor to our selves
only: but tell them to our parents, our wives, our children, our servants, our
friends, and our neighbors; that they may be signed by the same seal, and
saved by the same grace. Thirdly, God will have none other to be known in
Israel but himself alone. Whereby we are 3 We must not doubt of our religion.
taught, not to stand in doubt, whom, where, when, we ought to believe, fear,
love or worship: but only and perfectly to rely on the Lord. 1. King. 18. 21.
It is not good to halt betwixt two opinions, but either we must be constant
professors, or obstinate blasphemers. I would they would consider this that
say, they know not whether to be papists or protestants, for both live alike,
and therefore both shall be saved alike: But they must know that Cham escaped
the flood as well as Sem, but yet he escaped not damnation so easily; and so
wicked professors in this life do many times as well as good; but death and
judgment shall try the cause. The reasons: first, because the halting part is
often turned out of the way, Heb. 12, 13. and indeed it is Reason 1.
fearful that always evil does surpass goodness, as weeds ouergrowe corn,
and sickness over comes health. Therefore let us beware, least when we doubt
what is best we take the worst, as Jeroboam did. Moreover, while we doubt in
religion, we are carried away by the crafty 2
deceit of men, Ephesians. 4. 14. For heretics and evil men do always labor
first to draw us into wavering, and then to bring us into condemnation. Let us
then abide in that which we have heard, 1. Ioh. 2. 24. for that which is first
is truth, and that which is last is falsehood. Let us not have tickling and
itching ears, such as many in our days have, which like not our doctrine, our
preachers, our prayers, our government, our sacraments, our people, and our
prince: and what will they do shortly, but fall in dislike with our God, and
all manner of religion. Let us also learn to be constant, 2. Tim. 3. 14. that
we be not moved from it; but as Ioab would not come out of the temple, but
would die holding the altar by the horns; so let us die holding fast by our
altar Jesus Christ: And that seeing we must die, let us die in his arms, for
his sake, to his glory, and our own salvation.

The xxx. Sermon.
Verse. 28. And afterward I will power out my spirit upon all flesh, and your
sons and your daughters shall prophecy, your old men shall dream dreams,
and your young men shall see visions; 29 And also upon your servants and your
maidens in those days will I power our my spirit.
THese two verses contain the second part of the spiritual benefits to be
powered on them, namely, the spirit and the graces thereof; for when he says,
that he will power forth his spirit, he means not to divide the holy Ghost
into parcels: but by a usual figure of the scripture, he puts the spirit
for the graces, because wheresoever any one grace is, there is the holy Ghost,
1. Cor. 12. 6, 11. By this we may see that the old fathers and the prophets
had some knowledge of the Trinity of persons in the Godhead: for not only
here but in many other places is mention made of the Spirit; and we know the
name of son is and was very familiar in the scriptures. He says, he will
power out his Spirit, by a usual metaphor taken from water; because the holy
Ghost is resembled to water, Heb. 10. 22. meaning also, that he would give it
abundantly, in more plentiful manner then heretofore; so that all this
pertains properly to the kingdom of Christ, as Peter shows, Act. 2. 17.
and not to their return from Babylon. By the cohaerence of this verse with the
former, where is promised knowledge, as is here the holy Ghost: we may note,
that after God has given us knowledge, he also will give us the holy Ghost,
Act. After knowledge comes the holy Ghost.
15. 8. so that there is not any one that can assure himself that he knows
God by the word preached, but he may also be assured that he is made the temple
and dwelling house of the holy Ghost, Ioh. 1. 12. this is the only reward in
this world of the obedience to the Gospel, that we have the spirit dwelling in
us, and opening unto us the things of God. If the affairs of Potiphar were
blessed because he had Joseph in his house; much more blessed are the works of
a christian, because he has the holy Ghost in his heart. Oh learn (I beseech
you) to know the Lord by the scriptures, for then shall you have the Lord
dwelling in you; for then shall not sin hurt you, nor the devil annoy you;
you shall not fear any danger, nor any death; for the spirit shall still
comfort you, and carry your spirits into heaven. The reasons: First, because
we should evermore have him in our souls, Ioh. 14. 16. the Lord knows that
we have a Reason 1.
great deal of sorrow to suffer in the world, and therefore he has provided
for us a comforter that may help us to bear it: and they which care not for
their profession, care not for the spirit; and they which care not for the
spirit, care not for the Lord. By which we may see how fearful a thing it is
to forsake the profession of the Gospel, for then the Lord forsakes us, seeing
us give over his spirit: also the Spirit of the Lord is fire, and if it purge
us not it will burn us. Another reason; because it may persuade us that we 1
are in the truth, Ioh. 15. 26. for if our profession were but barely gathered
out of the scriptures by men, then might it be altered, as the ministers
thereof have been altered: but the spirit abides for ever, and does assure
our hearts that this Gospel, this faith, this hope, this obedience, and this
kingdom, is the same that Christ taught, the saints believed, good men
received, the disciples lived, and all the faithful have obtained. So that if
thou stand in faith and do peaceably enjoy the profession of religion, and
know by the infallible word of God thou art in the way of salvation; then
rejoice boldly, because the holy Ghost is in thy heart, as Simeon did when he
had Christ in his arms. But yet many have peace in their hearts thorough the
devil, which are in error, in Popery, in Mahometisme, and Idolatry, being
persuaded they are in the truth: but this persuasion is but counterfaite, like
as the miracles of the Magitians in Egypt were but counterfaite to the miracles
of Moses; and therefore not every one that is persuaded he is in the truth, is
to be thought to have the holy Ghost; but only they that are persuaded by the
scriptures, and rely upon nothing in the world besides. Let us then Use 1.
try whether as yet we have had the holy Ghost given unto us or not, for the
Lord teaches John. 16. 8. when the holy Ghost is come, he will reprove the
world of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment: of sin, because they
abound in it; of righteousness, because they want it; and of judgment, because
they fear it. Now search thy soul whether thou have been reproved for these
things or not: for it will speak to thee when thou art alone, and it will follow
thee whither soever thou go, and it will not suffer thee to rest in any
sins; but at the first it will admonish thee gently, afterward it will call
upon thee with diligence early and late, if thou amend not: It will make thy
meat unsavory, and turn thy sleep into many fears; and then if thou repent
not, either it will utterly forsake thee, or else lay load on thee of most
fearful judgments and terrible wrath of God; which will either turn thee
into lamentation and great distress of mind, or else into desperation and
utter loss of soul. Oh, fear my dear brethren for the conscience of these
things, for it will work most terribly in you: if you have it, you live in
subjection; if you offend it, you live in danger; and if you lose it, you die
in trouble. Therefore thou art happy, when thou art reproved for sin; thou
art more happy, when thou art inwardly scourged for thy faults; but thou art
most happy, when thou art repentant in tears, and ashes, and sackcloth, and
an infinite number of sorrows: so that hereby we see why God exempteth us from
the fear of hell, because he keeps us under continual correction of sin.
Another 2
use: let us ask for the holy Ghost when we feel the want thereof, Luke 11.
13. for God will send him to those that want him. Barren women ask for
children, sick men for health, old men for life, weak men for strength,
blind men for sight; and therefore let Christians ask for the holy Ghost: For
God will be as easily entreated for him as for the other; and he will give us
more joy then children, more comfort then health, more good then life, more
benefit then strength, more profit then sight; and therefore let us pray for
him more earnestly then for any other of these. If you ask how you shall pray
for the holy Ghost, I answer, by the holy Ghost. But you will say, if you have
him already, you need not pray for him: to which I answer; you must pray as
sick men do for life when they have life; so when you have a little feeling
of the holy Ghost, pray that it may be more, and that every little sparkle may
be a flame, and all our weakness turned into strength. The persons upon whom
this spirit is to be powered are sons and daughters, old and young, men and
women, free and bond; for of all these does the church consist: Whereby we may
observe, that there is not any sex, or any man, but he is capable of the holy
Ghost, and so of salvation. Isa. 44. 3. The reasons are: first, because they
have received the hope of eternal life. Tit. 3. 7. secondly, the promises are
general, and there is not any excluded. Therefore let us learn not to grieve
the holy Ghost, Ephe. 4. 30. nor to quench any motions of the spirit within us:
for the beginning of religion is like the blading of the corn, if it then be
bitten it never grows more. Again, let us fight against the lusts of the
flesh, Gal. 5. 17. for the spirit lusts against the flesh. There must be a
pitched field in every man's soul; the soul is one fighter, and sins are the
other; the soul is aided by the spirit, and our sins are aided by the
flesh: the weapons of the soul are spiritual, the word, the promises, faith,
hope, love, patience, and constancy; the weapons of sin are ignorance,
lusts, pleasures, ease, profit, gain, pride, selfeloue, and prosperity: The
means whereby they strike are temptations; if the soul conquer, the sins
bleed abundance of tears; if sin conquer, the soul is quiet and bound in
a soft bed of delight, that she may live in perpetual imprisonment fed with
all lothing of goodness, and starued with vain shows of food, stuffed with
sweet poisons of many woeful sins, and so in the end breaks in pieces, and
falls to eternal misery. This is a Christians combat, one must needs die;
the enemies cannot live in league; the battle must needs be fought out, and
therefore come prepared; the less thou eatest, the better thou shall endure;
the more thou watchest in prayer, the more shall be thy advantage. This battle
is like the battle betwixt David and Absolon; for our own sins which we
have begotten do conspire against us: and as David wept for Absolon when he
had gotten the field; so we shall weep for our sins when we have conquered
them, and wish, that either they had not been, or else that we had not been:
therefore let us have the spirit on our sides, that we may have peace in our
souls.

Now follow the effects of the spirit; and the first is that they shall
prophecy; the next, that they should dream 3
dreams, and see visions: for these were accounted the most honorable works
of the spirit before the coming of Christ, because herein did the Lord
answer the demands of men, as we may see in Joseph, Matt. 1. 21. and in
Zachary, Luc. 1. And under these old types does the prophet signify the
abundant graces in the church, when every one should prophecy, that is,
should be able to speak the word for the comfort and edification of his
brother, and every one should see the counsels of God day and night by dreams
and visions and not be afraid. First, we may observe here, that none can
prophecy but by the spirit of God, 1. Cor. 14. 29. It is not possible that
any None prophecy, but by the spirit.
should open the word of God and speak to the comfort of them that hear
him, but by inspiration of the holy Ghost; therefore those which speak in the
congregation, and are not able to edify them that hear them, do nothing
less then speak by the holy Ghost, opening their barren wits to the wonder
of the world. The Reason 1.
reasons: first, because prophecy is an opening of the counsel of God, which
none can do but those which have the spirit of God, 1. Cor. 2. 11. Again, it
is the spirit of God 2
that opens our hearts and makes us able to answer the adversary of our
profession; much more does it help us when we are to comfort the people of God
in the congregation, Luke 21. 15. Let us therefore in our preaching or
prophesying learn to prophecy according to the proportion Use 1.
of faith, Romans 12. 6. for as it is a damnable thing before God under an oath
to cover falsehood; so is it alike damnable thing under pretense of the spirit
to teach heresy and impiety. Again, let us learn to try the spirits, 2
1. John 5. 1. whether they be of God or not: for many false spirits are come
into the world, bringing in again popery, heresy, idolatry, and the
monarchy of the devil, the which I pray God for ever destroy. But in this that
we said that the abundance of the spirit under the time of the kingdom of
Christ, is shadowed forth under these types of the old testament; so that the
kingdom of Christ consists of such members as are here described to be
possessed with They which labor not to prophecy do deface the kingdom of
Christ.
the spirit of God to prophecy and such like. Whereby we learn that those
which avoid the ministry, and other spiritual functions, do as much as they
can darken and deface the kingdom of Christ, Ioh. 5. 39. so that a continual
and an unwearied study must be applied unto the same: there is no wit so fine,
but herein it may be busied; there is no profession so needful, but it must
give place to this. For Divinity is like Sara, and other arts and sciences
like Agar: and although humane arts have conceived with child, and gotten more
followers then Divinity; yet they must know they are but handmaides, and must
be subject to their mistress. The reasons: First, because the ignorance Reason
1.
of the scriptures is the mother of all abomination and error, Matthew. 22. 25.
so that take away religion and Divinity, although their sciences could make
gold, yet they cannot stand. Secondly, in the profession of faith and of
religion consists the groundwork and foundation 2
of the church, Matthew. 16. 18. and therefore they which give not themselves
hereunto, do not only pull down the building of christianity; but raze
down the very foundations thereof. I have followed these things more at large
in the beginning, and therefore I now touch them lightly. Let us therefore
exercise the commandments of God, and purge our impure lives by their rule,
Psalm. 119. 9. for so long as our ears are open to his word, our lives shall be
covered from shame: as Ioas prospered all the days of Iehoijada; so shall we
so long as the Gospel and religion rules in our souls. Let us take that
which the angels brought, Act. 7. 53. for they brought the law, and in nothing
are we so like the angels as in the study of Divinity: for they behold the
face of God in heaven, and we behold him in the scriptures. Thirdly, when he
says, 3
that their sons and their daughters shall prophecy; we may note that there
are not any in the church too rich or too good for the study of divinity:
Isaie the Prophet was of None in the church too good for to study divinity.
the kings seed; and Solomon the richest and wisest king that ever was, would
be called a preacher in his wisest and best days. Our gentlemen scorn this
priestly trade, but set their sons to merchandise, or to the law, or to one
golden trade or other; but they set their sons as much to Divinity as their
daughters: yea, they think their whole family is disgraced, if there be any
of their name a priest: for so they odiously term us, otherwise the name is
too good for them or us. The reasons: First, because bodily Reason 1.
exercise profits little, but godliness is profitable to all, 1. Tim. 4. 8.
One was wont to say, that the world was destroyed by three sorts of men: by
Lawyers, for they destroy men's goods; by Physicians, for they kill men's bodies;
and by ignorant Divines, for they damn men's souls: now verily I think that
so it is with us; for there was never more contention for wealth, or more cost
laid forth on physic, and never less care for salvation. Such ignorant
divines have marde all, whose heads are as full of learning, as a flint stone
is of oil, and their lives correspondent to their knowledge; so that now
adays there is no difference between Aaron and the priests of Egypt, betwixt
Nadab and Phinehas, betwixt Sadoc and Abiathar, betwixt Michaiah and Zidkijah,
betwixt Jeremy and Shemaiah, betwixt Christ and the Pharisees, betwixt Peter
and Simon, betwixt the Physician and the patient, betwixt Balaam and his Ass.
Study does not commend a Divine, but a noble man's letter, and an angel is
more worth then a preacher. Another reason: it will amend every man's way,
Psalm. 119. 9. Let therefore the word of God dwell ^
among us plentifully, Col. 3. 16. and let us exercise the scriptures from our
childhoode, 2. Tim. 3. 15. that so we may have God in our selves, religion in
our hearts, and holiness in our lives, that our ancients may teach better, our
youth may live better, our children may learn better, that our houses, our
hearts, our lives, our fathers, our sons, our daughters, may be blessed.
Fourthly, he says, 4
He will power forth his spirit upon their servant and maidens: who in
old time were baselie accounted of, especially if they were not of their own
nation. From hence we may note that it is the duty of christians Christians
must have religious servants.
that live in these times, since this Gospel was fulfilled, to have care to
make their servants religious, Prou. 14. 35. or else to make choice of such
when they want. A good christian will be always a good servant, and therefore if
thou would have good servants, make them good christians: He is a better
servant that lives well, then he that labors well, for think not that he
will ever make conscience of thy business, that makes not conscience of the
Lords business, Col. 3. 22. The reasons; First, because Reason 1.
thou may safely give all into his hands, as was in Joseph, Genesis 39. 8.
Again, he may profit thy sons, and 2
do them more good then thou can, Proverb. 17. 2. Therefore Use 1.
let servants be handled like christians, not like slaves, like men, and not
like beasts, Leuit. 25. 39. They are your brethren, despise them not, 1.
Timoth 6. 2. They are the Lords free men, abuse them not, 1 Cor. 7. 22.
Command them no evil, offer them no wrong, hinder not their faith, torment not
their lives, forsake them not in age, nourish them in sickness; pay them their
hire, feed them sufficiently, empaire not their credit, revile them not,
correct them for evil, commend them for godliness, and be such masters to
them, as Christ is to you. Again, let servants 2
make choice of christian masters; not where they may have most wages, but
where they may have most instruction; not where they may have most ease, but
most information, 1. Timot. 6. 6. You were better eat herbs with a godly
master, then a fat ox with a wicked; you were better fare hard, and work
hard, where your souls may be governed, then fare well and work little,
where your souls are endangered. Be subject to thy master, 1. Pet. 2. 18.
Serve not an Atheist for any money; nor a papist for any meat; nor a neuter for
any hire; nor a known hypocrite for any wages: but serve thy master, look to
his wealth, tranaile for his profit, mispende not his substance, defend his
credit, make much of his children, and pray for his salvation: Care not for
ease, spend nothing in riot, carry no tales, keep within the house, and
remember God in thy work, that he may remember thee in thy death; for as thou
seruest, thou shall be served again.

The xxxj. Sermon.
Verse. 30. And I will show woonders in the heavens, and in the earth: blood and
fire, and pillars of smoke. 31. The sun shall be turned into darkness, and
the moon into blood, before the great and terrible day of the Lord come. 32.
But whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord, shall be saved: for in
mount Sion and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as the Lord has said, and
in the remnant whom the Lord shall call.
NOw we are come to the last part, namely, the manifestation of the power of
God by great and fearful signs in heaven; and secondly by giving salvation to
the faithful. Concerning the great and fearful woonders, much has already
been spoken, and now the less shall suffice. For the interpretation take
thus much: That when Christ is come and ascended into heaven, and the world
converted from infidelity unto him; then shall appear many extraordinary
tokens of the Lords power, both in the heavens and in the earth, the lights
shall be most fearfully ecclipsed, being in show turned into darkness and
blood; the air shall be troubled; and many terrible and strange things shall
be seen: So that herein is described the constitution and event of all
things at the change of the world, when God shall come to take vengeance on
his enemies, as it is in the chapter following. I will briefly touch every
thing that I purpose to handle in this verse. First, in that he tells us of
these fearful woonders presently to succeed, or rather to accompany the
preaching of the Gospel, the pouring forth of the spirit and conversion of
the world: we may learn that God will give us temporal calamities with
spiritual benefits, Luke 21. 9. So that there is no marvel that in our times
there have been seen so many terrible things in heaven and earth, seeing the
Gospel has been preached unto us; for calamities make us to believe it more
willingly, Hos. 5. 15. And if the Gospel be not shadowed Reason
in this trouble, and we not overthrown by them; then have we a notable
trial of the Lords promise toward us, Luk 21. 18. For as Gedeons fleece was
dry when all the earth about it was wet; so shall we be safe when many shall be
cast down. Let us learn to commit our souls unto him, 1. Pet. 4. 19. that
although the heavens fall down and the earth Use 1.
be removed, the sea be dried, and the light be darkened, yet we may possess
our souls, and our souls may possess our Savior; for it is God that sends
woonders, and rules all signs: the same cloud did lead the Israelites to
Canaan that brought other to destruction; and the same signs are for our
salvation, which are for other men's condemnation. Secondly, when he says he
will set woonders in 2
heaven, we are taught that God will manifest his wrath before it comes,
Romans 10. 18. Heaven is in the sight of God shows his wrath before he does it.
all, and naturally we are inclined to look upward; so that whatsoever we
there see, we know it comes from God; and therefore there are the signs
manifested, because every one might see them. The reasons: first, because we
Reason 1.
may either confess them, or be confounded by them, Isai. 2. 18. Secondly,
that the greatest enemies of God may be 2
stilled, Psalm. 8. 2. Therefore learn so soon as you see the Use 1.
rod to fear him that ordained it, Mich. 6. 9. Again, let us make a good use
of the signs that we have already 2
seen, and not try the Lords patience any longer, or tempt the power of God
any more, Amos 5. 18. The wicked Jews would have had Christ show them a
miracle when he was on the cross, and then they would believe him; but yet
they were wicked: and so you which desire more tokens of the Lords power, that
you may be amended, are still wicked; for if you cannot believe the living
word, you shall not believe the dead miracles.

Thirdly, when he says that all these shall come before the great and terrible
day of the Lord: we must note, that 3
all the woonders and signs in the air must prepare us to judgment, Isa. 29.
6. Oh how can the Lord change us, when he thus changes the world; and how
does he provide for our safety, and preach our repentance by all the woonders
of heaven and earth? Darkness puts us in mind of hell; fire puts us in
mind of the latter day; blood puts us in mind of destruction; smoke does
admonish us of the vanity of our life: the earth would move us to repentance
by remoouing her self; the light would cover our sins in darkness, by
withdrawing it self; and the clouds would call us to heaven. Let us learn to
fear the power of God more earnestly in his creatures, that if these strange
things come upon us, yet we may not forget our Savior, who shall come in the
clouds. But whosoever. Least we should think that these troubles should
ouerturne and overcome all in the world, when there shall be no light but
darkness; no peace but thunders; no comfort but fires, nor any appeerance but
wrath and judgment: the prophet in these words tells them, that then even in
those most desperate miseries, God would remember to hear the prayers of his
children; for the godly cannot choose but fear mightily, when they should see
all the world in an uproar, and heaven and earth roaring to their destruction.
Whereby I might note, that good men must endure the fear of those evils which
shall come on the world, Isa. 33. 4. because they love their life too much,
Psalm. 119. 108. and because their whole life must be mortified and mangled
with many sorrows, Romans 8. 36. yet let us not so fear that we despair, how
near soever we seem to destruction, Isa. 41. 14. but be obedient as Noah was,
Heb. 11. 7. though the waters and cries of all the world be as near to us as
they were to him. First, when he says that all that 1
call on the name of the Lord shall be saved: we may note that salvation must
be prayed for before we can have it, Heb. 7. 25. Salvation comes not as
honor came on David, which made him a king before he thought on it; but it
must come on us as cleanness and health came on Naaman, which he traveled
for, and prayed for, and washed for seven times in Jorden before he could be
cleansed. And as the poor Canaanitish woman entreated Christ a good while
before he would grant; so the Lord looks that men should entreat for
salvation many days, and nights, and times, with many tears, and sighs, and
groans, thorough many sorrows, and cares, and troubles, before they can be
saved. The reasons: first, because salvation is the Reason 1.
Lords, Psalm. 3. 8. and therefore it must be prayed for: secondly, we must be
saved by faith: now faith is no faith that prays not for grace, Ephesians. 2. 8.
Therefore as the old fathers searched for salvation, 1. Pet. 1. 19. so do
thou; and as the woman did for her money, which never gave over sweeping and
seeking till she had found it: in like manner do thou; but follow salvation as
Isaac followed Abraham unto the place where he should be sacrificed. Secondly,
when he says that there shall be deliverance in Mount 2
Sion, we may note, that God will evermore have some Some of the Jews shall
ever be saved.
among the people of the Jews that shall be saved, Romans 11. 15, 16, 26. so
that, notwithstanding their intolerable hardness of heart, and great obstinacy
against the Gospel, yet there are some believers among them, and it may be
that there shall be a day, when they shall all believe in the Messiah: and I
think verily that this is the very cause why they are reserved alive; for else
in consideration of that great villainy offered to our Savior Christ, with
their infidelity, and other notorious sins, they had long ago been
destroyed, man, woman and child. Thirdly, the prophet alleges the proof
hereofwhen he says, (as the 3
Lord has said) whereby we may note, that the promise of God his promise shall
preserve his church.
God shall preserve his church in what distress soever it be, Heb. 13. 5. yea
when heaven and earth shall be burned, they shall be preserved. The reasons:
first, because all the promises of God in him are Yea and Amen, 2. Cor. 1. 18.
20. Reason 1.
they are not changeable but constant as it is already declared, because he is
mighty that does his word. Again, 2
life eternal is given by promise, Col. 3. 14. and if the promises never fail
in that, no more they can in this. Therefore let us through patience do the
will of God, and wait for the promise, Heb. 10. 26. and having once received
it, let us fear no evil nor any death, Genesis 32. 9, 10. Fourthly, 4 Few shall
be saved.
when he says that salvation shall be to a remnant, and to as many as God
shall call: we may note, that but a remant, that is, a very few shall be
saved, Luc. 13. 23. The reasons: Reason 1.
because of the great hatred of God against sin, Romans 5. 14. the which hatred
shall cause the damnation of many thousands. Secondly, the Lord will make but a
short account 2 Use 1.
of all the earth, Romans 9. 28. Therefore let every one study to enter,
although he know there be but few to be saved, that if it may be, he may be
one of those few, Luc. 13. 24. Again, let us know that except the Lord of his
great mercy did keep this remnant from the violence of sin 2
and satan, no not one should or could ever come to life eternal, Isai. 1. 9.

Lastly, when he says, to as many as God shall call: we 5
may note, that we must be called by the gospel before we can be saved in the
kingdom, Jude 5. But of these points I have often already spoken in the former
treatises, and therefore I may the safer excuse my brevity; and the God of all
mercy give a blessing to all.

The xxxij. Sermon.
Chap. 3. Verse. 1. For behold, in those days, and in that time, when I shall
bring again the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem.
THis third and last chapter of this Prophet Joel, contains a most
lamentable destruction of mankind, namely of those which were the sworn
enemies to the church of God: which cannot choose but move a heart of stone,
to exceeding sorrow and abundant tears, to consider that so many brave men,
stately kings, warrelike soldiers, honorable persons, rich possessors,
beautiful women, and innocent young children (as it may seem) should be
violently driven and drawn unto the slaughterhouse of woeful destruction.
Oh, how may men forrowe, that they were so borne to be enemies to God, and so
live that they hurt themselves; and so shall die as they condemn their souls?
for their blood is worse then water, their flesh is viler then dung, their
heart is baser then the earth, and they were only created that they might be
destroyed. In the handling of this chapter we will observe this method: First,
the time when the enemies of the church shall be discussed; and secondly the
manner. The time is set forth in this verse. to be then when the Lord should
bring again the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem: that is, when he should
deliver them from all manner of thraldom. For behold: The prophet after the
usual manner of the Scriptures, begins the matter with words of
demonstration and attention, and so tells them of this matter, as if it were
already in action; bidding them to behold it, as we may see the like Esaias 24.
1. and 42. 1. Ierem. 51. 1. Matthew. 24. 25. By which words we may note, By the
word we behold what is to come after us.
the word of God in prophets and preachers must teach us to consider, as well
the things that are to come, as those that are present, 2. Cor. 4. 18. We
look not (says the Apostle) on the things that are seen, but on the things
that are not seen. The voice of the Lords word must not be like the stroke
of the musition, which only affects a man while he hears the sound: but
it must be like a Physicians potion which works in the body many days
after it is taken. But what do I talk of days? as Jonathan loved David when
he neither saw him nor heard him, so must we love the word of God and think
thereon, when we neither see it nor hear it. The ox cares for the prick
which presently goreth him, but yet he never thinks on the slaughter which is
coming; the child fears the rod which he sees, but thinks not on it
when it is hidden; the sheep windeth from the storm when it blows, but in
calmer times it never remembers: but God which has made us more excellent
then oxen and sheep, and wills us to be more wise then children, has given
his word that we may know and fear the things that are to come. So that in
this sort thou must persuade thy self; if thou hear the preacher tell of any
plague, then think with thy self that thou now beholdest it a far off: and
therefore it will certainly come. Believe the Lord and his prophets, said
Iehoshaphat, and you shall prosper: but alas, our dull hearted hearers will
believe no more then they see; will fear no more then they feel; nor be
righteous any longer then they are in affliction: Death is far off, they care
not for it; and the day of judgment will be God knows when, and therefore if
their time be so long, they think it will be never. Oh wretches! behold
presently before your eyes, how the Lord comes, how the sword wastes, how
the blood runs, how vengeance increases, how Christ condemns, and all
things are ouerturned. If thou can so behold the coming miseries, and with
tears lament them, as if they were present, thou shall likewise by the word
of God so behold the coming ioies of another life, and with heart rejoice, as
if now thou enioiedst them: Therefore behold judgment, and terror, and
thunder, and fire and the overthrow of all things, which one day shall be,
that thou may fear thy proud and sinful nature, and so behold mercy, the
resurrection, the life to come, the face of God, and the fellowship of Angels,
that thou may quietly repose thy soul in the sweet profession of the
Lords Gospel. The reasons of this doctrine are these: first, because they
Reason 1.
are base minded, if not beastly affected, which only look to the temporal
things that they see, and not to the heavenly and eternal things, which they
see not, as the Apostle in the before-named place says; and therefore it is
far more honorable that thou should believe the things that are to come
when we hear them in the word, then the things that are past and present which
our eyes behold. Again, our Savior says, Marc. 9. 23. that all 2
things are possible to him that believes, which is verified in nothing more
then in this: when we give up our whole hearts to the things that are preached,
and daily wait when they shall be performed. And if all things be possible,
then is salvation and the joys of heaven possible for thee if thou can
believe them, and so live as thou may obtain them. The uses which we are
to make of this Use 1.
doctrine are these: first, seeing we must be instructed by the word of God to
behold the things that are to come, as if they were present; then let us
evermore be faithful: the which thing the Apostle teaches us, when he
says, that we stand by faith, Romans 9. 23. so that as our bodies stand upon
our legs, so our souls stand upon our faith. And if this be so; how many lame
souls are there in the world? nay, they are not lame that never had legs, but
those that had them, yet are they monsters; and such monsters are faithless
and infidel men. If thy legs be sick, thou will go to thy surgeon; and if thy
faith be sick, go to thy Savior: what comfort have thou of the world, if
thou can not walk in the world; and what joy has thy soul if it have no
faith to walk in the scriptures? Stand by faith and fall not, believe soundly
and strongly; bring not a wooden leg, I mean a wooden faith, such as men can
make, but a true and substantial faith, which the Lord only gives. Let not
any thing move thee, for all things are possible to the believer: though the
earth remove, be not thou afraid; though the heavens pass, yet the world
shall not pass: believe all things; say not this will be long, or that will be
late, or the other is doubtful, or God is merciful, his mind may alter, or
the preachers are but men, they may be deceived, or the judgments be
conditional, they may be reuersed; or the promises be uncertain, they may be
recalled. Oh beware of an infidel heart, Heb. 3. 12. and 2
depart not from the living God: Moses because he did but once distrust God,
he could not enter into the land of Canaan; the governor that would not
believe the prophet was trod to pieces; the princes which would not believe
Jeremy were slain by the Babylonians; and the souls which will not believe
the preachers, shall be overcome by devils. Oh consider how fearful a thing
it will be for you to say as the Jews, Ezech. 33. v. vlt. surely there was a
prophet among us. Therefore as the husbandman looks to the harvest in the
winter when the corn appears not; as the servant thinks on his wages long
before it comes; as the bird thinks on her young ones long before she
breeds; and the builder thinks on his dwelling long before it be finished:
so do you think on the joys and woes which shall be long before they come.
And account your selves the happiest men alive whom God warns with his own
word, that you may avoid the day of destruction: for if you lived not under the
check of the gospel and the controulment of preachers, you might go as other
barbarous nations do blindfolded, that is, unwitting and unknowing, to the
slaughter of your bodies, and the butcherie of your souls. Surely the Lord
does nothing but he reuealeth the same to his servants the prophets; and
therefore blessed are they that live among them; but more blessed are they which
hear them, believe the^, love them, receive them, and regard them, because
God has sent the^. Secondly, in this verse. we may observe when he says, In 2
Redemption must be certainly known.
those days and in that time: that God will have the redemption and delivery
of his saints, and church to be most certain and known; for upon this
occasion does the prophet double the note of the time, as it were noting both
the day and the month: So as once he told Abraham that his seed should be
a stranger in another land four hundred and thirty years, and no longer; to
show unto him, that they should be assuredly delivered: So does he here by
this prophet (though not so precisely) note the assurance of their redemption.
The reasons Reason 1.
of this doctrine are these; First, because we are not redeemed with any
temporal, worldly, or earthly price, but by and with the most precious blood
of Christ Jesus, 1. Pet. 1. 18. Again, another reason is, because as the
Apostle 2 Use 1.
says, 1. Timoth. 2. 6. that this was done in due time. The uses which come of
this doctrine are these; First, seeing the Lord will have the redemption of
his people to be sealed and certainly known; then let us look for that time,
and that day, when Christ shall finally deliver us from the wrath to come, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10. What should make good men to fear the latter day? their
redemption is certain, the Lord is their Savior, the Savior is their head,
their head is their brother, and until Christ come they are subject to wrath,
but when he is come they are delivered from death. Again, let us receive any
pledge or token of 2
the Lords love and favor toward us, which is shed in our hearts by the
holy Ghost, Romans 5. 5. and seeing this is it, that we are certainly redeemed,
and our souls health is not builded upon peraduentures, but it is surely
established, then let us certainly persuade our selves that God loves us with
an everlasting love. What will he keep from us? that gives us his own
son, and will kill him to acquit us? If this persuade us not to be
penitent, and to love God again; then is not the love of God, nor the blood
of Christ sprinkled in our hearts. Naaman would have given to Elisha many
thousand pounds, because the water of Jorden had cleansed his leprosy; what
would he have given if Elisha had cured him by medicine? But Christ has cured
our souls and bodies by the river of his own blood, and by the loss of his
own life; then are we worthy to give heart for heart, blood for blood, body
for body, eye for eye, and life for life to him again. Shall bring again the
captivity. The prophet under the name of 3
captivity does understand all the miseries of the people of God; for in
captivity there is a concurrence or consent of all manner of evils. For in
truth, if there be any estate lamentable in the world, it is the estate of a
captive: He shall live a common slave, he shall ever be abridged of liberty;
he shall wear the coursest; he shall eat the basest; he shall lie the hardest;
he shall labor the sorest; and he shall live the unhappiest: His correction
shall be fitter for a beast then a man; his pity shall be nothing; if he
be sick, he shall have no attendance; and in this he is worse then any
prisoner, for he must not beg for necessity, but either live with little,
or else starve: and the prisoner knows, that the judge only has authority
to take away his life; but a captives life is in every man's hand. So that when
we read of the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem, we must understand an
intolerable mischief to be fallen upon them. For their country was all
spoiled, their goodly houses were razed to the earth; their streets ran with
blood of men, their women, wives and virgins were most shamefully abused; they
were carried from their own country, kindred and acquaintance; they were sold
like beasts, they were killed like sheep, they were kept like dogs, and
they lived to see their children sold away into other countries, whose sweet
faces they should never see again. Oh, that we in England could think with
our selves what was the cause, why God did so lamentably give over his people
to be racked and ruled by others, which was the contempt of his word: and we
may greatly fear the like punishment for the same sin among us! Oh, my heart
bleedeth to think what will be the estate of many, if a captivity should
come, their goods which they would not give to the poor, shall be taken by
the enemy; the fire shall consume their houses; the sword shall destroy their
lives; the lust of men shall defile their gallant proud dames: and
peradventure their tender babes and gentle posterity shall be sold to be some
galli-slaues, some kitchin-boies, some to draw the plow instead of oxen, with
their backs bare for the scourge; some to be slain before their eyes, and many
to be committed to the beasts, to the waters, to the heathens, and to the
infidels to be new nurtured in paganism. O Lord keep this day from England.
But he tells them that the Lord would deliver the^ out of this captivity
before they were in it, as God told Abraham of the delivery of his seed,
before he had any seed. By which we may observe, that God does think upon our
deliverance and redemption, before we be in misery. O God determines the end
of good men's trouble before trouble.
unspeakable mercy of God! which had so in his everlasting decree appointed,
that his son should redeem us before the world was made: yea, before there
was any to be redeemed. He does not make thee sick, but first he has made
thee a medicine; he does not take away thy children or thy goods, but first he
thinks a way how to restore them again; he does not stir thee up any
enemy, but he has appointed thee another friend: and as at the beginning he
made every tree, and plant, and herb, and fruit, before he made either man
or beast which should eat them; so he continually provides meat before
hunger, ease before danger, light before darkness, and joy before sorrow, as
Joseph of Arimathea which made his toombe before he was dead. The reasons
hereof are these: First, because he will not have his church to be in
desperation of deliverance, Reason 1.
Isa. 10. 30. for our afflictions are called our burdens: now a burden is
appointed to be taken off before it be laid on, and so our miseries are
appointed to be taken from us before they be cast upon us; for the rod of the
wicked shall not always rest upon the backs of the righteous: And therefore let
none cast in our teeth the misery of a christian which seems to be borne for
misery; but rather christians are borne for immortality; for our short
enduring calamities are nothing worthy the glory which shall be heaped upon
us. Another reason is, because that this is a 2
token of the Lords just judgment, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6, 7. The Lord which every
way does show his mercy, will also declare the same in the chastising of his
children: and therefore as in justice he does wound them for their sins; so in
justice he first provides for their safety, whereby we may know a singular
comfort for them which are troubled in conscience, and let them not much
trouble themselves to seek for the means of their ease: for as Abraham did
bind Isaac to be sacrificed, so he did unbind him again; and in like sort as
God has troubled thy soul, so he will give it ease again. The uses which we
may make of Use 1.
this doctrine are these: First, letvs never despair for any miseries
whatsoever, but still hope, Isa. 40. 2. for the Lord has already numbered the
days of thy life, and of thy sorrow, and of thy pain, and of thy affliction;
therefore never care, for it will one day be ended. Oh, but thou will say, it
will be ended, but it will be long first; therefore I fear I shall faint in
suffering: but how can thou tell? it will be long: has the Lord told thee
so? then abide his pleasure, although it be to thy pain: has he not told thee
so? then make not thy affliction longer or greater: God which made the oaks
subject to the greatest winds, has given them the largest and deepest roots
to stay them up withal: And if God do tempt thee with long calamity, O happy
man art thou, for he tempts none above their power: and if God load thy days
with sickness, or poverty, or losses, or pains, or wounds, or infamy, or
servitude; yet know thou shall be able to abide it, if God have sent it.
Another 2
use is, that under our afflictions we rejoice in hope, Romans 12. 12. for what
greater persuasion can we have to move us hereunto then this, that the Lord
has already determined the continuance thereof? Rejoice therefore that thou
art like unto Christ, though thou be unlike to thy self: Know, that there is
no darkness, but it flies from the sun; there is no poison, but it yields
unto medicine; there is no winter, but it is removed by summer; and therefore
there shall never come unto thee any such misery, but it shall be taken from
thee. But some will say, we may endure our adversity, but we cannot rejoice in
the company thereof: how shall we whet our hope and rejoice under tribulation?
My dear brethren, if you can bear it patiently you may easily rejoice
therein; for there is not required laughter to this joy: but the inward peace
of your soul, whereby you may know it shall turn to your good; and this you
may have although you lament with tears: therefore pluck up your sorrowful
minds, and put away your mourning garments, for the time is at hand, that your
easeles days shall be turned into painelesse rest, and your careful prayers
into the joyful possession of life and glory, and angels and saints, and God
and Christ for evermore.

The xxxiij. Sermon.
Verse. 2. I will also gather all nations, and will bring them down into the
valley of Iehoshaphat, and will plead with them there for my people, and for
mine heritage Israel, whom they have scattered among the nations, and parted my
land.
Having handled the time when the destruction of the churches enemies should
be, which was, when they were delivered from their captivity: now it
follows, that we pursue the manner of their destruction in this and in the
verse following: and for our more orderly proceeding, we will first handle the
causes of the Lords judgment upon them, and secondly the execution thereof:
the causes expressed verse. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. And first, before the causes the
prophet notes these two things, their assembly and the place thereof: their
assembly in these words, I will also gather, etc. the place he calls the
valley of Iehoshaphat. When he says that he will gather all nations, he does
give The infinite power of God can at one time assemble the whole world.
us to understand his infinite power, that he can easily bring the whole world
together: Psalm. 50. 2, 3. David says that he calls them from the rising of
the sun, unto the setting thereof; that as he could and did at the beginning
create the whole world in one man: so can he at the latter end, bring them all
together again as one man. How can the thief escape him, by riding? or the
whooremonger, by keeping in a secret chamber? or the swearer, by creeping into
a princes court? or a king, by lying in his strongest hold? but as he brought
all creatures to Adam that he might name them, and seven of every clean beast
to Noah that he might save them; so will he bring all the world before his
son, that he may judge them. The reasons are these: first, because he does
it by his angels, Reason 1.
Matt. 24. 31. who are of infinite power and wisdom, and celeritie, and
diligence. One angel is stronger then all men, as appears by that angel
which killed of Saneheribs army in one night, an hundred fourscore and five
thousand, Isa. 37. 36. yet for all this power, we must not fear or worship the
angels; for they are but our fellow servants, but rather let us fear the
creator of the angels: for if he have given so much glory to his angels, oh
how much has he kept to himself? and if he makes them flames of fire,
himself must needs be a consuming furnace. Another 2
reason is this: because all the world do live and move and have their being
in him, Act. 17. 28. and therefore he may as easily bring every one to
judgment, as a man may lay his left hand in his right. Oh how might this
terrify a great sort! which living in God, yet deny God, as Absolon which
would depose his own father to make himself king. The uses which we may
make hereof are these: Use 1.
first, that we avoid not, and do not fly from the presence of God, as Jonah
did, Ion. 1. 3. for the Lord will bring us again, as he did him. Whither will thou go from the Allseeing spirit of God? oh fly not from him; for there is
no heaven so high, but he is higher; nor any earth so deep, but he is deeper;
nor any world so wide, but he is larger; nor any place so secret, but he can
find it out. Abide in his temple, for there is his presence; and in his
church, for there he dwells. Look to him above, look on him beneath, look
for him in the morning, and run to him in the evening. Go not out of the
congregation, for then thou runnest from him, but abide the Lords leisure for
evermore. But how might I complain on them that run away from God? some
run from the faith; some from the sermon; some from our prayers; some from
our company; and some are gadding abroad in strange, popish, and paganish
countries; some go to tauernes, when they should go to churches; some to
exercise of pleasure; some are riding in the fields, when they should be
praying in the congregations; and some are at the beare-baiting or play houses,
when they should serve the Lord: oh monstrous times that ever men lived in!
and they account themselves happy, that never come where any goodness is. If
God correct them, they are desperate; if the law would punish them, they are
obstinate; if the preacher rebuke them, they are almost malice-mad. What do
these men, but fly from the presence of God? for they will not go to him,
they will not pray to him, they will not live with him, they will not tarry
for him, they will not see him, they will not hear him, but they shall surely
feel him. Although Tzedechiah would not abide the Babylonians but fled away by
night; yet they ouertooke him, and brought him back to their captain, who put
out his eyes, and led him in chains to Babylon: so although you fly from the
Lord, yet he shall follow and gather you, be your company never so great,
and deprive you of your best estate, and lead you in chains to the devils in
hell: They are separated from God; but you are worse then devils, for you
separate your selves from God; yet be assured, you shall shortly try, that it
were better for you to follow Christ into the sea, as Peter did, then to
forsake him on the land, as Judas did. Into the valley of Iehoshaphat. These
words contain the place where the nations should be gathered together: the
which I take not to be any special place, much less the valley of Engedi, 2.
Chron. 20. 2. where Iehoshaphat by the help of God destroyed the Ammonites,
Moabites, and Edomites; but rather by allusion to that place and battle, he
shows what slaughter he would make of his enemies. But this word
Iehoshaphat, may be taken as well appellatiuely as properly, and so it
signifies the judgment of God: and therefore the valley of Iehoshaphat shall
signify the place of God his judgment, as afterward the valley of threshing
shall signify the execution thereof. By the former words and by these we will
observe, that the wicked shall be drawn to judgment whether they will The
wicked shall be unwillingly drawn to judgment.
or not, Luke 23. 30. for God will gather them into the valley of judgment: As
there is no force in the corn to resist the reaper, so shall there be no
resistance in the wicked to avoid judgment. And this thing of all other may
mightily a stonish all deceitful and infidel hearts, which cannot abide to
hear of judgment; yet they shall be compelled to come to judgment. How
desperate is their estate, when their conscience shall be more against them
then all the world, and their helps of nature shall give them over; and they
left destitute of all hope, shall be delivered into the hand of devils: and
surely they which scorn the company of God his saints on the earth, are
worthy to be torn by the teeth and claws of devils in hell. But have thou
no grace to consider this before hand, and to think with thy self how thou
shall see an infinite company of Angels driving thee to judgment, and then
presently all the devils in hell haling thee to damnation? Be willing therefore
to come to God in earth, that thou may be desirous to go to God in heaven:
for be assured, that if thou fear judgment, and wishest it might never be,
thou art in a pitiful case, for thy conscience does already condemn thee;
and if thou despise judgment, and watch not for it, thou art more retchlesse,
for thou resistest God: but if thou cry for the last day, and say, Come Lord
Jesus, come quickly, thou art a happy man; for the Lord is in thee, Christ
has cleansed thee, sin is dying in thee, thou love God his kingdom, and
therefore thou shall possess his kingdom. Oh, that we could willingly
submit our hearts to the Gospel, and then should we not unwillingly offer
our souls to judgment! The reasons Reason 1.
of this doctrine are these: First, because they shall be compelled by the
power of God, Matthew. 26. 64. They which will not feel the power of God in
saving them, shall feel it in condemning them: and therefore as the power of God
made Pharaoh to yield to Moses and Aaron; and made Sisera to yield to Deborah;
and made Goliath to yield to David; and made the temple to rende a sunder when
Christ was crucified, and the sun to loose her light, shall compel the
wicked to the judgment seat of God. Another reason is; because their hope for
help or mercy 2
or pardon is but in vain, Lam. 4. 17. And therefore although they would
escape, yet their hope shall deceive them: as the mother and wife of Sisera
which told of the victory, when in the end it turned to their own overthrow.
I do but briefly touch these things, because I have handled them more at large
already. The uses which Use 1.
arise from hence are these; First, that we come willingly to the throne of
grace, Romans 5. 2. or else we shall be unwillingly drawn to the throne of
wrath. Come to all godly exercises joyfully; hear the Gospel diligently;
read the scriptures zealously; love the godly tenderly; and pray to the Lord
comfortablie: and then shall thou come to grace, not to wrath; to glory, not
to shame; to life, not to death; to heaven, not to hell. Make no excuses for
thy absence, admit no delays for thy hinderance, suffer no temptations for thy
allurement; and let not the wife of thy youth keep thee from prayer, and the
throne of grace. Fear God more than love the world; hate evil more than love
thy wife: Say unto all cumbrancers, away from me, for I will keep the
Gospel of my God: I had rather loose my finger than my hand; my hair than my
head; my body than my soul, my friends than my GOD. I will fear the Lord
before wrath, that I may rejoice in judgment. Again, let us learn to
acknowledge and persuade our selves of this terror of God, 2
2. Cor. 5. 11. for except we consider before hand how the heavens shall be
consumed, how the earth shall be burned, how the world shall be ended, and
how the Lord shall be manifested the Gospel; will be but a weak word, and
an idle tale unto us: But if thou can believe the last judgment, and with
the eye of faith behold it a far off, and tremble at the secret meditation
thereof, then thou may easily feel the power of life unto life, and happily
forsake the sentence of death. Therefore evermore remember judgment at thy
feast, in thy bed, on thy table, in the morning, at thy labor, before thy
sleep, and with thy friends, that thou and they be not of the kindreds of the
earth, which shall wail and lament before the coming of Christ, Revel. 1. 7.
There will I plead with them. Having finished the gathering together of the
wicked into the place of judgment; now it remains that we go on to the
causes of their destruction which the Lord here opens, as pleaders do in
their courts at the law: and therefore he says, that he will plead with them
for his people, alluding to the manner of worldly judgments: so that here we
may see that the Lord is both judge and counselor for his church, which may
greatly comfort us, and discomfort our enemies: for the Lord who is to tally
for us, and eagerly against them, has the whole law in his own hand. But in
this that he says, All sins shall be opened in judgment.
he will plead with them, we may note that God will open all the sins of the
wicked in judgment, Eccles. 11. 9. For pleaders will not omit any thing which
may discredit their adversary, or the cause against which they speak: yea,
they will suspect those things which they cannot gainesay, and condemn those
things very peremptorily which they can any way blemish. In like sort, the Lord
when he shall draw thee to judgment, will there open all thy life, and tell
thy secret whooredome, thy hidden theft, thy often blasphemies, thy idle words,
thy vain expenses, thy proud gestures, thy idle worship, thy friend-pleasing
vanity, and all thy hypocrisy. Thy charity, he will defame with vaineglorie;
thy prayers, he will account abomination; thy fasting, he will call
dissembling, and thy gentle nature shall be accounted a flattering virtue: All
this will he bring to judgment; he will prove it by thy conscience; he will
condemn it by his Gospel; and he will punish it by condemnation: oh, then
shall thy faults be written in thy forehead that al may know them, and thy
privy doings blown with a trumpet that all may hear them, and thy forsworn
sins opened by a crier, that all may loath them. Oh wretched wretches! which
had rather abide this judgment of God, then that which is in this life: but if
thou have any means to persuade thy soul unto goodness, or to terrify thy
flesh from evil; let this help it forward, that God shall open all thy faults
at the day of judgment, and discredit all thy virtues be they never so many,
or never so glorious. Think not that thy good deeds shall overcome thy evil,
but as one blemish disfigureth a whole body; so one sin will disgrace a
whole body of virtues. The reasons of this doctrine are these, because the
counsel of every heart shall Reason 1.
then be manifested, whether it be good or evil, 1. Cor. 4, 5. and if the
counsels of men be opened, much more their sins. Another reason is, because
they are remembered before God, Revel. 20. 12. and if all the sins of the 2
wicked be in the Lords continual sight and remembrance, then shall they not be
forgotten or covered when the number shall be rehearsed. And surely me thinks
that the conscience of this matter should mightily terrify our natures from
sin, seeing that all our offenses are continually in the Lords memory. Some
think that because the time is long since they committed adultery, or
sacrilege, or theft, or drunkenness, or idolatry; now God has forgotten it,
and it shall never more be laid to their charge. But they must know that a
thousand years, are with the Lord as one day, seeing that is past as a watch
in the night: and therefore the Lord does as well remember their old committed
sins, as a watchman remembers who came by him in the night; their childish
vanity, their youthful wantonness, their sinful sporting, their filthy
resting, their babish trifling, and their merry pastimes are fresh before the
Lord, 1. Sam. 15. 1, 2, 3. The Lord tells Samuel that he remembers what
Amalek did to Israel, Exodus 17. how he was the first that bid them to battle
after they came out of Egypt: and therefore commands Saul to destroy them
man, woman, and child. This was many hundred years after the act committed,
and the injury offered; yet God thinks upon it, although they had been
already well punished for it. And so does he remember, how thou have oppressed
the poor long ago, how many acres thou have encroched, how many pounds thou
have gathered by usury, how many men's cattle thou have bought by extortion;
and finally how often in thy younger days thou were negligent to sanctify the
sabbath. If thy sins might fall from thy life, as thy teeth in age do fall
from thy mouth, thou were happy; or if thy life could be changed into
holiness, as thy old years turn thy black hair into whitenes, blessed were
thou: but alas thy strength fails, thy beauty fades, thy life wears, thy
hand weakeneth, thy blood dries, thy head changes, and thy whole body
stoopeth to the earth; yet thy wickedness remains untouched and vnblasted, as
the Iuie which is thickest and greenest, when it has killed and withered the
great oak. The use which comes Use.
of this doctrine is the same that the most wise preacher that ever was taught
us, Eccles. 12. 13. That seeing God would bring every secret work into
judgment, therefore fear him and keep his commandments. How many ways
we are taught to fear the Lord appears in the former sermons; and
therefore it were needless to urge this exhortation any farther in this place.
But if we consider that if it be such a shame to endure the speeches of
friends and enemies in this life for the faults we have committed; how much
more ought we to blush before the Lord with all the angels of heaven, and all
the men that ever were, are, or shall be in the world, when at the latter day
our faults shall be opened; when every one shall hiss at our filthiness,
and laugh at our wickedness. Oh confess thy self to a few in this world,
rather then defer to be revealed before all in the end of the world. Think
not that thy own estate will be any thing more tolerable, because all other
men shall have their faults also ripped up and repeated; for the more the
worse, a Judge will be more easily entreated for one then for twenty, and
therefore God will be less partial, because so many shall be found guilty:
fear not shame, but death; abstain not from sin for the worlds sake, but
for the Lords sake; and let not other men's voices more appalle thee, then the
sentence of God. It has been heretofore and shall be hereafter more
manifestly showed, that God does no more spare a multitude then a man, or many
then one: and therefore never flatter thy self in the matter, but only use
the time and these admonitions, that God may forget thy sins, and then they
shall be forgiven thee; and if they be forgiven, they shall not be opened,
but silenced at the latter day. For although we shall then hear of the murder
that Cain did; of the mocking that Ismael did; of the filthiness that Er and
Onan did; of the rebellion of Absolon, and the treason of Judas: yet we shall
not hear of Noah's drunkenness, or Lots incest, or Joseph's oath, or Moses
unfaithfulness, or David's adultery, or Peter's denial, or of any of the
faults of the elect; for their sins shall remain in the grave, when their
bodies are raised up to the joy of another life.

The xxxiiij. Sermon.
FOr my people. In these words we may observe, that God will judge the world
for the injuries done to his church, and for nothing more, Psalm. 9. 17. for he
will God will adiudge the injuries done to his church.
then open the counsels thou have conceived against the godly, how many stripes
thou have given them; how many times thou have reviled them; how many ways
thou have oppressed them; how often thou have imprisoned them; and how many
thou have murdered of them. He will ask thy poor neighbor how thou did
relieve him; how often thou did lend him; how much usury thou tookest of
him; how many times thou did harbor him; and with what affection of heart
thou did embrace him. I grant that he will open thy other sins, and
condemn thee for them: but yet the special cause why he sits in judgment
at the latter day with all the world before him, is, that he may make
inquisition for the blood of his saints, and justify his children whom the
world condemned.

The reasons are, First because he is the life of the faithful, Col. 3. 4.
Secondly, because this does show his righteousness, Reason 1. 2
2 Thessalonians. 1. 6, 7. when he does acquit the faultlesse, and condemn the
guilty. The uses which we may make Use 1.
thereof are these: First, that we never grieve any of the saints of God,
Psalm. 105. 15. when Iehu was to kill all the prophets of Baal, he bad them
search diligently for the servants of God, and be sure that there were not one
among them to be hurt. This care ought men to have of the least and basest in
the church, that they provoke them not to complain upon them to the Lord: for
surely if the poorest member of Christ that lives among us, do justly
complain of the greatest Lord and potentate of the world, unto the God of
heaven; it were better for that Lord that a millstone were tied about his neck,
and he were cast into the sea. Again, seeing it is so dangerous to offer any
violence to any of the Lords children, let us abide in the Lord Jesus, Ioh. 2.
28. and then will he revenge our cause; for he cannot forget his own stripes,
and for his sake are we buffeted and disdained, and mocked, and reviled, and
persecuted, and martyred: and therefore by him shall we be defended, and
revenged upon them. If we be of the Lords body, we cannot hurt the Lords
members: and therefore they which persecute the church and speak evil of the
poor, are none of the Lords family. Whom they have scattered among the
nations. We have already showed that one principal part of a captivity was
the scattering and dispersing abroad of the people into many countries, where
they should never gather strength or hope to return home again. This is the
first cause why the wicked are thus judged, because they scattered abroad the
seed of Jacob, that it might die and never grow; for so is the meaning of the
word: Whereby we may observe, that the wicked are nearest to destruction
Wicked men in their greatest joy nearest to hell.
when they most of all triumph over the godly, as here we may see the first
cause of their condemnation is the scattering of Israel. So the Lord
affirms by the prophet, Esaias 49. 25. that when the mighty were at the pray,
and the tyrant at the spoil; then will the Lord come and spoil them, but
deliver his children. The lion and the Bear that David slew might have
escaped with pray and life, if they had not meddled with David's lambs: and so
the wicked might escape damnation if they could refrain from biting of the
Lords sheep. But seeing then they are at the brimme of destruction, when they
are in the highest of their mischief; O unhappy men which die as soon as they
conceive pleasure. The reasons of this doctrine are these, Reason 1.
First, because they help to aggrauate the evil upon the poor saints of God,
Zech. 1. 15. I did it a little, says the Lord, but thou did it much more:
so they make our faults greater then they are, and give us more stripes then
God has appointed them; therefore does the Lord so suddenly destroy them.
Beware how thou accuse a good man, although thou do it justly, for if thou
make it any thing more, it shall redound to thy own danger. Again, when the
poor and good men are most oppressed by the 2
wicked, then the Lord arises to hear their cry, Psalm. 12. 5. and when he
arises he comes with all wrath to recompense the injury. And as already I
have warned, so I must again and again, make not a good man complain on thee
to God, for thy oppression; for the Lord has more delight to revenge the
cause of one that is helpelesse and friendlesse, then of ten thousand that are
able to defend their own business; and in my choice, I had rather be
unjustly accused of treason to my prince, then by a godly man, to be justly
complained for injury unto God. The uses of this doctrine are these; First,
that we comfort our selves in the destruction of the wicked, Isaie 62. 1. For
although Use 1.
we are not to rejoice at their overthrow for our own sakes, yet for the
Lords cause, by whom they are ouerturned, we may lawfully and ioifully be
comforted for their end. For God does then take them when they are in their
deepest mischief, and when they purpose to execute their most deadly malice.
None can know it but God, because none should have the praise for their
overthrow but God. Therefore it is a vile thing for any to lament the loss of
wicked men the enemies of God; for their life is not to be desired, that live
not for the benefit of the Lords household. Although David lamented Saul and
Absolon, yet that makes not against this doctrine; for David lamented Saul
because he had undone himself, and lost the glory of the field: and Absolon,
because so kind a father could not choose but be moved for the utter
condemnation of the fruit of his loins. But this is most lamentable that even
in our days there are yet some that lament the overthrow of God his enemies
the Pope and Spanish forces, and it grieueth them that so many cardinals and
mitred fathers, so many abbots, and shaueling friars are clean driven out of
England; whereas, if these had continued, the Gospel of Christ must have been
banished: As well might Moses and all Israel lament the overthrow of Pharaoh
and the Egyptians in the sea (which they reioiced at) as these lament the
overthrow of papists and popery, for which they should be thankful: and I
pray God give us shortly as good cause to rejoice against all Atheists and
idolaters. Another use is this, that wicked 2
men learn to know their own danger; for woe be unto them that laugh, for
they shall lament, Luke 6. 25. Bless not thy self when every one honors
thee as they did Haman, for presently he fell to the gallows: Exalt not thy
self because others praise thee, as they did Herod; for by and by he was
devoured of worms: fret not thy self because others deserve better then thou,
as did Saul with David, for he fell into a lunacie: follow not any man nor
any cause with a desire to oppress as Saneherib did, for the Angels of God
destroyed his host, and his own sons made an end of his life. And parted
my land. Another point of a captivity is the taking away of the land from
the possessors thereof; for we must not think that if the Lord should suffer
an invasion, that men should escape with a tribute, but rather their houses
and lands should be distributed to strangers: Their demesnes, their
free-holdes, their manors, their copieholds, their rents, their knights-fees,
and all other their possessions shall be quite and clean taken from them,
which the conquerors challenge by law of arms. But this is worthy to be
noted, that notwithstanding this law of arms, God alleges this parting of
the land, and dispossessing the ancient inheritors thereof, to be one cause why
the wicked should be judged: they won it in deed, but yet they are called to
an account for it. By which we may observe, that it is not lawful in wars so
to triumph over the godly and their possessions, as it is over other men,
Tzeph. 2. 8, 9. although the king of Syria had triumphed against Amath,
Sepharuaim, Iua, and many other countries No lawful triumph over the godly in
war.
and kingdoms, and cities; yet when once he came to touch Jerusalem, and to
rail upon Ezechiah, he and all his host were quickly dispatched: and in like
sort when the wicked come to deal tyrannously with the church of God, and put
them to extremities, then does the Lord take their cause into his own hand.
The Spaniards boast of wonderful countries, which they have conquered among
the silly heathen and barbarous Indians; which may well be so, but what have
they gotten in these parts of the world, which are the beloved Jerusalem of
the Lord? surely nothing but blows; for here they loose more men at the siege
of a town, then there in the conquest of a country: and therefore they may
teach us that such barbarous cruelty as they have used among the Indians, and
such tyranny as they would have practiced in the Lowe-countries, must not be
offered to any Christian nations: but rather as David was glad that Absolon his
son had lost the field, yet was he sorry that he was slain; so must we
rejoice if God give a Christian enemy into our hand, and yet be sorry if any
blood beshed, or any violence be executed in his overthrow. But I know some
will say, how shall we war against the papists? may we not triumph with all
manner of warlike and lawful joy at their overthrow, as we would do against
heathens? Surely I answer, we may so war with them as with idolators, not
with heathens, and so to triumph in their conquest as Judah was wont against
Israel, that is, being provoked by them, to try it to the uttermost, and to
spare no person that is an adversary; yet to suffer the remnants to enjoy
their country, if they will embrace the truth and forsake idolatry. The
reasons of Reason 1.
this doctrine are these: first, because as men spoil the godly, so shall they
be spoiled again, Ier. 30. 16. Again, 2
good men are at peace in the land, and therefore it were cruelty to rage
against the peaceable. And therefore make this account that God will revenge
the injury offered to his people, upon the children and childrens children of
them that were the workers thereof, Isa. 13. 16. As David commanded Solomon,
that he should not suffer the hoare head of Ioab to go into the grave in peace,
because he had slain two men more righteous then himself in the time of
peace; so God will not suffer them to come in peace to their graves, that have
had any hand against the righteous of the world. Learn therefore as the
Prophet exhorts, Use.
Ierem 39. 12. that in wars or in any common slaughter, thou ever use
gentleness to them that thou shall know have lived godly: And therefore in all
the wars betwixt Judah and Israel, you shall never read of a priest or
prophet of the Lord to be slain, but they were slain in the time of peace,
when men were weary of the word of God. Be a valiant soldier; but be also a
merciful christian, if any yield himself, then give not his life to thy
sword. Remember that glory does not only dwell in fighting and killing, but
in ouercomming; and if thou overcome by any means or stratagems, thy conquest
is never the less. Spare them that pray for thee, for all christians pray one
for another: and as the King of Syria fought no more after he had overcome
Ahab, but let all Israel go home in peace; so after thou have overcome the
principal actors and procurers of the war, then let the residue go
scotfree. Think also that the wars are mutable; and if they give thee
victory at one time, yet they may let thee be conquered at another time; and
therefore so spare as thou would be spared: and as Abner would have
persuaded Asahel, Ioabs brother to depart from him, because he should slay him,
and then would Ioah be wroth with him: so if words may pacify thy enemy,
rather use them then weapons. And as I would have thee deal in wars; so thou
must deal in peace, that thou take not every advantage against thy brother,
but spare him, when thou have him in thy hand, whether it be in combat, or in
suite at the law, or in complaint before a magistrate, or in any extremity. Do
thou nothing against him, but let the law do all; rather silence some bitter
things, then invent any new occasions of strife, and to the uttermost of thy
endeavor, labor to buy peace although it cost thee dearly, for whether thou
win or lose, thou shall be polluted by trouble.

The xxxv. Sermon.
ANd they have cast lots. This is another cause why the Lord does enter into so
sharp a judgment against the wicked, and that is as you see because they used
them most vilely; and not only them, but the holy ordinance of God, which is
casting of lots: So that they as it were played at dice for the people of God,
they cared not who won them, nor how they grieved them; for it could not
choose but offend them to see the lottery made upon them; which God had
appointed for another use. But in this that they cast lots for the people of
God, and the lot being the very ordinance of God, not to be used in sport or
pastime: we may note that evil and ignorant men do profane and abuse every
thing, yea Evil men make good things evil.
though in it self it be never so good, Tit. 1. 15. To evil men and defiled,
all things (says the Apostle) are polluted: their toonges are adders spears,
their lips are instruments of guile, their hands work iniquity, and their
feet run to evil, and shed blood: and if they thus abuse their natural
parts, what will they do with the spiritual benefits? Oh, it greeueth my heart
to tell you! for their prayers they use to curse and banne them with whom they
are angry; their knowledge they abuse to beguile and deceive the simple and
unstable souls; they will have the Scriptures to cover their profaneness; and
when they be espied, they say they can approve their sins by holy warrant.
Oh, damnable blasphemy! they use their wits to cavil, their wealth to
oppress; their strength to steal; their friends to bolster out their
offenses; and their natural wisdom to maintain their unnatural blasphemy;
they are hungry, to be gluttons; they are thirsty, to be drunkards; they are
clothed, to be proud; they are honored, to be disdainful; and they are well
borne, that they may live ill uncontrolled: with a thousand such like
enormities, which we may find in the continual practice of the wicked: they
abuse their marriage for lust; their children for covetousness; their offices
for bribing; their ministry for reprehension; their law for delay of truth;
the day for open evil; and the night for secret shame. If a good man fall into
their hands they will use him scurrilously, the holy word of God either they
despise or wrest damnablie, the ordinances of God they profane wickedly, and
the society of men they dishonor shamefully; and yet still they live, and
still shall live, that they may so abuse death, as they have abused life: that
as they make life a time of sin, so they may find death a day of
destruction. The reasons of this doctrine Reason 1.
are these; First, because they are blinded of the devil, 2. Corint. 4. 4. And
therefore they cannot see so much as that which nature teaches, for the devil
never cease to toule on a man till he have made him defy the grace of God,
and to defile the nature of man. Another reason is, 2
because such is the poison of sin, that it defiles the very garments of a
man, and the walls of a house, Iud. 23. wherefore it will work more
effectually in man, who is a more meet and apt subject for the same. The uses
which come of this doctrine are these; First, that we learn to discern a man
that is thus given over to abuse very lawful things; woe be to them (says
the prophet) that Use 1.
speak evil of good, and good of evil, Isai. 5. 20. For men in this estate
will not stick to commend any kind of filthiness, because they would feign
bring all unto filthiness. And if ever there were times of such practice, now
they are; for sin is become kind, and religion turned away naked: We have
heresy, and blasphemy, and paganism, and bauderie committed to the press,
to be commended in print; there is no Italian tale so scurrilous, or fable so
odious, or action so abominable, but some have adventured to defend the same:
Plays on the Sabbath are made lawful; to be sometime a companion of evil is
good policy; whoredom with some is good physic, and no man can be a good
member in his country except he think well of himself: Honesty is
foolerie, knauerie is commodity, dissembling is discretion, and idleness is
gentry. Oh my soul, come not in their habitation! bearding of the ministry
and clipping their livings is but enimitie to popery, racking of rents is good
husbandry, wicked scoffing is a token of a good wit, and common jesting at
God, scriptures, goodness, and good men, is but solace. I tell you nothing but
that I have read in print, and heard with my ears. Gaming is as lawful as
labor, and money so gotten is well gotten. Men may be saved without preaching;
and faith comes not by hearing: papists live better then protestants,
because they give more to the poor; and the world will never be well till
the ministers be turned to ten pounds stipende and a cloak. Woe be unto
them! for they follow the way of Balaam, who for a little money would have
cursed the people of God: And I pray GOD, either purge our times from these
men, or take these monsters from among us.

They have given the child. Here is another cause of their condemnation; for
that they had sold a child for a harlot: and harken, I beseech you, if ever
you heard of the like mischief, or more base and beastly part of a man, then
to take a young child, well borne and godly brought up, and to give him for
the price of a harlot. Harlots in those times had a special desire unto boys
and young youths, whom they bought and made eunuchs: but this villainy to
be done to the Jews the people of God, that their holy seed should be the
hire of so unholy business, it could not choose but make the people that
heard it, to rende their hairs from their head. For it might be they had a
farther reach in selling their children for a whore, because it was commanded
that the price of a harlot should never come to the Lords tabernacle, and
therefore they gave their children for this price, that for ever they might
undo them. But whatsoever moved them thereunto, they did it; and therefore we
are herein given to understand, that wicked men set more by their lust, then
by any good man Wicked men esteem more of their own lust then of others life.
in the world. A good man (says Solomon, Prou. 29. 27.) is an abomination to
the wicked. They had rather have a harlot then a Christian, as Herod that cut
off John Baptists head to please his whore, Mar. 6. Would or could a man have
believed this, if God himself had not told us of it? truly no, if we had
seen it with our eyes: yet such, I fear me, we have among us, that if time
shall serve them, they will be forward enough to spend our goods, and consume
our livings; and when they be gone, they will sell our wives and children to
harlots or heathens, or to any that will give them any money for us. O England,
England, look to thy welfare! Thy goodly men, thy brave women, thy sweet
children, and thy rich possessions will all fall to the hands of an enemy.
What will they not do to the old, that thus deal with the young? to the
parents, which thus undo their children? Give not your selves to too much
marrying and marriages, as they did in the days of Noah; for here you may see
the price of the fruit of your body, begotten in sin, and given for sin;
sin sells them to satan, and men sell them to harlots: that as they were
borne in a body of sin; so they might be brought up in a school of
filthiness. O wicked sellers! O wretched buiers! O unhappy wares, that are
thus exchanged to fulfill beastliness! The reasons of this doctrine are these:
first, because they are inceassable and vnsatisfiable in their Iustes, Reason 1.
2. Pet. 2. 14. and therefore they care not what they do to perform their
lusts. Another reason is, because they 2
are lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God, 2. Tim. 3. 4. and such have
we in our days, if love may be esteemed by the work as Mary's was by her
oil; for these are the latter days of which Paul speaks. The uses which we
may make of this doctrine are these: first, that Use 1.
we consider the miserable estate of these kind of men, who as the Apostle
says, 2. Pet. 2. 13. shall receive the wages for their pleasure. And if
Sichem, for rauishing of one woman, lost his own life, his fathers, and all
his citizens, Genesis 34. what shall be the reward of these men, that have
defiled themselves and many women? O dangerous evils that hang over their
heads! And that which is said against this pleasure, may be said against all
other kinds of pleasures, that they shall every one receive their reward: as
Cain for his wrath was cursed; Laban for his oppression was empouerished; David
for his lust was troubled by his own sons, and Josiah for his boldness lost
his life: so shall every one that takes pleasure in drunkenness, or
whooredome, or idleness, or quarrelling, or murder, or bravery, or
belly-cheere, receive the hire of all their pleasures. Again, let us learn to
make precious account of 2
the seed of the faithful, and suffer them not to want any comfort; for God
has promised to be a friend to their friends, and an enemy to their enemies.
Offer them no violence, no not in their infancy, for Joseph who was sold by
his brethren, was at length able to be revenged upon them: And so it may come
to pass, that as twigs come in time to be trees; so children come in time to
be men, and then beware your old injuries be not repaied by them; for that
which is conceived young, will hardly be removed old. I see in many places
the posterity of good and godly men, yea of those that have suffered very much
for the gospels sake, to be accounted no better than vagabonds and roagues; and
I fear that men would be content to send them into the farthest parts of the
world, and to sell them to any Spaniard, papist, or infidel, rather than to
help their estate, and keep them according to their quality. And sold your
girls for wine. This is another cause why the Lord deals thus rigorously
with his enemies, because they had sold away the women children for cups of
wine; which was as much among them, as a cup of drink among us. Whereby we
may note, that wicked men make no Wicked men set nothing by the godly.
reckoning of the godly, Amos 8. 5. They sell them for bread, and for old
shoes: And so we may see the rich man in the Gospel, that esteemed more of
his dogs, then of Lazarus, and so Nehe. 5. 3, 4, 5. the poor were driven to
sell their children to slavery for to buie them bread. Such hard hearted men
were and shall be for ever, which make not any account of their poor brethren.
The reasons Reason 1.
are; First, because they are unmerciful, Pro. 21. 10. and therefore how can
they be merciful to them whom they hate, seeing they are not merciful to them
whom they love? Another reason is, because they do not think good 2.
men worthy to live, Ioh. 19. 15. and therefore they care not how they abuse
them. The uses which we are to Use 1.
make hereof are briefly these; First, that we give not to wicked men any
commendations, Proverb. 24. 24. What is there in any ungodly man worth the
noting, except it be sin? and shall we commend any body for their sin?
But I think that in our times either every man is righteous, and none are
evil, or else many men are beside the exhortation of the wise man. For there
is not any Usurer, nor any briber, nor any tyrant, nor any Atheist, nor any
papist, nor any rich man, but they are all commended by one or other: No
landlord so hard, no gentleman so lewd, no minister so ignorant, no whoremonger
so filthy, although he die of the French disease, but we have some epitaphes
of his commendation, although they lived without praise, and died without
repentance. Whereunto will the world come? and who will desire to live
therein? if thou commend evil men, how can thou dispraise evil? for evil
does not make the man, but the man makes the evil. Yea, we have of our noble
and royal preachers, that will in a funeral sermon tell of the good deeds of
many blasphemers, and misers, and covetous, and filthy, and ignorant, and
gamsters; and I think for money, of witches and coniurers, and rebels,
pronounce in the pulpet that they are in heaven: but beware, and be as wise in
saying that a man is saved, as thou will be wary in affirming that any is
damned. Another use which we may make of this 2
doctrine, is the same that God asked of satan, Job 1. 8. Whether he had
considered his servant Job: Insinuating unto us, that we ought to weigh and
measure the dignity of a godly man, how there is none like unto him in all
the world. And truly if we did often call to our minds the blessings that
righteous men do bring unto the world; we should account them as happy that
live with them, as the Queen of Saba did those which lived with Solomon: but
since no man considers either their life or their death as the Prophet
speaks, men grow to so perverse and corrupt a judgment concerning the world,
that they think there is no difference betwixt the just and the wicked. Sodom
never knew what a good man was, till the fire came; and the world will not
know the benefit of a christian, till Christ come to judgment. But do not
men consider what righteous men are? yes verily, for they try them as the
devil did Job; they vex them with many troubles, and load them with many
evils, and offend them with many outrages, and grieve them with many
slanders: you shall hear in the open streets open reuiling of God his dear
children; and now adays there is not a play or an interlude, but there are
some scoffs at religion; many scorns at good christians, and infinite abuses
offered to the preachers. What considering is this? but grieuing of the
righteous spirit of the Lord that dwells in them, and studying how to
improoue their sins to the uttermost. But it shall be sufficient for us to
know that the Lord of glory will not do so unto us. And therefore be not
discouraged my beloved brethren, gold is gold, although it lie in the dirt;
and pearl is pearl, although it be buried in a dunghill: so a christian is a
christian, although he be trod under the feet of helhoundes, and be buried
alive in the company of serpents. Consider them that fear God, to honor
them, not to vex them; to help them, not to hurt them; to love them, not to
tempt them; to live after them, not to accuse them: Think they are the stars
that give light in the night; they are captains that are foremost in service;
they are the souls that shield others from danger. Now if there be no
stars, and no captains, and no shieldes, how shall we walk in the night of
this world, or fight in the battle of Christ, or be saved from the fiery
darts of satan?

The xxxvj. Sermon.
Verse. 4. Yea, and what have you to do with me, o Tyrus and Zidon and all the
coasts of Palestina? will ye render me a recompense? and if ye recompense me,
swiftly and speedily will I render your recompense upon your head:
THis verse contains a question of the Lord unto the nearest enemies of the
church, namely, the merchants of Tyrus and Zidon, insinuating that they did all
the before named villainy to the Jews, as it were to wrecke their malice upon
God: and therefore he asks them whether they will recompense him; and if they
do but once think so to do, then will he fully repay them home again. And
first of all we may here note, that it is in vain to be angry with God, for
he says, what have you to Be not angry with God.
do with me, etc? and so the Lord chastises Jonah, Ion. 4. 9. that he might
learn not to repine against his creator. The world now adays as they care
little to please God: so they care less to offend God; and like mad people, if
their doings be but a little crossed, they swear and stare against God
himself: they like not his government; sometime he sends too much drought;
another time too much rain; another time they are angry for the loss of
their cattle; and most times for the reproof of their sins. So that thus
they lie tossed like an unquiet sea, fretting and foaming against God and
heaven: but what have they gained by their repining? or what are they eased by
their swearing? Surely nothing, but their wound is greater, and their sore is
made more incurable: learn therefore to be more quiet, and open not thy mouth
against thy creator. If thy sores be as thy hairs, and thy pains be as thy
thoughts, and thy wounds be as thy days, and thy losses be as thy life; yet be
not angry with God, he is more inclined to our patience then to our wrath; for
the patient spirit shall inherit the land. The reasons hereof are these: First,
because sin Reason 1.
will slay us as the Lord told Cain, Genesis 4. 7. Again, we cannot possibly be
angry or repine against God be it but the least motion, but we shall sin
against him. And therefore in 2
all extremities let every good christian say with old Eli, it is the Lord,
let him do what he will; let him take my goods, for he gave them; let him have
my children, for he made them; let him remove my health, for he sent it; let
him change my friends, for he won them; let him trouble my conscience, for
he can give it peace; and let him take away my soul, for he can give it
salvation. The uses Use 1.
that we may make hereof are these: First, that we wait patiently upon the
Lord, Psalm. 37. 7. and we shall see in the end our hearts desire, and commit our
whole care to his protection, who is able and will be willing to effect the
same. Wait patiently, for there is no master so kind, but he has some
attendance of his servant; and therefore how can thou be the servant of God,
if thou never attend upon him? A good servant of a willing mind does obey his
master even in those things that are hard to be performed: and so although it
be hard for thee, yet endure the calamity that somewhat presses and
oppresses thee. Naamans servants said to him that the Prophet bid him but a
small thing, that was, wash and be clean, and then he washed and was cleansed:
and so I say unto you, it is but a small thing I exhort you, wait and you
shall be eased. Oh, that I might persuade any sick man to wait for health, or
any poor man to wait for relief, or any old man to wait for death, or any
young man to wait for Christ, happy were I; but more happy were they, that
so could be taught to be so cured. Wait in the morning for a blessing, and in
the day for a comfort, and in the night for a light: in the morning, that thou
may work; in the day, that thou may continue; and in the night, that thou
may receive thy reward: oh tarry but a little while, and thou shall see an
end of all misery! Another use of this doctrine is this, that we take 2
heed how we by our wrath provoke the wrath of the holy Ghost against us, and
so grieve the spirit by whom we are sealed. We were far better let our souls
go forth of our bodies, then let the Spirit go forth of our souls: I mean
it were better for us to die then to live without the holy Ghost. Yea let us
eat sorrow as we eat meat, and grieve our consciences rather then grieve the
holy Ghost. David's servants were afraid to tell him of the death of his child,
because it would grieve him: oh, therefore let us be more afraid to grieve the
Spirit of God, then they were to grieve the king of Israel! Now, if thy sins
be reproved, amend them; if thy life be threatened, abide it; if thy goods be
wasted, fret not at it; if thy enemies rejoice at thee, be not desperate; if
thou be offended, swear not rashly; if thou be punished, curse not outwardly;
and if thou be accused, yet answer not bitterly, and grieve not the spirit of
promise. For ye have taken my silver and my gold. This is the fifth cause
specified in their enditement, for the which the Lord calls them to
judgment, for that they ransacked his temple, and took away all his gold and
silver which was appointed for his service, and carried into their
idoll-temples, whatsoever was ordained for the performing of his worship. And
first of all we may observe in this place, that What is once lawfully given to
religion, may not be recalled.
whatsoever has been lawfully given, and appointed unto the maintenance of
religion, can never be taken away again: or else in vain had the Lord blamed
these infidels, for that in their lawful conquest they had spoiled his temple
also; and this selfsame thing do the godly complain of, Psalm. 74. 6, 7. So
that if any lands have been given, or any houses have been builded, or any
privileges have been granted, or any money have been delivered for the
furtherance of the Lords worship, it is sacrilege to transfer them
violently, or couetously, or craftily to any other uses. Oh how shall they be
judged that live upon the spoil of the church, and share the Lords portion so
near and so narrow, that they have made it too little to fit his glory? Do
they not know that the Lord shall call them to a reckoning for his silver and
his gold; and then, oh then, how dear will their dainty fare, their silken
suites, their velvet slippers, their french-hoods, their golden borders, and
their blew-coate-hirelings cost them, that they have gained and maintained by
the robbery of churches? The reasons of this doctrine are these: first,
because the Reason 1.
goods of the church are holy things, 2. Chron. 20. 19. and therefore not to be
profaned; which is then done, when they are withdrawn from the Lords service.
For certainly, although in substance the gold and treasure of the church be
the same that all other is of, as the water and the bread and wine in the
sacraments, in substance be all one with other water, wine, and bread; yet in
regard of the use there is a difference; for they are made holy by dedication:
and therefore as it were horrible villainy to abuse the elements in the
sacraments; so is it execrable robbery to profane the treasure of the church.
Another reason 2
is this, because if it were not lawful for Ananias and Saphira under pretense
of religion to sell their land, as if they would have given it to the church,
and yet kept away part thereof, Act. 5. 4. then is it much more unlawful to
keep away any part from the church which we never gave, but it was rightly the
churches possession before we were borne. And the uses which may be made
hereof may be Use 1.
these: first, that these church-robbers and sacrilegious persons know that
the judgment of God does continually hang over their head, as often as ever
they abuse and take any of these hallowed and sanctified treasures, as it did
over Belshazzar, Dan. 5. 3, 5. who was then sentenced to destruction, when he
was drinking wine in the cups of the temple. And surely we were better wear
camels hair for our garments, as John Baptist did, and have not a house to
rest our heads upon, as Christ had not, and lap up our drink, as Gedeons
soldiers did out of the running stream, then so to be clothed and lodged, and
delicately nourished with the goods of the church, and the curse of the Lord.
What though some kings of Judah did buy peace with them? and David did eat of
the shewbread? yet they did it for necessity to maintain the commonwealth,
and to preserve life; and so verily I think may be done now. But blessed be
God we never yet tasted of the like necessity; and so long as there shall be
one penny of money, or one foot of land in the possessions of private men; so
long must the treasury of the church be left untouched. O ye gentlemen, and
rich men, and unhappy men! which have filled your private cofers with the
Apostles goods, whereas you should have laid your goods at the Apostles
feet: what will ye do when the mouth of God shall pronounce your destruction
for meddling with his tithes and his offerings, and his sacrifices, and his
livings, as the hand of God did Belshazzars deprivation on the wall? surely,
not your knees will bend, but your hearts will quake; not your countenance will
change, but your conscience will tremble; not your loins will be loosed, but
your lives; and not your wealth shall be only destroyed, but your souls and
bodies for ever and ever. Secondly, we may observe out of this verse. when he 2
says, that they have carried into their temples, his goodly and pleasant
things: that God accounts preciouslie of the means of his worship, how
basely soever the world and God takes pleasure in his worship.
all worldlings do judge thereof, Leuit. 1. 2. for he calls them his goodly
and pleasant things. The which thing I would have most diligently observed,
that we may so think of the things of God, as the spirit of God does
deliver them unto us: that we find them goodly as full of grace, and pleasant
as filled with delight, that we may all say: Oh Lord, how sweet are thy
laws unto our hearts, yea sweeter then honey to our mouths? For carnal
minded men, see no more grace in a church then in a tavern, nor no more
delight in a christian then in a ruffian; nor esteem any whit better of a
preacher then a craftesman; or find any more sweetness in a sermon then a
play; or take any more delight in the Gospel then in a little pedlars french.
Oh, how basely are you minded, that cannot think better of the Lords matters!
One of you think that there is great goodness in an ear of wheat; another
finds great delight in a field flower; another sporteth himself with the
smell of a rose; but none of you can feel any pleasure in that corn that
brings bread of life, or that flower that shows the work of life, or that
rose that offers the smell of heaven. Lay away thy base thoughts of
spiritual matters; and know that the church is the Lords house, who is
greater then a king; that the preachers are the Lords stewardes, who are
better then lords; that the Gospel is thy souls food, sweeter than any
iuncate; that a christian is the Lords friend, better than any rich man; that
a sermon is thy Saviors praise, higher then any prince; and that the
fellowship of saints is more worth then the valor of knights. Think I say,
how goodly and pleasant are the words full of grace, the company full of
goodness, the prayers full of sweetness, the Psalms full of melody, and
the souls full of sorrow which are gathered together before the Lord in his
church. The reasons of this doctrine are Reason 1.
these; First, because he evermore regards what himself has appointed,
Cant. 5. 1. His church is his garden, and therefore he has planted every
flower growing therein: wherewithal he cannot choose but be highly delighted,
as he was at the beginning when he saw that all his works were good. Another
reason is, because he punishes 2
them severely that contemn any part of his ordinance, Heb. 2. 2. 1. Cor. 11.
30. and therefore he accounts preciously of his word which he defends by
his power, and of his poor saints whom he maintains by his angels; and of
his mercy which he manifested in his son; and of the neglect of his Gospel
which he punishes by condemnation. Let us therefore honor whom Use 1.
God honors, Act. 10. 15. and that which God accounts precious, let us not
cast away as vile. Because Assuerus honored Haman, all the people of his
kingdom did him reverence; and therefore because the Lord thinks well of
the word, and of the Sacraments, and of prayer, and of preaching, and of
hearing the Gospel, let him be a dead dog that speaks against the same.
But alas, alas, as Vasthi would not come although the king her husband sent for
her; so will not our Vasthies, men, women, old and young, follow religion,
and come to the Gospel, although God our father, and Christ our husband send
for them never so earnestly: but she was rewarded for her disobedience, and was
divorced from the king; and so I fear will be the end of very many in our
days, to be put out of the Lords favor, and divorced from the blessings of
Christ. And again, let us learn to put on our eyes of faith, that we may
commend that which God commends; for except we can behold the works of
God, and the Gospel of God with spiritual eyes, it shall never be goodly and
pleasant before us: and cast away the blockish dullness that oppresses your
brains, like a drouzie nap in a shining day, which will not suffer you to
behold the light with any comfort: But lift up your eyes as the children of
light, that you may see the beauty of Christ's church, the riches of the Lords
spirit, the treasures of the Lords saints, the ornaments of a faithful
soul, and the glory of another life.

The children also of Judah, and the children of Jerusalem Verse. 6.
have ye sold unto the Grecians, that ye might send them far from their
border. This verse contains the last cause of the Lords judgment upon his
enemies, for that they had sold his seed and servants unto the heathen nations:
with this policy, because when they were carried far from their own country,
they should live like slaves, without hope ever to return home again. These
Grecians to whom they sold the people of God were Gentiles or heathens, the
posterity of Iauan the son of Iaphet, who was the eldest son of Noah. And
in this that the Lord now calls them to a reckoning, because they had sold
away his people, although they were their captives, unto infidels: we may
observe that it is not lawful to commit the children of the believers into the
hands of unbelievers. And for this cause it is reported, Genesis 12. 5. that when
Abraham was commanded by God to go out of Haran where all were fallen to
idolatry, into the promised land of Canaan, he took with him Sarai his wife,
and Lot his brothers son, for he would not leave him in the hands of Terah,
Abraham's father, and Lot his grandfather, because with the residue he then was
fallen to idolatry. And this Commit not the children of believers to Infidels.
example is a sufficient proof of the matter, to teach us that we should so
love the souls of the righteous seed, that we leave them not resident among
the infidels or Atheists, or Papists, or other profane wretches; but to our
own cost and labor redeem them from the devils tyranny. But in this we may
lament, First, that even in our times we may see many of years of discretion
to run away into papistical and heathenish wars, or else to sauegarde
themselves under the liueries of them that are open enemies to the Gospel: and
many to bind and put their own children the fruit of their body (which they
ought to consecrat to the Lord) into the education of most blasphemous and
abominable Atheists: are not these as much to be complained upon, as them whom
the Lord here condemns for selling of Ierusalems seed into the hands of the
Grecians? Yea much more, for these sold their enemies; but our men sell
themselves and their children: these did it by the law of war; but our men
do it contrary to the law of God: these men in so doing did not sin
against their knowledge; but our men in doing as they do, sin against their
conscience. O unhappy parents! which destroy your children in Popish houses:
what are you inferior to them that sacrificed them to devils? O unhappy young
men! which destroy your souls for the service of wicked men: why do you to
gain a gentleman's cognisaunce, loose your Saviors crown? I pray God open
your eyes, that you may come from them, or else you will be destroyed with
them. The reasons of this doctrine are these: First, because Reason 1.
it is not lawful to make marriages with infidels, heathens, papists, or
Atheists, Deuteronomy. 7. 3. and if in an equal band we may not adventure our sons
or our daughters; much more may we not give them over in an unequal: if it be
not lawful to give them in marriage, then is it not lawful to sell or give
them to slavery or servitude. The woorser part is apt to overcome the better:
for if an infidel man do take a believing woman, or an infidel woman a
believing husband, a thousand to one but the infidel will persuade the
believer, as wise king Solomon who was persuaded to idolatry by his wives: And
then I pray you, how will those that are wicked masters and governors compel
and persuade their poor despised servants and captives, hirelings and
apprentices, unto whatsoever iniquity comes in their brain? But
peradventure some will say, that when we be ouercharged with poor people, we
are glad if we find any that will ease us of our cost; and we were better
suffer our poor men's children to serve carnal men, and papists, and Atheists,
then to keep them in idleness, or let them famish: to whom I answer, that God
has not so dealt with any in England, for there are means sufficient to bring
them up with christians, and not to suffer them to famish, if men would but
strain their ability a little to do good; but all is too little that is
reserved for the wanton posterity of the wealthy, and men choose rather that
their unthrifty children should consume all in leudnes which they have got in
misery, then that any portion should go forth of their coffers to maintain
poor men's children, and so to put the less in their inventory. Another
reason to confirm this doctrine is this, that there is no part nor 2
communion betwixt the children of God and Belial, 2. Cor. 6. 15. and therefore
to send or give our children unto Pagans, Atheists, and carnal godless men to
be by them instructed, is to join light with darkness, heaven with hell,
saints with devils, and God with Beliall. Oh what a confusion is there now in
the world? for seeing God does yet suffer a few Papists among us as he
suffered Philistims among the Israelites to try them and provoke them: now
happy are they that can be in league with them, for they have good cheer, fat
beeues, many great manors, goodly rich farms, and they are able to pleasure
the^; but such pleasure will cost more then a lawiers or a courtiers friendship:
and although thou should co^uerse with the^ without al approving of their
superstition; yet thou oughtst not at al, for God has no fellowship with the^.
The uses which arise from this doctrine Use 1.
are these: first, that by the former example of Abraham we have singular care
that all the children which are born among us be godly and virtuously brought
up, and carefully provided for, that they may do Christ some service in the
co^monwelth or church. And surely, as our savior said, Ma. 18. that whosoever
does offend one of those little ones that believe in him, it were better a
millstone were hanged about his neck, and he cast into the sea: but of al
offenses there is non so great as to bequeath the^ unto their tuition that will
cast away their souls; for men of corrupt consciences and wicked affections
will co^pas heaven and earth to make any the children of da^natio^. Oh
therefore, cast not away the seed of the righteous, the children of Christians,
and the price of the precious blood of Christ! You have made the^ in their
baptism when they were young to confess Christ, now make the^ not again to deny
Christ; but if ever there be any poor man's child com to your provision, so set
him forward and deal for his health, that with the maintenance of this life he
may have the assurance of the life to com. Bind the^ to none but to Christ; put
the^ to none but to christians; sell the^ to nothing but to the gospel; and
leave not young helpless youths and maidens in the hands and custody of old
ca^kred and wicked enemies of God. Another use: if it be not lawful to 2
commit the children of the righteous unto the government of the wicked, then
is it not lawful for masters and lords to keep their servants from the true
service of God. It was a wicked tyranny of Pharaoh, Exodus 5. 3, 4. that he
kept the children of Israel from the service of God: and such surely is the
tyranny of them that will busy their servants even on the Lords day, rather
than send them or suffer them to serve the Lord: oh think with your selves that
Christ is your Lord and master, Ephesians. 6. 9. and therefore how will he take it at
your hands to see you thus afflict his free men? and how can you affoorde him
your own service, which will deny him your servants? Rather follow the example
of Iosuah, and say that you and your household will serve the Lord: and let
there be as many Pharaohs as will be, yet they shall know one day that there
is no cruelty more punishable then is the authority which is used against the
Lords service. That you might send them far from their border. That is, you
have a wicked policy to sell away my people, because you would never have them
come again; but that you might for ever possess their inheritances. By which
we may observe, that it is a most wicked and vile thing to deprive any of their
patrimonies or inheritances, and by violence and countenance to keep them from
them, Ezech. 22. 7. And the A wicked thing to spoil orphans of patrimonies.
reason is, because the Lord names himself to be a father of the fatherless,
Psalm. 68. 5. and therefore he that oppresses them shall be oppressed by God,
and they that take away their inheritance, how shall they look for any
inheritance in another life. Give unto them and take not from them, Deuteronomy. 24.
19. and augment their revenues, rather then diminish them. Is God their father?
who will not give them: are they not brethren? who will oppress them: are they
not helpless orphans? who will hurt them. If we see but the son of a mean
gentleman, we are ready to gratify him with the richest gifts we have: and
then let us not be backward to help fatherless children even with our own
unto their own. Oh my dear brethren! it is the cause that belongs to us
all, and therefore never suffer an orphane to be oppressed; for even thy
posterity may come to the like calamity. God takes more care for children
then for oxen, or sheep, or birds, or beasts, and he would not have any to be
oppressed: therefore be assured that he will not let thee go unpunished if
thou oppress the fatherless. Take not away their lands, which parents left
them; take not away their goods, which God gave them; take not away their
liberty, which Christ has gotten them; and deprive them not of those gifts,
which nature has bred in them. Some I know there are which make slaves and
fools of their wards and pupils, and desire nothing more then to get all that
they have into their own hands, whose books of account and bills of reckoning
shall surely follow them to the Lords judgment: and they think they are very
charitable if they can get away any man's lands and livings, and afterward
bring up their heirs in their kitchins to be scullions, or else at their
ploughes or sheep-folds, to be drudges and slaves all the days of their life.
O miserable and wretched charity! to make them the servants to their own
goods, and to pay their hire with their own lands. Others will cosen for lands,
and extort all that they can, and then will make them their farmors, who were
the owners, and think they do them a pleasure: and thus they threaten kindness
like lawyers and usurers which pay themselves with ours; and yet say, we are
beholding to them.

The xxxix. Sermon.
Verse. 7. Behold, I will raise them up out of the place where ye have sold
them; and will render your reward upon your own head.
Having hitherto dealt with them, and opened their injuries as it were in
several bills of enditement, which they offered to the church, he now
proceeds to their condemnation. And first of all, he shows them in this
verse, that their policy in oppressing his people, and selling them to
strangers so far off, that they might never return home again, shall be
utterly void: for he will raise them up again, and will recompense the injury
as if the enemy had prevailed; and therefore he bids them behold it,
because the wicked shall certainly see and perceive that their counsels against
the Lords saints shall be all in vain, and to no purpose. But first of all
we may note when he says, that he will raise them up out of the place where
they had sold them: that God will for evermore preserve his church in the
seed of the righteous, In the seed of the righteous shall good men be
preserved.
Psalm. 102. 28. So that although we cannot say that this man's children, or
that man's posterity shall continue in the church; yet we may certainly
believe, that the posterity of righteous men shall be the church for evermore;
for God says, he will raise them up, yea if they were dead, as Abraham thought
he would do with his son. Three several times has God in one man knit up
his church: First, in Adam, who was a righteous man (although he fell out of
Paradise) and of him came all, both good and bad: Afterward he destroyed the
wicked, and in Noah one good man did he combine his church: but when his
posterity fell to idolatry, then in Abraham did he bless the world. What if
we see many called to the faith, whose late parents were enemies to the
Gospel? yet we must know that they are descended from some that were godly,
insomuch as that we may boldly affirm, that there is not any righteous man in
the world but he came from some parents that had been godly, and so may hope
that God will again raise up out of his seed (although many years to come)
some that shall be saved. No doubt but Adam had some fruit in Cain, as Noah
had in Cham; Abraham in Esau; and Jacob in the sons of his bondseruants. And
if this were not so, good men might do well to leave of from marrying: but God
which has determined the world, will have us in a continual hope of good
children, and a holy posterity; and therefore has instituted marriage to
continue as long as the world shall endure. The reasons of this doctrine are
these; First, because the power of God Reason 1.
shall uphold them; and this was it that John Baptist told the Pharisees,
Matthew. 3. 9. that God was able of the stones to raise up children to Abraham.
Again, the gates of hell shall never prevail against the church, Matthew. 16.
18. 2
There is no enemy that men ought more to fear, then sin, which is meant by
the gates of hell; but yet sin shall not for ever prevail against the seed
of the righteous. We may see many times a young sprout coming forth of an
old stub which has long been dead; and so we may consider, that as Samuel
came of the rebel Corah, who murmured against Moses and Aaron, so shall there
some good seed come from them who seemed to be dead and drowned in sin. But
yet this must not make good men to set any thing lighter by their sins
because God has promised it shall not prevail: but we must know that the
promise is, that it shall not condemn the church, yet may God cast thee out of
the church, and there condemn thee, if thou abide in sin. Let us therefore
after the example Use 1.
of Moses, Exodus 32. 13. remember God of his promise when the church is in
affliction, and feels his heavy wrath. For the promises of God are the
pillars of the church, insomuch as every member therein is called the child
of promise, Roman. 9. 8. Now then none can so forget the church of God as that
he should forget himself, for he is borne by promise as that stands by
promise. But it is no marvel that the church of God so decreaseth, that good
men's children become wicked, and wicked men's issue multiply, waxing worse and
worse, because there is not a Moses left to remember the Lord of his promise.
Many are more afraid that their posterity will be too righteous rather then
too profane, and therefore their mouths are opened against Jerusalem, because
they are opened against heaven. Yea good men are too loose in this point, for
they forget to remember the Lord of his promise to continue his church; and
therefore I fear, the Lord forgets them in their progeny. Blessed was
Abraham, Genes. 17. 18, 20. that he never gave over to pray for Ismaell, till
God had promised to make him a mighty man; and therefore the church of God
would be much greater, and the posterity of the righteous much happier and
godlier, if more often with Moses we remember him to take away his wrath by
continuing his church. Another use are we taught, Ier. 32. 39. which is, that
we 2
likewise pray that our posterity may have one and a single heart, that they
may dwell for ever in the presence of God. We can no way so much benefit our
posterity, as by praying for them; for then we lay up their treasure in
heaven before the Lord, making him the ouerseer of our wills, and his kingdom
their inheritance. So that as he promised David, that he should never want a
man to sit on his throne, if they would continue in his covenant; so may every
righteous man assure himself, that they shall never want posterity, if they
continue in the Lords worship. As there is but one God, so men should have but
one heart; and as there is but one heaven, so men should have but one soul:
now the heart is one when it abides in the worship of God; but when it
wauereth, and is distracted into as many follies as affections, there is no
heart at all: as it is all one to make mo gods, and to deny God; so is it all
one to have many hearts and no heart. Therefore pray for thy children whom thou
have nourished in the world, that they may be single hearted, and remain
before the Lord for ever and ever; for surely if they multiply their hearts,
God will remove their graces. For as Ahab by seeking to win Ramoth-Gilead
lost his own life, because he would increase his territories; so shall we
loose our own souls if we enlarge our hearts for more vanity. Remember that
Jerusalem was so built as it was at unity in it self: and so must every
member of Jerusalem, that is, of the church, have one heart in himself, that
his heart may fit the Lord, and his soul may serve for heaven. Secondly, we
may observe in this verse, that the policy of wicked men cannot Wicked men's
policy cannot always stand.
always prevail against the good, Psalm. 124. 1, 2, 3. It was one of the wonders
of the world, that ever the counsel of Achitophel was so soon confounded,
that he took against David, but the Lords hand was in it; for seeing he had
promised that David should reign, was not wise Achitophel a fool, that
would assay to break the covenant? and so were these gentiles in taking
counsel against the Jews to keep them from ever returning to their country
again. The first reason: the Lord will purge Reason 1.
iniquity from his sanctuary, Dan. 8. 13, 14. and therefore he will not
suffer iniquity to overthrow his sanctuary. For the policy of wicked men in
the destruction of the godly is not so much against mankind, as it is to bury
for ever the worship and worshippers of God. Would God that this reason might
be well waighed of them, who are evermore corrupting the sanctuary of God, who
broach all the devises of the world to corrupt the gospel. But as the Roman
Image standing in the holy place was called the abomination of desolation; in
like manner shall the imaginations of heretical and proud men standing in the
church be called the abominable desolation of religion. Another reason,
because good men might not fall from 2
God by enduring their injuries, Psalm. 125. 4. and therefore be assured, if God
will make one of his own saints worth a thousand of his enemies, then will he
rather destroy their counsels, then want his worshippers. The use is: let us
then Use 1.
know that not all the counsel of men, nor all the policy of the devil, nor
all the power of the angels shall ever cast down the members of Christ. Apoc.
7. 3. Oh sweet instruction for us miserable deemed wretches! when we need not
to fear all the engines and devises of the devil: if he stir up princes,
yet God is greater; if wise men, God is wiser; if strong men, Christ is
stronger; and if learned men, yet God catches the learned. What shall I say
more? all the devils in hell cannot take away one soul from the Lord. They are
bound, they cannot roue; they are muzled, they cannot rore; they are ruled,
they cannot rage; and they are damned, they cannot hurt us. Nay, they can
neither hurt body nor soul; for the same that redeemed souls redeemed bodies,
and preserves both: Therefore fear not death, that has lost his sting, and
fear not the devil that has lost his force. Another use: let this confidence
2
for our raising up, out of misery into glory; out of iniquity into
holiness; out of death into life, and quitteth us from the wicked, stir up
every man's soul and heart to cleave to the Lord for evermore: for as Dinah was
safe in her fathers house, and none could touch her; so shall we be safe in the
Lords presence, and none can hurt us. Thirdly, by this verse, when he lays to
their charge the selling of his people, that they might never return again,
which they could not bring to pass; but yet he tells them he would punish
them: we may note that God punishes our devises and thoughts of evil,
although they Thoughts to do evil, like evil actions.
proceed no farther, as if the thing had been effected, and the sin
perfected, Genes. 11. 4, 8. The builders of Babell thought to build a tower to
reach to heaven; but they could not prevail, and yet God punished their
enterprise, by confounding their language: So that, imagine with thy self how
often thou have stolen by coveting; how often thou have committed adultery
by lusting; and how often thou have deserved actual punishment, by mental
transgressing: we do therefore all of us most justly suffer the danger of
all kind of deaths, because we live in the danger of all kind of sin;
neither is there any man living but at one time or other he has lusted after
every sin that he knew, for if we knew not sin, we should not sin.
And indeed these builders, and this building of Babel does notably describe
and decypher unto us the nature of sinners and sin: for as Babell was built
without God his consent, so is sin: as the builders made the substance and
frame thereof, of themselves; so do we of sin: As they did it to continue
their names, that the flood should no more ouerflowe them, not trusting to the
former promises of God; so do sinners forsake God his promise, and for worldly
causes fall into many follies. Again, as they would build, never cease
building till they had brought it up to heaven: so is the measure of sin, it
would never cease till it ascended up into the sight of God, and filled all
the space between heaven and earth. And lastly, as the building was not
stayed, but by the confounding of their toongs; so shall not sin be stayed
but by confounding the souls of men. The reasons of this Reason 1.
doctrine are these; First, because they which consent to sin (and go no
farther) are worthy of death, Rom 1. 32. So that it is a grievous thing to
be made privy unto any unlawful practices, and not to reveal and open the
same. Secondly, our corrupt estate is such, that our temptations 2 Use 1.
do draw us from God, Iam. 1. 14. The first use, Let us follow the counsel
of the prophet Isa. 1. 16. That we take away the evil of our hearts. Men
think it lawful for them to range in conceit upon any folly or sin, or
lust or treachery whatsoever, and to play with the devil in imagination,
suffering his delusions to tickle their delights, and delight their souls with
an inward desire only: But in truth this kind of sport is a most unlawful
game, condemned by the Lords own statute, when he bids us to take away the
evil of our hearts; Cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purge your hearts you
wavering minded. the devil first comes into your hearts by doubting, then by
entreatie or begging, then by delighting; when once he delights, he has
erected his throne in thy soul, and if thou labor not to cast him out, he will
become irresistable. Dally not with him as Samson did with Delilah, for it
will betray thee; trust him not as Sisera did Iael, for it will destroy thee;
desire him not as David did Bathsheba, for it will repent thee; choose him not
as Lot did Sodom, for in the end it will vex thee. Remember that God which
sees thy heart will punish the sin of the heart, for in truth thy heart is the
principal in every offense, and the body is but accessorie: Thy heart
provoke thee to sin, as the high priests provoked Pilate to crucify
Christ; and thy body obeieth as Pilate did, while in the mean time thy
conscience gives thee warning as Pilats wife did him: and therefore have
nothing to do with sin, which is poison, with the knowledge of it, for it will
infect thee, and purge thy soul from evil thoughts, as Ezechiah purged
Israel from idolatry. Fourthlie, when he says, that he will render their
recompense upon What we do to other, we shall receive of other.
their own head: We may note that the same measure which we offer unto others
shall be repayed to us again, Isaie 33. As we smite with the sword, so shall
we perish with the sword: and as we shed the blood of other, so shall we have
our own blood shed again. We know that as Ahab and Iezabell did cause Naboth
to come to a violent death, and the dogs to lick his blood; so the dogs did
lick up their blood again. And this falls out with the most godly in the
world, as we may see in David, who took away the life and wife of Vrijah, he
lost his own sons, and escaped himself very narrowly; and in the end you
know how his son Absalom lay with his wives before all Israel. Therefore
harken unto this, my dearly belooued, that you never offer any other things to
other, but the same that you would have offered to you again. Take what
liberty thou will to offend other; to waste their goods, to shame their lives,
to open their sins, to defile their wives, to oppress their goods, to harden
thy heart against the poor, and to heap up injuries in the highest measure:
for as Solomon said, He that stops his ear at the cry of other, shall cry
himself and not be heard: so shall thou be offended, and wasted, and shamed,
and opened, and defiled, and oppressed, and iniuried, and revenged, as thou
have deserved. We see the king escaped not this law; and therefore think not
thou, whether thou be rich, or wise, or great, or noble, or worshipful, or
poor, or strong, or weak, or young, or old, or learned, or ignorant: but as
thou have rejoiced in others harms, so shall other in thine; as thou have
defiled others wives, so shall other thine; as thou have stolen other men's
goods, so shall they steal thine; as thou have reproched other men's lives, so
shall thine be; as thou have been pitiful to others, so thou shall receive
pity: for this law shall never be broken, that whatsoever we do to other, we
shall receive of other again. The reasons: First, because this Reason.
is the whole doctrine of the law and the prophets, Matthew. 712 for surely there
is not any thing that sauoureth more of beastly tyranny, or less of godly
piety, then to do that unto other which we would not receive of other: and
therefore in the practice of religion betwixt man and man, let this serve
instead of the golden rule, whereby the weak shall be never offended, or the
poor be ever oppressed, or the rich be ever envied, or the godly be ever
defamed. This will take away all bribing from officers, all tyranny from
princes, al pride from gentlemen, al covetousness from landlords, and all malice
from enemies. Truly, truly, there was never precept given better for the
church, for the commonwealth, or for the world: for the church, for it
teaches to save souls, for who would loose his own: to the commonwealth,
for it preserves life, for who would kill himself: and to the world, for it
keeps humanity, for who would become a beast? Let us therefore learn Use.
to forget injuries, Leuit. 19. 18. for their remembrance provoke us to
revenge, and all revenge is damnable before God. Oh, whose soul is not set on
fire to embrace this doctrine, which I might follow with all the examples of
the world? For who can abide to have his own blood shed, his own body maimed,
his own children murdered, and his own soul damned? therefore do not so to
other, but write this law on the palm of thy hands that it may never be out of
thy sight. It will teach thee all religion, it will save thee from the strife of
toongs, the shame of fools, the blame of good men, the fury of devils, and
the wrath of God: for if thou can bear the injuries of thy brother, and not
revenge them; thou will also bear the afflictions which God sends, and the
sorrow which good men endure, and not repine at it: but as Joseph having all
his brethren that sold him, yet did not hurt one of them; so do thou not hurt
any of them that hate thee.

The xxxviij. Sermon.
Verse. 8. And I will sell your sons and your daughters into the hand of the
children of Judah, and they shall sell them to the Sabeans, to a people far
off: for the Lord has spokenat.
Having showed them, that he would do unto them as they had done unto him and
his people; that is, he would take their sons and daughters, and give them
into the hands of the children of Judah whom they had spoiled, and the children
of Judah should sell them away to the Sabeans, who dwelt in the utmost parts
of Arabia, being great merchants, which should likewise send them away into a
very far country, that so their own policy might return to their own
damage. Whereby here comes a question to be handled, namely, whether it be
lawful for Christians having conquered any nation their enemies, to sell away
their children whom they had taken prisoners, unto heathens and infidels, as
the Lord here says, that the Jews should sell them to the Sabeans who were
infidels. First, for the opening of this place, it was lawful for the Jews so
to do, because they had the express commandment of God, as it is here set
down: and if at the commandment of God they must in their wars, kill man,
woman and child; much more at his commandment may they sell their prisoners
to heathens. Secondly, we must not make this place any rule or example for us
to imitate, but take it for a special curse upon the enemies of the Jews at
this time, because they should sell them as they had sold theirs. Then to the
question, I think it not lawful for us to sell any unto heathens; yea though
they be heathens and our enemies: The reasons are these; first, Reason 1.
because Deuteronomy. 20. 11, 12. the Lord propounds an everlasting law for war,
standing upon these conditions: first, that they offer peace; secondly, if they
overcome their enemies, then shall they make them their tributarie servants,
and not sell them away; or if they refuse peace being offered, then shall they
destroy them all: so then, selling of men and women becomes barbarous and
heathen men, and not the children of God. Secondly, by selling away our
enemies, we do not weaken the common enemy of our faith, but rather
strengthen him; for a bond-slaue can fight as well against the gospel as a
free man; therefore it is better to slay them outright, than to make a gain of
them unto heathens or men of no faith. Thirdly, it is not lawful to sell them,
because it is an unnatural thing for one man to buie another, or to sell
another, as we may see in the history of Joseph. Fourthly, they were better
be among us, and be the least in our congregation, where they may possibly
come to learn Jesus Christ, than to be among heathens where Christ is hated:
and so I cannot see how we can wash our hands clean from the guilt of their
damnation. So that now it appears, that men must look especially that they
undo not those whom the Lord has commended to their safety and preservation;
besides many other reasons which I could add unto the former. And again, by
this verse we may see how the children of the wicked bear their fathers
faults; for here are the sons and daughters to be sold: so may we read,
Psalm. 127. 9. that they are blessed that revenge the fathers cruelty on the
children. Oh my dear brethren! let your tender babes procure pity and piety
in your souls; for you see how their lives shall pay for your wrongs, and
their butcherie for your tyranny. It were an easier calamity if the hand that
sinned should only be cut off; but we see that if the right hand slay a man,
the whole body must perish thereby. It is a singular blessing of God to be
descended of godly parents, yea the wicked brag thereof, Ioh. 8. 39. Matt. 3.
9. Therefore if you will make your posterity happy and blessed; make your
own souls godly and your works holy. Let not your children be made slaves to
the wicked, and bondslaues to the devil for your folly; but be you gentle,
that they may live; be you patient, that they may be beloved; be you honest,
that they may be honored; and be you good to the godly, that they may
possess your revenues.

Publish this among the Gentiles, prepare war, wake up the Verse. 9.
mighty men, let all the men of war draw near and come up. Now are we
come to the second means, whereby the Lord takes vengeance on the enemies of
his church, that is by war; for as by war they had wasted the Jews, so by
war should themselves be confounded. In this war we are to consider,
First, the preparation thereof by soldiers, verse 9. then the instruments or
weapons, verse 10. Secondly the execution in the verses following. First then
in this verse he calls for the soldiers, and bids that the war should
be proclaimed, and that all the men fitted thereunto should come up to fight.
Whereby we must first of all observe, that war must be proclaimed before it
be waged, Ios. 22. 12. For it becomes not any War proclaimed beforehand.
prince or great person so to deal with his enemies, that he overcome them
before they have intelligence of him. The reason, First, because peace must be
first of all offered, Deuter. 20. 10. For war, which is the slaughter of
mankind, Reason 1.
must be the last means for princes to right and try their injuries. It must
be taken in hand for necessity, not for pleasure; and it must be executed
with mercy, not with cruelty. Another reason, because victory only
depends 2
on God, 2. Chron. 13. 12. and therefore we must use all good means in the
undertaking thereof, least beginning without the Lords counsel, we end with
his curse, being guilty of our own death, and others. Let us not then in this
latter age of the world fear any of the rumors Use 1.
of war, Mat. 24. 6. for the Lord of hosts is the great warrior, whose
soldiers we are; and if he can use the roaring of the devil to drive us
from hell, then think also he will use the trumpets of war to bring us into
heaven. Fear not I say all the rumors of war in France, Flanders, Hungary,
Turkey, or in other places of the world; for if the wicked die in them it is
for sin; if good men, by the punishment for sin, they kill sin; and all
this shall promote the Gospel and preserve the church. Secondly, 2
when he bids to awake the mighty men, we may note that men of greatest
courage and valor are fit for the wars, 2. Sam. 10 9. But of this matter we
have spoken in the second chapter. Again, when he calls them Soldiers must
have a calling from God.
to draw near and to come up, we note that soldiers should beware that they
have a calling from God, and a commandment from him to fight, 1. King. 22. 7.
Iehoshaphat would not fight with Ahab against the Syrians, till he had
inquired of the Lord: and this we may see in David many times. For seeing
wars are the cause of many men's death, let us beware that we add not curse
to curse; like the king of Moab, who being overcome by the Israelites, went
home and sacrificed his own son in the fire. The Reason 1.
reasons are; First, because they cannot prosper that wait not for the Lords
calling, Ios. 1. 17, 18. Secondly, he gives 2
power to fight, Psalm. 18. Let us therefore be so minded in wars, that we
never undertake them when the Lord disalloweth them, Numb. 14. 44, 45. The
Israelites fighting with the Amorites contrary to the Lords will were slain
and driven back again; whereas at other times they lost not a man, but
returned in victory. Again, let soldiers learn to keep themselves from
evil, Deuter. 23. 9. For the battle or warfare is like a man's deathbed, and
although a man have made no conscience all the time of his health, yet on his
deathbed will he lie most devout: so let devotion and religion reign in them
that follow the wars, that every man's death may be a sermon of repentance
unto them: and let the trumpet admonish them of judgment, and their continual
danger awake them, for the Lords coming. Oh that men of this life would so
live, that they might fight in less danger, overcome with smaller loss, live
with greater holiness, and die with greater honor: die I say, to honor
their country with their lives, and their Savior with their souls.

Break your plow shares into swords, and your sithes into spears: let the
weak say I am strong. Having handled Verse. 10.
the pressing of the soldiers, now it follows that we go to the preparation
of weapons in this verse, where he bids them to take their tools wherewith
they husband the earth, and turn them into the instruments of war: whereby
we may observe, that the war which the faithful War as needful as
husbandry.
have against their enemies, is as needful or more needful then tillage of
the earth, Genesis 14. 14, 15. Abraham to recover again Lot, took all his
household both shepherds and other, and followed the kings which lead him away
captive, and by a main battle overthrew them all. And surely many times, there
is none but they may do more good in the war, then at the plow; and at the
slaughter of men, then at the mowing of corn. If Abraham had not stirred
presently, all had been lost, and then woe had been Lot, which should have
lived a prisoner, and forgot the God of Abraham: therefore better was it to
leave the sheep to the danger of the woolfe, and the earth to be untilled and
ouergrowen with weeds, then to let any souls of God be captiuate by man, or
be taken away from the flock and visible church of God. The reasons: First,
because Reason 1.
it is waged for the Lord and for the church, 2. Sam. 10. 12. now then it being
sometime a part of the Lords service, what worldly work is there that must not
yield unto it? Yea, though it be as natural as the tillage of the earth.
Again, then does the Lord take vengeance of the sins 2
of wicked men, whereupon they were accursed by the prophet Jeremy that did
the work of the Lord negligently; meaning those which did not execute the
fullness of his wrath upon the wicked that he had given into their hands.
Therefore learn the necessity of war, and when thou Use 1.
art called, then refrain not to come, Ios. 1. 14. to help thy brethren; for
they are accursed that follow not willingly the war of God, Judge. 5. 23.
Deborah cursed Meroz, because it did not help Barac against Sisera: and so are
those faint hearted and white-liuered soldiers, who are afraid to loose their
life in the Lords quarrel. Some that are great, press forward those that are
under them: other being lawfully called, buie out their calling with money,
and so avoid the war; substituting some one or other in their place, who
peradventure runs away before the battle: Yea, if it be so necessary, let
them learn that God is sometime as well served by killing in the field, as at
an other time by praying in the church; and it is better for them to leave wife
and children, to go and fight against the Lords enemies, then to live at home
and follow their daily labor. Let us also learn to entreat the Lord to go
forth 2
with our armies against our enemies, Psalm. 44. 9. for there is no policy like
his presence, no captain like his direction, no power like his grace, no
sword like his anger, no foe like his displeasure, no shot like his breath,
and no danger like his absence. Oh therefore, if Barac would not go except
Deborah went with him, then go not to the war except the Lord go with thee.
The Israelites never lost battle wherein Iosuah was; and therefore never shall
we loose the field if the Lord be on our side. Let his call command thee, his
cause provoke thee, his presence arm thee, and then shall never foe hurt thee.
Let him be thy captain to go before, thy company to follow after, thy
provision to feed thy camp: let his laws govern thy soldiers, and his
presence shall preserve thee from danger. Oh, pray when thou go, that he may
guide thee; and when thou trainest, that he may see thee; and when thou
fightest, that he may save thee. Secondly, when he thus calls unto the^ to
turn their plowshares into swords, and their siethes into spears: we may note
that it is a thing requisite that every one do provide him weapons for the
defense of his country: and Weapons needful and lawful for any christian.
therefore does the spirit of God 1. Sam. 13. 23. account it a detestable
policy of the Philistines, who took away all the smiths out of Israel,
because they would keep the Israelites without weapon; for therein they were
never able to try their cause, and to avenge themselves of their tyranny. The
reason: first, because no man by the law of God is forbidden to defend
himself, although in his Reason.
own defense he kill his adversary, yet could he not be blamed, because the
Lord had delivered him into his hand. And in truth I think it a rare policy
of the devil in the mouths of Anabaptists, denying Christians to wear
weapons, because thereby the Turks and Pagans might come upon us unarmed men,
and so take away our lives and our profession together: therefore I hold it as
needful for a man to wear weapon to defend himself from wounds, as for a
man to take physic, to preserve himself from sickness. Let us not spend
more time herein then needs, but let us learn that we provide the weapons of
the spirit, Ephesians. 6. 11. Be not armed against men, and unarmed against the
devil; be as cunning to defend thy soul from hell, as thou would be to
defend thy life from death. See thou not that a whole nation are overcome
without weapon; and so shall thou be overcome without the sword of the spirit,
the shield of faith, the helmet of salvation, and the darts of faithful
prayers to wound the infernal foes. They are stronger, therefore thou must
learn more cunning; they are wiser, therefore thou must get more strength; they
are swifter, therefore thou must strike more sure; they are more dangerous,
therefore thou must be more zealous. Again, when he bids the weak to say
that they are strong, he thereby teaches us, that we must not admit any excuse
to keep us from the battle, neither sickness, nor lamenesse, nor poverty,
nor riches, nor youth, nor gentry, nor weakness must excuse men from
fighting of the Lords battles; but rather the zeal to do him service must
exceed and excel the want which oppresses us. Therefore learn from hence
how thou ought to live in all thy ways that God looks for at thy hand: no
excuse can be ever admitted; none can be exempted from religion, because they
are honorable; or from the gospel, because they are rich; or from sermons,
because they are learned; or from the churches, because they are tender; or
from prayer, because they are sick; or from war, because they are weak: but
the weak must say, I am strong. Rather pray the more, and go the farther, and
hear the oftener, and obey the willinglier, and profess more earnestly,
because God has made thee sick, or poor, or weak, or rich, or tender, or
honorable, or learned: for I tell thee that there is no excuse from coming
into the Lords vineyarde. Thou can not come into heaven by a proxee, or
substitute another to hear the gospel for thee; but in thy own person and
soul, and strength or weakness thou must enter into it. Therefore now look
to the matter, if ever thou will obtain grace: for although we satisfied the
wrath of God by another, namely, by Christ; yet we cannot be sanctified in any
man's person, but in our own. All the lazers and lame diseased men of Israel,
came from all quarters thereof to be laid by the poole of Bethesda to be
washed and cured, and none suffered any let to keep them away; in like manner,
let all the weak and lame souls of the world come to worship the Lord, and
let not any hinderance keep them back.

The xxxix. Sermon.
Verse. 11. Assemble your selves, and come all ye heathen, and gather your
selves together round about, there shall the Lord cast down thy mighty men.
12. Let the heathen be wakened, and come up to the valley of Iehoshaphat, for
there will I sit to judge all the heathen round about.
AS in the former verses he called the soldiers which should be the
ministers of his wrath, to destroy his enemies: so now again the second time
he calls the heathen to judgment, to prepare them for the execution; and
although their destruction should come of themselves, yet the Lord calls
them to battle, that they might know it proceeds from him. Concerning the
first part of these two verses, namely, the gathering of the heathen into the
valley of Iehoshaphat: we have already spoken in the second verse of this
chapter. Therefore we will briefly touch that which is not handled already. I
might first note unto you, that the Lord cares not for all the multitude of
the world, although they were up in arms against him, when he says, Assemble
your selves and come all ye heathen, meaning to war, and defend themselves
against his soldiers before called. Secondly, in these words I might show you,
how the heathen and infidels in all their wars, trust to their multitudes,
and bring all the force they can make: as we may read of the Madianites
against Gedeon; and the Philistines against Barac: but it is the Lord that
overthrows the horse and the ryder. I will cast down thy mighty men. By
these words the prophet tells us, that God will deal with the strongest,
and confound them, Luke 1. 52. The Lord who is of great wisdom and infinite
strength and power, does buckle always The strongest overthrown by God.
with them that are of greatest account, suffering the pride of the lesser to
be punished by men, but he himself controuleth the oppressions of the mighty.
Whereby we may see, that there is no cause why we should fear any force or
fury, or rage of man, for he can, and does, take the mightiest to overthrow
them. When we see any lifting up themselves above their brethren, then are we
to think their pride is ascending up before the Lord to be crossed. This is a
sweet instruction and comfort for the poor members of Christ: for as there
are none in the world more humble than themselves, so there are none more
oppressed by the pride of other than they are: But they may here learn, that
their mightiest foes are nearest to the vengeance of God. The reasons: First,
because Reason 1.
his name is omnipotent, Exodus 15. 4. this was the reason that Moses gave of
the overthrow of Pharaoh: and therefore it is no marvel if any man or army,
or navy, or castle, or king, or emperor, be thrown down as the snow
falls from heaven; for the omnipotency of his name remains for ever. By it
he drowned the giants, he burned the Sodomites, he overthrew the Egyptians, he
slew the Cananites, he captiuated the Israelites, he has changed the lives
of great princes, and shall at the latter day judge both quick and dead.
Another reason: because strong 2
and mighty men do mightily abuse their strength: as we may see in Goliath,
who knowing his own strength, came and defied all Israel. And surely herein
we may greatly lament the estate of the world, for men do abuse all the
benefits of God: Such is the corruption of sin in Adams children, that their
riches are the coals of iniquity, their authority a liberty to transgress,
their health a patent for worldly vanity, and their strength a sufficient
charter to revile God, and oppress man: But as David the least in Israel cut
off that monsters head, so shall the least part of the Lords power take
revenge upon our highest abuses. Let us Use.
therefore learn to be humbled under the hand of God, 1. Pet. 5. 6. For if we
be poor and base, men will punish us: but if we be high and rich, God himself
will plague and cast us down. But alas, we are never humble till it be too
late, namely, till we be laid in our graves; for while we live pride is
rooted in us, that it will not out of us: there is such league betwixt the life
of man and the sin of man, as was betwixt Naomi and Ruth, for nothing but death
can part them in sunder. Who would be rich to be spoiled by thieves? who would
be wicked to be damned by devils? and who would be proud to be plagued by God?
Advance not thy soul for thy birth, or thy wealth, or thy friends, or thy
office, or thy liberty, or thy strength; for God will cast down the mighty
men: distrust thy virtues, and thy cause, and thy favor, and thy health, and
thy joy, and thy life, for if thou be exalted in any of these, God will
surely humble thee to thy shame. Let the heathen be wakened. Now he shows
us, that the heathen after they had spoiled the church, grew to security, and
therefore he calls on them to be awaked; for there were no manhood in it to
slay them in their sleep. By which we may note, that the wicked in their
greatest A sudden destruction to the wicked.
security shall be drawn unto judgment, Ier. 22. 23. when their buildings
are stately, their bodies healthie, their minds lofty, their wealth abundant,
and their lives past fear; then, then comes the alarm of their misery,
waking them from their soft beds, heavy sleep, sweet love, pleasant pastime,
easy health, and happy joy, to gather them into the slaughterhouse of hell.
Oh that men would mitigate their desire of pleasure, and once distrust their
hearts when they be joyful! for as Herod was struck with death while he sat
upon his throne of majesty; so are we never nearer to our woe, than when we
are mounted to honor, or seated in quietness. The physicians say, that want
of motion, and love of rest breeds more diseases than all evil surfeits: and
so must we say that are the physicians of men's souls, that more perish by ease,
than by labor; by joy, than by sorrow; by pleasure, than by pain; and by
idle religion, than by earnest and zealous profession. The reasons: the same
that Isay taught, chap. 65. 12. because God is refused in his word: and good
reason why Reason 1.
it should be so; for as already we have showed, that the word must be a light
for our paths, and a remembrancer to our souls: which being forgotten, no
marvel if in our greatest security the Lords wrath overtake us. Therefore let
the idle followers of the gospel persuade their souls with more zeal and
diligence to be informed by the Lord, least the wrath take them sleeping, or
selling, or drinking, or playing, or dicing, or dancing to their condemnation.
Secondly, another reason, because they love pleasure 2
more than God, 2. Tim. 3. 4. therefore as Saneherib Isay. 37. was slain at
that instant when he was worshipping his idol; so shall their bane be
wrought when they are in their belly-worship following their pleasing delights.
Let us therefore never put danger out of our Use 1
minds, but then when we are in most quiet comfort of soul and body, let us
trouble our peace with one thought or other, Mich. 3. 11. If thou have
children, fear their death; if thou have parents, fear their wrath; if thou
have friends, fear their hatred; and if thou have health, fear thy sickness;
if thou be joyful at a feast, think on the misery of famine; if at a
pleasure, think upon the pain of the wounded; if at liberty, think upon the
irons of the imprisoned; if in life, think on the pangs of death. Never exempt
thy self from danger, but in peace remember war; in youth remember age; in
play remember labor; and in the heaven of the worlds delight, think upon the
hell of another life. Let sorrow be in thy sense; mourning in thy soul; danger
in thy life; fear in thy music; trouble in thy sleep; pain in thy health;
want in thy plenty; dislike in thy love; and distrust in thy desire: so shall
thou never be called to sickness, but with less grief; or to danger, but with
less fear; or to death, but with less trouble; or to judgment, but thou
shall be provided for it. Another use: seeing the wicked shall be drawn to
judgment 2
in their greatest security; then we may learn, whether they fear wrath and
evil, or fear it not, yet all is one, it shall come upon them. David said,
that the fear of the wicked shall fall on him; and herewee see Joel says,
that though they sleep, yet shall they be awaked with and for their danger; so
that if wicked men fear, their sorrow is the more; and if they fear not,
their danger is not the less. Oh miserable captivity of wicked men! which are
hardened to feel more pain, and softened to fear more wrath; would not this
bring us out of love with our sin, and make us earnestly to lament our
follies, which give us no peace till we desire them, and no rest after we
possess them! But of this often have we spoken before. For there will I sit.
When he says, that he will sit in judgment: we may note, that the Lord will
with no labor condemn the wicked, as it is Mal. 1. 4. even as one that
sits in all ease. Again, in this that he sits in judgment, he alludeth
to the judgments of men which were most lawful; showing that his proceedings
against the wicked were not unjust or extraordinary, but according to equity.
But this is especially to be regarded when he names the persons whom he will
judge, saying, all the heathen round about: meaning all those which dwelt
near unto Israel; Whereby we are taught, that those which are our neighbors
The nearest foes of the Church in the greatest danger.
and see our worship, and live near, or among us, and yet be not of us, but
are our enemies, God will judge them more seuerly, Ierem. 12. 14. For if they
which live among us, and see every day the works of God for us and in us,
will not be ruled by us or turned to us, they may wait for the heavier
judgment. And therefore was Philisthia more judged then Arabia, and Syria more
vexed then Ethiopia, because they were on the confines of Israel. Then surely
this may teach the loose Protestants and vain professors among us, what great
danger they live in all this while; they have heard the Gospel and not
believed it; the nearer they were to the truth, the more is the Lords wrath
against them; and the longer they have lived in our peace and seen the
glorious works of God, the more shall be their heavy judgment. It were
better for them that they lived in Rome, or in Barbary, or in Tartarie, where
the gospel is not talked of, for then should they be farther from danger; but
now they live with us, eating at our tables, treading on our Land, standing in
our churches, clothed with our garments, and blessed by our God: Oh how dear
shall they pay for all these benefits! for the Lord will judge them that dwell
near us; much more them that dwell with us: he will condemn them that dwell
about us, much more them that dwell among us. The reasons of this doctrine are
Reason 1.
these: First, because they should be subject to the church, Isa. 60. 5. The
members of the church are the true and lawful kings of the world, and all
other ought to be their subjects: therefore when the subject rebelleth against
his natural prince, he is more punished then a stranger; so when the nearest
neighbors of the church are most of all negligent, they are more endangered
then other are: for when the Lord gives most means of instruction, such as is
to live among the godly, then he rewards such neglect or contempt with more
severe punishment. Another reason: because 2
they should succor the^ in their necessity, Isa. 21. 14. but if they will
taste of their benefits, and not believe their sayings or comfort them in their
sorrows, they are the more worthy to be destroyed. The use: let us never
meddle Use.
against good men, Matthew. 27. 19. for their injuries will be rewarded double
upon our heads. If thou live with them, honor them; if thou hear of them, go
visit them; if they teach thee, believe them; if they want thee, relieve them;
and never be an enemy unto them. The Lord says, that our treading on the
earth, is sufficient to make us without excuse if we believe him not: and then
surely it is sufficient to condemn those that live under the Gospel, and
receive not the Gospel that they tread on our land, see our churches, read
our books, and believe not our Sermons. Now think with thy self that have
lived thus long in a strange place, and yet know not, nor obeyest the Lord
of that place, art thou not in danger to be arraigned for rebellion? Yes
verily: and so are all those that live with good men, and know them not, that
may have the truth, and labor not for it; that might be saved, and yet will be
reprobated. Be not therefore an enemy to godliness or to any member of the
church: for if thou hear them not, their words will hurt thee; if thou help
them not, their wants will witness against thee; and if thou oppress them,
the Lord himself will judge thee.

The xl. Sermon.
Verse. 13. Put in your sithes, for the harvest is ripe: come get you down, for
the wine press is full: yea, the wine press runs over, for their
wickedness is great. 14. O multitude, o multitude, come into the valley of
threshing: for the day of the Lord is near in the valley of threshing.
AT the length by the assistance of God we are come to the last part of the
execution, contained under the allegory of an harvest and threshing of corn.
In the harvest and wine press, we must consider their death; and under the
threshing, their condemnation. For the first, where he compares their
destruction to a harvest, he does but as it is usual in the Scriptures, both
old and new, to set forth a massacre of men, by cutting down of corn; the
which is applied to the latter judgment in the Revelation, only here is
mention made of sithes, but there the angels are said to reap with sickles,
the matter is all one, for as one said; Non multum refert an vno grandi
fluctu, an paulatim aqua subrepente, nauis submergatur: It comes all to one
thing to have a ship drowned either with one great wave, or by a leake; and
it is no matter whether a man be killed with a sword or a rapier: so the
judgment is alike both with the sickle and with the sithe. By the allegory
both of the harvest and of the wine press, wherein there is not a stalk but
it is cut, nor a grape but it is pressed out, we may note that not one shall
escape the judgment of God, Amos 9. 2. The which thing the Lord by this
plain similitude would have us observe, that every day we might see our
misery, and learn to mitigate the wrath of God toward us. Neither is the
estate of the wicked more tolerable, because it seems they are here compared
to corn, for it is but the woorst and basest corn, such as is cut with the
sithe, not reaped with a sickle: For although they are corn, yet they are not
for the Lords spending. David says they lie like sheep in hell: are they the
better in hell because they are compared to sheep? no verily; no more are they
the happier because they are resembled to corn. The reason of this Reason.
universal judgment is, because the Lord will bring every action whether it
be good or bad unto judgment, Eccl. 12. 14. If he will bring every action,
then much more every man, for every man has a thousand actions, all which
shall be so adjudged, as we shall know the particular censure of God upon every
one of them. Seeing therefore Use.
there is not one man in the world but he must come to judgment; as there is
not one stalk in a corne-fielde but it must be cut down; and as the apostle
says, 2. Cor. 5. 10. that we must every one appear before the judgment
seat of God: then let us live in the continual expectation thereof. A man
that is wrongfully imprisoned thinks it long till the judge come, who will
set him at liberty because he knows his injury: in like sort, a man that is
a christian is a prisoner in this world, having his flesh for his jail, his
sins for his irons, the devils for his keepers, and Christ his Savior for
his judge; thinks long till his judge come and set him at liberty, and
therefore desires every day to come into the presence of God. A judgment we
must all undergo; therefore they are happy men that desire the same; let not
any be so wilful as to wish there were none, for they which cannot like
judgment, do deny justice, and they which deny justice shall certainly
feel it. Appear before the Lord often with thy prayers, that he may know
thee at the general judgment. Be not as unwilling to come before him, as a
thief that cares not for the face of the judge; but as Joseph thought long
till he saw his father Jacob, after he knew he was alive; so do thou think
every day many years, till thou have seen the Lord in his kingdom.
Again, when in the second place he mentions the wine press, saying, it
runs over, and their wickedness is great: he thereby notes the quality of
sin, namely, if God had not set a measure thereof, it would grow
immeasurable; for as the measure of the wine press never staieth till it be
full, and when it is full, it cease not till it run over; so will the
sins of men never cease til they exceed measure, Ier. 9. 3. whereby we may
see a wonderful work Sin will never cease growing.
of God, for there is not one man living but he has in him the seed and
spawne of all sin: now it is wonderful that every one grows not, and that
any man living should have in him any little drop of goodness. We may also
lament our corrupt and sinful estate, that during the time of our life we are
subject to all sin: for there is no subject so true, but if God let him fall
he will become a traitor; no woman so honest, but she may become an
adulteress; no man so righteous, but he may become a thief; and to conclude,
there is not any so glorious, but he may be as infamous; for as we are subject
to all sicknesses, so are we to all sins. O miserable men that we are, who
shall deliver us from these bodies of sin! it is borne with us, it grows
with us, it lives with us, and it dies with us, it is the death of it self,
and the death of us; the death of it self by killing us; and the death of us
by exceeding measure: for as the sons of Zeruiah were too strong for David,
although he was king; so our sins are too strong for us, although we should
rule them. We were happy men if our sins were not, or if they were not so
immesurable. They will com at the first to be our slaves, as the Philistines;
but in the end they will be our lords, as they would be to Israel. Oh, would
God we might conquer them and drive them out of our souls, as they expelled
the Philistines out of Jerusalem! The reason is; because the power of satan
which Reason 1.
is the efficient cause of sin, does increase to deceive us, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9
11. The devil never cease to suggest new temptations, and we are seldom
able to resist them: therefore he never is idle, but ever proceeds farther
and farther, till he have plunged us over the ears in sin, that so he might
drown us. When he made Peter deny Christ once, then he made him to deny him
thrice; so when he has persuaded us a little to follow the ways of our own
hearts, then he never gives over till he have made us to deny him often: so
that this increasing in sin must be attributed to the devil; for in truth
the devil shall be punished for the sins of the whole world, and yet every
wicked man shall be punished for his own. Let us learn Use 1.
then that there is a measure appointed to receive our sins, and ifwe cease
not till it be full, we cannot cease till it run over; and if we suffer it
to run over, we cannot hinder it from ouerrunning us. There is none that
would be willing to sell his inheritance to fill a thieves purse with gold:
Therefore let not any of us be so simple as to fill the devils measure full of
our sins, which we buie by selling away our souls. Oh, that we were as hard
to the devil when he craves for a sin, as we are to a beggar when he cries
for an alms! we think well, if we bestow a penny in a week upon such a
person, and we can hardly be drawn in for more: but sin after sin we
commit, as fast as hail comes from the clouds. Let us then empty the
measure of our sin, and not fill it, and be as unwilling to cast one folly
into the devils hand, as many are to cast one farthing into the poor man's
box. Let us resist the temptations of sin, as Jacob resisted the voice of
his sons persuading him to suffer his little Benjamin to go with them into
Egypt; and let us never yield unto him: let us not be overcome, rather let us
die. For their iniquity is great. These words contain the reason of their
judgment, namely because of their sins; for in truth if men did never sin,
they should never be judged: and therefore seeing every one that is borne has
sinned, every one borne shall answer for their sin at judgment. But when he
says, it is great: he teaches us that every man shall be punished according
to the quantity Such as is our sin shall be our pain.
of his sin, Luc. 12. 47. Many sins many stripes, great sins great
judgment: As in civil political government there is a difference; so also is
there in the heavenly regiment; for every one shall be punished according to
the measure of his sins. Therefore now take occasion to stay the heat of thy
sins, seeing many pleasures, many joys, many thefts, many adulteries, many
oaths, many lies, and many wicked actions shall bring unto thee manifold
indignation. Moses would not suffer any of Israel to sacrifice in Egypt,
because the Egyptians would slay them: if fear of death made them cease
sacrificing to God, then let fear of death make thee cease to sin against
God. Some men will not eat the best meats, although they love them well,
because their price is too costly: oh that we could as willingly abstain from
sin, which we love too well, because it will cost so dearly! for one hours
pleasure will bring a whole worlds pain. The first reason: because God has
ordained his church to have Reason 1.
several kinds of punishment, Matt. 18. whereby he teaches that he will
observe the same order in the world to come, to cast out obstinate offenders
into the pit that is prepared for heathens and hypocrites; for all the actions
in the church militant, do lead us to the like in the church triumphant.
Secondly, another reason is, or else the greatest wretch of the world were in
no worse case then the 2
newborn babe: but this cannot be; for then were there not degrees of the
Lords justice, as there are in his mercy. Let us learn to make this use
thereof: seeing the Lord would have a man that had stolen any goods, or
taken wrongfully from any man, to restore it fowerfolde: then let us learn by
the greatness of our sins to aggrauate our sorrows; for surely, if we still
remain impenitent in the church of God, his wrath will in the end overtake us
as it did Ioab, who was slain at the horns of the altar. For the slaughter of
the Gibeonites which Saul made unjustly, God after his death caused seven of
his posterity to be hanged, because Saul had not pacified the matter
himself. Be careful therefore to repent thy sins with sorrow, and to
recompense them with obedience, least thy deserts fall upon thy posterity:
otherwise thy delight will be too dear, and the fruits of thy pleasure will
be more bitter then wormwood. Had Judas known when he was with Christ at
supper that which now he feels, all the priests of Iewrie and all the money
in their several treasuries, could never have persuaded him to that treason:
Try not the adventure of thy sins; for hell is hotter then the furnace of
Babylon, and they which once come in it, can never come out again. Learn also
to know the weight of 2
every one of thy sins, that thou may easily see they are odious to God,
infamous to men, and dangerous to thy soul: how the devil hatcheth them, the
flesh nurseth them, the world maintains them, and God abhors them. Look
I say, unto their weight; for they are a burden too heavy for thee to bear:
if thou keep them, they will eat thee; if thou strive with them, they will
weary thee; if thou bear them, they will hurt thee; if thou forsake them, they
will follow thee; and if thou know them, they will fear thee: therefore
learn to measure them, and number them, and weigh them, that thou may
empty and lessen, and cast them down, never to take them up again.

O multitude. In this verse is contained the second similitude, Verse. 14.
whereby their destruction is decyphered. For after harvest comes threshing:
and in my opinion in the former verse is set down their first death; and in
this verse their second death, by reason of the resemblance betwixt the pains
of hell, and the action of threshing. First, the stroke of the thresher seems
to threaten the corn to strike it in pieces, but yet it does not so; a man
would think that the pains of hell would make an end of them that suffer
them, but yet they abide them: Secondly threshing follows the cutting of the
corn; and so hell follows the death of the body. Thirdly, threshing is a
continual striking of one sheafe; and so hell is a continual tormenting of
one soul: for pain follows pain, as stroke follows stroke. But certain
it is a destruction is here signified, and that a more sharp and severe one
then was noted in the former verse: wherefore he calls unto them
mournefullie; O multitude, o multitude: The which phrase of speech teaches us,
that God is very sorry God is sorry to destroy us.
to execute his wrath upon the wicked; for so our Savior expressed his grief
for Jerusalem, Luke 13. 34. when he cried out, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem! how
often would I have gathered thee, etc. The which thing puts us in mind of
the infinite love of God, whereby he would pity our loss, revoke his
sentence, silence his wrath, and save us from heavy destruction. But such is
our nature, as is the nature of children in their birth, which think not upon
the pains of their mothers in travail; although they die in extremity, yet
they forget them when they be old: and so do we both the anger and the love
of God, we regard not his mercies, nor his judgments, nor his gospel, nor
his tears, nor the blood of our Savior The reasons of this doctrine: First,
in regard of us, because we know Reason 1.
not the things that belong to our peace, Luke 17. 42. So wretched is the
estate of men, that they are not able to discern when God blesses them or
curses them: when he wishes them well, and when he wouldeth them evil. This
is cleerer then the sun, for Christ and his Gospel being offered to the
world, and preached to every degree of men; you shall see nothing more vilely
esteemed, or basely regarded, insomuch as we may say, that the men of our time
do not know the things that belong to their peace. For if the Lord threaten
them, then they spurn; if he bless them, then they are wanton; if he punish
them, then they murmr; if he honor them, then they are proud; and every
one thinks that the Gospel serves but for a time, and they shall do as
well without it, as with it. They know not that now is their visitation, or
that now they work their death, or life; or that now they are married to God
or the devil: Surely, if men believe not the Gospel, and walk not
thereafter, they are satan's bond-slaues, although their wealth be as great as
Salomons; and their authority as great Hamans: but if they joyfully embrace
it in the ministry of the word, then are they the wife of the lamb, and the
elected heirs of grace. Another reason; secondly in regard of God, because he
2
rather wills repentance then vengeance; of this we have often spoken. Let
us make this use: First, when we Use 1.
see the froward and wicked disposition of the world, that will not be
reclaimed by any warning, or any mercy of God: let us do as Christ does for
the Pharisees, Mark 3. 5. Mourn for the hardness of their hearts. It is the
custom of some vain professors, (for so I may term them) to rail odiously
at them that will not be ruled by their words: and so it is of some
choleric and unwise preachers, who will take liberty in their pulpits rather
to revile men then to reclaim them, except at the first they come and lay
their hands under their feet; in the one it is foolish zeal, in the other
vain folly. Learn therefore by our Savior how to be affected when thy
people, or thy children, or thy servants, or thy friends, or thy neighbors,
will not be governed by thy instruction, namely, to mourn for their hardness
of heart; and no marvel, for thou see God to mourn for them: when thy words
can no longer prevail, then let tears; and if they will not be moved by
warning, let them be by mourning. Hardness of heart is a sickness sent by God,
and it lies not in the power of man to cure the same: therefore cast not away
a man when he is sick, not a soul when it is hard; but let sorrow and prayer
speak for it to God when there is no help in man's physic. Another use:
seeing God is unwilling, and therefore mourns for our destruction, ^
and so do all good men also: oh let us not despise and neglect all their
sorrows, and cares, and tears which they power forth for us! it is
ungodliness not to regard the Gospel, but it is unnatural not to regard the
sorrowful. In heaven is nothing but joy, oh wretches that we should make the
Lord sorrowful for us! in the church there is al sorrow; oh unkind and
pitilesse men that we should increase their sorrow, and mourning, and tears,
and add to their affliction! but that which is worst of all, we are hardened
and will not care for their cries. Be moved to repentance, and conversion, and
holiness, and religion, for God and men do mourn for thy rebellion: let their
tears make thee weep in this life, or else they will make thee roar in
another life. Secondly, we may observe in this verse, when he calls upon the
multitude to come to destruction, that God cares no more for a multitude, then
for one man, and will as easily cast many into hell as one soul, as we may see
in the drowning of the old world, Genesis 7. 21. The reason: because all are but
flesh, Genesis 6. 3. that is but vile, made of earth; but weak, wanting strength;
and abominable, corrupted with sin. Now what should the Lord strive and
stand with earth, or weakness, or sin, he has not an angel, but it is
stronger then a world: and therefore a multitude are as easily given to
damnation as one or two. Let us learn not to do evil after the example of a
multitude, Exodus 23. 2. Although many be blasphemers, or Atheists, or heathens,
or papists, or whooremongers, or neglecters of the Gospel, despisers of
preachers, and such like: yet be not thou so, for it is no ease to have
company to hell.

Again, when he calls them to come into the valley of threshing, meaning the
place of wrath, using no other ^
means to draw them thither but his call: we may note, that the only word of
God shall bring men to judgment, Psalm. 50. 1, 2, 3. and the reason is, because
he is strong that gives the word, Ierem. 30, 7. Oh therefore that the same
word might stir us up to salvation, which shall prepare us to condemnation
and judgment, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 1. For verily if it be so powerful as to bring all
the world in one company together, and to raise the dead out of their graves,
and make living men out of the dust of the earth: in whom I beseech you is the
fault? that it gathers not us to hear it when the Lord speaks in the
congregation, and rayseth us not up to the life of righteousness: surely as the
Lords hand is not shortened; so his word is not weakened.

The xlj. Sermon.
Verse. 15. The sun and the moon shall be darkened, and the stars shall
withdraw their light. 16 The Lord also shall roar out of Zion, and utter his
voice from Jerusalem: and the heavens and earth shall shake: but the Lord will
be the hope of his people, and the strength of the children of Israel.
AS in the former chapter, when the destruction and calamities of the Lords
own people the Jews, were threatened, the heavens were said to be covered
with darkness; so now, when the enemies shall be brought to judgment, the
like terrors, and fear, and darkness, and wonders shall be wrought to their
astonishment: so that the prophet to the end of this chapter handeleth these
two things; first, the fearful tokens of the enemies destruction in these
verses: and secondly, he concludes with sweet comforts to the godly.
Concerning the darkening of the sun and moon and stars, we have already
spoken in the former chapter, where we told you; first, that the darkening of
these lights did teach us, that no creatures are able to keep their places
when the Lord is angry, Isa. 13. 9, 10. because they themselves have a
natural fear of corruption, Job. 15. 15. Secondly, we showed you, how they
wait upon God to shine when he smileth, and to frown when he chideth,
teaching us to do the like. Again, by uttering of his voice we showed you
that he meant thunder; and therefore when he says, that he will utter his
voice out of Zion, and roar out of Jerusalem at the overthrow of his enemies:
he thereby teaches us, that all that live in the church of GOD must make
account to hear and see many fearful signs Fearful things in the church.
and wonders, Psalm. 48. 5, 6, 7. for in the church God manifests his wrath
against others and against it; he shows, that he is terrible and will be
feared: therefore we hear the thunders, when other feel the blows; we see
the miracles, when other smart for their operation; we are taught by others
harms, and we are terrified by other men's destructions. Therefore none can
live in the church proudly, but the heavens will dismay him; or profanely, but
signs and wonders will admonish him; or wickedly, but the word of God will
reprove him; or ignorantly, but the shaking, and quaking, and troubling, and
darkening of the world instruct him. Therefore the church is well called the
kingdom of fear; for there is fear of God, and fear of trouble, and fear
of damnation: fear of God, wrought by word and woonders; fear of trouble,
least violence should overthrow all religion; and fear of damnation, least
the devils kingdom should be enlarged: and surely we were better fear in this
place, then be secure in another; as the godly Jews which had rather fight
upon the walls of Jerusalem, then suffer all quietness in Babylon. But I have
followed all this more effectually in another place. But the Lord will be the
hope. When he had told them that he would roar out these destructions in
Jerusalem, least they should fear that a new calamity was coming upon them:
He tells them that he will be their hope; that is, they shall hope in him,
and he will be their strength to deliver them from al his wrath and vengeance.
Whereby we may see that by the fearful signs and woonders which he works
in his church, he teaches us to hope in him more assuredly, Ierem. 30. 5. 11.
So that now I might Woonders make good men to hope in God.
thus reason with all my brethren: We have had many fearful and extraordinary
thunders; many terrible flashes of lightening, which have killed men, and
burned houses; many wonderful apparitions in the air, as fire and blood,
and light and darkness, and the visions of armed men; many comets or blazing
stars; beside many other: yet has the Church stood, the Gospel been
preached, our land quieted, our prince preserved; yea God is still our God,
and we are still his people. Therefore let us hope in him more assuredly. Paul
having been once stoned, and raised up again, feared the violence of that
death never afterward; and so seeing we have often suffered these things, and
never yet perished in them, let God be our hope for evermore. Consider how he
saved some in the fire; some in the dens of lions; some in shipwreck on the
sea; and some being taken up above the clouds, yet returned without all hurt:
Even so will he do unto us; no quaking of the earth, or breaking of the
clouds, or darkning of the day, or changing of the air, shall change our
minds from trusting in our God. When Sinai shook and burned like a world on
fire, not one of the people were hurt by it; but they were prepared to a more
reverend receiving of the law: and so let these wonders and fires prepare us to
the like, that our proud natures may be humbled by them, our secure lives may
be wakened, our little fear of sin may be increased, and our daily
expectation of judgment may be renewed; that when the Lord shall come, he may
find us preaching or praying, or mourning, or fasting, or watching, or
hearing, or reading, or repenting and ready for his kingdom: Oh, blessed are
they that are in such a case, and blessed are they whose hope is in the Lord.
The first reason: because Reason 1.
all the ends of the world may see the salvation of our God, Esaias 52. 10. For
the godly which are scattered here and there thorough all the world will
spread abroad the same, that every one might learn it. Another reason;
because in the midst of all terrors, yet is God in the church, 2
Psalm. 50. 2. and his beauty is then greatest, when he shines in darkness, and
dwells in fire, and rules in woonders, and is feared in his signs. Let us
learn by these things to increase our faith, and confidence in the Lord,
that we may Use.
say with David, Though the earth be removed, yet we will not fear There is
a base kind of trust or confidence which men retain and content themselves
withal, when as they grow not forward into a most Christian resolution, not
caring for riches, which are but vanity; or for health which is but
weakness; or for life, which is but temporal; or for death which shall bring
immortality. This confidence makes a man like to Christ, who cared not for the
cross, because God was his father, and in like sort shall not we care for the
miseries of the world, if (as we say) we care not for the world. Let us not
care for that which we cannot keep, I mean our life; much less let us sin
to keep it by unlawful means, for then we do but hire a lion to watch our
lambs, which in the end will destroy them all. We can say in our health,
that we can comfort the sick; but being in sickness, we can receive none
our selves: so there be many that make great show of faith, and confidence in
these times of health and peace, and quietness, as if they were ready to die
for God; but alas, if the Lord frown upon them but a little, their faith
fades like mowen grass, and they are at their wits end. Therefore come into
the closet and storehouse of thy soul, and see that thy faith be as good as
thy face, and that it will as well abide the burning furnace, as the warm
sun, and try whether it will abide the torments of death, and not be killed:
thy faith if it be true must be as immortal as thy soul, that it may stand
in all storms; swim in all seas; abide in all dangers; live in all deaths;
and reign in all glory.

So you shall know that I am the Lord your God dwelling in Verse. 17
Zion, my holy mountain: then shall Jerusalem be holy, and no strangers shall
go through her any more. Now the Prophet drawing to a conclusion of his
Sermons, shuts them up with many sweet promises of the Lords favor; as
first of all his presence, then his bounty: his presence in this verse, which
shall sanctify them and keep them from enemies. Concerning the former part of
this verse where the Prophet says, they shall know him to be their God
dwelling in Zion; sufficient has been already spoken, and I will not stand
any longer thereon, but refer you to the former chapter. This therefore his
promise unto Jerusalem, that it should be holy, teaches us the perfection or
greatest honor of the church, namely Holiness, Ephesians. 1. 4. when Holiness is the
perfection of the church.
the Lord promises that his church should be holy: he thereby teaches us
that all gifts and goodness, and mercy, and glory, and dignity of the church,
proceeds from this that she is holy; neither can the Lord in this world
bestow any greater benefit upon his church, then her sanctication. This Holiness
consists not in learning, nor in studying, nor in knowledge, nor in
prophecy, nor in miracles, nor in church-offices, but in a good life and in
all them; so that a holy man is a perfect christian. Now verily when the Lord
promises Jerusalem to be Holy, he gives her all things, for he gives her
grace to be righteous, his favor to be honorable, and his benefits to be
glorious: Without holiness men are heathens, but with it they are christians;
without it they cannot enjoy the earth, but with it they may enjoy the heavens;
without it they are satan's slaves, but with it they are the Lords sons: and
to conclude, Holiness is the will of God, the end of our redemption, the fruit
of the Spirit, the clothing of our souls, the joy of the godly, and the
perfection of the church. By Holiness, lands are established, evil is banished,
kings thrones are maintained, and it makes a nation dwell without danger; no
enemy can touch them, no famine can dismay them, no misery can overthrow them,
because they be holy: and so may every man's soul by Holiness drive away the
devil, continue in the church, and obtain the kingdom of heaven. The Reason
1.
first reason: because in nothing do we resemble God more then in holiness,
Exodus 22. 23. who is only holy, Revel. 15. 4. Holiness and righteousness was the
image wherein God created us, and therefore he caused to be wrote upon the
breast of the high Priests roabes, Holiness to the Lord. Contrary unto this
holiness, is profaneness, when men abuse whatsoever is appointed to be holy;
whereby I see that they are very justly termed profane men, who have no manner
of show of holiness. God his fearful name which is holy they blaspheme; the
sabbaoths which are holy, they profane; religion which is holy, they contemn;
the congregation which is holy, they persecute; prayers which are holy, they
seldom use; and to be brief, all the laws of God which are holy, they
violate: these are carnal men; these are miserable men; these are subject to
all abominations. So that as there is no blessing, but it belongs to the
holy; so there is no curse but it belongs to the profane. Another reason is:
because holiness is freed from 2
sin and hell, Isa. 11. 8, 9. now to be freed from sin, is the greatest
blessing in this world; and to be freed from hell, is the greatest blessing in
the world to come: and indeed one follows another; for whosoever is freed
from sin, is also freed from hell. But there are many that think it a great
pain unto them to be free from sin, because they cannot endure to be free from
the means of sinning: yet let us know that this is, or ought to be our prayer
that we may once be freed from committing of sin; that whereas we have a
mind to idolatry or Popery, it may be turned from it; or if we be inclined
to swearing, we may fall to leave it and hate it; and if we be addicted to be
envious, we may be charitable; or to lusts, we may be chaste; or to falsehood,
we may be true; or to covetousness, we may be liberal; or ignorance of the
scriptures, we may be learned in them; and finally if to any vain or unlawful
thing, we may no more desire it, then children do the rod: oh happy were we if
we were thus cleansed from sin, that we might be thus sanctified. Let us
learn that exhortation of the Apostle, 1. Pet. 1. Use 1.
15, 16. That seeing God which has called us is holy, so let us be holy,
that we may purge our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit.
And surely this reason of the Apostle, is very effectual to move us unto
holiness, when he tells us that God which called us is holy. Therefore
look to thy self, that hear the Gospel preached, and leadest a lewd and
profane life; for I tell thee that this very call of God whereby thou art
severed from Jews and Turks, shall at the latter day tell thee of thy evil,
which would not walk in holiness, although God which called thee were
holy. The first image of God created in thee is decayed, and it can never be
repaired but by holiness: would thou be glorified, thou must first be
sanctified: thy body must be holy, abstaining from pleasure; thy soul must be
holy, not yielding to temptation; thy affections must be holy, not corrupted
with vanity; and thy life must be holy, not drowned in sin. Oh be holy as
God is holy; it is a part of his essence, so let it be of thine; it is never
parted from him, so let it be ever with thee; it is always found in him, so let
it be always found in thee: God is holy in the earth; so be thou; he is holy in
the church, so be thou; he is holy in the day, so be thou; he is holy in the
night, be thou so also; and he is holy in heaven, oh that we may be so! his
judgments are holy, so let thine be; his words are holy, so ought thine to be;
and his works are holy, so let thine be. Oh that we could be holy, as he is
holy; that we might be perfect, as he is perfect; holy without sin, holy
without want, holy without love: without sin, that they were pardoned;
without want, that all graces might be supplied; and without love, that life,
and health, and world, and pleasure, and lands may give place to holiness; for
holy people are redeemed of the Lord, but the wicked and profane are damned
to hell. Another use is, that now we are exhorted 2
to holiness, let us learn how to be holy, which John teaches us 1. Ioh. 3.
2, 5. which is first by expectation of Christ's coming: secondly, by hoping for
our glorification: and thirdly, by purging our selves; in a word this is all,
We are made holy by regeneration and sanctification; for a new mind is a holy
mind, as a new life is a holy life. So then, would thou be holy, the word
must beget thee in the womb of the church; and the blood of Christ must purge
thee in the tabernacle of thy flesh: and this is the way to make a saint first
by the word, the^ by the blood of Christ; and all of this must be done in this
life: for they do but mock and delude the world, which canonize saints after
they be dead, except they can bring them to life again. So then a pure life
makes not a saint, that is, holy, without a new mind; nor another mind
without a clean life. Some are of opinion, that there are no saints but in the
kingdom of heaven: but they are easily confuted by the scripture, which
calls the godly at Corinth, at Ephesus, at Colossa, and many other places, by
the name of saints. But they say we do, all them saints which the scripture
calls holy men: and I pray what difference is there betwixt a saint and a
holy man? surely none at all: but every holy man is a saint, in all toongs that
ever I learned. But if they understand saints to be the souls of godly men in
heaven, then I say that in all good divinity and sound writers, there are none
such spoken of, I mean, that the blessed souls in heaven are only called
saints. To conclude, hear the gospel, believe the promises, wait for the
appeering of our Savior, and take but a drop of his blood to purge thy soul
and life, and thou shall be holy, thou shall be a saint: otherwise, thy life
lead in long iniquity shall end in everlasting woe, pain, and misery.

And no strangers. In these words he tells them one benefit of his presence
and their sanctification or holiness, which is this, that no strangers shall any
more go thorough Israel: meaning, that they should never be overcome by any
enemies; otherwise to harbor strangers is the commandment of God. But by
these words we are taught, that only religion makes a commonwealth or
kingdom Religion only makes a kingdom happy.
to be peaceable and happy, 1. Sam. 12. 14, 15. Although humane policy and
worldly wisdom do much in the government of any nation: yet there is not any
thing that so establishes a people and makes them happy as religion, which
is the wisdom and written word of God. Why was not Ahabs government as good
as David's, or Ieroboams a most politic king as good as Salomons? Surely
because the one was stablished in the law of God, and the other was mingled
with filthy idolatry. Let all the Politicians of the world, and cursed
Machiuillian Atheists murmur what they dare into the ears of kings and great
persons, that they must sometime regard Stratagems contrary to the Scriptures,
or else thrones cannot stand: yet they are all deceived, for no policy nor
counsel can stand against the Almighty. Oppression, breach of promise,
toleration of malefactors, insinuations, examinations, extortions, creations of
offices, and all the like policies cannot stand without religion: for there was
never yet any Politician, but he ended his life in great sorrow, as did
Achitophel: I mean such as are not ruled by the scriptures. We have read many
policies of wicked men, as of Pharaoh, to keep the Israelites in Egypt; of the
Philistims, to keep them without weapons; of Jeroboam, to keep them from
Jerusalem; of the kings of Assyria, to keep them from returning home again;
of Herod, to kill our Savior Christ, but what gained they all by their
policie^ surely nothing, but their own sorrow and death: for as David says,
The Lord intrappeth the wicked in the net that he laid for other, Psalm. 9. The
reasons of this doctrine are these: First, because for sin God dissolueth
kingdoms, Proverb. 28. 2. Reason 1.
and therefore for religion he establishes them: for there is not any thing so
contrary to sin, as is the Lords worship, I mean religion; for all other
humane virtues, are rather in the compass of sin, then in the shadow of true
godliness. Neither yet are all policies so condemned, as it is utterly
unlawful to use any; for some are godly and may be practiced, as we may see
in Joseph with his brethren, who was a great courtier, and yet used no
unlawful extremity of his authority: so we may read of Moses that sent
spies into the land of Canaan; of the Israelites fighting with the Beniamites,
and of Gedeon when he slew so many of the Ephramites whom he found out by
pronuntiation of the word Shibboleth: but if policy be grounded upon any
sin, or accompanied with any unlawful thing, then better abide the hazard,
than that we should do evil that good may come of it. Another reason:
because, Kings reign by the Lord, and by him Princes bear rule. Now we must
not think that he favors or 2
accounts any nation blessed without his worship, for he regards not a
soul that fears him not. For this cause he drove Nebuchadnezzar from the
throne to the herds of cattle, that he might teach him, that his throne
depended upon him. Now shall we say that God is, where there is no God
accounted; or if accounted, yet not worshipped; or if externally worshipped,
yet not sincerely; where every fancy of a worldly wise man is preferred before
that truth, which is sealed with the Lords blood. I grant that Iethro a
heathen gave Moses counsel how to behave himself in his government, but GOD
approved it: and so let every man speak for the good government of a nation;
but let the word of GOD govern their sayings. The uses: first, let us take
that counsel of the wisest king that ever was, Prou. 25. 5. Take away the
wicked from the king, and his throne shall be established in righteousness. If
the wicked be removed, wicked counsel will be silenced; and if wicked
counsel be silenced, then will the princes throne be established in
righteousness. David would not have them to be his courtiers that slew
Ishboseth his enemy, and no more would he have any vain persons or liers to
be his servants, Psalm. 101. 5, 6. for as Gedeons army was most honorable
when he had sent away all dastardes and fearful soldiers (although it was
small) so a kings court is most glorious, when all wicked are banished from it,
although very few be left. Multitudes are very dangerous, and many men many
wicked men: Our Savior Christ had but twelve, and yet one of them was a
traitor, and so it is most likely there is not any great company living in
court or country, but there are some wicked among them. Although wicked men
may be good for the common wealth, yet they cannot establish the kings throne
in righteousness: therefore I would that all the princes of the world would
say with David, Psalm. 119. Away from me ye wicked, for I will keep the
commandments of my God. Another use: let us pray for kings and kingdoms, that
the word of God 2
may take place in their hearts and lands: for verily, if it only make them
blessed, we shall be very uncharitable to make them cursed, for seeing God does
so highly delight in our prayers, that when we pray but for our own peace, he
hears and grants our petitions: much more will he be merciful unto us when
we pray for his worship, and for the enlarging of his kingdom. And surely if
Paul wished that king Agrippa were like himself, his bonds excepted; then let
us also unfeignedly pray that all kings and people were like ours, our sins
excepted, which are as heavy on us, as were Paul's bonds on him.

The xlij. Sermon.
Verse. 18. And in that day shall the mountains drop down new wine, and the
hills shall flow with milk, and all the rivers of Judah shall run with
waters, and a fountain shall come forth of the house of the Lord, and water
the valley of Shittim.
Having promised them his presence, now he also grants them his bounty,
for as the barrenness of the earth wrought their famine; and their famine
wrought their curse: so the fruitefulnesse of the earth must work their
plenty; and their plenty must bring their joy. Now then the church being
delivered, the wars quieted, the godly sanctified, and religion or the true
worship of God once again established, all the mountains and hills, and
valleies and rivers flow with abundance of worldly comforts. That the
mountains should drop wine, and the hills flow with milk, and all rivers
run with water, it is but a figurative or hyperbolicall speech: whereby is
noted the wonderful plenty and abundance that should come unto them after
their peace; yea, beyond the nature of the earth, and the expectation of man.
In this verse there are these two things to be spoken of: First, of the
plenty of victuals and food: and secondly, of the fountain that should come
out of the house of the Lord; and water the valley of Shittim, which was a
place in the country of Moab, where the Israelites committed fornication with
the daughters of Moab, Numer. 25. 1. First, in the large promise of so great
plenty as these Jews The peace of the church rejoice the creatures of God.
should have after the restitution of worldly things, we may note, that if
God give peace to his church, then all the creatures of the world are the
better for it, Esa. 30. 24, 25. For and in the peace of the church, there is
nothing in the world but are reioiced in it: The heavens are cleerer, the
sun is lighter; the ox is stronger; the sheep are fatter; the rivers are
fuller; the bread is sweeter; the fields are fruitfuller; and the world is
ioyfuller. So that when they grow which worship God, they shall also grow that
serve man. Till Adam sinned there was not any creature that knew the curse:
and so if the church could live without sin, there is not a creature but
should be free from evil. Wherefore when their sins are purged and
themselves reconciled to God and established in peace; then the herbs grow, the
fields abound, the trees blossom, the cattle labor, the wines nourish, and
all things prosper forgetting their curse, as a man recovering health,
forgets sickness, or as a reconciled friend forgets his malice. The godly
therefore being in captivity in Babylon, had good cause to put away all mirth
and joy until they saw the deliverance of the church of God. And if ever any
nation in the world had the experience of this prophecy, that they could say
their land was quiet, their earth was fruitful, their people were many, their
hills flowed with milk, their houses with wine, their coffers with gold, their
pastures with sheep, their yokes with oxen, their fields with corn, their
bread with strength, and their health preserved by the fruits of the earth:
then may we in England say that the Lords plenty has been among us, because
his church is with us. We have had no war, but we conquered; no sickness, but
we were comforted; no famine, but we were delivered; no danger, but we were
preserved, and no occasion of mourning in our streets, and all because the
spouse of Christ dwells among us. Our earth has not lost her strength; our
children have not been left fatherless; our summers, have not burned us; our
winters have not killed us; our harvest has not failed us; our season has
reached our barley harvest; our barley harvest, our wheat harvest; our wheat
harvest, our vintage; and our vintage, our season again: and this is all
because the lambs of Christ feed with our flocks, the servants of Christ sit
at our tables, the spouse of Christ dwells in our houses, and the church of
Christ is at peace in our land: oh wake not the beloved of Christ until she
please, and let her not be imprisoned as Joseph was, because all things
prosper under peace! The Reason 1.
first reason, because when the church is at peace, the people have the Lord
about them as rivers, and their iniquity pardoned, Isa. 33. 21. 24. The Lord
is all things to the world, as he is all things to the elect in another life:
What is the reason? that the angels hunger not, that the saints in heaven die
not, or be not sick or cold, that they live without bodies, or without meat,
that they see without day or sun, that they watch, and never sleep; that
they speak, and never be weary; and that they live, and shall never die; but
because the Lords presence is all unto them, Revel. 21. 22, 23, 24. and so is
it in the church when the Lord gives quietness unto it, he brings all joy,
and peace, and comfort, and glory, and plenty; that not only men, but his
dumb and senseless creatures may rejoice in them. Then it follows that the
peaceable estate of the church in this life, is little inferior to the joy of
another life. In the other life they have no want, no more have we; there they
have no sorrow, no more is here; there is no fear of enemies, no more is
here; there they take no care for life, no more do they here; there they have
immortality, here they be assured of it, only death hinders: there they
worship God continually, so they do here, only natural infirmity lets: and
to conclude, there they have God, and so have we here. Oh, who would not live
in the church, that he may have a heaven in this world? Secondly, another
reason: the angels of heaven rejoice at it, and therefore 2
much more men and creatures of the earth: for when Christ was borne, a number
of heavenly soldiers sang glory unto God, because peace was on the earth and
good will toward men, Luke 2. 13. 14. Blessed therefore is that peace which
glorifieth GOD that sends it, and reioyseth angels that hear of it, and
comfort good men that have it, and blesses all creatures that grow in it.
Surely they which take away the peace from the church, take away all glory from
God, and all comfort from men. Let us which live in these blessed times look
to our selves Use.
above all other: for as God has made our earthly estate better then other
men's, so will he do our condition in the other life worse then all men's for
the abusing hereof. Let me lament my country as Esaie lamented Israel, cap
43. 22, 23, 24. saying. Thou have not called upon me o England, but thou have
wearied me; Thou have not brought me the sheep of thy burnt offeringes,
neither have thou honored me with thy sacrifices; I have not caused thee to
serve with an offering, nor wearied thee with incense. Thou have not bought me
sweet savor with thy money; neither have thou made me drunk with the fat of
your sacrifices, but thou have made me to serve with thy sins, and wearied
me with thine iniquities. O my brethren! thus may the Lord complain of us. We
have had peace, who has been honored for it? we have had money, who has
been worshipped for it? we have had cattle and corn, to whom have we
sacrificed? surely we have honored our policy, for our peace; we have
worshipped our goods and lands, with our money; and we have sacrificed our
corn and flesh, to our bellies. What could the Lord give more then he has?
or bear more then he does? or tarry longer then he must? or we receive more
then has been cast upon us? Oh, that I could now power forth my self in
words, to lament the estate of our times! We have much preaching, but little
religion; for the prophets scant believe themselves; we have much peace, but
little knowledge of God is reaped thereby; we have great plenty, but very
small thankfulness: our peace has bred pride; our pride has bred want; our
want has caused mourning; our mourning has brought forth plenty, and our
plenty has hatched pride again. Let the hearts of men cleave in sunder, to
consider this point: that now we fall as fast to our former vomites, as any
ruffian to his former follies. We have been humbled, and God has heard us;
God has heard us, and we regard it not: for the rich men eat their flock in
plenty; lavish out their money in wantonness; spend God his fruits in
riote, and never think of thankfulness. This, says he, my friends left
me; or I gained by such a bargain; or I won at such a game; or got by such
an office, or I saved in my shop, and now I will be merry with it: And the
Lord has no sweet savor by their money, nor any sacrifice by their flocks.
But to come to the point, they begin already to forget that there was a
famine: and as the staruen kine in winter, become wanton and wild in the
spring, so they which of late could speak pitifully, and mourn bitterly for
want; now they begin to forget their want, and their God and all. Oh my dear
brethren! we are now in more danger to perish by plenty, then we were to
fall by famine; for ease slaieth the foolish, and the prosperity of the wicked
shall destroy them. When the children of Israel went every day poor and rich
to gather Manna, and to eat thereof, they lived well; but when the quails
came, and they eat thereof, the plague took them while the meat was in their
mouths: so, not want of food, but want of grace and thankfulness destroieth
men. Therefore now let the magistrates look to the laws; let the ministers
discharge their places; let the fathers admonish their children; and let all
men govern themselves, least our plenty of fruits cost the death of our
souls. Now be as diligent to render praise, as you were wont to be vigilant
in prayer: let the tears burst forth for joy; for our peace reioiceth both
men and angels. We are come to our first heaven (I mean the peace of our
church) if we now wax proud, and grow insolent, as the devils were cast out of
heaven above; so shall we be out of heaven beneath. Remember sickness
follows health, death follows sickness, judgment follows death; and
damnation follows judgment: now are our souls sick, let us recover the^,
for else they die, and if they die, they will be judged, and if they be
judged, they will be damned. Secondly, he promises that a fountain shall go
forth of the house of the Lord to water the valley of Setim: meaning that the
Gospel should be preached to the Gentiles; for it began at Jerusalem as at the
spring head, and so flowed thorough the whole world; of the which the Prophet
Ezechiel saw a vision, Ezech. 47. 3, 4, 5, etc. whereby we are taught: first,
that God caused salvation to flow from the Jews unto the Gentiles; they had
both spring and stream, and yet wanted grace to drink thereof: whereupon she
speaks, Cant. 1. 5. that they made her the keeper of the vines, but she kept
not her own vine. Secondly, in that the Gospel is compared to a running
water: we may note that it never stands still, but goes as it were a flood
thorough the world, and there is no power to resist it: And this is the cause
why all the kings and counselors of the world could never stop the course
thereof, only the Bishop of Rome is that star called Wormwood, Revel. 8.
10. 11. that fell from heaven and corrupted these fountains of water; whereby
they being made bitter, caused the death of many that drank thereof. Thirdly,
the valley of Setim was a very dry place, and these waters made it fruitful; so
were all the Gentiles, whereof we are a part: and if these waters of the Gospel
had not come unto us, we had remained unfruitful land, very near unto
cursing and burning. Lastly, we may see that no other doctrine or profession
whatsoever is to be received, but this which is derived from Jerusalem: We must
not fetch our water from Rome, or from Mecha, or from any other place, but take
of these which flowed from the temple. And it is verily thought, that God would
not suffer Jerusalem or the temple to stand, nor convert it into a
Bishops-seate, least the antiquity or dignity of the place should challenge
authority to send forth what waters and what Gospel they pleased into the
world.

Egypt shall be wasted and Edom shall be a desolate wilderness, Verse. 19.
for the injuries of the children of Judah, because they have shed innocent
blood in their land. Once again he mentions the destruction of their
enemies: for in their overthrow stands the felicity of good men, when they
shall not be able to molest the church by their power, nor to corrupt it by
their evil example. Hereby we see first of all noted unto us, that the blood of
the Lords saints shall be certainly reue^ged, although it cost whole countries,
Isa. 9. 12. The reasons: First, because they are the images of God, Genesis 9. 6.
the Lord says that he will have his blood shed that sheddeth any blood:
Secondly, the nature of it is to cry for vengeance in the ears of God, Genesis
4. 10. as the Lord said to Cain: and therefore I think verily there will come
a day that our recusants, which are the offspring of many bloody persecutours,
shall have the blood of the Lords saints revenged upon them. But if the blood
of saints shall be so revenged; then much more shall the blood of Christ, Heb.
10. 29. There are only two kinds of people upon whom the Lord will bring the
blood of his son, the Jews whom we see scattered over all the world, being
accounted a very miserable and forlorn people: the other are the contemners
of the Gospel, which make no account to be saved thereby; who are in a manner
as guilty of the death of Christ, as were the soldiers and Jews that nailed
him on the cross: Wherefore God will not forget how they tread under their
feet his precious blood. Again, let us take occasion to praise the Lord which
lets not the blood of his children be shed in vain, Deuteronomy. 32. 43. as he
blesses them that take revenge upon his enemies, and make them fall to the
earth; so he curses the^ that cause any of his servants to com to their latter
end. Again, by this verse we may note, that the blood of the Lords saints is
innocent, 2. King. 21. 16. whatsoever laws of princes or decrees of men be
laid to their charge, yet this must still comfort them, that if they die for
the Lords cause, they are innocent, and shall certainly receive life eternal.
The reasons: because thorough hatred and malice of the world are they
delivered, Ioh. 17. 4 Secondly being the servants of righteousness, they cannot
be justly executed for the same, Romans 6. 18. Let us be hereby encouraged not
to fear death, 1. Pet. 2. 19. for if we die naturally, we die happily; and if
we die violently, we die innocently. Again, let not any of us that are
Christians suffer for our evil doing, 1. Pet. 4. 15. but rather let us watch
over our lives, that no sinful danger of humane laws do ever overtake us.

But Judah shall dwell for ever, and Jerusalem from generation Verse. 20*
to generation.

For I will cleanse their blood that I have not cleansed, and the 21
Lord shall dwell in Zion. These verses contain the last promises of the Lord
unto his church, grounded upon the presence of God among them; First, for their
perpetuity; Secondly, for the declaration of their innocence, which he
notes when he says, that he will cleanse their blood, etc. when as upon the
report of the injuries received in the former verse, he presently adds, that
they shall dwell for ever: we may note, that the wrongs which good men in this
life endure, shall be one means to forward their rest, and glorification,
Psa. 12. 5. For this is the fruit of our afflictions, to persuade the Lord for
our immortality: for as when the Israelites cried in Egypt, then the Lord
brought them into Canaan; so when we cry for our wrongs, we are readiest for
heaven. The reasons; God evermore has an eye to the afflicted, Psalm. 9. 13.
Secondly, then are we most like to the son of God, and when we are likest to
him on earth, we are nearest to him in heaven. Let us so bear our afflictions
and wrongs, as if we were borne for them, 1. Cor. 4 9. for we see they shall
turn to our greater joy. But of this matter we have spoke often. I might also
remember out of this verse, when he says, that Judah and Jerusalem shall dwell
for ever: he means not the city Jerusalem, for that is long ago destroyed;
but he means that the Jews shall never be utterly destroyed, but many of
them shall be saved in the world to come. When he says, that he will cleanse
their blood: that is, he will manifest to all the world that they were not
justly executed, but unjustly murdered: whereby we may see at length that the
wicked, whether they were wilfully blinded, or ignorantly affected in
persecuting good men; yet they shall know, and so shall other, that they
murdered them unjustly, as the Jews which shall see Christ whom they pierced,
Revel. 1. 7. Mat. 27. 3, 4. for wilful murders cannot be everlastingly
concealed: and it is al one before God to steal by authoriti^ or without law,
to kill by law or without authority. Lastly we may see when he says, he will
dwell in Zion, that the presence of God preserves the church, Revel. 1. 13.
how can it ever perish when the Lord maintayneth it? Surely satan told Christ
that he could not do amiss, for the Angels watched about him and held him up
that at no time he should dash his foot against a stone: If the help of Angels
in the devils conceit was so great to preserve Christ; then much greater is the
presence and hand of God to uphold his church. He alone builds it, that it
fall not; keeps it, that it fade not; dresseth it, that it may be holy; and
preserves it, that it may be godly: so that so long as the Lord endures, so
long shall the church stand, maugre the might of all the devils in hell. To the
which God everlasting, immortal and only wise, the most glorious Trinity,
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, let us render all praise, ascribe
all majesty, and give our whole spirits, souls and bodies, that he may be
glorified in us, and we be glorified in him:

Amen, Amen.
FINIS.

