OF THE FABRIQVE of the Church and Church-mens livings.

By WILLIAM TOOKER Doctor in Divinity, his Majesty's Chaplain in ordinary.

AUGUST. Psalm. 34. Quare in praecisione vultis magnificare nomen Domini?
Quare duos populos ex vno vultu faecere?
Why will you in praecisenesse magnify the name of the Lord? Why will you make
two peoples unto him of one?

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE.

DIEV ET MON DROIT



LONDON Printed by Melchisedech Bradwood for John Norton. 1604.

The Contents.
1 Of Paritie and Imparitie of gifts. 2 Of Competencie and Incompetencie of
men's livings, and of the rewards of men's gifts or maintenance so called. 3 Of
Parity and Imparity of men's livings, which arises out of the aequalitie or
inequality of men's gifts, and of preferments so called. 4 Of singularity and
plurality of Benefices, and of the cause thereof, videlicet, Dispensations. 5
Of the friends and enemies of Pluralities. 6 Of supportance and keeping of the
fabrique of the Church upright.
TO THE MOST MIGHTY PRINCE JAMES by the grace of God King of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith.
MOst gracious Sovereign, in all humility I offer to your learned censure,
the fruits of my labor, the first fruits whereof, as likewise of my dutiful
disposition seven years before your Majesty's coming, as messengers of my
devoted affection, I sent into Scotland to meet with you, as it were a far
of: Secondly I presented you with a Book at my waiting upon you in your late
progress: And now again, in time of Parliament, and Synod, the time of
representation of all our Church and commonwealth I have presumed of the like
gracious acceptance, assuring my self that nothing comes amiss to you of
scholastical exercise, that tends to union, or to nourishing a fellowship and
communion in Ecclesiastical or civil affairs. It remains that I give,
dedicate, and addict my self and all my studies to your Highness service: I
resume often into my hands your (...) and weighing the ponderous sentences of
that Book, I find none to import more good to the Church, then that golden
sentence, or rather incomparably more precious then all the gold of Ophyr, in
the 41. page of that Book: parity the mother of confusion, and enemy to
unity, which is the mother of order: That is, parity in the Church once
established in the government Ecclesiastical, will draw on paritie in the
political or civil estate. The consideration whereof has occasionally lead
me into this discourse, as I think not vnrequisit at this time, in which
parity is so much applauded: Your Majesty knows by particular experience who
they are that hate all eminency of gifts, and praeeminency of authority, and
mislike (unless it be in themselves all government and superioririe, who they
are that would aequall the Scepter of their Presbytery, or rather advance it
above the Scepter of Princes, who they are that have filled all the world full
of needless controversies, called all things in quaestion in the church
discipline, from the highest Cherubins, to the lowest pin of the tabernacle,
who they are which reproach all jurisdiction of Bishops, though it be the very
same that was in the time of Constantine the great, Theodosius, and other godly
Princes times, and contemn all degrees of the Universities and other digniteis
of Cathedral Churches: who they are that would take away all pluralities, and
maintenance of learned men, and reduce all inaequalities to an aequalitie, and
are professed enemies to the Hierarchy of the Church, and would bring all to
popularitie, or Democracy, and afterward to Anarchie, if their designs might
take effect and place. Look what pleasure or pains they take of the faction
in demolition of churches, whether it be by hand, or handwriting, so much or a
great deal more, my delectation and travel is according to my small talent,
for the supportance, and upholding of the fabrique of the same. Your Majesty
as a Christian Atlas must bear the whole frame, we of your clergy as
supporters. Most matters are well calmed with your good moderation (if no after
tempest does arise) as my hope is and prayer to almighty God for the
perpetuity of the peace of Gods Church, and for your Majesty's and your royal
issues happy preservation. London. 2. April.

Your Majesty's most humble Chapleine W. TOOKER.

OF PARITIE and imparitie of men's gifts.
IN common experience of this life, and in the usual traffic of men's wits,
whether it be in Church or Commonweal, is most clearly seen, as in a
Crystal glass, the great diversity of men's gifts; Men's, because they are
given unto men; Gods nevertheless, as descending from God, who although he owe
us nothing, yet bestows all things of his abundant bounty and superabundant
grace. In contemplation and view of so many gracious gifts shining round about
us, no man may grudge or complain against his God, that he has given him
nothing; for the poorest wretch is enriched with some portion of the substance
of his grace: no one can glory or brag, no not the richest of his creatures,
Angels and Archangels, that they have received all things.

This infinite variety and garnish of Gods gifts does show it self every
where, but no where so much resplendisheth as in the Garden or Paradise of Gods
Church here upon earth militant; whereby we may gather what is the glorious
glistering of the Church triumphant: There are diversities of gifts, 1. Cor. 12.
but it is the selfsame spirit, differences of administrations, but it is the
selfsame Lord; diverse manners of operations, but it is the selfsame God
which works all in all: and all this is given to profit withal or
edification, which is all in all. To one is given the word of Wisdom; to
another, the word of Knowledge; to another, Faith healing, Power operative,
Prophecy, Discerning of spirits; to other, diverse kinds of tongues, or
interpretation of tongues: and the Spirit that works in every one, divides
to every one even as he will. To some one man are given two, or three, or five
talents of the grace of God, to be well used and to be employed to Gods glory,
because they are the talents of his Sanctuary: and when a man comes to make
his audit, the account will be heavy to be made, if the occupier be either a
slothful and unthrifty servant or an evil storer. The incomparable
excellency of all such gifts does eftsoons draw me to the admiration of the
gifts, sometimes to the praise of God the giver, who has given such gifts to
men, never to disdain or reproach the men whom God himself has honored with
such high titles, invested with such sacred functions and offices graciously
vouchsafed of such praeeminent gifts which are for the honor and service of
himself, least of all to equal all those men in matter of preferment, whom
Gods own right hand has given a precedencie, and made inferior and unequal
one unto another by a certain prerogative of his celestial gifts.

This is certain, God never gave any such gifts, but he would have them to be
honored; and it is as certain, the gifts are diverse which are to be honored:
which because I would have it the plainer to appear, I will enlarge a little
more of the diversity of men's gifts, to make a way to that which follows in
this short Discourse of competencie and incompetence of men's livings, which is
called maintenance; and of equality and inequality of livings, which is
termed preferments; and consequently, 1. Cor. 12.
of singularity and plurality of Benefices, and of the cause thereof, which
is Dispensation; and lastly, of the enemies and friends of the same. As in a
great Lords or Princes house, so it is in the Church of God, which is Gods
house, there are diverse offices and diverse services, and every one is promoted
to an higher or lower place, according to the quality of his deserts and
gifts; whereupon grows superiority or inferioritie in every well-disciplined
house.

In the Oeconomie of the Church there are many orders and degrees of men all
tending from imperfection unto perfection, that the man of God may be made
perfect. Some excel one another in the same gift: Some, and those few, excel
in all those gifts. Some are (...), nouices new planted themselves, and newly
implanting others. Some, whose praise is in the Gospel by long continuance and
well deserving: God forbid all should be proportioned to one and the like
reward. Some Teachers, able to give milk and not strong meat; other, both
milk and strong meat. 1. Cor. 2. c. 3. Heb. 5.12.13.14. v.
I have nourished you with milk and not with meat: some have need of milk,
and not of strong meat. Every one that uses the milk of Catechism or
instruction is unskillful of the word of righteousness, for he is a babe in
Christianity, but strong meat belongs to them that are strong or perfect,
even those which by reason of use, have their wits exercised to discern both
good and evil.

The Church of Christ always had Readers, Catechists, Preachers: by Readers, I
mean not only Readers in Divinity controuersiall, such as are in the
Universities; but Readers of the Scriptures, which is an inferior office: And
Catechists, whether you take Catechism for general instruction, or for
summarie teaching of the Articles and principles of faith, which is a
compendious kind of preaching, such as Deogratias and Heraclas at Carthage,
and also Preachers of the word, which is a more honorable calling: Who will
gainsay these to be all worthy of reward? Who will say them to be deigned or
thought worthy of the like reward? The Apostles had their Deacons, the
Apostolical men their Evangelists companions and fellow laborers: the ancient
Bishops their assistants and coadiutours, but they had not the like honor and
the same reward. Neither is it probable they had the like gifts 13. Act. Act.
13.
in the Church which was at Antioch, there were certain prophets and teachers,
as Barnabas and Simon that was called Niger; and Lucius, and Manahen and Saul;
doubtless their gifts were diverse, and inequall the one to the other. Yea the
Apostles themselves were not endued with knowledge and other gifts all alike;
some of them are said to be Columnae, Gal. 2.9. v. (...).
as Saint James and Cephas and John pillars of the Church; Paul planted;
Apollo watered the Church of God: Apollo is said to be (...), mighty or
powerful and eloquent, or skillful or full of persuasion in the Scriptures, but
Paul as a wise architect or builder of the Church, or to lay the foundations
of many Churches, and to take care of many congregations, or labor more then
all. The more laborious the workman is, the more worthy of the greater
reward; according to the gift and grace of God men do labor in the work of
the Lord. Even as it is in the host of heaven or firmament of his power, one
star differs from another in glory, and yet all stars of whatsoever
magnitude, are Vasa lucis, vessels full of light; so is it in the Hierarchy of
his Church; all Ministers and Pastors, and Teachers are profitable instruments
and necessary implements of the same house, although not all of the same honor
and dignity, nor equal one to other in place or preferment, or like
superiority, or endowed with paritie or idenditie of Gods gifts: yet all
replenished in some measure with fullness, as sanctified vessels with the light
of Gods grace: The diversity of gifts are in all sorts of men of great
multiplicity and variety, and every one has not all but as pleases God to
dispense to every one: and therefore the like inaequalitie may be amongst
Ministers, as amongst other men. Now albeit S. Paul sets down As it were a
certain Idaea or a perfect samplar of an absolute Minister for all to aim
unto the same, yet I nothing doubt many more come short, then attain unto the
same, Tit. 1.5. v. (...), If a man be without reprehension or blame, the
husband of one wife, having faithful children, not accusable of riot or
intractable, for a Bishop must be blameless or without reprehension, etc.
(...), able to exhort in sound doctrine, (...), to convince the gain-saier: S.
Paul uses the word thrice, 1. Timoth. 3. A Bishop must be blameless or
without reprehension, that is, both for his doctrine and gifts, and for his
life and conversation, and so in the word (...) or Bishop, includes all
Ministers, who must be perfectly endued with all the enablements by S. Paul in
that and other places largely described: yet again, who does not know that
every Bishop and Minister cannot be of perfectest knowledge and incomparable
gifts which are there required, as in the point of perfection or that which is
Superlatiue, which can agree but to one. Are all Prophets? Are all Doctors? do
all speak with tongues? Do all interpret? My Illatiue therefore is that of
necessity, the Ministers every where which are teachers of the people, whether
in matter of belief or of virtuous life and the knowledge of the same, can
neither instruct nor teach, but according to the proportion of their own
knowledge and of their own gifts wherewith they are endued: And for all to
attain to the point of perfection of gifts is a thing incredible, and to
obtain the same gift is a matter impossible, and nevertheless, they may covet
after and seek for the best gifts, at lest set before their eyes as imitable
and admirable, the Idaea or sampler of a Bishop or Minister, furnished or
enriched with all these gifts: Touching degrees of learning and other
requisites for the Ministry, it is worth the while to consider, and weigh that
which Saint Hierom has professedly disputed and written of the same: Hierony.
ad Oceanu. ep. 83.
As Orators and Philosophers (faith he) when they describe what Orator and
Philosopher they would wish to have, do none injury to Demosthenes or Plato,
(who perhaps are not so perfect) but describe the things without the persons:
So in the description of a Bishop, and in the exposition of those things that
be written, a glass Sacerdotij of Priesthood or Ministry is set before us. In
that Saint Paul (says he) requires a Bishop without a fault, or without
reprehension; he comprehends in one all virtues, and requires almost a thing
Contrary to nature. And speaking of variety of gifts of Ecclesiastical men,
Hierony. l. 1. ad Pelag. c. 8.
(he says) Many do treat well upon the Gospels, but in expounding the
Apostle, are not like themselves: others that very well understand the new
Testament, yet in the Psalms and old Testament are dumb: This I say (says S.
Hierom) because every one cannot do all. And again, God has given diverse
precepts and manifold virtues, all which every of us cannot have at once. So it
comes to pass, that which is excellent and perfect in some, is in other but
in part: And he that has not all, is not blameable, nor condemned for that he
has not, but justified and commended for that he has. An instance he gives
of this in Bishops and Ministers: Truly God would have all Bishops and
Ministers to be such as the vessel of Election teaches them to be. First, in
that he says, a Bishop must be without fault; either there is none such, or a
very rare man: Who is there that has not some wart or blemish in a body
otherwise fair, as Peter himself had: then to be the husband of one wife,
sober, etc. admit you do find them; that which follows (...), he that can
teach, with the other virtues ye shall hardly find: I am of opinion you shall
hardly find such as shall be accused of none: especially ye shall hardly
find him that is (...), able to resist the adversaries, or convince erroneous
opinions. So that there is none, or he is very rare, that has all that a
Bishop ought to have, and yet though one or two things in the catalogue of
Bishops virtues be wanting, he shall not thereupon want the name of a just
Bishop or fit, neither shall be condemned for that he has not, but shall be
crowned for that he has: for to have all and want nothing, is his peculiar
virtue who sinned not, and in whose mouth is found no guile. To want some one
or other gift, is ordinary; to be equal or matches one to another, is rare and
extraordinary; to excel one another, is commendable; to be inferior and one
beneath the other, is not dispraisable; to be an exact Preacher and Pulpit-man,
is profitable to the Church: scant shall you find two men of the same gift;
some have graceful eloquution and utterance, or a sweet deliverance; some
others, subtlety and sharpness of wit; some make great show of Reading and
Learning; some are able to anatomize the conscience; some better move and
stir up affection; some the gift of explication; some of application: all
trees are not of one growth or proceritie, all fruits of one ripeness and
maturitie, all flowers of one hue and beauty. All Students in an University of
one standing and proficiencie, all Ministers of one degree of learning, or of
one quality in gifts, or in coequality of the preferment apperteining to the
gifts, my collection is out of the parity and imparity of men's gifts, and so by
consequence of men's deserts rises the equality or inequality of men's livings:
howbeit, all must have competencies; of which I will treat in the next place.

CHAP. 2. Of competencie and incompetencie of men's livings.
IT is commonly debated, what is a competent living for a Minister of the Word,
and what is incompetent, and what is the cause of such incompetencie, and
whether if any man's living be incompetent and insufficient, somewhat may be
drawn or derived from other men their increases and sufficiencies, and the
same added to the insufficiency and small maintenance of another: and so to
accommodat and fit all men as Procustes did his bed for men of all statures by
cutting of some, and stretching out the shortest to the length of the other.

As for Competencie of estate and the benefit of contentation, is a matter
generally prescribed unto all, whether they be of Laity or Clergy, of high or
low degree, Counselor or mean person, Prince or subject, and described by the
Apostle, having victum and vestitum, food and raiment, let us therewith be
content. Wherein the rule is, Let every man stay or remain in the calling
whereunto he is called, and not aspire higher or above his degree, as the
fashion of some is, to tower loftier still with the wings of restless
ambition: and Divines of all other must endeavor themselves to attain the
benefit of this contentation, not desirous of filthy lucre or unmeasurable
purchases, or studying nothing else; from which imputations I think they are
freest of all men: for if we look into their private estates, so many paiments
ordinarily in a manner issuing out of their living, their hospitality extending
to the uttermost of their ability, their poverty every where showing it self
with naked face, before and after their deceases; insomuch, that if any of them
thrive through his industry, always foreprised the blessing of God, all their
desire and providence is, but to save themselves from reproach of the world and
stark beggerie. And I see no cause they should not make honest provision for
themselves and their family, and thrive in the fear of God, being free and no
bondmen, being citizens and no aliens from the Commonwealth in which they
live.

But to return where I was, without apparent digression. All the question is,
What is a competent living, and what is incompetent and unfit for a man of the
Church? And whether this competencie consist in the quantity and number of
Benefices, as of many, or in the quality or goodness of a Benefice, as of
one? And whether that Benefice which is fit for one able and sufficient
Minister, be also competent and fit for another somewhat insufficienter person,
having the same essence or being in the Ministry, because they are both said
to be of one coat: And further, what square or measure every one that shall be so
promoted to a competent living shall be measured by? And lastly, who shall be
Judge of competencie and incompetencie, as of the whole matter?

To begin with that first, which I proposed last, (...): The Judge of all
this must be the Law, or the Magistrate who is Lex loquens, I mean the
supreme Magistrate who is interessed in all Estates, the Prince and other
Judges and Ministers of Ecclesiastical Laws; for if every man should be
Judge, and not according to Laws on this behalf provided, we should have an
old a do to accommodate every man.

Now for the Law, it has already defined who shall have a Benefice, with cure
of souls, whose clearly value is thirty pound and above: and who shall have
under the value aforesaid; videlicet, a Preacher duly qualified with gifts,
authorized to preach by the Bishop, or either of the Universities, or graduated
in Divinity, or shall enjoy a Benefice of thirty pound, or above that value:
and for other Benefices under that value, men of meaner gifts, and of under
deserts, may obtain the same. All which is so well settled already, that it
needs no innovation which is dangerous, nor further limitation or restriction
which is incommodious, if especially this be well looked unto and executed by
the Fathers of the Church and Spiritual Judges, all is well. As for the norme
or square whereby they shall be squared always, is the paritie and imparitie of
men's gifts and merits, observing by the way this for a rule, Where no exception
is to be taken to the life and conversation of the man, admitting they are both
to be preferred to a competent living, and both honest and godly men, the
learneder of the two must carry it away. And in case the living caeteris
paribus, be mean or small, it may be competent and fit for a mean learned
man: for if it be absolutely incompetent, it is fit for no man: and to make all
men's livings competent a like, and to range them in an equality, is a work of
the wisest man alive, whether the proportion of equality prove to be
Arithmeticall or Geometrical, it shall be a work to busy the wisest man.

To come therefore to that which was principally proposed and in the first
place, What is a competent living for an Ecclesiastical man: I doubt not, if
you should assemble an hundred men, they may chance to prove of an hundred
minds: Quot capita tot sensa: So many men so many minds. How often have I
heard it blaterated by diverse newfangled fellows, that forty or perhaps
fifty, or at the uttermost an hundred pound is sufficient for an honest man,
or for the honestest of us all. And by an honest man, as they weigh in their
balance of consideration Honesty it self, they mean the grauest Divine, the
learnedest Preacher, the profoundest Doctor of longest study and continuance:
so that by this proportion, if the most reverend Father of the Primitive Church
were alive, the learnedest Bishop of the ancient flourishing Church, the
excellentest Doctor and painfullest Pastors were conversant amongst them, such
as Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, a Bishop and Martyr, such as Chrysostom
Archbishop of Constantinople, the golden mouthed Doctor, such as Ambrose Bishop
of Millaine, such as Epiphanius Bishop of Constantia in Cyprus, a man of
incomparable industry and pains taking in the church, or as S. Austin Bishop
of Hippo in Afrique, and an hundred more whom I could rehearse, were amongst
them if S. Hierome who was a Presbyter, and: no Bishop, termed Magister orbis
terrarum, were at their finding, or to be preferred by them: if all the famous
men for writing or preaching were amongst them, they must have but a living
competent and fitting one of their honest men, and must not have a living for
men of their estate. There is no respect to be had to their Episcopal honor
or Doctorall degree, or to any terms of hospitality, or to their attendance
and family, or other things coincident to their callings or estate, or to the
furnishing or increasing of their Library, which some years may chance to
cost them the whole or half profits of their benefice: The Minister or Pastor
of what quality soever, graduat or vngraduat, must have no more than one of
their honest men, the rest must be exonerat some other way, as matter of
superfluity.

As competent then is all that which is sufficient and enough for the
maintenance of a Minister in his place, so also it is that which is agreeable
to the credit and dignity of his place, and a meet reward suitable to his
degree taken in schools, answerable to the eminency of his gift, and somewhat
proportionable to his pains and continual labor in the Church of God: for if
the Minister be called to fight with wants, and encounter with necessities his
calling of all other is a laborious calling, and his work cannot choose but be
often interrupted. If his hap therefore be to arrive upon a Benefice of 20.
l. or 30. l. by the year, and that be to small or incompetent for the
supportance of his estate, I see no reason why another may not be added to the
former for the ampliation of his living, and bettering of his estate,
nevertheless with such cautions and limitations of distance of miles, and
number of sermons, many or more, as in case of plurality the law has
provided. Here offers it self to be discussed whether competency consist in
the quantity and number of benefices or in the quality and goodness of a
benefice as of one. The vulgar opinion and popular error is to account every
two benefices of small validity and little worth to be two livings, or two
good benefices collated upon one man, to be two men's livings and too much for
one: whereas two good benefices joined together make but one competent living.
And one benefice aequivalent to two makes still but a living for a learned
man. Who would not be glad to have both his benefices adioine and lie near
together, or in case they lie, to the distance of thirty miles or under,
disioined the one from the other, so that the duty of places, in giving of
sacred and sacramental things be always discharged, by himself or his
sufficient deputy, it amounts but to one man's living still, for pluralities
of livings is an offense or scandal, quatenus, or in regard that favor or
Indulgence is affoorded to an unworthy man whom the law should not favor: And
non Residence is a fault, quatenus as men under a charge, are destitute of
instruction or disfurnished of spiritual food and teaching. I will not
possitiuely set down what is competent: for that which is competent or
sufficient for a man of mean gifts, may be altogether incompetent for a man of
incomparably greater gifts. Let this suffice, that magis and minus sunt in
Relatione, great and less are in relation: out of my own judgment I will set
down nothing: yet I will remember what a man of grave judgment and long
experience did sometime delineate and set down for a competent living for a
preacher well studied, richly gifted, double or treble graduated in the
Universities. Settle the foot of your compass in a that is the center or
parish Church, draw your perimeter or circumference b semidiameter g, the
parish shall be in circuit and breadth so many miles as may make a competent
living in tithes for a learned and Ecclesiastical man. Howbeit because this
opinion shall be neither approved nor reproved by me, and because this
delineation and project tends to the disbounding and disunion of parishes
which is causeless and to an alteration of matters so well settled, which cannot
easily be agreed upon by the patrons of parishes, and is wholly needless. Let
that stand for competent which the favor of Princes and Nobles, privilege of
laws, and act of Parliament does cast upon the Ministers. I say all that which
the desert of men of learning does inure or lawfully procure toward the
maintenance of their degrees or furnishing of their libraries, or nourishing of
their families, or holding on terms of hospitality, and giving to the poor:
In case any living be incompetent, as sundry livings be, let the blame thereof
rest where deservedly the blame does lie: Let them surrender that are willing
to yield up the Impropriations. Such as the Abbeys dispoiled the Church far and
near, as for the coactiue power of law to enforce a surrender, were summum
ius, and for power perswasiue, it is all in vain: I say not only every
learned man indeed should have two Benefices to make up the competency of his
estate; but men of little worth, and many unworthy men should have every one
his single Benesice, and of all these crauers not one of them should lack: But
forasmuch for the hardness of men's hearts, this is not likely to come into the
hands of the holy Church again from profane hands, and by reason they are
bought and sold, by other unlawful merchandise chopped and changed, and to
speak as men would have us to speak, at the lest degenerated into a lay fee;
I could in all godly zeal desire and wish the proprietaries and leasees of
such impropriat livings, to imitate the godly precedents of some Cathedral and
Collegiat Churches in the Universities and else where, who of pure and perfect
devotion, enlarge the Vicars endowed, with some addition or stipend, or the
Donatiue with some more ample contribution, for the labourer is worthy of his
reward: as for the loiterer he is worthy of nothing. There is no reason to
disrobe learned men of their livings which they hold by law, and have continued
therein in many Princes times, because the Impropriations leave not a
competencie for the Vicars and Curates of the place. Let it be rather defalked
from those who are ten times worse then the Abbey lubbers were, for they
offended in idleness and fullness of bread, and yet relieved with their bread
the country round about, and did many things to the glory of God, although
they erred in the means which leads thereunto: but the other offend in
avarice and pride, and unmercifulness to the poor in all manner of wickedness
and superfluity of maliciousness: A medicine for this shall be, if the Bishop
shall provide for every such destitute place, a godly Curate, an edifying and
instructiue service, with some augmentation of stipend from the proprietaries
or leases, for certain sermons in the year, for every such living will prove
incompetent for a learned man, as the case now stands: Leauer (said well) in
a sermon in king Edward the sixth days, Nothing is so Papisticall as
impropriations: nothing so Anabaptisticall as parity of livings.

CHAP. 3. Of paritie or equality and imparitie of men's livings.
FRom parity or imparity of men's gifts springs parity or imparity of men's
livings; for although some are so maleuolent and injurious to allot an
equality in the assignment of Church livings, yet none I hope shall be found
so unconscionable to allow that which is absolutely incompetent for an
Ecclesiastical living. A necessary provision must be made for all, and this
maxim or rule is general: He that ministers about holy things, may eat of
the things of the Temple; even so the Lord has commanded those which preach
the Gospel, to live on the Gospel. He that waits on the altar, must live on
the altar or partake with altars oblations. No man planteth a vineyard, 1. Cor.
9.
but eats of the fruit. No man feeds a flock, but eats of the milk of
his flock. No man goes to this Spiritual warfare at his own charge. Deuteronomy.
25.4.
The law of Nature teaches this, and Moses law also, Thou shall not muzzle the
mouth of the ox that treads out the corn. Has God care of oxen and has he
not much more care of men? If we sow spiritual things, we are worthy of
carnal. Consent of all nations is the law of Nature. In the School of
Natural reason this is taught: They that watch over us, and labor for us,
must be recompensed by us. For this cause we pay tribute unto Kings; wages or
stipends unto Soldiers; salary unto Judges; tithes unto Clergymen: because
the King governs all; the Soldier fights for all; the Judge or learned
Lawyer hears and determines all; the Leuite and Priest prays for and
preaches unto all, catechiseth and instructs all. Let him that is catechized
make him that catechiseth partaker in all his goods or in all good things. Gal.
6.6. v.
Hierom super 3. Mallachy. Hierony. super 3. Mal.
Quod qui facere noluerit, Domini fraudat and supplantat. He that will not do
this, defraudeth God, etc. We must give to God that which is Gods: August. 129.
sermon. super eum locum.
give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's. There is no nation so barbarous that
will rob his Gods, no people or generation so pernicious and hurtful to
godliness, that will professedly rob the servants and Ministers of his or
their God.

Tithes, oblations, donations are not the goods, or debts of the Churchmen or
Clergy as they are either good or bad Clergymen, but as they are, simply
Clergymen: unless therefore Christian men will be worse than heathen, they
are bound in conscience and constrained by the law of God, to pay their due to
Gods Ministers, that God may for payment of the tenth part send down his
blessing upon the other nine parts: especially open the windows of heaven and
power down his spiritual rain and blessing. This matter being
controuersilesse, That tithes praediall and personal of all and every sort
belong to Churchmen by all laws; that lands, and glebes, and houses, as to
the Levites of old, cities, and suburbs and fields; so to the Levites of the
New testament, by the liberality and endowments of Princes and other zealously
devoted persons appertain, all which makes for a perpetuity and
establishment of good things thorowout all generations, and for a thankeful
reknowledgement that we have all received these and many more good things from
the hand of heaven I will insist no longer in this matter, whereof all books
divine and humane, all stories Ecclesiastical and profane are full fraught.

Sithence therefore no question is to be stirred about this, videlicet, That a
portion of our substance is due to holy Church and to such as attend the
service of God: it will rather be questioned, What portion is due, and how it
should be proportioned which is payable to the Ministers, whether to all alike
it ought to be equally distributed, since all are equally Ministers touching the
essence of the Ministry, and do all minister about holy things; or whether
some must have more, and some less, since all are one man's servants, that is,
God and man, the man Jesus Christ, And whether it be not (...), an acceptance
of persons or injustice for Aequalibus inaequalia tribuere aut in aequalibus
aequalia, to distribute to those who are equal unequal things, or to unequal
persons equal things; that is to accept the persons of men, which is an
opposite and repugnant to distributive Justice. First hear, that it may be
better understood, in laying out the equality, and casting forth the line and
level of this distribution of livings of the Church, the eye of civil or
ecclesiastical Justice must be fixed upon the magnitude or exiguitie, upon
the greatness or smallness of men's merits, that he that meriteth more should
always have more, he that meriteth less should have less reward: of which
equality the Law it self ought to be the keeper and obseruer. And this may be
termed a proportionable equality, not absolute nor Arithmetical which is very
near Anabaptisticall, which distinction is once fit to be laid down, because
there is often use of the same in the business now in hand. Benefices
Ecclesiastical, are like in this to Benefices Military or secular. For as such
are given to soldiers and seruiters in the war for their faithful and
trusty services, so these Ecclesiastical or sacred Benefices to men ordained
to the Ministry for the better execution of their sacred Ministry and holy
offices, and are also remunerations of their painful studies: In Military
affairs, all that served received not one and the same reward: but different
honor, wages, or stipend, more or less pay: a common souldior had not like
entertainment to a Captain, to a Lieutenant or Colonel and the rest, in and
after service done, the General of the field or Emperor divided unto them as
every man was more or less forward or meritorious: witnesses unto this (after
the battle) the manner of the ancient Romans, which was Ob ciues seruatos,
for Citizenssaued in time of wars, to give garlands or crowns, some laurel,
other of oken leaves, or holme or such like, some of gold, or to give
ornaments, as jewels, chains, besides the stipend or pay due unto them:
Virgil. aurea pectoribus demissa monili pendent.
Now ye know the service of God is called a warfare, and none ought to go this
warfare on his own charge, but must be provided for by the Church, which
Church is a vineyard: every dresser of a vineyard is not of like skill and
industry. The Church is a flock, and Minister a shepherd, but all shepherds
have not like hire or wages, or are of like desert or pains taking; Jacob kept
Labans sheep and his own; and for his painful service had double reward and
increase of reward. Some flocks are greater then other, and must be committed
to more discreet and watchful overseers: Even so in Benefices or pastoral
charges, the greater cures are to be delivered over to the wiser and learneder
persons.

A Benefice therefore (which is by definition Beneficium estres Ecclesiastica
quae sacerdoti vel clerico ob sacrum ministerium vtenda in perpetuum
conceditur. Duaren. l. 2. de sacr. Eccl. Minist. ac Beneficijs.
a matter Ecclesiastical given to a Clergie-man to be used of him perpetually
for his sacred ministry) whether it takes denomination of a benefit
received, or of a charge or benefit given, imports thus much: That Benefices
of what quality or condition soever, can not be equalled: it follows then
that benefices have bin always proportioned according to that same
proportionable equality not strict or absolute, having an eye respectively
looking upon the deserts of Ecclesiastical men. Some Benefices have title of
dignity, as Bishoprics, Archdeaconry and the like: some have cure of souls
without dignity annexed to them, as Parsonages: some neither title of dignity
nor cure of souls, but simply so called. Amongst which again, some are of
more eminency and ornament, other of inferior and lower degree. Such as are
more conspicuous are prebends or the Canons of Cathedral churches: such as are
less are rural Prebends so called. Some Benefices have actual or habitual
cure of souls, other have cure habitually, and are discured actually; other
neither actually nor habitually, but utterly discured: yet nevertheless
retain the name of Benefices in a generality, as our impropriations.
Bishoprics and Archdeaconries are Benefices with title of dignity, unto both
which are annexed Iurisdictionall power and authority: some other Benefices
with dignity, as Deanries, Chantorships, Chancellorships, and Treasurerships,
for the most part are dignities (as the custom of the Church does bear it)
without any Jurisdiction: all which inequallitie is not disagreeing from
Ecclesiastical policy or administration, and may serve for the better
constitution of Cathedral churches, and other Collegiat or not Collegiat
churches or Parishes: so that many of these are dignities, but none are
indignities, whosoever shall undergo the burden and charges of them.

If we shall look into the Aaronicall race of Priests and into the Leuiticall
order, it was according to imparitie not paritie. To descend and go lower, if
we shall look back upon the Primitive times of the Apostolical men, the
times of Martyrs, and the next succeeding times, we shall easily find
superiority, and inferioritie, and imparitie of livings. If we shall unfold
the memory of former times in our Church, and the ancient practice, we shall
plainly see an allotment of church livings according to inequality, and that by
the wisdom and discreet distribution of the Bishop: all which is matter
worthy the deduction; for the Bishop and all his Clergy lived first in a kind
of community in the city (for in the cities were Bishops Seas first planted)
whereof he bare the name of a Bishop. He and they going abroad at certain most
convenient and requisite times to preach and minister the Sacraments in the
territory adjoining. At what time all Church revenues of the whole diocese,
whether lands given by the liberality of Princes, or tithes, oblations or
legacies given by the people, were in common amongst all, but at the
distribution of the Bishop to be divided unto all according to a proportion of
their pains and labor: one part was employed, pro mensa episcopali, for the
Bishops hospitality; another part to maintain the com-Presbyterie and those of
the Clergy; the third, for building or repairing the Churches in the city and
Churches of the country; the fourth part for redemption of Captives, relief
of the poor, and for other godly uses. The Bishops then seemed to have had a
large part, videlicet, one fourth part, as much to his own part as all the
Clergy had to their part: which part or portion of the Clergies was not so
proportioned to every man equally or alike, but as the Bishop liked, who in
revenues of the Church in title as a kind of proprietarie, of himself did
set down every man's part. But after all this, when diverse godly men upon their
zeal and devotion to the glory of God and service of his Church, and the
rather induced and lead thereunto to have the nomination of a Minister, had
erected and endowed diverse churches in several places far distant in their
countries: insomuch that so many multiplied several parishes could not
conveniently and in due season be so often and orderly respected by those whole
special attendance was about the Bishop, the general Pastor of the Diocese,
saving at certain times, and that the former community began, partly by
multitude of the Clergy thronged together in one place, and partly for other
inconveniences to be no less troublesome than envious. Then followed hereupon
in the most parts of the world of Christianity, a division ratable of all
Church-reuenues: so that the Bishop and the Clergy which was to remain in the
Cathedral church of the chief city, and the Clergy of the Diocese besides
had their portions allotted unto them, but not by any Arithmeticall equality.
out of which every one of them severally besides their own maintenance, was
afterward to defray for the fabric of their Churches, and relief of the
poor, as their abilities did stretch.

My Illatiue therefore is, the Bishop (as a common Pastor of the whole
Diocese, as the common law at this day does account him) did call other
Ministers in partem sollicitudinis, into a part of the charge: the Bishop by
institution of them into several Churches, and the revenues thereof, did
inuest them into a title of that part of the glebe and tithes, etc. which was
reckoned as his own before: Howbeit at the presentation of the Founders or
Patrons to whom the Canons gave the pre-eminence in regard of their cost
bestowed, the Bishops did not institute them who were of equality of gifts,
the Patrons presented not their Clerks to an equality of livings: It seems
every Clerk was accommodated as was fit for every Clerk. If the original
Patrons did present any, their presentation was no maine bar to other incident
preferments. How church livings fell into so many fractions, I list not now to
rehearse: it seems the remedy found out for so many incompepetencies and
insufficiencies of Clergy men's estate, was favor of the law, and the
privilege of pluralities.

CHAP. 4. Of singularity and plurality of Benefices, and of the cause
thereof, vz. Dispensations.
THat every Clergy man should have a co^petent living, that is, sufficient
maintenance, and none be insufficiently provided for, has been proved
before: that all Ministers of the word and Sacraments, should be provided for a
like, and equalled in preferment, can never be proved: that some have enioied
more, some less, in portion and allotments of tithes, oblations, glebe, etc.
which I call an imparity and inequality of Church livings, is not reproved
nor disallowed by the Scriptures: that singularity or dualitie of Benefices
which is commonly termed plurality of livings (which is more then one) is
descended of the ancient practice and custom of the Church and canons
approved: remains now to be handled in especial. The points in order are
these: the word plurality of Benefices, is not found in so many syllables in
the word of God, and yet not repugnant to the word of God. Division of parishes
or singularity of Benefices is not laid down in express terms in the word
of God, yet a matter deducible out of the word of God: Residence and tarriance
upon a man's Benefice or cure, is a matter praiseable with God and his Church,
Non Residence or absence, I mean, not to reside corporally for a time or
season, leaving sufficient direction and instruction for the cure, is not a
thing unlawful or damnable before God and the Church of God.

Singularity and pluralltie of Benefices, that is, Plurality and Residence,
are not oppositiuely set one against the other, as either privately opposite as
light and darkness, death and life, sight and blindness, and such like: or
contrary opposite, as white and black, vice and virtue, righteousness and
unrighteousness, or contradictorily opposite, as feeding and not feeding,
preaching and not preaching, governing and not governing, ministering and not
ministering, teaching and not teaching, catechizing and not catechizing:
although in some appearance at the first sight it might seem so: but rather
Relatiuely opposite or set one against the other: Relatiua sunt quaecunque hoc
ipsum quod sunt dicuntur esse aliorum, aut quaecunque modo ad aliud. Arist.
Cati.
Benefice or Benefices, one or more, are a beneficiated man his Benefice or
Benefices: a Beneficed man whether he take his denomination from one Benefice
or more, is always but a Beneficed man; and therefore one man to both his
Benefices is but, tanquam vnum ad vnum quod est aptissimum, as one to one,
which most apt and agreeing. Physic. quaecunque vni and eidem sunt eadem inter
se sunt eadem.
This vnum (one) is vnum Regimine, vel Cura pastorali, those things which are
one and the same to one and the same, are between themselves, the very same.
Logicians do well know that one in abstracto and incon^reto ad duo in
Abstracto vel in concreto, is not repugnant: I will not spell Logic: This is
plain, for neither number is repugnant to number, nor substance to substance:
To resort to the original and beginning of Pluralities: it seems that first
of al Plurality did rize upon so many divisions of parishes, which parishes
seem divided again into so many fractions. Dyonyse Cap. Ecclesias cans. 13.
quest. 1. and cap. pastoral ecclesias singulas singulis Presbyteris dedimus,
parochias and caemiteria eis diuisimus ita videlicet vt nullus alterius
parochiae terminos aut ius inuadat.
Bishop of Rome, was the first as some say, that divided parishes and appointed
every Presbyter the limits and precincts of parish Churches and Churchyards,
and that none should intrude or intromit upon other: others ascribe it to
Euaristus Bishop of Rome, who about the 112. years of Christ, did assign to
every several Presbyter his pastoral cure apart, with title thereunto, and a
certain limitation or compass to take charge thereof alone, which was drawn
into imitation and matter of like consequence by all this part of the world of
Christianity: for in the Apostolical writings nothing is set down, but that
they were ordained in every great or small city, 14. Act. 23. v. Tim. 1.
(...), and (...) thorough every Church: which words seem to be equipollent,
or of one and the same signification: one thing by the way may be well
observed, that all Parishes, or for the most part, grew by several degrees to
a narrower restriction then in their first foundation or original planting
they were. Every man being desirous to cohabite in as great neerenesse and
proximity to the parish Church as might be, was the cause why parish Churches
confined so near the one with the other, and was the begetter of so many
incompetencies of Church livings, and occasioner of plurality in part, or
rather of fractions and multiplicities of Benefices: Innocentis and Hostensis
post eum in cap. cum ad monasterium in glossae nisi ex causae titulo de statu
Monachorum and Regularum, extra.
Distinction therefore of parish Churches, is of mere positive law not
Divine, and the prohibition to retain two parishes or Benefices, was not a
matter of Divine ordinance, but of Ecclesiastical decree and constitution, not
of God, but brought in by man, and by the will of him that made the canon, and
by a contrariant will may be taken away: agreeable unto that maxim and rule in
law, C. de Legibus L. vltima.
Eius est tollere vel interpretari cuius fuit condere: And none other laws
besides the law of man, does forbid pluralities or retention of more parishes
then one: it will therefore follow by the former maxim, that whatsoever is
prohibited by the law of man alone, by the same law may be licensed again, and
that dispensations as thereupon may be, lawfully granted for such things as
Gods law has eternally and inuiolably commanded to be observed, no man may by
any Ecclesiastical or civil authority omit, nor that which he has
contrariwise forbidden, by any man be put in ure and practice.

And in case the positive law of man forbids Pluralities, it does not
thereby take clean out of the way the granting of dispensations, for if there
were no prohibition, there were no need of dispensations. Now the orderly
giving of a dispensation for pluralities, affoordeth to every worthy man
according to his worthiness, and prerogative of his person, which is called
by the Canonists Dispensatio Iustitiae, and consequently denies to the
unworthy, that favor for his unworthiness.

Sithence therefore plurality of Benefices is not a thing repugnant to the word
of God, I see no cause why upon every word of man's reproach and contradiction,
it should be dissalowed; C. pe multa extra. execrab. de prebendis. Extrag. fo.
22. de prebend. and dig.
especially standing upon the ground of law, or at the least upon lawful
dispensation which is the favor of law. And here because I would not be
mistaken in the matter of pluralities of the simpliest man be he never so
ignorant nor of the subtillest Rabbyn be he never so arrogant. I am well
witting of this, that some pluralities, which are grounded upon avarice and
ambition are not only incommodious, but plain odious, Execrabilis quorundam
religiosorum and sacrileg. ambitio quae semper plus ambiens eo magis fit
insatiabilis, quo sibi amplius indulgetur.
and by how much it is more insatiable it is the more execrable. Every man of
meanest skill can easily tell them. C. ordinarij. 1. caeterum de officijs
ordinarij in 6.
He that holds two Benefices with cure without dispensation is of both
depriuable, and to be turned out, as also he that being scarce able to
discharge one office, does not only seek being vnqualified and vndispensed
with to procure unto himself two diverse Ecclesiastical dignities but also
diverse parish Churches. Neither can every man of mean skill, of no degrees or
vnqualified offer himself into this Court of faculties or obtain his
dispensation: for that were as the learned Canonists call it: dissipatio potius
quam dispensatio, Rather a dissipation or wasting of the substance and
patrimony of Gods Church, then orderly giving and dispensation of the same.
Guiliel. Duranti. L. 10. particul. de dispens. qualiter and quondo. dispens.
sit facienda.
C. quia nonnulli, Eyt. de clericis non resident.
For every dispensation is or ought to be prouida iuris communis relaxatio
vtilitate, sieve necessitate pensata: it is with a provident deliberation, not a
rash or prodigal hand to be dealt, and that for urgent necessity or appare^t
vtility, it is to be stewaredly dispensed not wastfully spent or powered upon
every ones head or altogether: Vit. Dispensatio est rigoris iuris per eum ad
quem spectat canonice facto Relaxatio. 1.9.7. nisi rigor c. se and in gratia.
it is a te^perature or mitigation of the rigor or strict severity of the
common law: it is for the favor of certain worthy learned and qualified
persons, not a gap wide open for all to make breach into.

Lastly it so goes against common right, that it emplieth no Diametrall
opposition against common right; but imports an exception from the rigor of
common Right. That which common law or right does bind priuileged right does
unbind, in a matter favorable concerning the party so priuileged:
Priuilegium personale personam sequitur.
which being granted to one or few, may not by the like extension of favor be
yielded to all, for so it should reuert to common right: which common right
does not take away, Speciale priuilegium, Reg. Priuilegium aliquibus concessum
si postea concedatur omnib. personis commune priuilegiatorum nil opitulatur.
priuileged right, and therefore does not lie as a maine bar against the
right of dispensation: but rather the one carries a subalternation unto the
other, and not absolute contrariety: neither does any such dispensation make a
thing which is simply unlawful, to be by the operation thereof lawful, See
the answer to the abstract.
but shows the rigor of some general positive law, weighed with all
particularities of circumstances, and the reason thereof to cease or be
released at that time, and in that case: all which dispensations (unto which
the Archbishop of Canterbury is limited, are not contrary to the laws of God,
or laws of the land, and has been usually granted upon qualification lawful
may not be denied to them that sue for it. And farthermore the qualities of the
persons to whom he is in those cases to grant are expressed: And in case the
Archbishop would unjustly deny the dispensation, there is a remedy otherwise
in all equity provided.

This is a matter infallibly ever true, that Dispensations from their first
original have euerstood, and ever been withstood by some maleuolent persons
in the church of Christ: All that which has bin grounded upon malice stock,
and does rise from the envy and aemulation of the unlearned against the
learned, and of the vnqualified and vngifted men, against those of better and
more excellent gifts; for the better appeasement of such tumultuary spirits,
the law has appointed who shall dispense and have power, and who shall ask or
sue for such lawful dispensation. The Christian Magistrate or Prince, 21. H.
8. 25. H. 8.
and those authorized under him have this power, who must do it in providence
or prudence for the good of the Church. The parties who are to be dispensed
withal, are men of praerogatiue of deserts, who in discretion and godliness
are to sue for it. To give some too much, and other too little were accepting
of persons; to ask more then a man in duty can well menage or discharge, were
sauouring of covetousness, or some worldly humor: for the first and foremost
of these two, because dispensation is defined, Commensuratio communis ad
fingula, Tho. Aq. 2.2. q. 97. art. vito.
the faithful and wise Steward of Gods house, dispensat singula singulis and
laborem and praemium, and legem vniuersalem ex causa interdum relaxat: I say
the steward of Gods family must distribute and deal with the hand of justice
to every particular, upon suit or request made, or otherwise, Intuiturationis
and boni vniuersi and causae propter quam dispensat, Dispensans debet habere
intuitum rationis, and boni vniuersi, and causae propter-quam dispensat. quae
causa in beneficijs potest esse triplex Necessitas vtilitas and euidens
praerogatiua meritorum c. de multa etc. exposuist. and Panormi. super tertio de
praebend. and dignitatibus, Repetititio. qui vere. c. extirpendae.
upon contemplation as well of some reasonable cause or circumstance, and for
the universal good of the Church, as for the respect of general rules and
axioms of law: and so his judgment proceed as from the face of God, or as the
Angel of God, and must mittigate the severity of the law sometimes, and upon
some cause, as the wise and discret steward, in appointing every household
servant his task and labor, and the congruent wages or recompense of his
labor. And as for the second, none are dispensable but for one of these three,
or such like causes, videlicet, urgent necessity, apparent vtility, or evident
praerogatiue of deserts: other divide the causes of pluralities into these
five, Gloss. verb. intitulata Tit. de Electione and Electi potestate in cap.
Dudum 2.
none can or ought to have two Benefices with cure of souls, but where either
the one depends upon the other, or if the one be annexed to the other, or
where a man has one Benefice in title, the other in Commendam, or by way of
trust or tuition; or a Benefice in Commendam to a Bishopric of small
revenues, or where the Churches are poor and of mean revenue, or where there
is paucitie or penury of Clerks, C. Pris. 56. distinct.
by reason of scarcity of such men, it was permitted, or unless as they then
called it, by Apostolic dispensation. For concerning great personages and
learned men which are to be honorably respected with greater Benefices as
reason shall require, they were then C. de multa finali Extr. de praebendis.
dispensed withal. But as for all other, which are not Constitut. Othoboni de
institut. seu collationib.. 1.
able to take charge over themselves, which do not reside upon their cures,
which are not within any sacred orders requisite to the retaining of such a
Benefice, which do not only usurp many, but infinite such Benefices, which
though they would, yet by no possible means are able to satisfy their charge,
which by violent intrusion or subtle shifts and colorable devises, do seek
to retain them, and lastly without all lawful dispensation hold them, all
ages and times have not only learnedly declaimed, but grievously exclaimed,
lifting up their voices like a trumpet against them. The necessity is urgent
or enforcing, to dispense then when many unfit men are to be found, and few
fit for the government of Churches, and instruction of souls, which case may
sometimes fall out, at which time it shall be necessary to commit two churches
to one man, rather then to suffer them to be destitute of pastoral cure, and
spiritual food and teaching: or in case the churches are poor, and one
makes an incompetent living. The utility is apparent when the churches are
infected with schism and haeresie, upon the new reformation of which decayed
estate of the church, it is profitable to plant such pastors as are able to
divide a right the word, convince adversaries and gainsaiers, and preach sound
doctrine: in case the church of Christ had been tainted with Arrianisme and
Pelagianisme as of old, or Anabaptisme, and Libertinisme, Circa sublimes and
literatas personas, quae maioribus been ficijs sunt honorandae. Durantus l. 1.
particul. 1. de dispensationis.
or such like poisonable heresies as of late. The prerogative of merits is
evident, where worthy men must be worthily rewarded, whose gifts are shining
in the church, whose labors are abundant, the testimonies of whose gifts is
extant in the school of learning, and therefore their reward must be evidently
set down in the commonwealth, or else none will endeavor for excellency in
learning. C. Vbi personae est bona and industria and lit^rata, quae melius
sciret, and posset regere duas Ecclesias vel december, quam alius vnam Innocent.
4. cap. cum iamdudum Tit. de praebend. and dignit. vid. Simm. Angelic. verb.
Benefic. verse. 34.35.36.
That such meritorious men are abroad, and laborious or industrious teachers,
may not seem strange or a paradoxe now, being said long ago, who can better
rule two churches or ten, then some other one church, and such does the
privilege of dispensatio^ always respect. Even so the tenor of every
dispensation runs in the preamble, Maiores in sacris literis progressus
praemia maiora postulant and plures vitae quotidianae necessitates plura vitae
necessaria subsidia requirunt. Vid. Rigist. facult
Higher degrees in sacred learning does ask higher rewards, and more
necessities or wants do require more supplies or helps. (...). 1. Tim. 5.17.
verse.
The Elders Doctorall or Pastoral, are worthy of double honor, especially
they that labor in the word: well governing is the cause of double honor, but
with this condition, if they labor in the word: where (as I take it) the word
Honor, if it signify maintenance requires double maintenance, and as for
Honor, it presupposes maintenance always, or else it is but single Honor God
wot: And as for double, it is more then sufficient to some, for single
maintenance may also be sufficient, but not to some other, whose virtues,
gifts, and degrees must be doubly Honored: And for this cause the Fathers of
the Church and commonwealth, although they ought to allow to all their
children, meat and cloth, yet out of their indulgence and favor, and
especially for their labor, give a larger allowance for some respect or due
consideration, as Joseph the governor of Egypt, to Benjamin his brother in
messes of meat gave not double and treble, but five times so much as to any of
his brethren, 43. Genesis 34. v. He gave all (none excepted) change of raiment,
but unto Benjamin he gave three hundred pieces of silver, and five suits of
raiment. 45. Genes. 22. v. And to dispute with too much curiosity, rather then
cunning, of the fact of the fathers of the country, or of the favor of the
Prince, which is the head, in whom Ecclesiastical authority and civil is
united, Sacrilegij enim crimen est disputare vtru^ dignus sit quem princeps
approbauit. Dur. L. 1. partic. a de dispen. and C. d. per. Sacri. l. 2. C. de
diuer. rescri. L. sacrilegij ext. de etc.
is not only temerity and rashness, but impiety and sacrilege: or to reason
against that which the Parliament and Synod which are representatiuely the
whole Church and commonwealth, has proportionably laid out for learned men's
allowance, in three or four religious Princes reigns, and never make an end
of needless reformation, until all be turned topsie turuie, sauoureth of
Satanismie or devilish audacitie: Who may dispense and be dispensed with, it is
hitherto apparent: upon what cautions they are dispensable it remains to show
in a few words, all which makes much for the equity of granting plurality of
Benefices,b Volumus autem stricteque monemus, etc. We will and strictly monish
and require, which the law does require: That in every such Benefice from which
the party dispensed shall occasionally be absent, for the greater part of the
year, he nevertheless do preach 13. sermons in the year, and in those
sermons he do reverently, religiously and sincerely handle the word of God. And
that also in that Benefice, from the which it shall happen the Incumbent for
the most part to be absent or away, yet for two months in the year he keep
some terms of hospitality and relief of the poor; providing always a
sufficient Minister and Curat, to be allowed by the judgment of the Ordinary
of the place to administer sacred and sacramental things, and able to expound
and interpret the principles of Religion, and to deliver unto them the Word of
God, if the reuenew and profits of the Benefice will bear it.

My inference is, if the granting of dispensation in case of pluralities be not
repugnant to the Law of God, if it be allowed by the Canon and Provincial law,
if the laws of the realm upon the very beginning of reformation within the
realm do give due limitations to the repressing of the excess of
unmeasurable pluralities of the Sea of Rome, and does there set down a
mitigation of former extremities and convenient allowance for a learned
Ministry, they then do but lose their labor which skirmish with pluralities,
or unjustly charge the keepers of the Law with the iniquity of the same, or
calumniate others as breakers of the Law, or denigrate them with the infamy of
careless, and wilful, and continual Non-residency from their cures, who
themselves have a relation to their own flocks committed to their charges, who
by other deputed orderly thereunto, make a prouisionall care who leave an
instructing and edifying service always in the place. All which with the
circumstances above rehearsed being diligently provided for, I see no reason to
charge pluralities with such odious imputations of absolute Non-residency, or
continual absence or desertion of duty or relinquishment of the military
station or place. Finally, no man (notwithstanding many frivolous objections
and idle collections which in so many pamphlets have been thrown abroad,
thereby to make absence from a Benefice hate full, I say no man) as yet on our
side did ever defend an absolute estranging of the Pastors from their charge,
or in case of absence the Teacher being occasionally absent, may not apply
himself fruitfully elsewhere and to his own parish by godly directions.

It follows upon the premises, that such manner of pluralities does not
deduce to Non-Residency, or to a mere privation or absence from the place, or
discharge of the duty of the place. Here it may be questioned whether
Non-residency (...) in some respect for some time and upon some occasion or
cause, be to be termed Non-Residency, (...) absolutely, and whether a man may
be absent from his charge, as these peremptory men do utterly deny, and we
defend in the affirmative part. It seems Non-Residencie is not absolutely
against the Law of God, or directly opposite, as I showed before: for if it were
simply impious, then for none occasion, no not for an hour, might a man be
away, no more than he may for an hours space use blasphemy against God. And
then it should follow, that at no time, upon no cause, upon no commandment of
his superior, no embassage abroad, for no attendance upon the Prince at home,
for no prosecution of Law to recover or keep his right, for no service of the
Church, for no pacification of Schism, nor consultation of matters of the
church, finally, for no remedy and restitution of health a man may have a
coadiutor or substitute underneath him, no not an hour, or be Non-Resident
from his pastoral charge. But this is most absurd in it self to defend, and
they who most importunately call for continual Residencie in other, offend
therein themselves, as may plainly appear by their ordinary practice, in their
running up and down and absence from their cures, in riding to Sturbridge
fair or to the Act at Oxford, or in visiting their friends in half a
scoreshires, or in traveling half a summer from country to country, to
confirm the brotherhood, or in lying a dozen weeks or such a trifle at a
friends house, or last of al in meeting together in their classical
conferencies or synodical assemblies or in Parliament time. Therefore to be
Non-Resident is not utterly unlawful, but where the cause is unlawful there
it is unlawful, to discontinue or be away from a Benefice or cure, and that
for a time; where Gods law and nature and other positive and provincial laws,
do dispense with Non Residency (as in diverse cases) it is not unlawful,
Non-Residency is there in deed a fault, where the people of God are destitute
of spiritual instruction and that falls out by way of event and consequence.

A dispensation for plurality of Benefices, being orderly sued for and
favorably obtained (with the clauses before remembered) does not inure any such
dangerous, or impious effects, or any absolute estranging of the Pastor from
his flock, or dissolute Non Resisidency especially in a Church as the Church
of England so well reformed in such multitudes of the preachers of the Word,
which are increased every day in time of so much knowledge and understanding of
the word, which we have every day, so as the world grows inexcusable of their
Atheism and ungodliness and profaneness of life, finally in the
administration and lyturgy of so instructiue and edifying a service which is
read in our several congregations, every day. All the arguments on the
contrary side, if you mustre them are few in number, and weak in force, if
they be encountered as they may be with handie stroke of Sillogisme, or
enthymematicall conclusion: which is the fairest and most compendious decision
of a controversy: and without this manner of scholasticall dealing, all kind of
Allegations on the one side and on the other, are but an heap of waste words
and the further way about. Notwithstanding, those opinatiue men who dispute
against pluralities have little more to say then this which has been an
hundred times answered and said and reanswered again. A minister, or one
minister may have but one Benefice, Say they, for no man may have more then he
is able to discharge, and no man in any measure is able to discharge more then
one, and a reason is because he can not preach in season, and out of season to
the people committed to his charge, as saint Paul enioineth: or, in this sort,
a minister is a sheapeard and his congregation is a floke, and he must attend
on his flock and one shepherd can not attend two flocks, for he must always
go in and out before the sheep of his flock. Furthermore the ministers are
living Oracles lively paterns and samplers of holiness, of integrity, and of
virtuous life, they are leaders, feeders, guides, instructors, and directers of
their flocks, whereof the holy Ghost has made them overseers, that is to say
of their several charges, several congregations or parishes, and several
flocks. Al which emplieth unity or singularity of charge, and not a plurality
or multiplicity of flocks. Add unto this that to be placed in two cures, Say
they, Prax. Beneficiorum petri Rebuffi. de dispens. ad plura Beneficia.
is merchandise or filthy gain, and none should serve two masters, God and
mammon. So every pluralist is a mammonist by their interpretation. Again it is
to aspire higher and higher, and not to stay in the vocation wherein we are
called, which is to transgress the Apostles rule: 1. Cor. 7.
last of all because plurality and residency are oposite and contrary the one
to the other and irreconcileably disioyned. All these and the like
sophistications of theirs, deduce, as they think to necessity of feeding, and
that feeding one flock, or to impossibility of feeding, if a man undertake two
flocks, or to inconvenience or absurdity for him to be away or absent from his
floeke, who has undertaken a flock, and therefore must feed. To the first of
these arguments a plain answer is and must first of all be granted that no
minister must have more then in some measure he is able to discharge, that is
by himself or sufficient deputation: Vid. Rebuff. vt supr. in Respons. ad
argum. Nec obest. quod non possit vtrique seruire per se, quia hoc poterit
facere per alium: non enim Paulus administrabat officium personaliter in
Ecclesia Philippensi. Sed per suos ministros and tamen ab ipsis procurationem,
accpiebat and alimenta, vt ipse testacur. Philip. vltim.
as for the deputation it is and ever was lawful either in civil or
ecclesiastical function as when the magistrate or Minister is away: and that
the Minister may be absent is proved before, or if it be not true in the former
cases, then join issue with us and make some instance to the contrary, and if
it be true then yield to the truth, that by leave of law and leaving
sufficient direction the Minister may be away, and yet receive wages and
procurations and maintenance from them as Saint Paul of the Philippians.

As for the reason he can not preach (...) in season and out of season if he be
corporal absent, as when a man does personally reside: a man may preach by
word, by ensample, and hospitallity and by substitution of a careful curator
or deputy, when he shall happen to be away. the rectory and government of small
Villages, or townships, or country parishes is not as the administration or
diocesses of whole cities and Territory, which importeh Titus and Timothy to
preach seasonably and unseasonably to the observation of a straiter measure:
because it was then supposed that in cities all things necessary being more
plentiful then in the Country, they might by one Benefice be sufficiently
provided for and honestly maintained or else show some pregnancy of reason, why
in very good measure, a prudent and diligent, and well exercised preacher one
active man may not discharge two cures, being not far distant, and preach, as
shall be sufficient for both. But if in rigor of construction, you will needs
understand that which passes al wise men's understanding, that a Preacher upon
his cure must continually preach, then shall not a man have any time to
Catechize his people, or baptize Infants, or minister the Sacrament of the
Supper of the Lord, or be allowed any time To pray, Luke 18.1.
which he is also willed continually to pray, and never to cease, then shall
there be no cause allowed of being away, no not for an hour, which must needs
be absurd: as for that perpetual metaphore, or strong allegory, videlicet, a
minister is a shepherd, and the congregation a flock, and that the shepherd
must attend upon his church or flock, should not the shepherd feed the
flock? it may be likewise granted, but in some sense that Princes are
shepherds, 23. Ierem. 2. Ezech. 34.2.
and the people committed to their charge, may be termed sheep: 1. Reg. 22.17.
All Israel was scattered as sheep upon the mountains, that had no
shepherd, that is no King: And so is Cyrus called my pastor or shepherd; 44.
Esaias 28.
that is, my governor or king: howbeit for the illatiue hereupon, that one
shepherd can have in charge but one sheepe-flocke, may not easily be granted;
for Jacob in the 30. of Genes. kept Labans and his own flock of sheep, 30.
Genesis 36. v.
and put them in diverse pastures, which business might the better be
undertaken by his vnder-shepheards. And for a shepherd to go always in and
out before his flock is not ever true, 1. Sam. 17.20.28.
for David left his fathers sheep with a keeper, and ran into the camp, and
so stands charged with leaving his sheep in the wilderness by his brother
Eliab, which nevertheless were safely left with a keeper. As for that which is
usually inferred hereupon, that they are diverse flocks or diversity of
charges: It is but one charge, as committed unto one, for it is always Regimen
animarum, one regiment, or cure of souls, one in regiment, and for that cause
not the having of them both, but not having care of them, is a matter worthy
of blame, if they be not looked unto, neither is it simpliciter, absolutely
evil to have more charges, or congregations then one, for so Saint Paul
should fall into this reprehension, who seemed to have or bear a care of all
congregations, although Saint Paul were Apostle of the Gentiles Christ his
other sheep. Concerning that the Minister should be living Oracles, and lively
patterns of holiness and perfection to their flocks, and lamps of light to
their several parishes, it may not be denied: but that (if they for a time be
absent) or leave a Curate sufficient, personally to reside in their place, all
the light of their doctrine to be extinguished and go out, and all example of
holy and righteous conversation to be defaced, I shall utterly deny: Timothee
whether an Evangelist or Bishop, (...), was a pattern of righteousness, as
well absent as present: and so both the Person or Pastor and the Curate in his
place, may be both samplers of comeliness and honesty to their flock. It is
the Image of virtue that serves for imitation, not the corporal resiance, and
that this to be most true is manifest in Christ and all holy Christians and
Saints of God, who have left ensamples of themselves, although they be not
corporally present or resident amongst us: Ensample in this case is much, but
direction and instruction does counteruaile as much, which being soundly
delivered, may serve for the good of several flocks and disioyned places.

Now to come to that objection which is often objected, and as often refelled
in every place, where most plausibly it dares to show his face: God forbid
that every man of pluralities of Benefices or multiplicitie of gifts should be
the servant of Mammon: it is but rashness of judgment of the factionists of
our time, to condemn so many worthy men and learned (incomparably honester
and better learned then any of themselves) of avarice and ambition, and other
wordly humors. We have not received Spiritum mundi, sed Spiritum Dei, 2. Cor. 1.
the spirit of the world, but the spirit of God, and by the grace of God are
the servants not of Mammon, but of the high God. And as for filthy gain, that
should grow out of this service and pains taking: (...), Godliness is great
gain, together with the benefit or gain of contentation, if we rest contented
with that which law does cast upon us, or the favor of lawful dispensation,
or any godly privilege. And concerning the winning unto Christ, and gaining of
souls, it is neither chopping nor changing, nor merchandising of men's souls,
but rather there where somewhat comes between party and party of
simoniacall compact, and of unlawful cheuisance which the laws of this land
does most severely both restrain and punish, making them depriueable,
incapable, irregular, excommunicable, which offend therein; whether it be to
aspire higher and higher, or breaking off from our vocation and calling, for an
Ecclesiastical man to better by purchase of dispensation for plurality, his
estate, being the same estate, let every wise and impartial man herein be the
judge: In a settled estate of the Church, and prosperity of the same, why any
man should stand at a stay, and crave no other blessing then only one at the
hand of God, hitherto I find neither cause nor reason. To acquit all
singularity of Benefices, of auaricious desire, is no matter of aequitie, or
to accuse Plurality of covetousness, and that which is called (...), craving
or having of more, is the like iniquity, Summa angelica v. Benesscium.
for Vt fructus lucrificiat, sibi ad vtilitatem priuatam, vel ad augendum
patrimonium, vel vt lautius vivat, vel vt facilius ad Episcopatum, vel maiorem
dignitatem possit ascendere: cum tali intention etiam vnum Beneficium habere
de se est inordinatum, quod est contra rationem. They that procure dispensation
to retain more Benefices, to make gain and private commodity, or to increase
their patrimony, or to live more gallantly, or to climb the sooner to a
Bishopric, or some other dignity, they are in fault, and to acquire or
obtain any one Benefice with such intentions or purposes, is a thing
inordinate or of the like fault, sprouting out from the like root of ambition
and covetousness in any man whatsoever.

Finally, touching the opposition between plurality and residency, or that
same (...) or great or mighty gulf or infinite distance between the one and
the other, and irreconcilable contrariety, as some in their fantasies use to
depaint: it is only imaginary and not verifiable and true: for such lawful
plurality may stand with prouisionall Residency; neither is it the corporal
abode or personal residency on a place, but the discharge of duty, that
shall make answer unto God: neither is it the pinning of the Pastor upon
their sleeves, or any such like indefatigable reside^cy of the Rector upon his
Rectory or Parson on his charge, but the well governing of the people and
laboring in the Word, which shall save their souls. Where a man's employment is
any way beneficial, the same is praiseable and thanksworthy with God, yet it
follows not that they must be affixed to the place; for neither the Levites
of old (whose attendance was required in the Temple) did lie in the Temple,
but had their several habitations, and waited in their course: nor the Levites
of the New Testament are so narrowly tied to a continual residency, as if law
and nature could not dispense with their occasional absence. Yea shepherds,
who are said to watch over their flock by night and by day are permitted to be
sometimes away. The Exchequer men must of conueniency dwell near to
Westminster Hall, and the Singing men of Paul's near there about, but does it
follow they must never go out of their place?

To conclude this question, plurality and absence from a Benefice with cure of
souls is lawful, with leave and license of the law, with orderly deputation:
neither does it inure Non-Residencie, as some would utterly infame it, neither
is it any sin or scandal as perhapps some would misdeeme at the first: in
case the same be an offense or scandal, we can not do with all, there are
many scandalls of the world, and woe be to the world for many scandals at home
and abroad: they that are childish or rather babish will be scandalized with
every little or offensive thing, they who are proud and pharisaicall will be
scandalled also, even at the best and well disciplined things, all emulatory
men as these of the faction will take offense at or upon every light cause or
no cause given. There is nothing can be so well devised for the good of gods
Church but by the malice of Satanists may in time be ouerturned, to the
praeiudice, hurt, and damage, of good men and to the great disadvantage of God
and the Churches cause.

As for other ordinary objections which may also be more worthily rejected, it
shall not be amiss to give plathem their answer; let no Clerk be ced in two
charges, says the 2. council of Nice, 15 C: for it is filthy merchandise etc.
no man can serve two masters: impudent men to euict their purpose will not
refuse omne genus testium: any witness whatsoever even the corrupt and
depraved, 2 council of Nice, out of which council they may also prove
adoration of relics, and invocation of saints, worshipping of images with the
same worship, that the Trinity is worshipped as well as reprove pluralities of
Benefices; let them take better counsel and consider that which is in the end
of the Canon: in Regia ciuitate: let no man be placed in more great cities then
one; in other Townships and Villages it is lawful, Cans. 20. quaest. 1.
clericus.
and so Gratian expounds, and the counsel of Chalcedon, and the gloss. A man
may be entitled to two Churches if they be poor, and with dispensation, or by
way of trust and Commendam. Touching that impertinent allegation: no man in
very deed can serve two masters that is contrary masters, God and Beliall,
Christ and Mammon: the meaning is in plainness, and truth, let no man be
placed in two charges without hability to discharge them both; or let no man
make a filthy lucre of his charge, as mechanical and tradesmen, and usurers,
and simoners are wont to do. Furthermore let him that has an office wait upon
his office; Romans 12.
and the ministry is an office: what of this? The Ministry is an office, ergo
he must wait upon the Ministry, and consequently he may not have two offices:
and if not two offices, ergo much less two Benefices; this Paralogisme is
easily descried. He that has an office must attend his office: this is forth
with granted, ergo he may not have two offices, this is plainly to be denied.
He that has an house must look unto his house, or repair his house, ergo, he
may not have two houses to repair: or he that has a child, must look unto
his child, ergo, he may not have two children to look to their education,
This is childishly inferred: a Physician has a pacient, and a Lawyer his
client, ergo, may not have two patients, or two clients to give attendance
unto. Concerning the inferencie, A man may not have two Offices, ergo, not two
Benefices: although I may justly deny the antecedent and consequent both,
because a man may retain well and with a good conscience two Offices or two
Judicial places, if they be subalternate or subordinate one to the other, and
the one be not an hinderance or retardance to the execution of the other, yet I
will insist upon the denial of the Argument: for if it were in special terms
forbidden in Scriptures, the holding of two offices, which I can not find, yet
the lawful holding of two Benefices or the equity thereof (under terms of
Aequipollency) which is (...) and (...) is not forbidden, but rather commanded:
if all the question be, how many men's souls shall make up a charge, or what
quantity of ground in city or country shall be the bounderie of parishes,
this is a matter of indefinit limitation. In case any Clergy man intromit upon
more than he is able to discharge, he must fear the Apostolical Vae mihi
nisi Euangelizem: of which they would have us to be afraid. As for the other,
which is the Prophetical Vae 1. Isay. Woe be to them that join house to house,
and land to land, until there be no place for the poor, that they may be
placed alone upon the earth: what stir would there be if any such clear place
were extant against two Benefices, as if the Holy ghost had stinted them and no
body else. Yea but the Holy ghost commands a Minister to give attendance upon
the flock: Attendite vobis and vniuerso gregi: Attend or take heed to your
selves and to the whole flock whereof the holy ghost has made you overseers.
The charge is controuersilesse in general to the Bishops of the province in a
generality to take heed, to the general flock that is to to many flocks: or
if it be to the Bishops and superintendents of the flocks, and to make them
continue their attendancy, and to warn them of Non-Residency and to exclude
them from plurality of charges and flocks, what means the apostle to send
for them from their several charges, or to withdraw them from their particular
cures or flocks allthough for a season? Therefore all this must be understood
with the lawful exceptions and due limitations of the Apostles words, and
sentence of the holy Ghost: howbeit to urge a little further, and to argue on
their behalf, is not a Bishop or Minister a Pastor or sheapheard? and the
people sheep of the pasture? and is not this commandment of feeding
perpetual and inviolable, and should not therefore as Esechiel speaks, a
sheapheard feed his flock? True it is that the Prophet allegorizeth strangly
by a perpetual metaphor against all shepherds that feed themselves, and feed
not their flock: it is most true that a shepherd should feed his flock: and
how must he feed them? and feed them himself. How many must he feed? All
that are committed unto him: as many as Christ, with the purchase of his blood,
has dearly bought: Christ bids Peter feed his sheep, the sheep of
circumcision, the number is promiscuous: or a numberless number for his charge
was Apostolical. Peter is not forbid to feed the sheep of diverse sheepefolds
which were but one flock. Our Savior says Pasce, feed: what is that? feed,
or cause them to be fed, 23. Psalm.
The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want, he makes me, or causes me to
rest in green pasture, and leads me by the still waters: He leads me in
the paths of righteousness for his names sake: and therefore to feed, is
always to feed by himself, and to cause them to be fed: which is aequiualent
in the phrase of feeding: 21. Ioh. 15.16.17. v.
now in that our Savior says to Peter, Love thou me more then these: Feed
my Lambs, and so the second and third time feed my sheep: it is more then
evident that Christ committed to his charge diverse sheepefolds belonging to
that flock of sheep, for sheep and lambs seldom go in one pasturage, but
are divided and sorted by themselves. which not to be absurd is also as evident
by the words of our Savior: 10. Ioh. 16. v.
Other sheep I have also, which are not of this fold, them also must I bring
and they shall hear my voice: so that sheep of diverse folds, may not
inconueniently hear the shepherds voice: whose pains is the greater in
resorting to them: for which cause two distinct and several parishes
recommended to one man, makes but one flock, though two foldes. Which
distinguishment of parishes the positive law Ecclesiastical has devised, for
if Gods law had separated them, then no man by union (which is pretended) may
conioine them, as on the contrary side that which God has conioined, no man
may separate. And whereas it may be farther said, every natural body has his
natural head, and one head cannot be set upon two bodies, and therefore it is
as unfitting in a political body to have more then a political head, or two
bodies to have one head. It is easy to call these two flocks after they are
incorporated into one, and united together, one body and one flock to that
intent and purpose: but this is an improper Denomination, to call either parts
homogeneall, or heterogeneall of an entire body, or the lest member or parcels
of Christ's mystical body, by the name of an absolute or political body: and
it is al as improper to call the Pastor of a parish by the name of an head. The
head of the mystical body which is the Church, is Christ which is the head,
and he is the essential head, by whom the whole body being coupled and knit
together in every joint, for the furniture thereof, receaueth an increase. Next
under Christ his primacie, the king has supremacy: 4. Ephesians. 15.16. v.
After whom the Archbishop in his province, and the Bishop in his Diocese may
be termed a Ministerial head: but for every Pastor or Parish in country and
city to be so called by the name of a body or head, is a most abusiue or
catachresticall manner of speaking: for they are but members of the Diocese,
whereof the Diocesan is the head, and the whole province or Diocese is the
Ecclesiastical body: so that the belonging of two Benefices to one beneficed
man, is as two charges to one governor, and two foldes to one Pastor, two
companies to one leader, two families to one father, not two bodies to one
head. Add unto this the many disproportions between a natural and political
both head and body, and the manifold absurdities if such conformity be urged
in all respects between the one and the other: for if they were correspondent
each to other, and that in every point, then as when the head is deadly wounded,
the body natural dies: so when the king who is the political head dies,
the commonwealth should die. And that no king should be king over three
kingdoms, which are three bodies politic, because no head can be an head of
three natural bodies: Mark this argument of theirs, and the consectaries
thereof, whether it strikes not at the very head. The conclusion of all is,
either two parishes may be committed to one sufficient man, which is that we
call pluralities, or they may not be committed, by reason of some strong
impediment, or or bar against it in the law of God: not in Gods law; for
nothing is set down of distinction of parishes in so many sillables in the
word of God: for all is of mere positive law of man: neither is there any just
measure or standard of every ministers living, laid down in the Scriptures,
but all runs on in those terms of sufficiency, of competencie, of
maintenance, of reward, of recompense, of participation of al good things, of
reaping temporal or carnal commodities of honor and double honor, and such
other allotments for the ministry and doing of their office. But if they may
be permitted, videlicet, two several parishes to one sufficient man, then also
dispensations are to be tolerated and permitted thereupon, which is that we
defend; or else a learned Ministry shall lack maintenance, (as the state of
things now stands) if they should not be permitted: if one Benefice be not a
competent living, it shall be lawful with the circumstances aforesaid, to add
another thereunto, for the bettering of a Church-mans estate. A Benefice now a
days is nothing less then a Benefice, and an Ecclesiastical living nothing
less then that which affoordeth liuelihood or sufficiency of living;
especially if you speak of singularity or of one Benefice: and so (a few
Benefices excepted) all benefices may be resembled to the counsels of certain
Orators in Demosthenes days, Demost. Philip.
which he compares to the diets of sick men: (...). which neither give a man
life, nor suffer him to die. The pittances are so small, the annuities,
pensions, contributions, impositions are so many in comparison of that which
was paid in former times: and as for that which is now paid, it is either long
detained before it can be paid, and so paid unwillingly, or if it must needs be
paid, after extreme delays, and expenses, after so many prohibitions, which
are common and easy, and consultations which are seldom and not so easy to be
had, with an evil conscience at the length they are paid, that the old said
saw is verified still: Laici semper sunt non modo infensi, sed infesti
clericis: The Laity is always offended with the Clergy, and ready to hurt
what they can: they must view and reuiew, and inuiew the proceedings of the
Church: Some few Honorable and wise, and learned amongst them excepted out of
this number: Contra mansuetos terrae res fraudulentissimas excogitant, all
their devise is to disgrace and deface and put down them God would have
advanced.

CHAP. 5. Of the friends and enemies of Pluralities, and of other
Ecclesiastical superiorities and jurisdictions, all which imports an
inequality or imparity amongst men of the Church.
ALthough it be most true which the mouth of truth has spoken, a man has
enemies those of his own house: Yet it is no less true that it is most
difficill and hard to find who are a man's friends, and who are his enemies,
both within and without the door of his house: such is the insinuatiue
hypocrisy and colorable dealing of one man with another that it is an hard
piece of work to discern friends from foes, even in the Church of God, which
is Gods house: Notwithstanding because (if the visour of hypocrisy and other
counterfeisance be taken from their faces) it is easier found out, my inquiry
or inuestigation shall be of those only who are either dissembled friends, or
professed foes, whereof the one dance in a net, and suppose themselves to be
seen of no men, and are seen of all men, the other are such, whose cankred
malice, and shameless hostility against the mount of Sion and walls of
Jerusalem, and the builders thereof, as the sun at noonetide shining is most
evidently and clearly to be seen. The friends and enemies of Pluralities and
Ecclesiastical dignities, are of diverse sorts: our friends are fewer in number
then our enemies: Howbeit more preualent then our enemies: and so indeed more
with us then against us: and therefore first her late sacred Majesty, and his
most excellent Majesty, and other godly and religious Princes before them,
their principal spirits of wisdom illumined with Gods truth, together with
the heroical prudent spirits of certain Honorable personages of the Nobility
and Counsel, and other industrious learned men, affecting a provident care of
the posterity of the church, and patronizing the present estate of Church
discipline, have ever stood our friends, and ever resisted the private spirits
of these new-fanglists, or contentious and quarrelous men: all which enemies of
Pluralities and dignities are or may be digested into their several ranks, so
that we may reckon upon this division, all to be either enemies or friends,
excepting such as think Pluralities to be requisite and fit remuneration for
learned men, but they will not give any man a second Benefice that has one
already, which scruple arises upon this, that they suppose too great distance
of Benefices with cure to be inconvenient, or for some other consideration best
known to themselves, or perhaps they think themselves onerated in conscience
for the trust reposed in them by the prince and state to give and bestow upon
every one, one Benefice, until all be provided for, and not before, against
whom I will not argue, since they are no way our enemies or neutrally affected,
but apter a great deal to be our friends.

Amongst the multitude of them who are enemies, I may number those who have no
living at all, or have living too too much: they who have no living at all, are
certain penurious and greedy, or hungry companions, who will not stay their
time, but must be preferred in haste, and commonly before their desert, and
creep into the world before they are ripe, or flitter before they are flush,
or run away as the Lapwinge with their shells upon their head out of the
Universities, as soon as they see a man have two Benefices, their envious eye
is fastened upon one; which is much to be misliked. They who have too much
living are those whose lips are sweetened with thc fat of impropriations,
and they would have more. They take up all with the angle, they catch it in
their net, 1. Abakuck.
and gather it in their yarne whereof they rejoice, and are glad, therefore,
they sacrifice unto their net and burn incense to their yarne, because by them
their portion is fat, and their meat plenteous: shall they therefore stretch
out their net and that continually to slay the nations?

I write not this to the praeiudice of those who have any or many impropriated
Benefices, and lawfully hold them although I may boldly maintain it more
lawful of the two, to hold two Benefices with cure of souls then two discured
or impropriated livings as the world esteems them; and how they are esteemed
void of all cure the Lord knows, but my disputation is directed against those
who under a color of opposition against pluralities, give a secret blow to all
Ecclesiastical preferments and livings, would have the tithes brought home
from Gods barn to their own, and reduce all to pensions, and would sweep the
Church clean: these are the most pestilent enginers against the Bishop and
clergy, against the Deane and Chapter, that is the Ecclesiastical senate and
other prebends at large, all which is covertly vndertake^ for the most part by
the impugners of pluralities, the practice whereof springs from this
original, not so much from hatred of pluralities or duplicities of livings,
but from an intention forsooth to reduce and bring back all to the primitive
and Apostolical simplicity, which without Apostolical and primitive and
extraordinary gifts reduced together with it, is a fond conceit, and a vain
intention. As for Platonicall co^munitie or Anabaptisticall confusion which is
the daugther of parity or any such monastical conversation, which some would
have to be Evangelical perfection, I hope they not so much as dream of,
albeit they dote upon some such like phansied Church policy, and government of
the Church. But rather as I touched before, arises from a detestable and
implacable hatred against all Ecclsiasticall superiority and such like
imparities* they would have one man as good as an other, which is as much as
they said in Tusculans questions. Nemo de nobis vnus excellat, let non of us be
better then other. And in case any such one be better in gifts, better in
liuelehood, better in place, or superior in dignity, or in Ecclesiastical
authority: omnem exuperantiam virtutis odimus, all betternesse or preheminency
of virtue (say they) let us hate. Howbeit first let them understand what this
superiority is, and let them understand us, and let us understand one the
other, and then let them become enemies to that which they know: oderunt nos
gratis, if they hate us causeleslie so let them hate. That one Minister may
have more livings then an other and better means to live by the Church. I have
showed before, that in the Ministry some must be both preferred in living and
higher placed in authority, in a well ordered Commonwealth, and well
disciplined Church, I have in part declared, and will now enlarge somewhat
more, for the satisfaction of curious men.

They who would have paritie amongst the Ministers, would likewise maintain
them to be all equalled first either in equality of gifts, and equality of
living: or all to be of inequality of both gifts and livings: or else to be
unequal of gifts and equal in living: or unequal of living and equal of
gifts; for these are the parts: To make them who are suitable and equal in
gifts by a positive or general law, to be inferior and behind one another in
living, were against the law of distributive justice, at the least against
equity: To make them who come short of the best gift, equal in preferment,
were greater iniquity: To defend all to be equal in gifts and equal in
livings, simul and semel, were impossibility: To maintain inequality of both
gifts and livings, is the matter we seek for, and by argumentation and reason,
is deduced from the authority of Scriptures, and praxis of the Church. The
enemies of pluralities and friends of paritie, are for the most part haters of
all eminency of gifts, and sworn enemies unto all standing superiority of
Ministers over Ministers in the church of England, and are in a manner the same,
accusing always the inequality and rule which are exercised in the church for
order and Christian policy of arrogant dominion or Antichristian tyranny. For
so the fashion is of these discontented persons, to traduce in their speeches
all Archiepiscopall jurisdiction in the Province, or episcopal authority in
the Diocese, or archidiaconall power, or any other subordinate authority in
their limits, or whatsoever else branch of civil power and superiority annexed
to their places, for the well being of the same, and to sprinckle it with such
aspersions of domination and proud lordlinesse, as if those callings did affect
nothing else than terrene glory and worldly honors, and mind earthly things.
The Bishops are the successors of the Apostles, and are of the better sort and
condition of citizens, for they are citizens of the Commonwealth they live in,
and are not nor ought to be without all rule and superiority, or other civil
honor, if it be cast upon them. And as for any civil jurisdiction which
Bishops or some ecclesiastical men have, it is not claimed by them as due to
their functions, but imposed by the Prince as upon subjects serviceable for the
Realm, and for credit to their places, as Counselor, Ambassador, Justice of
Peace, and the like: although some of the Presbyteriall faction do call for it
as due, and that Ministers and Ecclesiastical persons may and in respect they
are wise and learned ought to be of counsel of Princes in affairs civil of
the Commonwealth, and to give special direction even in setting up and
deposing of Princes, L. 3. De politia civilly and Ecclesiastica, which challenge
of theirs proceeds from a distempered humor, and abominable arrogancy. And
because there are many resemblances between Ecclesiastical and civil
authority, and the exact laying forth of civil authority serves aptly for
the understanding of the other, and for the clearing of the Bishops and other
that exercise Ecclesiastical jurisdiction these many years, both before and
sithence reformation in the land, of the imputation of dominion or tyranny over
their inferiors, I think it not amiss (if it may not seem tedious in so
short a discourse and the rather because I was lately called before a Right
Honorable presence of Lords and other of his Majesty's Council by
commandment, to satisfy the scrupulous consciences of certain discontented
persons, who proposed many things against the authority and government of
Bishops, but in fine, would neither oppose nor answer in the doubts which
themselves proposed) and I will distribute civil or temporal authority into
his parts and differences according to Aristotle and other learned politicians.
Authority civil or temporal as the common phrase of speech is, is either
oeconomicall as that which is exercised within the limits of a family, or
political over a great society, oeconomicall is either (...), of the husband
over the wife, being the most moderate of al; or (...), of the father over the
children being more ample and large, or (...), which is of two sorts, either
of the master of the household, over such as be of condition free men, and is
less mild then the other two, or of the Lord over bondmen and villains, which
is most severe and absolute of all other: Now for Political authority, it is
either supreme or sovereign, or else subordinate and delegated. Sovereign or
supreme is either absolute called (...), which is of two sorts, (...), that is
called seigneuriall, such as Augustus and Nerua and Traian, and Adrian, and
Marcus Aurelius and other Emperors had and used, who though they had all
authority in them without restraint, so that their word was a law, yet did
they use it according to the rules of civil honesty, and according to law: or
(...), tyrannous, where not only their will became a law, but they also abuse
it, contrary to all rules of civil honesty and moderation of the law, as the
empire of Turks and other Barbarians who reverence not Christ and his Gospel:
or otherwise limited by certain bounds of laws: That which is sovereign and
yet limited, is also of two kinds, either universally limited as is the
authority of ordinary chief magistrates in all free co^mon-wealths, as the
Dukes of Venice and such other as come near it: or restrained but in part, as
for the most part in all Christian monarchies and kingdoms: for albeit kings
and such sovereign monarchs, are so tied to laws, that they cannot dispose
of their subjects lives or liuelihood and goods contrary to the laws, yet
they are at liberty to allow or disallow laws to be made, to enhance or
decrie the price or standerd of their coins, to pardon offenders condemned by
law, and to make war or peace, truice or league. As for those which have
subordinate or delegated authority by the supreme Magistrate, they may not
exercise nor claim more then is allowed them, either by commission or by law*
of all these authorities there is none simply forbiden, or altogether
unlawful, but the tyrannical government which makes self-will a law, and
that is utterly forbidden in civil and Ecclesiastical policy to all good
Christians. Now to apply this to the purpose in hand, videlicet, to the
authority that Bishops have in this Realm, a matter of superiority, so much
oppugned by these pert or rather malepert companions, it cannot be resembled to
oeconomicall authority (albeit a Bishop in some sense, as a Bishop is called a
father of those in charge, and the husband of that Church in a kind of
signification whereof he is Bishop) and that for two causes: first, in that his
authority is not contained in the precincts of one family, but stretches it
self over many congregations, which comprehends many families. An other
cause is, for that the Bishops authority (which the factionists suppose to be
so transcendent and illimitable, is tied by the laws, not only what not to
do, but he is also directed and appointed what to do: whereas oeconomicall
authority has no public laws positive, commanding a man how to govern his
family, but only Negative, what they may not do in that government, as not to
hurt nor kill, neither child, wife, nor servant, and such like inclusiue
prohibitions: and as for supreme power, whether civil or ecclesiastical,
absolute or limitable authority, our Bishops neither use nor claim. It is
that which they condemn in the Pope, as well for that as successor of the
Apostles, he claims both swords, and earthly kingdoms to be his to dispose,
si non actu saliem habitu, as Bellarmine distinguishes to his own great
confusion, as also for that in matters Ecclesiastical, he chalengeth to
himself, and usurps not only seigneuriall, but even tyrannical authority,
for he may judge al, and be judged of none, may carry millions of souls unto
hell, and none may say to him, Domine cur ita facis? may command angels to
carry and recarrie souls at his pleasure, may pardon sins past and to come:
yea in matters Ecclesiastical, may do what he list, as his own flatterers
and clawbackes, have sometimes said and now would unsay; all this Lordly
absolute tyrannous and usurped authority is condemned in the Scriptures. There
remains then to the Bishops of the Realm, none other but subordinate and
delegated authority, which they have partly from God, and partly from the
Sovereign Christian magistrate: and this is the point which is not well
understood of the vulgar sort, or is commonly mistaken of many sorts of
people, but principally or perhaps wittinglie or maliciously misconstrued of
those who band themselves against the orderly government and fatherly
jurisdiction of the Bishops of England. From God they have their authority to
preach and minister the Sacraments, and not from the Prince but from Christ
himself, 28. Matthew Go teach all nations Baptising them etc. Only the
Princes gives them public liberty, without let or disturbance, to do that
which Christ has commanded: all that Princes give in this respect, is not by
way of commission but by a free permission that with peace and praise, with
diligence and alacrity they may do their duties. From God they have also
either first to plant or else to govern, and direct Churches planted already,
to ordeine Ministers and Deacons, and likewise the use and power of the keys,
either by loosing the penitent, according to the Scripture, or binding the
impenitent; the last of which is done by five means: first by admonition;
secondly by reprehension; thirdly by suspension; fourthly by excommunication;
and fifthly by Anathematisme, which is the greatest of all: The three first, of
which censures Ecclesiastical are in use and practice, common to all
Ministers, so far as suspension is taken for the debarring of notorious,
detected, or convicted persons from the Lords Supper: The last two though by
all practice of antiquity in purer times, they were principally attributed unto
Bishops, yet not so, but other Ministers of the word, unto whom the keys are
annexed, might not unlawfully herein concur, if the laws of the Church for
weighty causes do not otherwise dispose, which they have done here in England
as I conceive, by reason of sundry civil effects, which excommunication and
anathematisme by law do work, and are such as without great inconvenience
and confusion cannot be permitted to every Minister in his cure or charge,
that have but slender skill, no direction of law in that behalf, none
authentic seals to certify of record, nor temporalities to be sued, for not
performance of the kings write, that lies in such cases, as De cautione
admittenda de excommunicato deliberando, etc. And these former be the points
wherein Bishops authority is from God, and not of man: But now from the
sovereign Prince by the mediating of laws, Bishops have set down unto them
the places where the compass of the Territory how far, the manner how, with
other circumstances, of executing both the former authorities, and also their
Jurisdiction, which although it be originally founded in the word of God, yet
all Bishops have the assistance of their jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, sundry
ways from the Prince and his laws, for the founder execution thereof, and
restraining of offenders, as to burn an heretic, to imprison a person
stubburnly and obstinately remaining excommunicate above forty days, and such
like: Lastly, the Bishops of this realm have the heads and matters wherein
their jurisdiction is conversant, by, and from the Princes authority, in whom
as supreme governor al jurisdiction within his highness dominions, as well
temporal as Ecclesiastical, by the law of God, and by man's law is invested.
Such matters in the Church of England, attributed to Bishops, are causes
beneficial, videlicet, for tithes and maintenance of Ministers, upholding of
Churches and Churchyards, causes matrimonial, contracts and divorces, matters
diffamatorie, where there is breach of charity, and no action lies in civil
Courts, as also Testamentarie causes, which even at the common law of the land
has always bin made Ecclesiastical, both because that law has little
direction in those causes, but such as is borrowed from the civil and
Ecclesiastical laws, and for that men's last wills (at least were wont) do
contain sundry demises for Churches, orphans, poor, captives, and such like
good uses, whereof the Church had the fourth part, and wherein Bishops are
intended to be most careful to minister right, indifferently to all for the
true performance of the deads will. Finally the punishing of diverse crimes
termed Ecclesiastical, being such as are not punishable at all at the common
law, or else are left by law to be punished by either authority: and in this
respect may this part of Episcopal authority and function, not untruly be
said to be derived from the Kings supremacy which they have under God. By
which matter that I have hitherto at large deduced, may planely appear the
undutifulness of popish Bishops and peevish consistorials: the first whereof
deriueth their jurisdiction Ecclesiastical within all Christian kingdoms from
the Pope; the second will needs derive their iurisdictionall authority
immediately from God, and not from the Prince, and in a larger manner, and in
more matters then Bishops in England may any wise exercise or intrude upon, and
make their Consistory or Presbytery a court of Conscience and Aequitie, a
transcendent court beyond his Majesty's high court of Chauncery, and put other
courts to a perpetual silence.

And on the contrary side may evidently appear to the World the dutiful
carriage of our Bishops, the B B. of the Gospel, who draw nearest to the
ancient and orthodoxe Bishops, as lineally deducing their doctrine and
discipline, their government and obedience, and other conformities from the
Apostolical and Primitive and purer times. And concerning papal Bishops
(which is one of the extremities) they derive all that from the Capitol of the
Pope which they well know, can not fetch his deriuation from God, that is,
borrowe of Antichrist his horn or power, which they can not derive from the
Head which is Christ: but for factious consistorials and presbyteriall men
(which is the other extremity) they without any warrantise of the Word with a
Luciferian pride (as if they were to ride upon the cherubins) draw immediately
their jurisdiction from the imperial seat of God, and will not fetch that
which is to be derived unto them from the Christian magistrate or Gods
lieutenant upon earth.

The former of these will be exempted from Princes, whereas no Priest nor
Prelate is exempted from their temporal sword, much less has any power within
or without their Realms iudicially to depose them, least of all to invade
them, or to discharge their subjects from their allegiance, or to warrant their
liege people to rebel against them, but rather are subject to their power for
reformation and correction of their errors in faith, abuses in discipline,
disorders in life, and all other Ecclesiastical enormities, as appears
plainly by the public laws and See the L. Bishop of Winchesters boooke of
the difference between Christian subjects, and unchristian rebellion.
acts of Constantine, Theodosius, Justinian, Carolus, Ludouicus and Lotharius,
and other godly and worthy governors abroad, as also by the laws of Canutus
and other religious Princes at home. The later of these, although they
challenge no exemption at all from the Kingly government, yet so munite
themselves, and advance their Puritanicall jurisdiction, as to attribute
therein no more to their sovereign Prince, but to be governed or ruled in that
behalf by them, that is, to be ouerruled when they list, and to defend the
exercise thereof by their temporal sword when as they shall be called upon by
them.

If these extremes be leadden, then is the mediocritie golden which our
reverend Fathers and Bishops of the land do perpetually observe and keep: for
albeit the Bishops are Spiritual Judges and Ministers of the laws, yet do
they not make any new Ecclesiastical decrees or laws, without the Princes
authority both praecedent and subsequent, and in the whole course of their
function are tied strictly and precisely to observation of due course of law:
which if they shall either negligently or wilfully violate, it is remediable by
appellation. The last resort, wherein is to the Sovereign Prince himself, who
hears and finally determines by his Judges delegated. The sum of all is
this, That our Bishops neither claim nor yet exercise any civil authority at
all as Bishops, though it is wholly unfit they should be without it: and that
their authority Ecclesiastical is but subordinate under God and the Prince,
moderated as much as any other thing, in the whole Kingdom and State, Exactly,
both positiuely and priuatiuely by good and wholesome laws, derived for the
most part from the Prince, and reformable by his Majesty, and that it
deserves no such slanderous aspersion of Supreme or of Absolute, of
Tyranicall, of Signeuriall, of Lorldly power or superiority, according to the
rulers lust. Let them rather look to this deserved reprehension, who claim
and exercise more absolute authority than the Bishops, namely, to have their
Consistoriall jurisdiction not derived from the Kings authority, but supreme
under God, and that in all causes of doctrine or manners so far as
apperteineth to conscience, to make laws and orders Ecclesiastical, without
the knowledge and consent of his Majesty, to sit and determine as themselves
best judge, without any guiding of the law; and where a case happens with just
and equal decision to determine contrary to law, to have their sentences once
given, to stand in force (though they be appealed from, until they be in the
last instance reuersed, to excommunicate their Sovereign, and consequently to
discharge themselves, for that time of all actual obedience, to call their
Synods and classies without the Princes writtes, and to have the last
appellation, not run unto the Prince, but to a National Synod. All which if
you rightly scan them, are true notes and charecters of sovereignty in
jurisdiction, or at the least (...), Lordly or Seigneuriall, if not
tyrannical, and condemned by the censure of our Savior. And let no man reply
that the bare title of Lords to be given to Bishops, for the same without any
authority in that respect is given to them: for the Scriptures gives not laws
to words, but to the matters themselves. That is lordlinesse indeed, when they
practice and band themselves, and confront the kings supremacy, and will have
him to throw down his scepter, and to lick the dust of the feet of their
Church, videlicet the presbytery, an Epitome or compendiarie representation of
every several congregation and church. All that I have hitherto discoursed,
tends unto this, that the standing superiority of Bishops over ministers, and
the other imparities and inaequalities amongst Ministers of the word, both for
gifts and livings (which are so odiously traduced) may be justly defended
against the adversary part, and that the bitter enemies to pluralities are
fiercest enemies to all dignity, superiority, and authority in the Church,
for ought that I can perceive by many years observation, whose hatred is
insaturable, whose malice is cancred, whose indignation is implacable against
this settled and prosperous estate of the church. Their meaning is to have a
base and beggarly and unlearned and contemptible clergy in the land: for
this cause their ordinary declamations are against Episcopal authority and
other subordinate jurisdiction in the land: insomuch that he thinks himself
the properest man now a days, that, although he otherwise be a seely man and
unskillful in his own faculty of law, or other profession, as commonly
falls out to be so, or utterly deuoid of University learning, and true
knowledge of Gods law and other provincial constitutions, yet comes in place
with a praemeditated speech, or some impolished oration, and that conned by
heart, against Bishops, Archdeacons, Chauncelours, and officials, thorough out
the land, and for two or three men's sake worthy of reprehension, is pleased to
sprinckle with the aspersion of reproach all whatsoever Ecclesiastical
Magistrates and Judges, and so thorough the sides of two or three evil
handlers of the spiritual jurisdiction is contented to wound the whole body of
Ecclesiastical administration and government of the Church. Were it well done
(trow you) for the greediness and extortion of 2. or 3. officers in a court,
if there were any such, to exclaim against the Exchequer, or any such court,
or for the avarice and exaction of one or two badde Justices, therefore to
complain against the whole bench: but this is the fashion of the world, of
certain factious men, and other whose oratorie, is but Canina eloquentia, they
must for lack of matter be ever babbling, though it be but barking against the
Moon: it is held amongst the^ perhaps a point of good policy to use
inuectiues and declamatory speeches against Pluralities of Church men and
against the faults of other men, that in the mean time, their own both
misdemeanors and misgouernances, may pass uncontrolled, or at the least
unespied: now the Bishops are in high court of Parliament, and in lawful
Synod assembled, let them exhibit complaints to their Lordships, that there
may be reformation of that which is amiss, or else with modesty and good
manners hold their peace and hereafter shut up their pipes.

CHAP. 6. Of supportance and keeping the fabrique of the church upright.
IT is a true axiom which is read in Aristotle: Facilius est destruere quam
construeere: a man may pull down more with one hand, than he can build with
two: or is it easier to pluck down many churches then to build one. And
forasmuch as many Churches are built to our hand, which is the honor of the
kingdom, especially the Cathedral and Collegiat Churches, the honor of which
churches is the orderly government and governors of the same: Let us do our
Christian endeavor to support and uphold that fabrique of the Churches which
our forefathers left unto us, and as near as we can keep and observe Saint
Cyprians rule for matter of doctrine and Discipline, that is well settled
already, Vt nihil quod traditum est innouetur, and to keep the unity of the
spirit in the bond of peace. The crafty enginers against the construction and
fabrique thereof, are of sundry sorts, by themselves, for of him I will say
nothing, who was principal in this machination: Sceleris fabricator Epaeus, our
late Church-wright, but of the accessors somewhat may be spoken. There lacks
not a number of those, who would have the Cathedral Churches plucked down,
and under a color of erecting or making of every such great Church, three or
four lesser Churches, and of three or four lesser parochial or country
Churches would enlarge or make one bigger Church, but of endowment or reuenewe
they talk nothing at all: they would reduce all to pensionary persons:
forsooth their meaning is to be discharged from paying tithes. Some do only
repine and mutter, other utter their malicious stomach against the
jurisdiction of Bishops over Presbyters, and of one Presbyter settled in
government over another, as if any of us went about to make Bishops Lords and
masters over the Church, and all the rest to be their servants, or that some
did ascribe so much power unto Bishops and superior Ministers, as that ordinary
Pastors had no power over the several flocks. As for the Bishops, first they
have no charge but pastoral, no power but paternall: they have superiority but
no Impery, they have authority legal not regal, their praeeminence is
fatherly not masterly over the people and presbyters; of which consequence is
all other Ecclesiastical inferior power or subordinate jurisdiction, over
Gods heritage and the Lords flock: the cleerenesse and lawfulness whereof
being such as no maligners can well overthrow or expugne, they hold another
course to impugn and give the onset, first upon the Deane and Chapter, and
Archidiaconall, and peculiar jurisdictions of Praebendaries and the like. As it
was my hap to be in hearing when one said, that Bishops he did allow with
all his heart, and did give them the honor and reverence that was due unto
their places, but concerning Deane and Chapter, which is the Ecclesiastical
Senate, and the true Presbytery (if there be any such thing in verity or
analogy) he could not abide nor digest reputing all that superfluous and
needless, and not worth the retaining. Needless it shall be to refute this
fancy, which falls to the ground of it self, as a ludibrious folly of the
man. As if he would have said, a king is lawful, but his counsel of state is
superfluous, and may well be spared, a Maioralitie is not unlawful, but the
Aldermen are not needful, a Chauncellor is a necessary office in the
University, but congregations of the Masters or convocation of Regents, and
not regents, is a needless thing, a Bishop is good, but co^sultation is naught
or assistance in matter of the church: as who would say, it will be easier for
us to be plucked down, one by one, then many, and as if when the members are
cut off, the head could stand upon the shoulders: or as if one did stand alone
upon the stage of their envy and obmurmuration, he were able to stand alone
or withstand so many gainsaiers which would rise against him. Semblably they
give good allowance of Episcopal dignity and their jurisdiction but they
utterly disallow and would gladly infringe Archidiaconall power and weaken that
first. They will make the head so monstrous and big that all the body shall
be the worse, and all this to be done by reducing or bringing back all Church
censures to the Bishops again, whom they will favor so long, and until they
may tread the one and the other vnder-feet, at least set them in opposition
each against other, whereof (as I think) wise men will beware, and a word of
admonition shall be sufficient to any wise man, whenever this matter shall be
most plausibly proposed, for it may be such kind of men will appear
forwardest in this stratageme, who care neither for Bishop nor Archdeacon, nor
Church nor Chapter, and are like to those soldiors who would crucify Christ,
so they might have his clothes, that is care not for any religion so they may
have the spoil. Nevertheless what they would have or not have, it skilleth
not at all: that which we in all zeal require, is, that the Church of Christ
may be still cherished, and if by Kings that have been the nourishing fathers,
and Qeenes that have bin the nourishing mothers, then by her own children it
is most congruent and fit she should be reverenced: and in case we honor God
who is our father, we may not offer dishonor to the Church which is our
mother: and if we credit Saint Cyprian, we cannot have God to be our father if
we have not the Church to be our mother. The Churh is our mother says August.
epist. 38. de Baptis. l. 1. c. 10. idem in Psalm. 57. and 30. Epist. 203.
Saint Austen, she conceived us of Christ, and nourished us with the milk of
faith: she conceaueth by the Sacraments, as by the seed of her husband: thou
wast conceived in that thou receauedst the name of Christ, and again, she is a
most true mother, which opens her bosom to all nations when they shall be
new borne, and offers her teates when they are borne. Whether we take the
Church for the number and company of men regenerated by the Word and
Sacraments, truly serving God according to the Gospel of his son, and
sealed by the spirit of grace against the day of redemption: or whether we take
the Church by Synechdoche for the governors and presidents of the Church, that
is, men so qualified Chrysostom. super 5. Math.
as Chrysostom does take, or whether we accept it for a city or house, not
built with hands, August. de verb. apost. sermon. 22. 1. Timoth. 3. August. 1. 5.
7. epist. quaest. sup. Leuit. l. 3. c. 57. Psalm. 137.
which is founded by believing, erected by hoping, made perfect by loving, or
lastly whether we call the Church the Temple, where the people which are called
the Church are contained, that by the name of the church the people which is
contained, we signify the place, which contains, or as the same Austen
speaks else where; The Church is the place, where the Church is assembled, for
men are the Church; that is, for a material house, and built with hands: The
Church is highly to be honored of every one of us, 1. King. 8. c. 2. Chro. 5.6.
for it is the place where the Honor of God dwells, and which he replenisheth
with his glory, it is the house which is built to his name, and wherein he will
have his name to be called upon for the obtaining of his blessings or the
turning away of his curses: In which soever of these significatio^s the church
is taken, and because Christ reigns in his Church by his word and spirit,
which is called his kingdom, city, and house, (whereby we learn that it is
furnished not only with persons, but with all things needful for the servants
Citizens and people of God, to the converting and saving of their souls:) many
honorable things may be spoken of it, many duties pay able unto it. Give to
all men their duty, tribute unto whom tribute, custom to whom custom, fear
or reverence to whom fear, honor to whom honor appertains: Saint Paul
bids the Hebrews remember their rulers or leaders that go in and out before
them, 13. Romans 7. v. 13. Heb.
which have spoken to them the word of God: many duties belong unto them. For
the well being of the church they are to be remembered in diverse respects: Four
things the church may not want as requisites for the good and establishment of
the church: Honor, authority, reuenew, and treasury or stock, without the
which, the very frame of the Church will fall down: Whether the world will
honor men of the Church or not honor them: honor consists tam in honorato
quam in honorante. Their gifts, virtues, pains, or diligence, and places are
to be honored of all good men, yea God himself will honor those that honor him:
if you shall deuest them of authority they shall fall into contempt, yea the
very abiects of the world will make no regard of them: the basis of honor is
authority amongst the people: Reuenew is necessary, and the sinew of
Ecclesiastical maintenance: they may not go a begging or beholding unto
others: Episcopus habet pecuniam, non vt seruet, sed vt eroget, says S.
Austen, The Orator could say, (...). Olynthiac. 1.
As for (...) the love of money the Apostle forbids, but bids or charge
the rich of this world to do good, to be rich in good works, to be ready to
distribute to other, and communicate, which is the true end of all riches and
revenues in laity or clergy men: 44. Eccles.
for Abraham the father of the faithful was rich (and as one translation
reads) they were also rich and able to comfort other, or mighty in power.
Last of all, the Church must have a treasury or stock, which is the ready way
to make provision for the fatherless and widows, captives, and the poor: In
the corruptest time of the Church, or Jewish synagogue, the (...) was not taken
away but remained amongst them, in the time of Christ conversant upon earth,
how much more requisite is the treasury to be vpheld now, or Churches
stock, in such infinite swarms of poor people, maimed soldiers, indigent
persons, sick and distressed members of Christ: Here offers it self a great
ocean sea of matter to enlarge upon, but I will contain my self within the
narrowes and streightes of this my discourse, which now admonishes me to be
short, and draw to an end: enough has been dilated of the imparitie of the
gifts of men of the Church, somewhat of competency, and sufficiency of their
livings, somewhat of inaequalitie, or of their Ecclesiastical preferments to
much, (it may be in the opinion of some) of the Plurality of Benefices or
Beneficed men, a little of the superiority of Bishops over Ministers, and of
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction over all the rest, a great deal against the
contemners and breakers or scorners of the same: what is due to holy Church is
apparent, videlicet, tithes, oblations, glebe-land, revenues, and possessions
etc. that God may be honored, his Ministers and servants maintained, Churches
repaired, the poor relieved, his Gospel and the truth published, his word
multiplied, his name magnified unto the ends of the world: what is due from
Church men, is by the way declared. The Ministers of the Gospel which will
live of the Gospel must attend their Ministry which they have received of
the Lord, the preachers of the word must preach in season and out of season:
the shepherds must attend and watch their flocks by night and day, and must
feed their flocks whether they be sheep or lambs, all must be fed, least
their blood be required at their hands, all must be Catechized, all must be
comforted by themselves, and by a prouisional care taken for them, they that
are babes in Christ must have milk and not strong meat, they that are men must
have strong meat, that they may grow up to the measure of the age of the
fullness of Christ, as he with his spirit shall replenish them. They who affect
Plurality and Multiplicitie of livings, must likewise effect labor and more
pains taking: or else it is discommendable to undertake that charge which they
mind not to discharge, or to feed themselves and starve their flocks.

They who desire superiority and Episcopal charge which carries with it
honor, and dignity, and authority, because they desire a good work, must
over and above that they govern well, labor in the word, and so they may be
worthy of double honor, teach orthodoxe and sound doctrine, convince the
adversaries, stop the mouth of the gain-saier, cleanse the Church from
Schism, and keep it from heresy, defend by writing and preaching the
Discipline of the Church. And for that they are to ouersee many flocks, to see
(where want is) every place of their Diocese, as much as lies in them to be
supplied with able Ministers, and with an edifying and instructiue service: And
farther, where impropriations are, and the Vicarages endowed with small
portions, and the Donatiues with smaller pensions, they would interpose their
fatherly helping hands, for some increase of stipend or other augmentation to
be gotten from the proprietaries and leassees, for the sustentation of the
poor Ministers of those places, if there be no other way or mean to better
their estate, which I refer to the gravity and wisdom of my superiors,
writing this under their Honorable reformations. Last of all, because it may
not be said, tempus offerendi, time of offering is past, tempus auferendi, of
taking away is come: or as our adversaries more bitterly then truly speak,
our doctrine to be negative, our religion to be ablative: Let every one do his
best for the supportance and upholding of the fabrique of the Church, which is
Gods house, for it is not looked for in these days, that any new Churches
will be built: it is therefore to be prayed for, that we may keep these
churches which we have, which by the singular providence and goodness of God
are left unto us, by the most famous Princes and Prelates of the land, that
have gone before us, and left such precedents and samplers as will hardly be
imitated. The destruction and abominable desolation of the Churches of
neighbor nations and kingdoms, may serve for a document and instruction to us
and those that come after us, to give no ground to any such as gape after the
like pray, or would so much as make the lest breach upon the walls of our
Church, by either rupture or interrupture, as Sanballat the Horonite, and
Tobiah a servant an Ammonite sometimes enterprized against the walls of
Jerusalem, who would have the walls that Nehemiah built to be so weak, and in
derision of them spoke and thought so, as if a fox go up he shall even break
down the frame of their stony wall, but rather if such foxes as themselves
would adventure to climb up, they might break their neck: Who were also sore
grieved as some now adays, that there was come a man, as now the like is come,
after so gracious a woman as our late religious Gouernesse, (whose memory be)
blessed, which seeks the wealth of the children of Israel, our zealous
Nehemiah: To conclude, let every one of what degree or dignity, of whatsoever
calling amongst laity or clergy, Let him, I say, do his best for the
maintenance of the fabrique of this fair order and economy, this decency and
comeliness of Church policy and discipline: And let us all join in one with
unanimity of consent against Church-theeues, and sacrilegious persons, against
robbers, and spoilers of Cathedral Churches, and against all covetous Patrons
or Latrons, the deuourers of parochial or Country Churches, the very authors
and fautors of all Atheism and ignorance, of all profaneness and ungodliness
of the land, and against al those who wickedly in their hearts, or with their
lips say, Let us take the houses of God into our private possessions: Let us
hold our selves to the sacred anchor of the settlement of those things which
we now enjoy, and (and maugre all our enemies ancient or vpstart, open or
secret, foreign or domestical) shall long enjoy, to the glory of God, and
prolong the joy, until the coming of our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ.

(...).


