The proof and declaration of this proposition: Faith only justifies: gathered
and set-forthe by Richard Tracy.

The preface.
To the most christen and vyctoriouse prince, Henry the.viii. by the grace of
God, king of England, France and Irelande, Defendour of the faith, and of the
church of England, and also of Irelande, in earth, the supreme head: Richard
Tracy wyssheth long continuance of health, prosperouse success, and life
eternal.
Most vyctorious prince, and prudent governor, godly unity, concord, and
love, is most praised, set fourth, and taught, thorough the hole course of the
holy scriptures, as to your majesty it is rygh well known: first taught by
the prophet, saying:

Behold how goodly and pleasant it is, Psalm.cxxii
that brethern dwell together in one unity. Christ also prayed to his father,
John.xvii,
saying: Holy father in thy name preserve them, whom thou have given me, that
they may be one as we be. The apostle exhorts, and prays al men, that they
be diligent to keep the unity of the spirit, Ephesians. iiii.
in the bond of peace, being one body, and one spirit, even as they be
called in one hope. Let there be but one lord, one faith, one baptyme, one
god and father of us all etc.

Seeing than that Christ, the prophet, and the apostle, exhort, and
command, such a christian unity to be had, and kept in the catholyke
church, and also considering the peynfull travail, study, and great
charges, which your majesty has sustained, and daily does sustain, not
only to preserve unity among your loving subjects, but also to avoyde, and
utterly remove, all occasiones, which might be cause, or mean of division,
or breche of such christen unity, therefore I most simple of this your realm,
and yet one of the lively members of this your civil, and polityke body,
hearing division, and diversity of opinions, among your loving subjects,
concerning one of the most principal, and necessary articles of our faith,
which is, that faith only iustifyeth: can not but lament and bewail, such
division, in so godly, and necessary an article, which is the foundation, and
ground of all the christen religion.

For the godly understanding of the said article, well tasted, and inwardlye
perceived, is the quyetnes of every conscience, oppressed with any kind of
adversity, other spiritual or temporal, yea the only anchor and refuge in
the extreme agony and panges of death. wherefore with all the poor knowledge
which god has given to me, I have diligently by the auctorities of holy
scripture, set forth and declared, the true sense, meaning and understanding of
the said article and proposition, most humblye desiring your highness, more
to ponder my good will, and fervent desire, to profit many, than my rude and
barbarouse setting forth of this little treatise, which I submit most
lowlye, unto your gratiouse, and godly judgment, to the which if this my
labor, and study shall be thought profitable for your christen congregation,
I than most mekely eftsoon desire your majesty that it may be put forth, to
the glory of god, your honor and the vtilytie of all your loving subjects.
And I shall daily pray to god, that he will vouchsafe, to strengthen you with
his holy sprite thoroughly to perform a godly reformation in Christ's
church, within your dominions, with good prosperity, in all your affayeres.

Of justification.
FOr as much, as the most necessary article of christen religion is, that
faith one lie justifies, which the ungodly do daily preach against, and
obscure by many ways, I have thought therefore very expedient, in this little
treatise, by ye holy scriptures, By mercy (...) faith, sinne^ be purified, by
the fear of god all man declyne from evil. Proverb. xv
to declare the right sense, and true understanding thereof, which is, that the
mercy and favor, of God justifies: which mercy and favor, we only by
faith obtain, beleuyng constantly the promesses of gods mercy, and favor
made unto us. And the scripture says, that this faith, Ephesians. ii.
which only justifies, is only the work of god in us, and comes, not by
any man's power, wisdom, lerning, nor that god gives it, because of any
virtue, or virtuous disposition, which he sees in man, nor that any man can
prepare him self, or make him self apt and meet, to receive this faith, but
god gives this faith freely, without any respect or regard to any good will,
good works, or good disposition, before by god seen in man. ^ath, xii.
For ye scripture says other make the tree good, and his fruit good also, or
else make the tree evil, and his fruit evil also.

^^d did first (...) upon A^ll and after (...) his gifts. Genesis. iiii.
Even so man must first be made good, thoroughe faith, before any of his
works can be good. Therefore I say that before this lyuelye faith be given
from god to manne that he neither has, nor can have other good will, good
works, or godly disposition to do good. For without this lively faith, it
is impossible to please god. Hebr. xii.
Wherefore faith must needs first be given of god, whereby the will is made
good and virtuous, before that any work, which springs our of the will,
can be either good, or virtuous, as saint Augustine says. Augustyne upon
the.cx. psalm.
Verylye a man can not work justice, except he be justified, but he that
beleuethe in him, which justifies the wicked, begins of faith, so that the
good works that go before, do not show what he has deserved, but such as
follow, Augustine upon the.lxvii.
show what he has receyved. Also the same doctor sayethe, Me thinks that
the faith is to be praised, which goes before works, for without ye merits
of good works, thorough faith, the wicked is justified, as the apostle
fayethe: To the beleuyng in him, which justifies the wicked, his faith is
counted for justice: that from thenseforth ye same faith may begin to work by
love. For they only ought to be called good works, which be done for the
love of god. To such works, it is necessary that faith should go before,
that from this faith, these works: and not from these works that faith
should begin. For no man works for the love of god, except he first believe
in god.

Also the same doctor says upon this text: Romans ii.
They are not rightuous which hear the law, but they which do the law,
shall be justified: That is as much to say, that we may know them, Aug. in
the book of the spryte and the letter the.xxvi chapter.
not to be the doers of the law, except they be justified: Not that
justification should come to the doers, but that justification should go
before the doers.

Here by these auctorities, of saint Augustyne, it is manifest and plain that
no works be good, except they spryng out of a living faith. Not withstandyng
some I think, will be offended with this my saying, yt God gives not faith
which only justifies to any man, because of any virtue or virtuous
disposition which he before sees in man: for they think that God, which
ever has seen all things presentely, did see before in Peter, Paul, Dauyd,
Maria Magdalene, and such other their repenting hearts: And also their godly
dispositions, wherewith they would mekelye, obedientlye, and wyllynglye
consent to gods spiritual motions, and grace offered to them, using and
exercisyng, the gifts and talentes, by god given to them accordynglye. Which
dysposition, and virtuous workynge, according to their calling, before they
were presently by god seen in them, did provoke and move God (think they) to
iustifye them.

To all men of this strange opinion, I answer that saint James says: Err
not my dear brethern, every good gift, and every parfect gift, is from
above, and comes down from the father of light.

Is every good thing come down from the father of light? what have they then,
that they have not received? i. Corint. iiii.
If they have received them, why rejoice they as they had not received them?
what wise man prayseth a stone for his swyfte flyeng in the air, which is
cast with vyolence, whose nature is to lie still, if it be not removed. Like
praise is to be given unto us for our good dispositions, and well workyng,
which only is wrought in us, agynst our nature, by the might and grace of
God, who works only in us, both the good will, Philip. iiii.
and to perform the same, without whom, we can do nothing, that good is.
John. xv.


And for my part I know no scriptures, which do encourage any man to
think, that their good works, or godly disposition to do good, by god before
seen in them, should move god to justify them, or to endewe them with his
grace and favor. And than thus to deuyne, Romans xi. who gave hi^ first that he
should recompense him again.
search or judge the causes moving god, to give his godly gifts, with out his
word, the same teaching prouyng, and testifienge, is rather of curiosity and
of vain opinion, than of any godly persuasion, or wholesome doctrine. For god
by his prophet Esaye says: Esaias. lii Rom x.
I am found of them that sought me not, and have appeared to them, that axed
not after me. And against Israel he says: All day long I have stretched out
my hands, unto a people that believes not, but speaks against me. By this
text appearethe but small provocation, or good disposition, mouyng god to give
his godly gifts. And other knoweledge, than by this his word, have we none.
For who has known the mind of the lord, Rom xi.
or who was his counselor, or who has given to him first, that he might be
recompensed again, for of him, and thorough him, and by him, be all the
things, to him be glory etc.

Where they think that god, for the good disposition and godly virtues, before
seen in man, does iustifye man: Verilye they be to much forgetful, of the
corruption and poison of our nature which is become so weak and simple that in
it can not be perceived and found any such good disposition, and godly virtues
to move God, to iustifye us. Math. vii.
For evil trees can not bring forth any such good fruits. Also the prophet
says, Psalm. cxliii.
enter not into judgment, with thy servant, o Lord, for in thy syghte no man
living shall be justified. Psalm.cxxix.
Also if thou wylt be extreme, to mark what is done amys, o Lord, who may
abide it, Romans iii.
for without dout all have sinned, and are destitute of the glory of God.
Where is then they, reioycyng excluded, by what law? Galath. iii.
of virtuous good dysposition, or good deeds? Nay, says Paul, but by the
law of faith. Wherefore there is another thought, will, nor work in us, if we
consider, and ponder their goodness in nature, where of we ca^ take any occasion
to rejoice, but rather have cause to lamente, and to say with Job, Ioh. ix.
I fear all my works, because they be evil.

Gene. viii.
Also the scripture says, the imagination of man's heart, is evil eue^ from
his youth. Item all man's imaginatio^s of ye thoughts of his heart are only
evil every day. Gene. vi.
It were therefore necessary, first to prove our works good, and also a godly
dyspositio^ in us to do good, whereunto all the scripture witnesses the
contrary, before yt we can prove, that our good works, and godly dysposition
before seen in us by God, do provoke and move God to iustifye us, and to give
us his grace and favor. Yea although there were a godly dysposition in us,
yet that should not move God, nor provoke him to justify us: for Abraham was
not justified, because he offered his son, and was also obedient to sley him,
but because he believed, says the scripture. Also Paul says, Romans xi.
Israel has not obtained ye thing which he sought for: no, but yet the
election has obtained it. And by what means, says Paul, eue^ through the
election of grace. Ibidem.
The^ is it not by the deseruynge of works, of vertuose, or of good
dysposition, for the^ were grace and favor, no grace, and favor. Therefore
has God wrapped all nations in unbelief, that he might have mercy on all.

And ye scripture witnesses more over, yt god said to Moses, xod^. xxxiii.
I will show mercy, to whom I show mercy, I will have compassion, on who^ I
have compassion. So says Paul, lies it not, in a man's will, Romans ix.
or runnynge, but in the mercy of God. Romans v.
In this God sets out his love toward us, says Paul, seeing that, while
we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us. Alas what good dysposition, virtue, or
good work was in us being sinners, to move, or to stir god to iustifye us,
or to show us any grace, Ierem. xxxii.
or favor, surely none. But the very true cause was only his eternal love,
where with he loved us. Wherefore he lyberallye, and frelye did draw us, moved
only with his mercy, toward us, as saint James says.

James.i.
Of his own frewyll begat he us, with the word of life. If our regeneration
came by ye free will of god, the^ was he not moved by our good dysposition,
virtue, nor good works before seen by God of us. And therefore Paul wyllyng
our health, and salvation to be certain, and sure teaches us yt our
justification hangs another of the works of ye law, nor of our good
dysposition, vertuose or good works, but only on faith, yt it may come of
favor and grace, and that the promise might be sure, for so Abraham was made
strong in the faith, and gave honor to god, Romans iiii.
steadfastly beleuyng, yt he which had made the promys, was able also to make it
good. And therefore was it rekned to him for rightwysnes. This was not wrytre^
only for Abraham, but also for us, that we should ground, stablyshe, and make
sure our salvation upon gods promises, which be ever certain and sure. So
that in all temptations of desperation, we may consta^tly, and surely trust to
that sure promise made by god to us. The scripture therefore gives all the
power of iustifycation, only and holly to god, which by his prophet Esaias
says, Ezaie. xliii.
I am he, I am he only, which for mine own self sake, do away thine
offense, and forget thy sins, so yt I will never think upon them Also the
prophet O see says: O^ee. xiii.
O Israel thine iniquity has destroyed the, but in me only, is thy help.

Therefore the christen man's justice, whereby he is accepted before God, to be
just, and ryghtwyse, is not a civil justice, and earthly justice, but an
heavenly justice, not an active justice, consystynge in works, which we yield,
and give to god, but a passive justice, which we receive of mercy, only from
god. For god sees in us no goodness nor any other thing, whereby he is moved to
favor us, but only our wretched mysery, whereby he is moved with his godly
benignity, and pytie to have mercy on us.

wherefore our justice is not wtin us nor of us, but Christ is our justice,
Christ jesus of God is made unto us wisdom and also righteousness. and
satisfiing and redemcion, that according as it is written, he yt rejoices,
should rejoice in the lord.
being without us, and he is frelye without our deserving, given to us, by God. It
is nothing of our worthynes, or deseruynge, yt Christ's justice is called our
justice, but of Christ's only infinite mercy, yt he estemeth and rekeneth his
justice to be ours. So that we sinners, covered, and clothed with christ's
justice, i. Cor. i.
do appear in ye sight of god just, and ryghteous, and so of god for Christ's
sake be accepted, as just and ryghteous. Alas then, what unkind, froward, and
styffenecked people be we, which will not most mekely, lowly, and thankefully,
accept, receive, and take Christ's justice, holiness, and redemption lyberaly,
freely, and most mercyfully offered, and given unto us of god, whereby we without
cause of our part deserved, should be esteemed, reputed, and accepted before
him, notwithstanding our weakness, and synfulnes, to be thereof forgeuen, and
esteemed, as just, and holy in his sight, for Christ's sake only. what
unthankfulness, and unkindness is this, to co^tempne gods most mercyful
aboundau^t, and lyberal gifts, offered and given to us? what arrogance and
presumption is this, to attribute, and give to our weak, and synful works
that help, comfort, favor, and remedy, which we only by all equity have
cause, and be bound to sech, desire and look for, from god, for christ's
passion and deaths sake, ye price of our sin and only cause of our
acceptau^ce to favor? This unworthy estimation of works, geuyng to the^ yt,
which god promised to give us freely, is no less then to judge, and esteem God
untrue in all his promyses, which is, to confess him in word, and to deny
him in deed, and an utter falsifyeng, and denial of all the scriptures. What
unwise, yea, and mad me^ be we, which will stablishe, and ground our salvation
upon our vnperfyt, inco^stant, and transitory works, rather the^ upon gods
mercy, to us frelye promised? which promise is ever constant sure, and
infallibly true. What quietness can that conscience have, which hangs his
health, and life everlasting upon instable, and vnperfyt works of man, which
perysh and vanishe away, like the shadows? Wherefore the joy, and comfort of
all Christen hertes is, that Christ is become our justice, holiness, and
redemption, which we apprehende receive, and accept to be ours, by the
lyberall gift of god, thorough faith in his promyses only, and by no other
means.

Note well the true understanding and meaning that faith only justifies.
And therefore we say, that faith only iustifiethe, when we speak under this
form, by faith we be justified, or by faith we be frelye justified, or that
faith only justifies. For all these sentences be of one like force, virtue, or
meaning.

We do not mean thereby, that faith so alone justifies, that these words
alone, and frelye exclude other good works, or godly virtues, that they be
not joined with faith, which never is without both good works, and virtuous,
but, we by these words frelye, and only, do utterly exclude all opinion,
trust, and confidence to our merits, virtues, dignity, good disposition, or
worthynes, that they in no wise be esteemed, thought, or judged, to be cause,
mean, motion, or help, or to be partlye cause, mean, motion, or help, to our
justification, which only, and holy we yield, and give to God, and to his
son Jesus Christ our Lord, which only is our hole, and sufficient justice,
satisfaction, and peacemaker for sin, without any respect to any good
motion or godly disposition, before by god seen in us. And therefore who
soever judges or thinks good works, virtuous or godly disposition, to be
any cause, or help, or any part of cause, whereby God is moved, or styred
to justify us, the same obscureth, and wythdraweth the glory of God, and
robs Christ of the honor, by him only deserved, and to him only due.
Who caused his prophet Danyell to say. Daniel.i,
To ye, o Lord, al rightuosnesse belongs, to us perteynethe nothing, Note
well what true justification is and what we be after justification.
but shame. when God has freelye of his only mercy, and favor justified
us, yet, we remain sinners. For the which we must daily pray with the saints
to god for pardon, and forgyuenes. For iustificacyon takethe not away sin,
so that it remains not in us, but justification is properlye fre pardon, and
remissyon of sins, a covering of our sins, a not rekening and layeng them
to our charge, only through the mercy, that we obtain by faith in Christ's
blood, as the prophet says, Psalm.xxxi.
blessed be they, whose sins be forgyuen, whose offenses be covered. And
blessed is that man, to whom god imputes not his sins. For god was in
christ, and made agreament between the world and him self, and imputed no^
their sins unto them.ii. Cor. v.
which remissyon, covering, and not imputynge of sin, were in vain, if
there were no sin in us. For other our good works and godly dispositions do
satisfye the law, or they do not satisfye the law. If they satisfye the law,
we have no need than of Christ's justice, to be imputed to us. For if
ryghteousnes come of the law, tha^ is Christ dead in vain, Galat. i^
says paul. To such therefore without dout, Christ is dead in vain. And if
we do not satisfy the law, than be we sinful, James i. Curses is every man,
that continues not in all things, which are written in the book to fulfill
them. Galath iii.
and move not god to justify us. For if we offend in one jot of the law, we
than transgress the hole law, so says. S. James. Paul says, I know naught
by my self, yet am I not thereby justified. If Paul knowing nothing by him
self, yet was not thereby justified, what means it, Cor. iiii.
that wha^ we examyne, and try our self, finding our self gyltie of the
hole law, knowing and feeling also in our selfs an evil disposition, and
sin, should think without cause, yt we have godly disposition, and virtues,
mouyng god to justify us? Not wtstandyng also yt the scriptures speaking of
justification, Romans iii.
declare it to be frelye given, saying al have sinned, and are destitute of ye
glory of god, but are justified freely, by his grace, thorough ye redemption
that is in Christ Jesus, whom God has set forth to be the obteyner of mercy,
through faith, by the means of his blood. who can more plainly set forth, the
true and right order of justification? Esai. xliii.
Also the prophet Esaye says: Put me now in remembrance, for we will reason
together, and show what thou have, for to make ye ryghtuouse Thy first father
offended sore, and thy rulers have sinned against me. By this text it is
manifest, yt God reproves al such, which thynk that they have any thing, to
move God to justify the^, or to endowe the^, with his grace, and favor. And
therefore if any man trust to his own merits or partly to christ, and partly to
his own merits, and not holy, and only to Christ's merits, ye same
dishonors God, Deuter xviii.
which did send to us Christ, which only is a sufficient savior, and
besides him, there is no savior. And he does much injury also to Christ's
blood, and utterly wa^teth ye sure affiaunce and constant trust, to have
remission of his sins only for Christ's blood shed. Which lively faith
only justifies.

And therefore let all Chryste^ men give the glory, and honor of justification
only, and holy to God, to whom only it is due. And then also let the^ confess
them, with the penytent, and miserable publicane, to be sinners, and al their
works to be vnperfyt, ne lest they be condemned with the proud pharesai.
Luke.v.
Remembryng ever that the hole have no need of a physician, Math. ix.
Luke. v.
but the sick. And Christ came not to call the righteouse, Math. v.
but sinners to repentance. Luke.i.
The hungrye, and thyrsty for ryghtuousnes, Christ called blessed, and
fulfylleth them with good things. And they which think them selves rich
enough of good merits, God puts them away empty, and void of all
goodness, as it apeareth in the Apocalipsis, where it is written: I woll vomit
the out of my mouth, because thou say, I am rich, and increased with
goodness, and have neade of nothing, and know not how thou art wretched,
and miserable, poor, blind, and naked. I counsel the, yt thou bye of me,
gold tried in the fire, that thou may be rich. wherefore, a meke and lowlye
confession of all our thoughts, works, and deades, to be vnperfyght, whereby
we earnestlye repent, leave, and forsake all trust, and confidence in the^, and
then to fly to Christ, trusting to gods promise made to us of remission of
al our sins, for Christ's sake, is a sure, and safe mean, and way taught by
the holy scriptures, to have remission of our sins. which says, repent
and believe. For where is no repentance, there is no belefe. And where as true
repentance is, there is a constaunt affiaunce, and suer unfeigned trust in
gods promise made to us. which lively faith only apprehends gods
favor, and mercy, whereby we be justified. And this lively faith brings
with it the holy ghost, which renewythe man's heart, and styreth him to love,
and to obey the will of God. It causes the heart to be meek, lowelye,
pacient in adversity, liberal to his neighbor in his necessity, sober,
just, fearing God continuallye, studiouse to mortify the flesh, and to
avoid al occasions of sin. And this living faith continually steryth, and
enforces the mind, with great lust, and courage to resyste sin, and all
her occasions. And in conclusion, this living faith, moves the mind with as
hot and fervent desire, to acco^plysshe and to fulfill, the good will of god,
as ever the mind was desirous and studyouse, to execute, and to fulfylle his
own carnalle concupiscence, and evil lusts.

Wherefore all such as hear or read gods word, and think al such
things written therein to be true, and yet not fealyng the^ selves changed,
nor no new affections, and desires in their hearts sprongen up to love God,
and to mortify ye flesh, have not yet received that living faith, which
only justifies, but rather a certain knowelege, new opinion or hystoricall
faith, which does not change the heart, nor quycken any new affection. And
because they feel not a study, and will to strive against there old lusts,
they may well perceive, that they have received no new sprete. But yet they
say and think that they believe perfytly, and then they slander, and
blaspheme the treweth, saying: that faith only does not iustifye. And so they
return to works, to be justified by them, daily workynge, and yet never
felyng, or perceiving any alteration of mind, will, love, or affection. All
the works, which they do, they work them only, because they would have a
better thing for their work. And so they be hyrelynges and work no thing for
love, but for reward, and wages, or else at the lest with there works, they
would pacify gods wrath, and obtain gods favor, and so rob Christ of
his glory. which by his Prophet says: Esaias. xlvi.
I will not give my glory to any other. For Christ only with his passion, and
death did pacify his fathers wrath, as the scripture witnesses: saying this
is my well-beloved sone, Math. iii.
in whom I am well pleased.

But when the faithful allege the scriptures, saying that a man is not
justified, by the deades of the law, but by ye faith of Jesus Christ, as Paul
says: Galath. ii.
ye iusticiaries to that answer, that Paul means by yt text, that man is
not justified by ye deades, or ceremonies of the law. And they further say,
that all they which work the works commanded by the decaloge, which is the
law of the ten commandments, be by the workyng of the said works
justified. To the which the faithful say, that if any works might
justify, then the ceremonies of the law should justify, because the
ceremonies were commanded of God, to be done for satisfaction, and to make
atoneme^t for sin, as it apeareth in many places of the old testament, and
specially Leui. primo, where it is written in this form: And he shall put his
hand upon the head of the brent sacrifice, and it shall be accepted for him to
be his atonement. For the law, which has but the shaddowe of good things
to come and not the things in their own fashion can never with the sacrifice
which they offer year by year, continuallye make the comers thereto perfect.
Hebr. x.
And yet these ceremonies did not justify, as the iusticiaries affirm, as it
apereth Hebre. vij. and.x. And the law of the ten commandments, was not
given of God to justify, or to satysfie for syn, but rather to condemn, and
to setforthe sin, whereby man might know his synnefull nature, and so fly to
Christ. The law, says Paul, meaning the law called the decaloge, was
given to punyshe transgressors, and not that by the works thereof, the workers
should be justified. For during this mortal life, there is no man having our
corruptible, weak, and sinful nature, yt ca^ by any means fulfill, and do the
works of the law so perfytlye, as the law requires them to be done. And
where vnperfytnes is there is not, nor can not be a deseruynge of grace, and
favor, but rather of punyshement. Paul says, that which was impossible to
the law, in as much as it was weak, thorough the flesh, that performed God,
and sent his sone in the similitude of sinful fresshe, and by sin dampened
sin, in the flesh, that the ryghtuousnes required of the law, might be
fulfilled in them, which walk not after the flesh, but after the spryte. If
Paul say, it was impossyble for the law to justify, because the flesh was
weak, and not able to perform the same: How can the iusticiaries affirm,
that the law, or any of her works can, or may justify? Abraham believed God,
and it was counted unto him for ryghtwysenes. For the promise yt Abraham
should be heir of the world, was not given to Abraham, Romans iiii.
or to his seed through the law, but thorough ye ryghtwysenes, which comes
of faith. For if they, which were of the law, be heirs, than is faith but
vain, and the promise of none effect. Also when zacheus said, Luke. xix.
Lord behold I give to the poor half my goods, and if I have done any man
wrong, I will restore him four fold, Jesus said not, yt health was comen this
day unto his house, because of his good works, but because he was become the
child of Abraham, Math. iii.
that is to say a faithful beleuer. Also Paul says not of the deeds of
ryghtuousnes, which we have wrought, but of his mercy he saved us. Romans vi.
And the same apostle sayethe again yt the reward of sin is death, but he
says not, that the reward of works of the law, other cerimoniall, or of
the decaloge, is life. But he concludes, by the grace of God life eternal to
come, and that only in Christ Jesus our Lord, and by no other means. All the
scriptures witness the fame.

And first Abacuc says, Abacuc. ii.
the just lives by his faith. Also if Abraham were made righteous through
works, then has he wherein to rejoice, but not before God. Romans iiii.
But what says the scripture? Abraham believed God, and that was counted to
him for ryghteousnes. Israel following ye law of rightwysenes, attained not to
ye law of ryghtwysnes. why so? even because they sought it not out of faith,
Romans vi.
but as it were out of the deseruyng of works. By grace are ye saved through
faith, and that not of your selves, Ephesians. ii.
for it is the gift of god and not of works, lest any man should bost him
self.

By these authorities of holy scripture, and innumerable more, to many here to
write, it appears that iustifycation is attributed and given, truly and only
to faith, and yt it is clearly and holy denied any iustifycation to be given to
works. But such me^ (says Paul) as know not the justice of god, Romans x.
and continually search and labor to set forth and stablyshe their own
ryghtwysenes, be never subject to the ryghtwysenes, which god aloweth. No,
no, the natural men do not perceive those things which perteyne to god, for
it is foolyshnes to them. i. Cor. ii.
Another can man perceive when he is spiritually examined, and therefore the
iusticiaries reading the.x. chapter of Matthew, think that it makes much
for them, which well perceived and understand makes much against them. This
is the storye.

One came and said unto Christ, good master what thing shall I do that I may
have eternal life? He said unto him: why call thou me good? there is none
good but one, and that is god. But if thou will enter into life, keep the
commandments. He said which? and Jesus said thou shall not kill, thou
shalt not break wedlock, thou shalt not steal, thou shalt not bear false
wytnes, honor thy father and mother, and you shall love thy neghbour as thy
self. The yo^ge man said unto him. I have observed all these things from my
youth, what have I more to do? Jesus said unto him. If thou will be perfyte,
go sell that thou have, and give it to the poor, and thou shall have treasure
in heaven, and come and follow me. when the young man herd that saying, he went
away mournyng, for he had great possessions.

The condition of all ypocrites here appears, how they be ever busye to do
works, trusting in ye same, nothing regardyng with what heart, love, and mind,
they shall acco^plyshe and fynyshe them. Is it not great folyshnes to labor for
ye fruit, before the tree spryng up? So unwise a thing it is to study and to
labor to do the works of ye law, before they know how to fulfill the law
truly. For Paul says, Romans vii.
yt the law is spiritual, and can never be truly performed and fulfilled with
outward deed, except the inward love and affection be purged and made
spiritual, by ye sprite of god

wherefore this wise man of law, in godly and spiritual things was but a
fool, for he should first have asked, by what means he might have fulfilled
the law perfitly. But to his ungodly question, which was, what he should do and
work to have eternal life, supposing life to be given by works, and not freely
by grace: Christ answered him so, yt he might perceive, that he could not
fulfill ye law, nor perform ye works thereof. Notwythstandyng he myndyng to
iustifye himself, did go away, as blind as he came. And so do all
iusticiaries, which think yt they can fulfill the law, and works thereof
perfytly, during this mortal life. In the which although the holy ghost be
given unto me^, yet because of our sinful nature, we be so weak, that we can
not perform the law perfytlye. But the most perfyte man, shall complain
with Paul, saying: the good which I would do, I do not, and the evil that I
would not do, that I do. Who shall deliver me, from this body of death? The
grace of God, by Jesus Christ.

These blind iusticiaries, do not feel the corruption of our synful nature,
poisoned by the inobedience of our father Adam, in so much that the
scripture, Math. ix.
resembles us to mustye vessels, which will corrupt the best wine that
shall be put into them. So although the holy ghost, work his works in us,
yet our corrupt nature does so alter and corrupt them, that they be never
done perfytlye, as the law requires them to be done by us. That proves well
the Prophet David, Psalm. xiii.
saying: All have gone out of the way, they be become unprofitable, there is
none that does good, no not one. Solomon says: Eccles. vii.
there is not one just man in the earth, which does good and synneth not.
Also I say says: Esaye. lxiiii.
all our ryghtwysenes, i. John.i,
before God is like a filthy cloth. Saint Ihon says that we be all sinners.
And he that says that he has no sin, does lie and the truth is not in
him.

If we be sinners, Math. vii.
surely then be we an ill tree, which as Christ says, Luke. xvii.
can not bring forth good fruit. For when we have done, all that we can do, yet
be we unprofitable servants, and do but that, which is our duty to do. Psalm.
cxlii.
Therefore the prophet prays yt god will not enter into judgment with his
servant, for no flesh shall be justified in his fight.

Galath. iii.
For a co^clusio^, the scripture has concluded all under sin, that the
promise, Romans xi.
by the faith in Jesus Christ and not for their works, should be given to the
beleuers. They presume to much, which with their works will challenge heaven
for their reward, which Christ only, so painfully has purchased already. They
compare, and make of like strength and virtue, Christ's blood and their good
works. But ones they shall feale and perceive, that their good works, be not
worthy in value to co^teruaile and pacifye gods wrath, other they will lack
perfection and goodness, or else they will not be sufficient in nombre.

This is good cause, to make the^ to dout. But if good works should pacifye
the fathers wrath, then christ in vain, has suffered so great pain. Also
they have no promise made by god, yt good works shall pacifye gods wrath, but
rather to ye contrary. As it appears by ye prophet Esaias, saying: Esaye. lvii.
I will show and declare thy goodness and thy works, but they shall not profit
the. And where is no promise of god, there can not be constant faith, and where
is not faith, there remains unbelief and mystrust: and where so ever is
unbelief, there follows eternal dampnation, as Christ says, who so believes
not, shall be condemned.

Although al ye scriptures declare this to be true manifestly, Marc. xvi.
yet there be many yt with this my sentence will be greatly offended, saying: if
works do not iustifye, why do the scriptures command them so earnestlye to
be done? To such I answer: that the scriptures command, the works of the
law to be performed and done, which be most perfyte and godly works,
because they be commanded of God. Yet although they be as perfytly done, as
man can deuyse them to be done, they do not iustifye. For we be all unclean
which can bring forth nothing clean, Job, x.
as Job says, who can make a clean thing, of that which is unclean
conceived thorough man's seed? Math. xvi.
Also some allege this text: The son of man shall come in the glory with
his angels, and then shall reward every man according to his works. To
this, I say, that by this text and such other, it appears that the
scripture, Deuter. vii. ^^^ter. xvi.
threateneth more the ungodly and their evil works, then to promise reward
of joy, for the merit of good works. And where the scripture sounds, to
give reward of honor and glory, to them which persevere in well doing,
there is no reward promised to the works, but to the worker: not for the
works sake, but yet according as the works do witness, and testifye of the
man, which did work them. It is out of order, to praise the fruit before the
tree, for the tree makes the fruit good, and the fruit not the tree, but only
declares and witnesses the goodness or ylnesse of the tree.

By what more laufull ways and means, may a man condemn a liar, then by
the untrue words which he has spoken, tried against him? And forthermore
good words and works, and the evil words and works, which we have spoken
and done, shall be sure proves and witnesses, other with us, or else against us,
at the general judgment according to the which we shall receive. If they be
good works, that we have wrought, then will they wytnes, that we be ye
faithful children of god, to whom of right bebelongeth, the enheritau^ce and
goods of our father, before that we can work of deserve it. For the children
do enheryte their fathers lands and goods, and not the servants. And the
children do not deserve the inheritance, but god rewards them with eternal
life, which he gave them, long before they could work, as it appears
Genesis.xxii. and.xv. And although the scriptures promise a reward to well
workers, yet it promyseth not eternal life, as a reward, deserved by ye
works, and so due unto them: for that is only the reward, purchased by
Christ's death, and freely given before any man can work. Wherefore let eternal
life, remyssion of our sins, and iustifycation, be only the reward
lyberally given by god, only for Christ's sake. And then give to works, all
the glory that the scripture does give, which, no doubt, to good works
gives many praises, and as well temporal, as spiritual graces.

Wherefore for the good fruit and great goodness, which do ensue and follow good
works, every christen man will exercise good works.

An other number therbe, which ever have in their mouths, this proposition:
faith only iustifyeth, which never tasted in their heart, any part of that
living faith, which only iustifyeth. Such those be, which use a beestlye,
and not a godly lybertye, in the eating of meats, Galat. v.
whom Paul reproved, saying: give not your lybertye to be an occasion of
lust. They forbear no kind of meats and drynkes at any time, Math. xv.
saying: that which enters into the mouth, does not defyle a man, nothing
feeling or perceiving their wanton lusts, which rage in their hearts (more
then any need to eat) and defyle the inward man. They remember not this
text, whether ye eat or drink, i. Cor. x.
or do any other thing, Collos. iii.
do it in the name of ye lord God did not ordeyne things to satisfye lusts,
but to socoure need.

These kind of people fast not, for that will hurt their co^plexio^, and also
their god their belie will never suffer them to be quiet, until he be full and
well served. Deal alms they will not, for fear the people should se the^, and
they also glory and rejoice in their good deed, and so, grievously offend in
hypocrisye. And pray they will not, for fear they should offend with much
speaking, as ye heathen did. For a conclusion, there is no kind of lust, but
they will taste it, and the good works commanded by god, will they not do,
trustyng only to their feigned faith, and false confydence, that it will save
them, and cover all their wicked lusts, at the general judgment.

These delicate and pleasant christians, James. ii.
saint James reproves saying: what avails it my brethren though a man say
he has faith, when he has no deeds? wylt thou understand, o thou vain
man, that faith without deeds is dead? But such wanton christians, had need
of a faith to iustifye them, which may not be showed and tried by their
works, for their works be such, that they be ashamed of them, that they
should be other seen or known, or else they will do no good works, ne lest they
should have confidence to be saved by the^. And like as to have confidence in
good works, to be justified by them, is erroneous, so in like wise, to believe
that good works shall not be rewarded of god, is deuylyshe and dampnable. But
yet the scriptures seem, oftentimes to attribute and give eternal life, to
workers of good works as a reward and sometime to works. But well
considered, it is not for the works sake, as deserved thereby. But eternal
life, is a reward frelygyuen by God to all the faithful for Christ's sake only,
which benefyte well perceived, tasted and feled in our hertes, will cause us to
work with love ernestly, because we have received freely, through Christ's
deseruyng, eternal life. And not because we shall receive eternal life, for
the deseruyng of our works. For so works should be iniuriouse to Christ's
blood and death, which only is ye price of eternal life. Also the scriptures
apere to attribute eternal life to good works, to move and to steare other,
diligently to work good works. And because the works of the faithful, be
seen of men, and the inward faith can not be outwardly seen, and perceived,
therefore the scripture applies eternal life to works, as to the cause,
which truly examyned, be but the effect of faith, which is ye very true
cause. And although, no dowte, to good works many and great rewards be due
as well te^porall as spiritual: Yet all the places, which sound to give
eternal life, as a reward other to good workers or to good works must be
understand, as I have before showed, or else they shall cause works to be
esteemed better, than they in truth be, or can be proved, and also shall cause
Christ's blood, to be of little reputacion. Wherefore that every good
Christian, may walk the true way, nothing trusting to have remission of
his sins for his good works, which only perteyneth to God, and is his only
gift, nor to think ye good works shall be unrewarded by God, whose reward
excedeth al ma^s understanding and knowledge. I will declare therefore some
causes, why good kes should be done.

First, ii. Pet. i.
that they may witness to us certainly, that our faith is living, and not
dead. For a living tree, will bring forth fruit, in time and season. Math. v.
Secondelye that other seeing our good works, may be provoked to do also good
works.

Thyrdlye, Luke.xvi.
we must do good works, to render and give acco^ptes, of ye talent to us from
God committed.

Fourthly, i. Petri. ii.
that through our good works, our heavenly father may be glorified. Fyftely,
Esaias. lvii. Romans xiiii. i. Cor. x.
lest through our evil works, we be offense to other.

Syxtely, Ephesians. ii.
of duty we be bound to work well, for therefore we be justified, that we
might and should work well.

ii. Petri. i.
Seue^thlye, God which did give al things, Psalm. xxxiii.
commands us to do well, saying: declyne from evil, and do good. Now it
apereth, ye good works be to be done, as fruits of justice, which not
withsta^dyng make no man just, but witness that he is just. Also it is
evident, that a living faith, which ever works by love, does only justify,
and also such works, as spryng out of a living faith, shall not be unrewarded,
and that with great rewards. And the works do testify, that this faith, is a
living faith. The works, which this faith ever bryngethe forth, be these. To
fear and to love God, to love his neybour, co^tinuallye to crucifye the flesh
with all her lusts. And as he daily synneth, so he daily lame^teth, askyng God
forgiveness there of, studyenge ever, how to resyste the same, and all
occasions thereof, and also prays God daily, to give him grace to resist
sin. And because he feleth in him self, yt al his good thoughts, wylles and
deades be vnperfyt, and lack the goodness which the law requires in the^,
therefore he knowelegeth his good deades, and thoughts, to be sinful and
continually prays God, to forgive and to pardon the synfulnes of the^.
Neither he ascribes, nor imputes, any justification, to his good works, but
rather flies to Gods mercy, which is promised to al true repenters, for
Christ's blood sake, trusting thereby constantly, and therefore only, to have
eternal life.

And as touching good works, he is glad ever when occasion is given, to work
them, as well as he can, and soroweth, that he can not do the^ with more
perfytnesse and love: But as perfytly as he can, he does them, having
respect, only to the good will, great mercy and favor, which God for
Christ's sake has showed on him, in forgeuynge him his sins. He thinks
him bound of duty, for love to do the^, so that his works spryng out of a
loving heart, remembrynge the love, which God has before showed, in gyuyng him
eternal life freelye.

Now it apereth, that good works spring forth of a loving heart, which no
man can have, except he first believe, that God for very love, which he
bears to him, forgeuethe him all his sins, and that frelye for Christ's
sake, who is his justice, satisfaction, holiness and redemption.

After this sort and good fashion, I would that all Christians should do there
good works, for love which they bear to God, for the great and inestimable
benefytes (which they undeserved of their part) have received of God, and not
for any thing, which they would for their works sake, or worthynes, receive
of God. For than, there intent and workynge, is grounded upon the love of their
self, and not upon the love of God, and so be no good works, but vnparfyt and
full of sin. And so this declaration of justification by faith, and of the
efficacitie and strength of good works, is a suffycient doctrine, I trust,
to all the faithful.

And as to them whose eyes be closed, and made blind, and whose hearts be
hardened, I did not mind to write, but in the mean season, I will pray to God
at his good will and pleasure, to open their eyes, and to mollifye the hearts,
that they may be conuert^ and that he may make them hole, of whom only all
health is, to whom be all honor and glory. AMEN.


