CHRISTIAN WISDOM, OR THE EXCELLENCY FAME AND RIGHT MEANS OF TRVE WISDOM. As
it was briefly delivered in a Sermon in St MARY'S Church in OXFORD. November: 11.
1638. By H. TOZER B. D. Fellow of Exeter College.

OXFORD, Printed by L. LICHFIELD An. Dom. 1639.

TO THE R. HONORABLE LORD ROBERT EARL OF ANCRAM.
R. HONORABLE.
I HERE adventure to present to your Lordship this Sermon of the Praise and
Worth of Wisdom. Were the Discourse answerable to the Subject, it were a
Treasure indeed and well worth the keeping, but the emptiness of that may well
give the World just cause to think it to be, as it is, too far below the
acceptance of so great a Personage, and my self so much the more unadvisedly
bold in presenting the same unto You. However, it will not be very seasonable
to enlarge a Preface with variety of studied words and elaborate expressions
for the obtaining of Your Lordship's favorable acceptance, but rather indeed
to adventure on a second incongruous boldness in trespassing on Your wonted
Goodness and daily serious Employment: whereof the One, as the world knows
well, respects not so much a verbal observance as plain Honesty and Truth;
and the Other, which duly is discharged in waiting on the service of GOD and
Your KING, does seldom give leave to spend much time in the reading of long
Epistles and tedious Dedications.

Wherefore, to say all that is needful in a little, if any by reading this
plain Discourse shall be occasioned to entertain one Thought of seeking after
VVisdome more than before he had, it is that which, God knows, was my aim in
the Publication thereof: and if, for this purpose, Your Lordship shall please
to let it go forth under Your Honorable Protection, and accept the Dedication
of it as a true acknowledgment of that service, wherein I have stood long
engaged, it is more than I deserve, and all that I do or can desire.

God direct the hearts of all men to seek after that wisdom, which is
acceptable and makes them such, who love it: and may the Gift thereof be ever
multiplied on Your Honorable Family, to the magnifying of God's glory here,
and Yours hereafter: which is the true desire and unfayned Prayer of

Your Lordships Humble Servant HENRY TOZER.

CHRISTIAN VVISDOME, OR THE EXCELLENCY, FAME, AND RIGHT means of TRVE WISDOM,
Delivered on
1. KINGS: 10.24. All the earth sought unto Solomon to hear his wisdom which
God had put in his heart.


IT was once the gracious bounty of God to Solomon, when he appeared to him in
Gibeon, to bid him ask of him what he would. Ask, says the Lord, what J shall
give thee. 1. King. 3.5. 1. Kin. 3.5.
Had Solomon been a riotous Libertine, he would (upon this unlimited proffer)
have asked Length of days; that so he might have enjoyed the pleasures of sin
for a long season; or had he been a covetous worldling, he would have asked
Riches for himself; that so, having enough laid up for many years, he might
have sung a Requiem to his soul, bidding her eat, drink, and be merry with
that, which he never took pains to get, but had it for the asking; or, had he
been a Cruel man, one of those Wolves (in Ezekiel) ravening the prey, Ezekiel.
22.27.
he would have asked the life of his enemies; that so, leading his battles with
victory, he might have enlarged his Dominions by building his Towns with Blood
and establishing his Cities by Jniquity. Hab. 2.12.
Flesh and Blood (and nothing but that) would have thought either of these
things desirable: but Solomon was of another temper; aiming more at the
promoting of God's glory then the satisfying of a carnal desire; and
therefore, considering that he was made the Head of a great People, he desired
nothing so much as Wisdom, that he might judge aright between them: Thy
servant, says he, is in the midst of thy People, which thou have chosen; give
therefore thy Servant an understanding heart to judge thy People, 1. Kings
3.8.9.
that I may discern between Good and Bad. V. 8.9.

He, that rightly considers this petition for Wisdom, may well conceive, that
Solomon had some wisdom of heart, before he made it: and it was indeed a point
of good understanding (which too many want) to be sensible, that, in respect of
the place where in he was, he wanted some Wisdom, and accordingly to ask it.
I am, says he, a little child, and know not how to go out or come in,
therefore give me an understanding heart.

Wherein he so far pleased God to his own advantage, that he soon received what
he prayed for, and more in abundance; for, because he asked not long life, nor
Riches, nor the life of his Enemies, but understanding to discern judgment,
therefore did the Lord give him Wisdom, which he asked; and Riches and Honor,
which he asked not; and both in so great a measure, that none, which were
before him, nor any, that came after, 1. Kings. 3.12.13.
were ever like unto him. v. 12.13 What was here so freely promised in the
General, we find as fully performed in sundry Particulars in this tenth
Chapter, whereof my Text is a part; where, (besides the particulars of his
abundant Riches recorded from ver. 13. to 23.) we have a specification of his
excellent Wisdom in the unparalled ordering of his house, and the full
answering of all the Queen of Sheba's Questions; from ver. 2. to 6. in both
which (namely his Riches and Wisdom) he exceeded all the Kings of the Earth.
ver. 23. So that here we see the condition of Israel was far better, then was
that of the Corinthians, when S. Paul to their shame objected to them, that
there was not a wise man amongst them, 1. Cor. 6.5.
no not one that was able to judge between his brethren. It is not to be
doubted, but that many wise men were here; at least it is evident, that One here
was, who was instead of many, for Wisdom beyond all the rest, and able to
teach them all; which made him so famous, that the wisest thought it no scorn,
but All their happiness to be taught and bettered by the Wisdom that was in
him: and for this purpose they all sought him with diligence to receive
instructions from him; for so we read in the Text, that All the Earth sought to
Solomon to hear his Wisdom, etc.

And to whom should All the Earth seek to hear Wisdom, but to Him, who was
the Wisest of all the Earth? a Sapiente convenit Sapientiam discere: Euripides.
says one; he, that will learn true Wisdom, must not (as the self conceited
do, who make themselves their own teachers) take a Fool for his Master; but
One, that is able to teach that, which he desires to learn; and so the choice
of this All in the Text was very good and right in seeking after Solomon to be
taught by Him, especially considering who it was, that had been Solomon's
Teacher before, namely God himself: for they sought to hear that Wisdom,
which God had put in his heart.

So that in the Text we have both the sufficiency of the Teacher, and also the
diligence of the Learner. Solomon enabled of God to teach, and All the rest
seeking him out to be instructed by Him. Whosoever will teach others aright,
must first himself be taught of God; and every man, that hopes to get
understanding and wisdom, must seek it with diligence.

The Parts then of the Text are generally two.

1. Solomon's great Worth, in these words. His Wisdom, which God had put in
his heart. 2. The Fame and Esteem of this worth, in these. All the Earth
sought to hear.
In the first General are 3 particulars. 1. Wherein Solomon's worth consisted.
viz: in his Wisdom. 2. Whence he had this wisdom. viz. from God. 3. Where he
laid up and kept this wisdom. viz: in his Heart.


The second General affords likewise 3. particulars. 1. The Persons, that so
far esteemed Solomon, expressed in this particle. All the Earth. 2. The
Action, whereby they manifested this their esteem, and that was their Seeking,
to him. They sought. 3. The End of this seeking, and that was to Hear him.


First God made Solomon Wise in Heart, All the Earth sought to hear Him.

1. Of Solomon's Wisdom.

To speak of Wisdom in the Audience of Fools, neither love nor know it, were
to cast pearls before Swine, which usually stick not to trample the most
precious Jewels under their feet, because they never knew what belonged to
them: but in Athens, a Nursery of wise men (where the general profession is
(...), the love and study of Wisdom) There to speak of Wisdom, is no less
proper, then it is for Athenians to study and practice it: nor is there any doubt
to be made of an answearable fruit; for, says Solomon, give instruction to a
wise man, Prove. 9.9.
and he will be yet wiser, Prove. 9.9. It will therefore be seasonable to speak
of Wisdom unto You as unto Wise men; and (as S. Paul once spoke unto the
Corinthians) judge you, what J shall say; and the Lord give you understanding
in those few things, which for the instruction of some, and the Remembrancing
of the rest, shall now be spoken on this subject of Wisdom. Where first we are
to enquire after that, which is not expressed, but only presupposed in the
Text, namely, Wherein true VVisdome does consist? And this we shall the better
know, if first we consider, what that is, wherein true wisdom consists not.

Here, to make a full Enquiry, and answer it accordingly, I might call in
question more Particulars, than one hour would give me leave to name; there
being nothing indeed, which our own Thoughts of themselves (as we are Men)
project; or this World of it self suggesteth to them, but may be well
brought into the number of those things, wherein true Wisdom consists not.
Sen. Epist. 125. Edit Basil. 1590 vel Epist. 124. edit. Genev. 1626.
Wherefore Seneca in his 125: Epist. (where he treats of this very subject)
shall by a few Questions of his answer mine.

Quid vires corporis exerces? Do thou stand (says he) on thy strength, and
conceive it a point of wisdom to show thy self more lusty and strong then
others are? Suppose I do so? Then, feris majores concessit natura: the wild
Beasts of the Forest would in this respect be wiser, because stronger than
Thou; and, if thou boast of thy swiftness of foot, par lepusculo non eris, the
least trembling Hare in the field, if thou have none other help but thine own,
will be wise enough to outrun thee quite and leave Thee, as a fool, behind.

Again, Quid formam excolis? Do thou esteem it a piece of wisdom, to mende,
what God has done, by painting out a cleerer beauty than first he gave thee,
as did once that (Honest) woman Iezebell. 2. Kings 9.30.
2. Kings. 9.30? Suppose I do this too? Then, Cum omnia feceris, a multis
animalibus decore vinceris: do what thou can, and thou shall see to thy
shame (which, were it not for thy dawbing, would make thee blush) that some
silly Birds will show more variety of splendor in the Feathers of their hinder
Parts, than thou can with all thy painting in the best of thy Face. Again,
Quid capillum ingenti diligentia comis? Do thou indeed think it wisdom to
spend sometime in the curious ordering of thy hair? It was wont to be the
saying of a reverent Divine, that he, D.H.
which has too much regard to his Hair, has commonly but little wit in his
Head. But Seneca will answer his own question well enough; Cum illum vel
effuderis more Parthorum, vel Germanorum modo vinxeris, etc. When thou have,
says he, spread it abroad in the most glorious manner that may be, or laid it
in as curious knots, as all thy wit is able to contrive; In quolibet Equo
densior jactabitur juba, horrebit in Leonum cervice formosior; when all is
done, thou mai'st behold a Lion in this respect more glorious and terrible to
look on than thy self; and thy Horse, whereon thou ridest, will, in spite of
all thy Art, carry a fairer Mane than Thou, and that which better becomes him.

If in these things there be little wisdom to be found, then give thy heart
(as Solomon once did) to seek and search out all the works, that are done under
Heaven, whither of Pleasure or Profit, or of whatsoever condition they be; and
if thou can find true wisdom in the contrivance of any one of them, fix thy
heart There: only be sure thou take not every thing for Gold that glisters;
but first bring it to the Touchstone, to prove whither it be true or not;
Salvian. ad Eccles. Cathol. l. 3. p. 466. Edit. Oxon. 1629.
and therein Salvian will direct thee in a few words to very good purpose.
Sapientia in exitu, etc. VVisdome, says he, is tried in the Conclusion; non in
Pueritia, etc. not in Childhood, not in Youth, not in Prosperity; because,
Quicquid in his laudatur, incertum est; a man knows not what to make choice of
in any one of these, as deserving well the praise of wisdom; there being in
the First too much weakness, in the second too much Rashness, in the Last too
much Forgetfulness of God; in All too much Folly, and so, little wisdom in the
Best of them: but in Exitu sapientia; true wisdom is to fix on That alone
which will hold out to the End.

Consider then of whatsoever thy Heart desires, or thy Phansy projecteth;
whither it be wallowing in pleasures, or Tumbling in Gold, or Throwing down
Others to raise Thy self, or Building up thine own House upon other's Ruins,
or the Enlarging of a Sonn's or Daughters portion by diminishing the Patrimony
of Fatherless Children committed to thy trust, with any such like fashionable
pieces of worldly wisdom; consider them all, and seriously ask thine own soul,
whither, in very deed or no, these things are like to stand thee in any stead
on thy Death bed, when thy Conscience (whither thou like it or no) shall call
thee to an account; and thy Soul (whither thou will or not) must be resigned up
to the Disposal of God, who gave it. If thou can be sure, that these things
(or any such like) will Then stick close unto thee, not to Burden, but to
Ease and Comfort thee; then rejoice in thy youth, or feed on gold, or supplant,
or do whatsoever thy heart delights in; go which way thou will, thou art in
a right way of wisdom; for commonly all is well that ends well. But if thou
suspect, that these things will then fail thee, and instead of Comfort be a
Trouble to thee (as it is much to be feared they will do so) then be persuaded
to fear too, that there is some unprofitable Folly in them; for doubtless
whatsoever will not hold out to help bring us Home to our God in Heaven, the
prosequution thereof can never be true wisdom in our Journey while we are on
Earth.

We see then what that is, wherein true wisdom consists not, even all the
Ways and Projects of the world, which will not help us out in Exitu, when we
are to leave This World, and go to Another; for that is the Touchstone,
wherewith to try them all, whither they be pure Gold or Dross.

It would now be worth our enquiry, to find out what that is, wherein true
wisdom does consist indeed; for nullo modo magis prodesse possum, (says
Seneca in his former Epistle) there cannot be a more beneficial employment,
then to show what is true wisdom, whereby we are differenced from all other
visible Creatures, and come near to the Creator, who is Wisdom it self: and
for this purpose, if thou will says he (leaving all those things, wherein
other creatures do excel thee) if thou will ad bonum reverti tuum, look home
and fix thy thoughts on That, which is proper to thy self as being Man; then
briefly it is, Animus purus ac emendatus, aemulator Dei: true Wisdom is, that
with singleness of heart we strive to be, as far as it is possible to be, like
unto the God of Wisdom.

And, what is required unto This, we may collect from the several Particulars,
wherein was expressed and made known that great wisdom of Solomon, that made
him so famous.

Abulensis in Textum.
Whither Solomon (as Abulensis proposes the Query, and some have conceited of
him) had the Wisdom or skill to find out all the hidden treasures of the
Earth, and became thereby so abundantly rich above other men, is a Question
both groundless and impertinent to our present purpose; for we find, that as
many as came to hear the Wisdom of Solomon brought large gifts in their
hands: the Queen of Sheba Talents of gold, Spices in abundance, and precious
stones. v. 10. and all the rest brought, every man, his vessels of gold and
silver, and Garments, and Spices, with such like more; and of These a rate
year by year. v. 25. and so it should seem they were all rich enough before
they sought to Solomon; and therefore it is unlikely they came with so much cost
and pains to hear this enriching wisdom of him. But, had this been their
aim, yet were all this, little or nothing to the saving Wisdom, that we are to
seek for. Take then but a short view of those things, which are not far from my
Text, and you shall see that Solomon was famous for his Wisdom in matters (as
we are to esteem them) of far greater worth and consequence: and these were
especially four.

1. His great variety of Songs and Proverbs, whereof Those were a thousand and
five, and These three thousand. 1. 1. Kings 4.32.
Kings 4.32. and herein was seen his Inventing wisdom.

2. His speeches concerning the nature of Beasts, and Fowls, and Fishes, and
Trees of all sorts without exception; V. 33.
and therein was manifested his Discoursing wisdom: and for the fame of these
things there came many to hear the wisdom, V. 34.
that was in him. v. 34.

3. His Answearing the Queen of Sheba to all her Questions; which were
Aenigmata, Riddles, Questions very hard to be resolved; such wherewith she came
to prove Solomon, or try his sufficiency. 1. Kings, 10.1. 1. Kings 10.1.
to all which he gave her so full satisfaction, that there was not any thing
hid from the King, which He told her not. v. 3. V. 3.
and she thereupon was so much taken with admiration of him, that the Text
says, there was no more spirit in her. v. 5. V. 5.
and this was his Resolving Wisdom* a gift of satisfying all those who came
with doubts unto him.

4. His admirable Deciding of the controversy betwixt the two Harlots. 1.
Kings 3.28.
1. Kings 3. whereupon all Israel, as it is said in the Text, feared the King,
when they saw that the wisdom of God was in him to do judgment. v. 28. and
this was his Rectifying and Ruling wisdom; a Wisdom to set in order those
things, that were amiss, and so to rule and govern aright.

In the three former we have Solomon's great Knowledge, in this latter his
singular Integrity and uprightness of heart; in both his complete wisdom;
being wise to Know, and Wise to Do: to Know every work that is done under the
Sun; for thereto he gave his Heart. Eccles. 8.9. Eccles. 8.9.
and of them all to Do only that, which is just and right; for that he
professed to be his care when he prayed for wisdom, 1. Kings, 3.9. 1. Kings
3.9.


So that now (if the example of Solomon, the wisest of all men upon Earth, may
be our Pattern) we need go no further to learn what true wisdom is; it being
no other but That, which hitherto we have seen as a gift of God in Solomon,
namely, a true understanding to see what we are to do, and a faithful care
to Do what we see.

This was the wisdom, which Solomon prayed for and obtained of God, and that
according to the counsel of David his Father; who formerly had commended this
Wisdom to him, as we may see, 1. Chron. 28.9.
1. Chron. 28. And thou Solomon, my Son, know thou the God of thy Father, and
serve him with a perfect heart, v. 9. as if he had said, it is not likely thou
should ever serve God with a perfect heart, except thou Know him first;
therefore Know the God of thy Father; and 'twill be to little purpose to Know
God, unless thou serve him too; therefore Know God and serve him.

What David here commended, Solomon took care of; the One pointed out the right
Way to be truly Wise, and the Other accordingly walked in it: and so from the
Counsel of David the Father, and the Effect of that Counsel in Solomon the
Son, we may see that True wisdom is (above all other things in the world) to
Know the God whom we are to serve, and accordingly to serve the God whom we
know.

Here I might enter on that useful Commonplace of Speculative and Practical
wisdom; of the Knowledge, that we are all to seek for, and of the Practice
that should answer this Knowledge, when we have it; and then I might show in
the former of them.

1. The Necessity of Knowledge, it being That especially, which differenceth
Man from other Creatures and Wisemen from Fools.

2. The right Object of Knowledge; and that is Every thing, which may help to
bring us to the apprehension of God; but especially God himself, who alone is
the unquestionable proper Object of all true Knowledge.

3. The true End of Knowledge; and that is, not to set up our rest in
fruitless thoughts and aerie speculations, but to Know that we may Do; and
this would bring in the consideration of our Practical wisdom; the sum
whereof Salvian gives us in this short but full expression; sapientia
Christiani est timor and amor Christi: the true wisdom of a Christian (says
he, speaking of that wisdom, which is Practical) is to fear and love Christ,
whose name we bear.

This again I might point out more distinctly by showing in St Bernards method
the Beginning, Bernard. in Fest. Andreae. Sermon. 1. Edit. Paris. 1632. Colum.
325.
the Progress, and the Perfection of this Wisdom.

1. That the Beginning of it (as Solomon directs us, Prove. 1.7. Prove. 17.
) is the Fear of the Lord, for with That we must begin, if ever we will be
wise; and a good understanding have all they that do thereafter, Psalm. 111.10.
Psalm. 111.10. and as many as lay not true Religion the Fear of the Lord for
their Foundation, may be sure they shall prove themselves very Fools in the
conclusion.

2. That the Progress or Continuation thereof is in Hope and Expectation to
gird up the loins of our mind and to hope to the end, as S. Peter does put us
in remembrance 1. Pet. 1.13. 1. Pet. 1.13
and so to run with patience the race that is set before us, as S. Paul does
encourage us. Heb. 12.1. Heb. 12.1.


3 That the Perfection of it is Charity; which (according to the same Apostle,
Col. 3.14. Col. 3.14.
) is the bond of all perfectness: a true Charity unto Men, who bear in them
the same Image of God with us, and that for the testifying of our true Love
unto God himself, whose Image both They and We do bear: and doubtless that
Practice, which begins with Gods fear, and goes on with Hope and confidence
in him, reaching full home to a true love of God and Man, even That is a
perfect Practice, and a true Practical wisdom, if there be any that is true.

The End and Crown of which Wisdom is the full fruition at last of the
Presence of that God, whom here by our wisdom we have seen darkly, through a
glass, and known in part, but hereafter (as the perfection of our Wisdom)
we shall see him face to face, 1. Cor. 13.12.
and know him as we are known. 1. Cor. 13.12. Of this Speculative wisdom in
the necessity, right Object, and true End thereof; and of this Practical in
the Beginning, Progress, Perfection, and Crown of it, J might well speak
more as of Man's truest wisdom and happiness; but of this subject I have here
spoken more at large heretofore upon another Text: On 1. Cor. 15.34.
and of the necessity of joining them both (viz. Speculation and Practice)
together, I shall have occasion to speak something again in the 2. General,
where we are to be put in mind of seeking them both. Jn the mean time, that
we may know of whom to obtain, when we seek them, it will be requisite that
in the next place we take notice, whose Gift they are and that is, Gods alone;
which is the next Particular of the Text. viz. Whence Solomon had his great
wisdom even from God himself. For all sought to hear his wisdom, not which
he had framed of his own Fancy, but which God had put in his heart.



And who is he, that can put true wisdom into the heart of Man, but God who
alone is truly wise? Jf any one of you lack wisdom, says S. James, let him
ask it of God. James 1.5. Iam. 1.5.
Where the Apostle does clearly intimate, not only with what confidence we
may ask and hope for Wisdom, when we ask it of Him; but also how little hope
there is to obtain, when we ask it of any Other but of Him alone.

If it be Speculative Wisdom, which consists in Knowing the right, it is
God alone that gives it; for it is He (and only He) that teaches man knowledge.
Ps. 94.10.
Psalm. 94.10. and his spirit is therefore called the spirit of Knowledge. Isai.
11.2.
Isai. 11.2.

Or, if it be Practical Wisdom, which is the Doing of what we know; even That
is the Gift of God alone too.

1. The Beginning of it, which is the Fear of God, is from none but Himself.
I (says the Lord) will put my Fear in their hearts. Ier. 32.40.
Ierem. 32.40. And doubtless if He never put it there, we shall there never
find it.

2. The Progress or Continuation of it, which is Hope and Trust in God, even
This also is from Him alone. The God of Hope (says the Apostle) Fill you with
Joy and Peace in believing that you may abound in hope. Romans 15.13. Romans 15.13.
And surely if He do not fill us with Joy and Peace, we shall be altogether
empty and hopeless.

3 Lastly the Perfection of this Wisdom, which is the true Love of God and
Man, even This too is only from the God of love; it being the fruit of his
spirit, Galat. 5.22. Gal. 5.22.
And questionless did not this Spirit of God incline our hearts to love God
for his Own sake, and Men for His, we should quickly have little true Affection
either to Man or God; but rather indeed whatsoever God and good Men hate, that
should we love.

Whither it be then Speculative or Practical, a Knowing or Doing Wisdom, it
is what God alone that gives it: without Whom, if once we undertake of our
selves to be wise, we shall prove in the conclusion as very Fools, as did that
Father and Son (which Bonaventure out of S. Hierom, Bonavent. D. Sal. c. 35.
speaks of) who fondly went about to empt the Sea with a little spoone; which
it is like they might as easily have done, as we can of our selves alone sound
the Depth of wisdom without God, who gives it; the One as likely and easy to
be done as is the Other.

Now if you will know what becomes of Men, when here they adventure to leave
God and to go without him, then Solomon (who found it by experience) will tell
you. Eccles. 7.29. Eccl. 7.29
namely that God, for his part, has made man upright, but they have found out
many Inventions; and that is by leaving God, who made them upright: and here to
show you the manifold Inventions, which men by leaving God in their Wisdom,
do unhappily find out and run into, were to lead you with my self into a
Labyrinth of many crooked ways and hardly find a way to get out again.

The Philosophers of Old, and the Schoolmen of latter times will abundantly
show us, what Jnventions there may be in the speculative part of Wisdoms; Both
of them, I confess, in their kind laborious and excellent too for many Rules
and Precepts well deserving the studious inquiry of the soundest Christian: but,
we know, the best unwinnowed Wheat is mixed with Chafe, and Hereof there has
been found so much in Theirs, that (if the frustrating, or at leastwise the
hazarding of many good Endeavors be not dissembled) there is need of a strong
breath to blow it away. the groundless Dreams, and Fictions of the One, and
the curious perplexing Niceties of the Other having so far molested their
Readers and diverted their intentive thoughts from the Truth, which they looked
for, that it is now one part of a Wise man indeed to discern aright between the
Wheat, and the Chafe; the Stream and the Froth; the Rules of wisdom, which
they pretend to give, and the fruitless Inventions which they have put us
upon. So that notwithstanding in many things they have done the World very good
service (as indeed they have) yet in This respect we may say of them (as Elibu
did once of Job) that they have opened their mouth in vain, Job 35.16
and multiplied words without knowledge, or (which is all one) they have
magnified themselves in a great deal of speculative knowledge to very little
purpose; and all because, trusting to the perfection of their own wit and
Judgment, they ran, without God, into many Inventions of their Own: and
doubtless did not we sometimes after Their example gather up Dross for Gold
and fill our thoughts with Aerie speculatives of very little consequence (as too
often we do) we should many of us be wiser than we are; and it would be well
we did remember, that in this regard we are wise but in our Own conceits; for
then Solomon would impartially tell us. Prove. 26.12. Prove. 26. i2
that there is more hope of Fools than of such wise men

Should I now show you the Inventive wisdom of Men (without God) in that part,
which is Practical, I might then tell you of the Rich man in the Gospel; who,
considering long with himself what he should do, had found out a way at last
(by enlarging his Barnes) to be merry for Many years; and that was a dainty
plot and a point of good wisdom indeed, if it had not fayl'd him; but we find
in the Text that he was called Fool for his labor; and he got so little by
that Invention, that in the very first night, which came over his head, he lost
his Soul, Luke 12.20.
Luke 12.20. Or, I might tell you of Achitophel and Judas, two great
Politicians in their several times; the One to betray his Sovereign David the
King, the Other his Master Christ the Redeemer of Israel; and therein it is
likely they supposed themselves the wisest of all their company. But this was a
new Invention of their own, wherein God was not with them; and, to prove the
goodness thereof, God suffered the Devil to add one Invention more, and that
was, to find out a way, the One to set his house in Order, the Other to
restore the price of blood, and Both to hang themselves; whih was at once the
Sun and Conclusion of all their wisdom. Such commonly is the wisdom of those
men, who study Themselves; and such for the most part are all those Inventions,
which never came from God, That alone being true wisdom which we are taught of
Him; and whatsoever He teaches us, we need not doubt of the truth thereof; and
happy are they whom God shall please to teach. But now as it is with the Word
of God, which is the Rule, whereby we are taught all true wisdom: so is it
also with our wisdom, which we are taught thereby. That, namely the Word of
God, sometimes enters in at the One ear and passes out at the Other, making
no stay at all, because it never had any good entertainment in the Affections
within: and This, namely our Wisdom, is no sooner gotten but as readily
sometimes lost again, because it was never There treasured up where it should
be kept; and where That is to be done, is (next unto the Getting of it) the
most considerable point in our wisdom. The Text refers us for this purpose
unto the Heart of Man; for it is said here that the wisdom, which made Solomon
so famous, was that which God had put in his Heart, and There He laid it up
and kept it.

Which God had put into his Heart. (that is, which he had fully possessed his
understanding with, and whereunto he had also inclined his Will and Affections
to lay hold on, and delight in it; for That is indeed to have Wisdom in the
Heart, even thoroughly to Know and heartily to Embrace and Love it: and
doubtless, if ever we think to keep and use this gift with Content to our
selves or benefit to others, we must There, in the Heart, treasure up the
wisdom, which God does give unto us. Wherefore, when Solomon persuades his
Son (that is every obedient Learner) to receive instruction, he bids him to
give him his Heart too. Prove. 23.26. Prove. 23.26.
to devote his Affections unto wisdom, and to set his best Love upon it; which
we must do, if ever we will be truly wise or True in Heart: for of this Duty
there is a double necessity; the One in respect of the wisdom, which we
desire to have, and the Other in regard of our Heart, wherein we are to keep it.

In respect of our Wisdom this Duty of Applying the Heart is needful; both to
the getting of our wisdom, and also to the Perfection of it, when we have
gotten it.

Needful it is to the Getting of our wisdom, because, without Applying the
Heart, we may daily receive Instructions of wisdom, and yet never be truly
wise: and therefore Solomon commends this for the right way to find out the
knowledge of God. If thou will, says he, receive my words and incline thy
Ear, and apply thy Heart to understand, then shall thou find out the
knowledge of God. Prove. 2.2.5. Prove. 2.2.5.
The Receiving of words and the inclining of the ear are means of singular
consequence; yet to find out the Knowledge of God (which is the sum of all
true wisdom) they are to very little purpose of themselves alone without
Applying the Heart thereunto: but with This we may find out and bring to pass
any thing, that we are capable of; as we may see in the example of Solomon,
who confesses to our Instruction that when he Applied his Heart to know
wisdom, he then beheld all the work of God. Ecc. 8.16. Eccl. 8.16.
and till then 'twas not possible that ever he should behold it.

Again, this applying of the Heart is needful (as to the getting so) to the
Perfection of our Wisdom when we have gotten it; the best of our wisdom (if
not settled in the Heart) being no better than the Foolishness of Fools, which
is very Folly, Prove. 14.24.
Prove. 14.24.

For be it a Speculative, or Knowing wisdom, which we have obtained and boast
of as of our glory; if it be not fixed in the Heart but rest in the Tongue, it
is a Verbal science, a very Froth of Wit and nothing else. Or, be it a
Practical or Doing wisdom, which we have got the plot of and stand upon as
our greatest Policy; if this too be not settled in the Heart, but only appear
in outward shows, it is but a Form of godliness without the Power thereof, a
mere Hypocrisy. Both Knowledge and Practice, if they reach not to the Heart,
are but as seed that is cast on the Face of the Earth, which the Fowls of the
Air will soon steal away, and leave the Husbandman in a vain expectation of
an harvest, that will never come. Hosea 10.12.
Wherefore the Prophet Hosea warns us to Break up the ground of our Hearts;
to lay open our Hearts as wide, as we can, for the receiving of Wisdom, that
so the Instructions thereof may sink Down and take root in the Depth, and
thence spring forth and become fruitful and acceptable at the last. In respect
then both of the Getting and also of the Perfection of our wisdom, this
Applying of the Heart is a Duty of needful consequence. There is also a
necessity hereof in respect of the Heart it self; which, says Jeremy, is
deceitful above all things, Ierem. 17.9. Ierem. 17.9.
and whosoever he be, though never so exact a Pharisee, that thinks not so of
His heart, is much deceived in his Heart; and it is indeed the very corruption
of his heart, which has blinded and so deceived him, and will daily deceive
him more, making him to be yet more vile than thus; and openly to appear, as
he is, a very Fool, even then when he looks to be accounted wise. But if
wisdom be once planted in this deceitful heart of Men, it will soon remove
the Deceit, and make the heart to become faithful to God and true to Man: for,
when wisdom enters into thy heart, Knowledge is pleasant to thy soul, then
Discretion shall preserve thee, understanding shall keep thee, Prove. 2.10.11.
Prove. 2.10.11. Possess thy heart then with true and sound wisdom, and thy
heart which before was deceitful, shall never fail thee.

The sum then of this Part is; that, as we ask all our wisdom of God
alone, so with the Heart we should embrace and love the wisdom, which he
bestows on us: and This indeed is the way to make the wisdom, that he gives
us, to be truly Ours; for so we find it was with Solomon, of whom it is said
in the Text, that All came to hear His wisdom. It was indeed originally the
wisdom of God, because HE gave it, and yet it was Solomon's own wisdom too;
for God had put it into Solomon's heart, where he had full possession of it.

It is the abundant Riches of God, that he has at pleasure wisdom and all
other Gifts to bless us with, of whose fullness every man receives whatsoever
he is blessed withal; and it is also the free Bounty and Goodness of God, when
he gives them to us, to lay aside as it were the Propriety of them, making
them to Be and letting them to be Called Our Wisdom, and Our Gifts, and
Himself in them our God too; and that is when He and his Gifts have taken up
our Heart; otherwise we have no right to nor part in either Him or Them; but
when they are There, in the Heart, then are they all Ours and We are His: His
Wisdom is Ours to make us acceptable, Himself Ours to make us happy; and We
are His, both For our Wisdom to be thankful unto him, and by our wisdom to
make him known to others as far as we our selves do know him.

For this purpose, when God once planteth the Tree of wisdom in the Heart of
Man, his Blessing usually makes the Fruit thereof to look over the Wall and be
Seen abroad, and by it is Beauty to draw many with Desire and Admiration to it:
for so we find in Solomon here in my Text; namely, that when God had once made
him wise in Heart, he was then daily sought to, as a Man who had God with him
whither soever he went; Every one thinking himself happy to gather some of the
Fruits that flourished in his Garden, to learn some of the VVisdome which God
in so great a measure had given to Him; and this brings in the second General
part of the Text, viz. The Fame and esteem of Solomon's Worth.

All the Earth sought to Solomon: etc. It is seldom seen that true worth
passes away without some Esteem and Acceptance, unless it be amongst those
who are either ignorant or unworthy of it; for Ita comparatum est in rebus
humanis, says one, M. Piccartus observe. Dec. 3. c. 7.
ut vel in viti virtutem excellentem admiremur; It is the usual condition of
Man, that where there is any Worth and Goodness in the Beholder, there is
commonly some respective Admiration of the Excellency that he beholds in other
Men. Let Homer (though never so blind) surpass in his Art the Rest of his
time, and whole Countries will be at odds about him to lay claim to him and
call for him as their Own; which might well occasion that of Ambrose, Amb. Ep
l. 6. Ep. 42.
Sapientis patria Mundus est; and, Sapiens ubique civis est: that a wise man is
a creature of such condition, who By his Wisdom knows how to make use of all
places aright, as if he were still at home, and whom For his Wisdom all places
will readily accept, as if they had some title and interest in him: there being
such an attractive Excellency in Wisdom (as Tully speaks) as that, Tul. 2. de
Fin. p. 108. edit. Hanov 1609.
Si oculis videretur, quam illa ardentes amores excitaret sui? if it could be
seen with an Eye of flesh, the most carnal man, that ever was, would be drawn
to look after It with a love and desire whither he would or no.

Great without question is the Majesty of That Wise God, whose Gift of wisdom
in a common expression of it was so much adored, not only by Christians, but
even by those men, who never had the true knowledge of God himself: and Gross
and Stupid, more Fleshly than They, must we needs be thought to be, if we think
it not our happiness to become truly wise, when all the world before us has
been so much transported with the admiration of Wisdom. Let it be the portion
of the Ass to carry a burden of Gold, which he knows not the worth of; it is
His portion, and let Him bear it; but, if Balaam be a Fool, that rides upon
him, the Ass may chance to speak as much to the purpose as He; for, the Ass
and the Fool are both alike.

To prevent this, as I have in the first General showed what true wisdom is,
so let me now briefly put you in mind of seeking after it, and that by the
example of All the Earth, which (as it is in the Text) sought to Solomon to
hear, etc. Where first we have considerable Who They were, that so far
esteemed Solomon for his Worth; and they are expressed in this Particle, All
the Earth.

That is; Generally, all the Inhabitants of the Earth; or more Especially All
the Kings of the Earth; for so this All is limited. 2. Chro. 9.23; 2. Chron.
9.23.
where the same Text is repeated.

All the Kings sought, etc. When Kings seek after wisdom, it is likely the Gift
of wisdom is Glorious and Desirable; so it is, and best of all others,
befitting Them; none having so much need of wisdom as Kings and Rulers; for
This, if in any Inhabitants of the Earth, is in Them especially the principal
thing; and therefore (according to the advice of Solomon the wisest of all
Kings) They of all Others should strive with all their getting to get
understanding: Prove. 4.7.
to get a Speculative or Knowing wisdom to Discern between Good and Evil, and
also a Practical or Doing wisdom to be Exemplary in Goodness, Both to Rule
and Govern aright: and This for Kings to desire and seek after will be in Them
(as it was in these here in the Text) an argument of their Humility, of a due
acknowledgement, that they Rule and Govern by the guidance of a King above, by
whom alone all Kings do reign and Princes decree justice, Prove. 8.15. Prove.
8.15.
and 'twill be a manifestation of their Fidelity and Care too; that, in seeking
after Wisdom (as Solomon did) to go in and out aright, their desire is to be
in the performance of their Charge faithful unto God, who has called them to
it.

But I stand not here now to read a Lecture of Wisdom unto Kings and
Governors: It is our happiness, that we (of all parts of the World) have
cause enough to bless God for crowning the Throne of this Kingdom with the
wisdom of Solomon these many years to this very day; where All, that stand
before it (and Some to their shame) may behold a Searching wisdom of God in
judging aright, with an Exemplary Integrity well befitting the Imitation of the
very best And let it be thy good pleasures O Lord, for the continual
maintenance of thy Truth, and the advancing of thine own Glory in this our
Kingdom, thy chosen Israel, to double this Heavenly wisdom of the FATHER upon
the SON to many generations.

Again (to follow the Text in the full extent of the Words) All the Earth
sought to Solomon, that is, All sorts of men upon Earth without exception. And
who, of All men, without exception, is there that needs not seek to find out
Wisdo^e? As for Knowledge the Speculative part thereof, it is not good the
Soul should be without it. Pr. 19.2. Prove. 19.2.
because This must guide us in the way wherein we go, Isai. 33.6.
and so wanting This we go without a guide, and run headlong (to our own
destruction) we know not into what. Hosea, 4.6.
Now if any had of This enough of his own, he need not then seek out for more.
bu St Paul will tell us, that the World, Sapientia sua, by it is own wisdom
knew not God. 1. Cor. 1.21.
1. Cor. 1.21. nor is there any hope it should ever know him, if it have no
oother Wisdom then it is Own and therefore, as We are Men of the World (and
the Best are no better of Themselves) we must All seek out beyond our selves
for that Knowledge and VVisdome, which He gives unto Men to know him with.

But, did we abound in This, yet are we not truly wise, as long as we fall
short in that part which is Practical; which to All men, without exception, is
needful, to make them appear worthy of the vocation, wherewith they are
called, whereunto St Paul so earnestly exhorts Ephesians. 4.1. Ephesians. 4.1.
Jn the performance whereof as long as we fail, our Knowledge (though never so
great) is but that Wisdom, which in verbis volat (as S. Gregory speaks in his
Morals) like a painted feather tossed in the Air, and vanishing away we know
not how; or it is cibus indigestus (as S. Bernard compares it) like to meat
undigested, Bernard. in Cant. Sermon. 36. circa. med.
which may chance to bring a surfeit in the end: Whence Tully does not unfitly
call true Wisdom Ars vivendi, Tul. l. 1. de Fin p. 82.
a certain Art of Living Well; This being indeed The Wisdom, that must keep
alive and preserve both our Knowledge and our Selves. Wherein how far Men of
themselves fall short, when they trust to their own strength and seek no
further, we may learn from the experience of Judas (before mentioned) with
many more, who (supposing themselves to be none of this All in the Text, that
are to seek for Wisdom) have run themselves along through their own
Inventions to an End far worse then ever their Beginning was.

We (Beloved) are of all other men (if Any be) in a blessed way of All kind of
Wisdom; of Knowledge, Consider, and the Lord give you understanding in all
things. 2. Tim. 2.7.
which in every corner profereth it self unto us. God knows how much or how
little we think we need it; and of Practice, which in many Worthies is made good
before us; God knows too how much or how little we are careful to follow it.
It will be, without question, a shame and misery too, if the simple vulgar, who
Know less than we but in plain honesty Practice more; if These, I say, do
one day rise up in judgment against us and condemn us for that, which we Know
and Practice not. From this shame and misery good Lord deliver Us: And sure we
may be, that, if ever we think to answer the bountiful Blessings of God
toward us, it is only true Wisdom must make us fit to do it: and This if we
desire to find and have, we must seek it out; which is the Action, whereby this
(ALL) expressed their esteem of Solomon's worth. They sought unto him.

There is a double vanity, One side to seek that which is not worth the
finding; and on the Other to neglect that which is well worth the seeking: each
of them is a folly, and he, which is guilty of the One, is seldom free from
the Other. The way to avoid Both is (with this, All, in the Text) to seek for
Wisdom; which must be sought for, because of it self it will never come unto
us; and it is well worth the seeking, because it is precious. One small piece
of silver (in the 15. of Luke) deserved the lighting of a candle to find it
out: be it never so little, yet, if it be Silver, it is worth the looking after;
much more; if it be Gold or Precious stones; and Wisdom indeed is all These
and more. How much better is it? Prove. 16.16.
(says Solomon) that is, it is far better, to get wisdom than Gold, and to get
understanding rather to be chosen then silver; for when we talk of That, we
then speak of Silver and Gold and all the Treasures of the World cast together;
All which we may have and be rich therewith, if we do but seek it: For, if
thou seek Her as silver, and searchest for her as for hid Treasures, then
shall thou understand; says Solomon, who found it so Prove. 2.4.5. Prove. 2.4.5.
Where, calling it a Treasure, he shows how well it deserves; and, in saying
it is Hid, he puts us in mind how much it requires our seeking: which two
are Motives to persuade us to the seeking of it; and Motives sufficient they
are (except it be to a selfe-conceited Fool) to put anyman with diligence upon
it.

But here the material Question will be, when and where and how we are to
seek it?

1 When? The Son perhaps would gladly put it off till his Pleasures be ended,
and the Father until his Projects be contrived, both supposing the Gravity of
wisdom better befitting the Grandfathers years. So in deed too many do, and
die Fools for their labor; for (says Solomon, Eccles. 9.10. Eccles. 9.10.
) there is neither Knowledge nor wisdom in the grave whither thou go; and
then it is much to be feared that They, which never had any before, will find
but little when they are going Toward the grave. We should then set upon it
with our might in the Morning of our Age, as soon as we can, because we know
not how soon we shall go; as soon, as possibly we can, we should seek and
strive to know God and serve him.

2 If in the next place you ask me where we may seek and find this wisdom,
I will then answer, that you must not think to find much good water, but either
in the streams, or at the springhead; and There, at the Head, you shall be
sure to find it clearest. Wisdom is that water of life, which the Lord by the
Prophet inviteth every man to come freely unto, Isai 55.1.
Isai, 55.1. The Head-spring of this Water is a Well of Gods own making,
namely, his sacred word; about which (unless we chance to meet (as too many
do) with some invidious Romanist, that will lock it up from us, we need have
no Contention now; as the Israelites often had about their Wells; for God has
now made it freely Ours, and every man may come and draw without exception, and
yet never empt it, because it is an Everlasting spring. The streams of
wisdom, flowing from this Head, are thence gone out into all the world, which
never had so many Helps for wisdom, as Now it has so that, go where you will
if you seek for wisdom, it will be very hard if you find it not. Only you may
chance in your way to meet with some Ditches of Puddle, fit for none but Asses
to drink in; which the Monks and Friars with such like wisemen have dug for
us, purposely to stay us from looking after better Waters; setting us on work
with some Tales and Fables of their Own to withhold us from the word of God and
as many good Books, as possibly they can. When These or any such we meet with
(as often we do) we need not make any long stay at them; or, if we do so, we
shall be very little the better for them. But, go to the Spring, the word of
God; or any streams, which proceed from That; and There you shall be sure to
find true wisdom, if you seek it Aright. Which is the next Query, namely, How
we are to seek it.

3 How? And How should we seek wisdom in the word of God, but only by daily
Reading and Meditating therein? Which I forbear any further to commend to You,
because it is Your Profession; and I hope it is Your Practice too. Yet thus
much let me put You in mind of (which too many forget) that, as the Woman of
Samaria said once to Christ, the Well is deep, Ioh. 4.11.
and We of our selves, have nothing to draw withal: All our Reading and
Meditation will but perplex and trouble us, if God do not prosper us with a
Blessing on it. It is said of these Men here in the Text; that when they sought
to Solomon, they brought Presents o^ Gifts with them, 1 Kings 10.25.
with them, v. 25. and so must we seek unto the God of Solomon; with the Gift
of Praise for what we have received; with the Gift and Sacrifice of Prayer for
what we want, and this is the way to seek and find the Gift of Wisdom, which
we desire. Wh^ therefore thou take thy Bible or any other good Book in thy
hand to seek Wisdom in it, say, with David, Lord open thou mine eyes, Psalm.
119.18.
that I may see the wondrous works of thy Law; and then thou need not
doubt, but thou shall behold the Goodness of Wisdom to thy great content;
especially, if (as Solomon his Son gives the advice Prove. 4.20. Prove. 4.20.
) thou attend to his Words, and not seek to mend what he has done, but humbly
incline thine Ear to hearken what he shall say. And herein These Seekers in
the Text may be a fit Pattern to us; for They sought to Solomon, not to
Reprove and Correct him, but to Hear and be Instructed by him; which brings in
the last Part of the Text, namely the End of their seeking, and that was to
Hear.

Hear Solomon; and that presupposes that Solomon, though a King, was ready
and willing to Teach them; otherwise he had been no fit Type of Christ, who
(though a greater than Solomon) did little else but Teach; and among other
lessons, that he taught, he taught this One to his Own Disciples; namely that
they should go out and Teach all Nations. Mat. 28.19
Which Precept of His, together with his own Example, wrought so much with
them, that neither Tumults nor Prisons, neither wicked Men nor Devils could
stop them from it; but, casting out the One and confuting the Other, they went
on to Teach in spite of All.

And who the^ is He, that is too good to Teach? Seneca, Sen. Ep. 90. alias 89.
in his 90. Ep. will tell us, that a wise man is but Humani generis Poedagogus;
by his Profession a Schoolmaster, a Teacher to any man that will learn of him.
The Son of Syrach, Ecclus, 21.13. Ecclus, 21.13.
will tell us; that the Knowledge of a wise man shall abound like a flood; and
that is, not only to be full up to the bancks, but sometimes to Run over and
water the Fields that are about it. Solomon also, Prove. 15.7. will tell us,
Prove. 15.7.
that the Lips of the wise disperse knowledge, but the heart of the foolish
does not so. Again, the Hebritians will tell us, that one and the same word
(...) signifies not only to Understand, but also to Instruct; to show that he,
which has knowledge, must not hide it, but Teach therewith: yea, the same word
signifies also to Prosper, to have good success; to put us in mind for our
encouragement that He, which is careful to Teach according to the wisdom that
he has, is in a way to do good not only to Others, but also to Himself too;
for God does commonly follow with a Blessing and Prosper those, who diligently
go That way to work. Moreover Saint Paul will exhort us, Col. 3.16. Col. 3.16.
that the Word of Christ dwell in us plentifully in all wisdom, teaching and
admonishing; and lastly the Practice of Solomon will (Eccles. 12.9. Eccle. 12.9.
) assure us too; that, Because he was wise, he Taught the People Knowledge; or,
(as it is in the Margin) the more wise he was, the more he Taught the People.
It is then a property of wisdom, that by our wisdom we strive to make others
wise; and it is a point of no great wisdom to censure the Endeavors of Other
men, and in the mean time do little good with our Own: This only by the way
should be remembered, that none Teach where they are not called, nor before
they are able; nor make One kind of Teaching a let and hindrance to Another:
but they, which can (pro ratione Loci and Personae) one way or other should
Teach; and for this Work there is None too good. But Teaching of Wisdom will be
to little purpose, except there be some to Hear and learn what is Taught; and
therefore, as it is presupposed in the Text, there was a Solomon to Teach; so
it is expressly said too, there came many to Hear. And indeed, to be ready to
Hear, is the very end of our seeking and the way to find out vvisdome.
Wherefore when Solomon desired God to give him an understanding and wise
heart, he used a word, 1. Kings 3.9.
which (in the Original) signifies Cor audiens, an Hearing heart, as it is
expressed in the Margin; to show, that how understanding and wise soever a man
be, he must always be ready to Hear, that so he may understand more and be
Wiser still: and so will every one, that is not a Fool, do; for, says
Solomon, give Instruction to a wise Man and He will be yet wiser; because he
will ever be ready to Hear, which is the way to be vviser than he was before.
Hear then we must; and to Hear we must seek and run too, yet not beyond
the Bounds that are set about us. When these men in the Text sought to Hear,
there was then but one Solomon in All the Earth; and therefore All the Earth
sought to Solomon: but now, blessed be God, Christ (who was greater then He)
has made many Solomon's instead of Him. Shall then a selfe-conceited Troup run
to seek out Other Solomon's of their own choosing abroad, because (in the
judgment of some) their Own at Home is not so Wise as they? though some do so
in simplicity of heart, being lead in a throng, and think no harm, yet of
Other some it is to be feared, that, choosing their Teachers, they will in time
make choice of the lesson which they intend to learn too, and then we may know
what to look for of them: A Parlour, an Anabaptisticall Conventicle with a
Censure of the Church and State, may chance to serve for a Temple, a
Congregation and a Sermon. God deliver the Womb of this Church from that
viperous Brood, which has too long struggled in Her.

But, suppose the covetousness of the Jmpropriator, or (which is worse) of the
non-residing Incumbent, who come only at the sheep-shearing; suppose that These
do scarce leave enough behind them to make a poor Curate speak, except
perhaps of his own wants, may we not then seek out a Solomon abroad to hear
Him? That case indeed is miserable and to be lamented. God in his mercy, for
the saving of those that are His, in due time free this Church from all those,
who thus make Merchandise of the Souls of Men; Rev. 18.13.
and that by putting either better Solomon's in Their room, or better Hearts in
Them.

In the mean time unless it can be showed that Sacrifice is better than
Obedience, 1. Sam. 15.22.
a Journey further will hardly be altogether excused: withal it should be
remembered too, that there is None so low, but has something of God in him: of
God, who knows how to bring Light out of Darkness, and to manifest Strength in
Weakness, and by small means to bring Mighty things to pass; and surely the
Water or Wisdom is never the worse, because it is brought in a Vessel of
Wood. It were a weakness to be on the One side so easily content, as not to
care how little we have; and it would be a Presumption to be on the Other so
wise in Own Conceit, as to prescribe unto God, what he shall do for us. If
therefore any thing be wanting in Others parts, do thou supply that with thy
earnest Prayers and daily Meditations, and the plain Honesty of thine own
Heart, for That indeed with a little Teaching will be more to the purpose, and
please God better, than a great deal of Teaching, and little Honesty therewith.

But suppose there be at Home a true Solomon indeed; then, I hope, we need go
no further to seek out more; and who at home would not be ready and willing to
Hear Him? Luke 14.18
He, which has a piece of ground to be seen, or an Yoke of Oxen to be
proved, or a Delilah to be sported with; or perhaps a self-conceit of doing
as much good by Reading at the same time in his Closet; These and such like,
though called for, would not be very willing to come, but rather desire to be
excused; nay, it is much to be feared they would have no great desire to hear
Solomon, though he should seek after and come home to them.

Of this Neglect of Hearing there might be much said to good purpose, and
scarce enough: but in steed hereof I must shut up this and conclude all; and
that shall be with humble Prayer unto Almighty God, One of the Church prayers.
that he will be pleased to grant us knowledge and true understanding of his
Word; that, all Ignorance being expelled, we may know what his will and
pleasure is in all things, and how to do our duties, and truly to walk in our
vocations; and that we may also express in our living those things that we
do know; that we be not only Knowers of his Word, but also Workers of the
same; which is the way to be truly Wise; And hereunto, O Lord, we beseech Thee
to incline our Ears, and open our Hearts to understand and embrace whatsoever
we shall at any time Hear, that so we may be the more fit to glorify Thee
our God on Earth here, and the better prepared to reign with THEE and our
JESUS for ever in Heaven hereafter; and this we pray for, in the Mediation of
JESUS CHRIST, To Whom with Thee, O Father and the Holy Ghost be all Glory and
Honor now and for Ever, AMEN.

FINIS.
Glory be to GOD, Good will toward MEN.

