GODS LOVE TOKENS, AND THE AFFLICTED Man's LESSONS: Brought to light, and laid
before him in two fruitful and seasonable Discourses upon Revel. 3.19.
Comforting under, and directing unto a right use of our personal, and public
crosses and calamities.

By JOHN TRAPP, M. A. and Preacher of Gods Word at Luddington in Warwickshire.

HEB. 12.6. Whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth.

Aug. Confess. li. 10 ^4. Amor ille paternus, sive approbet ^ne, sive improbet
me, diliget.

LONDON ^^^nted by RICHARD BADGER. 1637.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, and most virtuous Lady, the Lady ANNE, Countess of
Middlesex.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
YOUR late Noble acceptance of these rude and raw Meditations, conceived at
first for mine own, Hebr. 12.9.
but preached for your Honors solace (when once the Father of spirits, by
transplanting your darling-daughter That hopeful young plant, the Lad, Susann^
Cranfield.
into his heavenly Paradise, had assigned you a share in our common calamity)
has now occasioned and encouraged me to this over-bold Dedication. You look
not, Madam, I believe, for courtship and complement from a man of my coat and
quality: And to give slattering titles were (besides the dint of the divine
displeasure) to despite you with seeming honors. Job. 32.22.
A downright truth takes far better with an honest heart, then a smooth
supparasitation. But were your Honor of their strain that sound a trumpet
before them in the streets, Matthew 6.1.
Matthew. 23.7.
and love long ^^lutations in the Markets, ^ might perhaps, as fitly and as
fully as another, tell the world of your singular humility in height of
honors, your heart-attracting Courtesy to those of meanest rank and quality,
your exemplary readiness to relieve the poor Afflicted, your uncessant pains
in getting knowledge, and so suitable a practice of that you know, as has made
my self, and many more judicious, to value your Honor not according to these
outward vanities, but those inward virtues which the very Heathens accounted
the only true Nobility Nobilitas sola est atque unica virtus. Iuvenal. Nobilis
genere, nobilior sanctitate Augustine. epist. 179.
. But I know well, both ^ow hard it is for the best to profit by praises, and
how little they desire them that best deserve them. I shall therefore turn
praises unto prayers, beseeching him who teaches His to profit, Esaias 48.17
who gives wisdom liberally, and upbraids not, James 1.5.
to give your Honor a right sanctified use of former crosses, and to crown
the Calendar of your life (for future) with many Festivalls. So prays He that
is, and will be

Your Honors most humbly devoted in all duty, JOHN TRAPP.

The Preface to the Reader.
IT is, I must needs say, an over-just complaint of a Reverend writer D. King
Lect. upon Jonas Prof.
, that Presses are already oppressed, the world abounding with books even to
satiety, and surfeit. And of Another, that the untimely brats of men's brains
fly thick up and down the world, in this scribbling Age Passim circumvolitant
in hoo feraci chartarum saeculo humani cerebelli Minervae. D. Pride. Lect.
. And of a Third, that too many set forth in print, some, their own wit, more,
their own folly Hezek. Rec^v.
. Whilst, with Dominio in St. Hierome they care not What, but Howmuch they
utter Non quid, sed qua^^um etc. Hier. in Ap^l. ad Domnionem.
: with Alcibiades in the Moralist, they talk much, but speak little (...).
plutar.
: or with those triflers in the Gospel, they hope to be heard, for their much
habling Matthew. 6 7. confer Ec^les. 10.14.
. These forget, belike, that Writers should set forth not Treatises, but
Treasuries Amhores non debere libros, sed thesauros componere. Domitius Piso.
Sic Pli^^j Opus Erasino thesaurus est, imo vere mundus rerum cognitu
dignissimatu^
: and that words (as moneys) are valued by their matter, not by their multitude
Idem sermoni congruit quod nummi^ etc. S^hyox.
: and (as suffrages) they pass not among wisemen, by tale, but by weight Non
nume^arda suff^agia, sed expen denda.
. Great talkers, indeed, would be thought eminent: and some that publish much,
affect to be public; albeit they sound, many times, from their emptiness
only Vasa quae magis continent, minus sonant. Sen.
. Whereas the deepest waters are le^st heard Lene fluit Nilus, sed cunctis
amnibus extat Vtilior, nullas confessus mutmure vires. Claudian.
: and those orient stars, the higher they are set, the less they are seen.
The best and biggest of them, as they appear not at all by day; so by night,
they show themselves but small in their hugest Orbs, and but slow in their
swiftest motions In maxima sui mole se minimum ostendunt stellae.
: besides many a goodly one, that because of height comes not within our ken or
account. I wot well, there is never a mothers child of us that is not too much
the true child of our great grandmother. We have each of us (says our English
Seneca) an Eues sweet-tooth in our heads, and would be more than we are: Every
man would be either ((...)) or ((...)) The man, or Some body B Hall. Epist.
. The sweetest hearing (however dissembled) is ones own commendation (...).
Xonoph.
: and he is a rare man that has not some Babel, whereon he bestows pains and
cost, either to be pointed at digito monstrari, etc.
, and talked of, as Demosthenes (...)
, or to curry favor with the commonsort, as Herod Legatur Bez An^^t. in Ioh.
2.20.
. For my self, truly, as I look not to please all (men's fancies being as
different as their faces D. Haukw. Atol.
) so, if I may approove my poor pains to Christ the Judge of all Heb. 12.
, and to his Hidden ones Psalm 83.3. Equidem plutis secerim justam
commendationem unius alicujus pij and boni viri quam admirationem stultam
totius multitudinis. Host. in Ioh. 3.28.
, the godly judicious, I have enough, and shall well enough comfort my self
with that white-stone, Rev. 2.17. against the black coals (if any such be) of
the more malevolent Malis displicere, laudari est. Sen.
. It was a sweet and savoury saying of Occolampadius: I should be loath to
speak, or write ought that Christ should disallow Nolui aliquid loqui vel
scribere, quod improbaturum putem Christum.
. He (truly) is that master to whom every man stands or falls Romans 14 4.
: and one good look from him, is instead of all acclamations. For, not he that
commends himself, says that great Apostle; nor he whom the world co^mends,
is approved, but he whom the Lord commends. Wherefore, let him that glories,
glory in the Lord, 2 Cor. 10.17, 18. There are, that glory in themselves, as
those ancient Gnostics Gnostici se solos fontem veritatie hausisse, etc. Iren.
lib. 1 cap. 24
, and our modern Jesuits Iesuita non potest esse haereticus: and Imperium
literarum est penes Iesuitas Casaub. ex Apologista. They vaunt that the Church
is the soul of the world, the clergy of the Church, and they of the Clergy.
Sand. rela. of West. relig.
; sacrifice to themselves, as Sejanus Seianus sibi sacra facere solebat. Dio in
vita Tiber.
, and those Babylonians, Hab. 1.16. set up, and serve themselves of Christ and
his service, as Judas and his successors; that rob him of his rent, and run
away with his glory: dealing with his work, as once Phydias the famous Carver,
did with the Shield of Minerva, wherein he so cunningly enchased his own
countenance, that it could not be defaced, but the Shield must be disfigured.
Such were those flaunting Preachers of Philippi, that to carry away the bell
from a better man Philip. 1.16.
, sought to set up themselves in the hearts of their hearers. And such are
those deceitful workers (...). 2 Cor. 11.13.
now a days, as pretending to be Christ's spokesmen, will needs be his
corrivalls (upon the matter) whiles they give out themselves for some great
ones Testis est Justinius, quod hi^ statuam habuerit inter pontes Tiberis cui
insculpebatur, Simoni Deo Sancto.
, with Simon Magus, Act. 8.9. and interest themselves (as he, too far) in the
peoples affections, ver. 10 11. These cannot preface to their works, as those
ancients did (...) Co^l. Rhodig. ex Pausania.
: but may justly betwitted, as that Pope was pithily; when he had engraven upon
the gates of his new-built College: Vtretent (where he was borne) planted me;
Lovain (where he was bred) watered me; but, Caesar (who had promoted him to
the Popedom) gave increase: A merry Passenger underwrote; Here God did nothing
Papa Haartatus cum Lovanij collegium magno sumptu struxisset. etc. Hommis vanit
item reda^gait alius subs^ribens, Hic Deus ni h^l fecit. Pareus in 1 Cor. 3 6.
. So, God is not in all the tho ghts Psalm. 10.4.
of these selfeseekers, that thus i^tervert one part of the price; with that
ill couple, Acts 5.2. whiles they turn Gods glory into shame, loving vanity,
seeking after lies Psalm. 4.2. (...)
. The word there used, signifies such a lie, as deceives men's expectations,
Psalm. 89.35. Isa. 58.11. 2 King. 4.16. Of which sort, by a specialty, is that
smoke of popular applause, which the higher it mounts, the sooner it vanishes.
Verily, says our Savior to such, (and it is fearful) they have their reward
Math. 6.
: all they are over like to have; let them make them merry with it. But what
speak I of merriment? when the best that can come of such men's wood, hay,
stubble, laid upon the common foundation, is Repentance to salvation 2 Cor. 7.
, yet so as thorough the fire Inferiore gradu gloriae quam alij Paereus. quem
consule.
: besides the loss of their work, if not of some part of their wages, when
the day shall declare it 1 Cor. 3.12 13.
: that is, when the light of the Truth, Romans 13.12. or Time the father of
Truth, or that Day of death, (when many recognize, and recant their errors)
shall show them their Sin. Good S. Austin cried to God, to pardon the vanities
of his youth, and especially this, that he had preached ut placeret, Confess.
non ut doceret, to delight the ear, more than to smite the heart. A fair
glass for such to look in, a fair copy for such to write by, as write
nothing but as in a frame. Every word is so marshalled, and every sentence with
its apt cadencie, lies in such comely equipage. (...).
In these men's discourses, you cannot see matter for words Melaneth. apud Laert.
as in some men's again, scarce words for matter. Euripides, says the Orator,
has more sentences than sayings Plu es sententias quam verba. Cic.
: and Thucydides, has so stuffed every syllable with substance (...)
, that the one runs along parallel with the other Adeo plenus referrusque
rebus, ut prope verborum numerum numero rerum exaquet. Cic.
. Lysias his works are so well coucht, that you cannot take out the least
word, but you take away the whole sense with it S^ex Platonis oratione aliquid
dema^, manesque de elegantia tantum detraxeris; si ex Lysiae, de sententia.
Phaverinu^ apud Gell.
. And Phocion had a special sacultie of speaking much in few (...) Plutarch.
. Those best of Greeks were the short spoken partans (...).
; and the ^re^ans in Pla^ces time, (however degenerated in Saint Paul's Tit.
1.12.
; were more weighty than wordy (...). Plat.
. Timanthes is famous for this, that in his pictures more things were intended
than deciphered Plin. li. 35. cap. 10.
: and Homer, that none could ever peer him for Poetry, nor match him for
matter (...). Xenophon.
. How much more apt and apposite are these high praises to the Book of God,
rightly called The Bible? as if it were (as indeed it is, both for fitness of
terms, and fullness of truth) the only book; to which, all other books in
the world are but waste paper Ego odi meos libros, and saepe opto eo, interire,
quod metuo ne morentur lectores a lectione ipsius Scriptura quae sola namis
saptentiae sons est. Luther in Genesis 19.
. Called it is also, The Word, (by an excellency) because it must be the But,
and boundary of our words: and, The Scriptures, as the standard of all humane
writings. Yea, that princely Preacher styles them Princes, or Leaders Prove. 8
6. (...)
in one place, and Lords of Collections Eccl. 12.11. (...)
in another, because they are as Leaders, and Lords Paramount above all other
words or writings of men, collected into volumes. Here we are bound to bestow
our day and night-studies Josh. 1.8.
: and hence we may well gather flowers, and phrases to polish our speeches
with; even those sound words 2 Timothy 1.13. (...).
in Saint Paul, that have a healing property in them, far above all filed
phrases of humane elocution. To the Law therefore, and to the Testimony (says
that rare Rhetorician) for, if any speak not according to this Word, it is
because there is no light in them Isa. 8.20.
. This is the c rtaine Cynosura, the Lamp and Lantern, the Rule, and Rudder,
the Wisemen, star, that leads men to Christ, and without which, all their
learning and language does but light them into utter darkness. Good therefore,
and worthy of all acceptance is the counsel of Saint James: So speak ye,
and so do, as those that shall be judged by the law of liberty Iam. 2.12.
. And of Saint Paul: Let the word of Christ dwell richly in you, in all
wisdom, etc. that, whatever ye do in word or deed, ye may do all in the
Name (that is, in the word and warrant) of our Lord Jesus Christ Col. 3.16, 17.
. And of Saint Peter: If any man speak, says he, let him speak as the
oracles of God 1 Pet. 1.11.
: there is his pattern. Neither need we fear, as some profane miscreants
have done before us Longolius, Pon p^n Laetus, Poli^^unus Canonicus Florent:
qui odas Pindaricas psalmis Davidiers pratulit, ausit nelario. Spuinx Philos.
p. q.
, lest our smoother and purer style should be marred or bemired, by the
interlacing of Scripture solecismes Longolius, Pon p^n Laetus, Poli^^unus
Canonicus Florent: qui odas Pindaricas psalmis Davidiers pratulit, ausit
nelario. Spuinx Philos. p. q.
. The vulgar Translation, I confess, is so pesterd with Barbarismes, that, not
only Saint Hierome would disavow it, but Priscian himself would call for his
Ferula. But read, as it was written, or rightly rendered (besides that, for the
matter, it is that (...), 2 Timothy 3.16. that (...) ut ille olim de Liblioth.
A^^^ (...).
Physic for the soul, that crystal brook, out of which, nay out of that one
book of which, nay almost out of that one sixth chapter of that one book of
Deuteronomy, Our heavenly David chose all those stones, wherewith he prostrated
the Goliath of hell Matthew. 4.
) there is a divine majesty (that character of the deity) shining through the
humility and simplicity of the phrase: And oh the happiness of that man, that
can aptly utter his mind in pure Scripture! God himself, I am sure (the
greatest Master of speech, and Maker of it too, Exodus 4.11.) when he spoke from
heaven, made use of three several texts in a breath Matthew. 17.5
. This is my beloved Son, Psalm. 2.7. in whom I am well pleased, Esaias, 42.1.
hear ye him. Deuteronomie, 18.15. Which you may note against the curious
queasinesse of such nice ones, as disdain at the slately plainness of the
Scriptures (says one Cart. in locum.
) And to show of what authority Scripture phrase is with God, says another
expositour Malcolm. in Act. 3.
. I yield, there is a latitude, and a liberty lest here, wherein to expatiate.
Neither am I of Spiridions spirit, that could not brook it in a Bishop of his
time (more el^quent, happily, then himself) that he should vary the least tittle
in his text, though for another of selfsame signification Voce (...) cum usus
esset in istius historiae enarratione. Mar. 2 4. Episcopus quidam discitio^,
tam fuit offensus Spi^dion, celob^^ and lortasse morosior Episcopu^, ut in
media concione in rexerit. Beza in l^^. ex Niceph.
. They that stumble at such strawes, must first get their cares healed Demost.
orat. de o^d. civ.
(as the Orator told his countrymen) before they will be in cas to bear with
fruit, or read with profit. Let men be so ingenious, says a Father, as to
favor that in others which they cannot find in themselves. Eloquence is
certainly a singular gift of God, if not affected, abused, idolized: and
becomes no man better then a Divine: whose part it is, by the tongue of the
learned to time a word Esaias 50 4. (...)
, and to set it upon its circumferences Prove. 25.11.
: to declare unto Man his righteousness, when not one of a thousand Job 33.23.
can do it like him: to seek to find out pleasant words Eccles. 12.10, 11.
Verba desiderata: Ca^e^. delectabilia. Tre^^. expetibilia. Va^ab.
, and an upright writing: such words as have goades, and nails in them, being
neither lecta nor neglecta, too curious, nor too careless. Not this; for where
honey is forbidden for sacrifice, yet, there the first fruits of honey are
commanded, and called for. Leviticus, 2.11.12. Not that; because Gods holy
things must be handled sancte magis quam site, with fear and reverence rather
then with wit and dalliance, as he once told the wanton vestall. Holy Moses
covers his glistering face with a veil when he speaks to the people: and has
more glory by his veil then by his face. Those profoundest Prophets
accommodate themselves to their hearers capacities, fetching discourse from
that the people were most acquainted with, and accustomed to: as from fishes to
the Egyptians, from droves of cattle to the Arabians, trade and traffic to
the Tyrians, etc. So our blessed Savior tells his fishermen they shall be
fishers of men. And after many plain parables to the people, cries out Mark
4.13. (as if the wisdom of the Father, the essential word, had been at a
fault for a fit word, familiar and low enough for our slow and shallow
apprehensions) Whereunto shall we liken the Kingdom of God? or with what
comparison shall we compare it? Yea, it is well observed, that th'Evangelists
speak vulgarly, many times for their Hearers sakes, even to a manifest
Incongruity, Joh. 17.2 Manifestum (...). Sed Evangelistae multa di^endi genera
e medio petierunt, ut ^udi vulgo s^s^ accommoda ent. B^^ in loc.
. Rev. 1.4. etc. In after-ages (those two great lights of the Church) S. Austin
confesses that he was fain to use some words, sometimes, to those Roman
Colonies in Afric, where he preached, that were not Latin, to the end they
might understand him As essum for os, d^lus for dolor, stor^et for s^^rebit.
Bice^^voods enq^^ties. p. 29.
. And Saint Hierome is for this much commended, that remembering he was a
Minister, he stood not always upon the pureness of his style, but was far
more solicitous of his matter, than of his words L. Vives. lib 2. and 3. de t.
ad. discip.
. Children, we see, use money to gingle with, and men use slowers only for
sight and scent: but Bees for honey and wax; not to guild their wings, as the
Butter-flie, but to fill their Combs, and feed their Young. In like sort, others
store their heads, and tip their tongues, some for show, and some for delight:
but, Divines have these talents in trust, that therewith they may save
themselves, and them that hear them 1 Timothy 4.16.
; whiles they become all things to all men, in Saint Pau^^ sense, that they may
win some 1 Cor. 9.22.
. And this (to ^^y sooth) is the just intent and endeavor of this tumultuary
Treatise, hudled up, and scribled out in great haste and heat of Passion, and
Compassion (a pair of ill Speakers, as we see in David, Psalm. 116.11. and
Peter, Math. 16.22.) for mine own (...). Antonin.
, and some few others support and solace, in the sad loss of our dearest
friends, and sweetest children by the last-yeares mortality. Since then, it
fell (or ere I wist) into the hands of Authority, by means of such as
ever-ween'd it: Being got abroad, how it will take among the Many, I know not,
fear not, force not (...). Hero^ot l. 7.
. Those that have a blemish in their eye, think the sky to be ever cloudy: and
nothing's more common with weaker spirits, than to be criticizing, and
contending. The matter (I conceive) is sound and seasonable; much of it
borrowed from the best Authors I have met with; and I shame not, ye see, to
profess by whom I have profited Ingenuum est prositeri per quos profeceris.
. Neither need I, when I call to mind, how the Prophet Zachary (as some will
have it) commits to writing that which the Prophet Jeremy had preached Pareus
in Math. 27.9.
; Obadiah (I am sure) that which the same Jeremy had penned, before them. St.
Jude transcribes St. Peter in many things: St. Mark abbreviates the other
Evangelists, but yet, ever with Usury, as one speaks The blessed Virgin has
much of her Magnificat out of Esaias 29.
. Clemens Alexandrinus is called Contextor Clem. Alex a Ca^iedoro appellatur
Contexter. A^ste^. Chronol. p. 434.
, and a latter man, Comestor, for their often allegations and authorities Ibid.
p. 450.
. I will endeavor (says Gerson, and I with him) out of other men's good
Meditations and Collections, to frame to my self, with the busy Be, some
sweet Honeycomb of Truth, by mine own art and industry, in mine own words
and method Enicar ut ex been inventis, and doctrinis altotum ego men verbis
^^coordine, savum aliquem veritatis, etc. De land sc^ipt.
: and then be bold to say with another, Omne meum, nihil meum Macrob.
; All Is mine, though 'twere none of it m^^e. But something, I take it, I ^ave
learned by the things I have suffered Heb. 5.8.
. Affliction is a good help to experimen^^ll knowledge Zox practica. Pareus.
as Job fo^nd it chap. 42.5. And there shall be only fear, says the Prophet,
to make you understand the hearing. Isay, 28.19. (...). Nonn.
Understand ye these things? says our Savior: yes. Therefore every Scribe
that is instructed to the kingdom of God is like unto a householder that
thrusts forth (...). Math. 13.51, 52. (...).
(that is freely and fully imparteth) out of his storehouse (called here a
treasury, because we cast pearls before men Math. 7.6.
, if they be but as ready to take them as we to tender them) things both new
and old: that is, not only out of the New and Old testament (as son would
restrain it) but new for the nice, and old for the stronger stomach. A good
stomach, we see, falls to the same dish often and afresh, again and again, to
day and to morrow, and feels no satiety, nor cries out, he is cloyed: No more
does a good Christian. And this meets with those that demand, what need this
waste after so much written already of the same subject Quasi post Homerum
Iliada.
? The Heathen answers: What forbids to say the same good things over once and
again (...);
? Our Savior, I am sure, (in whose one example is a globe of precepts) preached
the same thing himself, and bad his disciples do the like, that John Baptist
had done before him Quod utinam ^j perpenderent quib^^ ade^ (...) placent,
neq^id ab alijs didicisle videantur. Muthes.
So he twice over, taught his Apostles the Lords prayer; nay, that whole
sermon, as some probably gather by the circumstances, as they are severally set
down by the two Evangelists Math. 6. Luke 6.
And when at twice, he drove those mony-merchants out of the temple, he both
times made use of the selfsame allegations, and arguments Ioh. 2.16. Mark
11.17.
. Most sure it is, that that can never be too much taught, that is never
sufficiently learned Nunquam satis dicitur quod nungaa^ satis discitur. Sen.
. And how others have profited in Afflictions School Schola crucis, schola
^icis.
, they can best tell: but for mine own part; though I fear not lest while I
preach to others, my self should be a castaway 1 Cor. 9. ult.
; Yet I have cause to fear lest some man say unto me, Physician heal thy
self: or twit me in earnest (as one did Erasmus in jest, touching his
Enchiridion) that there is more good sound in my book, then in my bosom Plus
sanctin onix conspici in ipso libello quam in l^belli authore. Eras.
The comfort is, I am chiefly to approve my self (and so art thou, Reader) to
him that takes goates-haire from some hands as well as Jewels; and two mites
from a mean body (...). ^uc. 19 2. id est, irquit Sy^us, duas octavas ^e
licet, oboli.
in as good part, as two millions from those that are more able. A female was
allowed in peace offerings: to note, that a ready heart sets an high price with
^od upon a low p esent. Araunah was but a su^ject, yet because of that little
he had, he gave like a King, 2 Samuel 24.23. his piety is renowned, and registered
to all posterity, Zach. 9.7. Ekron (that is the barbarous people of Palestina)
shall be as the Iebusite: that is, as this famous proselyte Araunah, as Iunius
interprets it. Saul had but five pence in his purse to give the Seer: the Seer,
after much good cheer, gives him the kingdom 1 Samuel 9 8. and 10.1.
. Lo such is Gods dealing with the sons of men. Does Job serve God for
naught? chap. 1.9. does any so much as shut the door or kindle a fire upon his
altar for naught? Mal. 1.10. I trow not. God is a liberal paymaster, and all
his retributions are more then bountiful. Nebuchadnezzar the tyrant going upon
Gods errand, shall have Egypt as his pay, for his pains at Tyr^ Ezekiel. 29.18,
19.
. And Simon of Cyrene, Ezra 9.8.
with his two sons Alexander and Rufus, have a nail and a name in Gods horse
better then of sons and of daughters Isa 56.5.
, for that involuntary service he did our Savior, in carrying his cross, Mar.
15.21 Lege Bez^^^n ad locu^. and ad Act. 20 4. Nec illum tantum sed filios ejus
Rufum, and Alexandrum ad Ecclesiam aggregatos and inter discipulos probe notos.
Luc. 23.26.
. How much more then will he graciously accept, and liberally reward the small
offerings of his weak servants, when he sees them to proceed from great
love? It Is of his own alas that we give him, as David gladly acknowledges
when the people had given their best 1 Chronicles. 29.14.
. And what are we Ministers, but the voice of another that cries Math. 3.3.
, as John Baptist: the pen in Gods hand as Moses, and the prophets, 2 Pet. 1.2.
vessels to bear Gods name, as Paul, Act. 9.15. Brethren (said he, Act.
13.15.) if there be in you (as in so many vessels of honor, 2 Cor. 4.7.) any
word of exhortation, say on. Spiritual niceness is the next degree to
unfaithfulness. If thou have not fine Manchet (said Bucer to Bradford) yet
give the poor people Barly-bread, or whatsoever else the Lord has put into
thy hand Fox Martyrolog.
. He has concredited unto us these precious talents, not to hide them, but to
trade with them Agricol^ e sterco^ibus quaestum faciunt, quanto magis in
preciosis de^ donis nihil non exercendum?
: which if we do faithfully, ascribing all the gain and glory to God, as
those good Servants did, Luke 19.16. when they said; Not we, but thy talents
have gained other five, and other two, etc. (which is parallel to that of
Saint Paul, Howbeit, not I, but the grace of God that was in me, 1 Cor.
15.^0.) he will surely reward our labor of love, Secundum labor^m, non
secu^dum proventum. Bern.
(...), not according to our acceptance with the world which is ^fiea little
enough) but according to our honest endeavor of serving the Lord Christ. Who
will in that name* put upon us the inheritance, Coloss. 4.24. and in that day
meet us with an Euge bone serve, Well done good servant, thou have been
faith^ull in a little, (so he calls the largest measure here, even ten
talents, in comparison of that sarre more exceeding and eternal weight (...).
2 Cor. 4.17. Alludit ad Heb^^u^^ and Chal leu^ nomen gloriae (...) and (...)
came ro^.
hereafter) be thou master of much; whether five, or ten, or two Cities
according to thy proportion, and capacity; besides, a largess of joy to boot;
Enter into thy masters joy Math 25.21 Non ita mortales, Luc 17.7. A^raba^^us
cum oeconomum fideliss: haberet, ^g^e tamen tulit illum sibi h^^re lem,
liberotum o^bitate, conseribendum. Solomon, Ieroboamum, etc.
. A joy more like the joy of God than of Man, a joy more meet for the master
than for the servant; yet, such a master do we serve, as will crown us with
such a joy. Oh how should the serious consideration hereof, fire up our hearts,
and force open our eyes, to see with all Saints, what is the breadth, and
length, and depth, and height; And to know the love of Christ, that passes
knowledge, that we might be filled with all the fullness of God Ephesians. 3.18, 19.
! But I must contract, for if a great book be a great vill (...). Callimachus
apud Athenaum.
(as he said once) how much more a long Preface to a little book? I shall
therefore suddenly shut up with the same Apostle, in the words next following
those before cited: Now, unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly,
above all that we ask or think, according to the power that works in us;
Unto him be glory in the Church, by Christ Jesus, throughout all ages, world
without end ver. 20.21.
. Amen.

GODS LOVE TOKENS, AND The Afflicted Man's LESSONS.
Revel. 3.19. As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten: be zealous therefore,
and repent.


IF all holy Scripture be but one entire letter, dispatched from the Lord
CHRIST, to his beloved Spouse on earth (as a Father fitly styles it: Greg.
) then this much more, and the foregoing Chapter; which are merely made up of
seven several Epistles, dated from heaven to the seven then famous Churches of
lesser Asia. Five of the seven are partly commended, partly condemned; That of
Smyrna is only commended; this of Laodicea only condemned, and sorely
threatened with shameful spuing our, for her loathsome luke-warmness, and
wretchlesse indifferency. Now, lest the weak hereby should be disquieted, or
the worst so dis^ouraged, as to say with those in Jeremy, There is no hope, but
we will walk after our own devices, 2 Iere. 13.12.
etc. Our Savior, first, counsels them in the former verse; secondly,
comforts, and counsels them both, in this of the Text,

As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten: be zealous therefore and repent.

The words divide themselves into a Proposition, and an Exhortation: or (if you
please) a Doctrine, and a Use. As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten: there is
the Doctrine. Be zealous therefore and repent: that is the Use.

The Doctrine is comprehensive, and full of doctrine; each word having its
weight, each syllable its substance. This first offers it self:

I rebuke and chasten, says the text. I, is emphaticall, and exclusive: as if
he should say, I, and I alone. So elsewhere God assumes it, and the Saints
acknowledge it. I form the light and create darkness, I make peace, and
create evil. I the Lord do all these things Esa. 45.^
. So in another place, I kill, and I make alive, I wound and I heal etc Deuteronomy.
32.39 So 1 Samuel 2.6, 7 Job 5.18 Hos. 6.1, 2.
. This the Lord does sometimes more immediately by his own bare hand, as it
were: 1 Cor. 11.29, 30. sometimes again by the hand of our fellow creatures
(the rodd in his hand) as he afflicted Job by Satan and his Sabeans Job 1.21.
, David by Absalom and (his second) Shimei 2 Samuel 16.10.
, Joseph by his Ge^. 45.8.
brethren, Israel by Ashur ^sa. 10 5.
, Christ himself by the Priests and Act. 2 23.
Elders. But still, what ever the means of our misery be, the hand is Gods; as
both Job, and Joseph, and David, and the son of David Matt. 26.39
savve cause to acknowledge. For,

Mat. 10.30
: not a bristle from a sow's back says a Father; Tertull.
much less a hair from a Saints head L^^e 21.18
, least of all, the head from the shoulders Psalm. 116.15.
, or any matter of like moment and consequence, without Gods al-reaching and
most wise dispose and appointment.

Psalm. 57.5. This to imply the offender was confined to the city of Refuge as
to a prison during the high Priest life, as being the chief God on earth
Godwins Antiq. Heb. p 98
Every sin strikes at his face, lists his throne, makes to his dishonor.
Thou have made me to serve with thy sins, and wearied me with thine
iniquities E^t 43.23.
It is an offense to all his senses; nay to his very soul, as he complains by
the same Prophet Es. 1.11, 12 13, 14.
. Now, if one sin against another, the Judge shall judge him 1 Samuel 2.25
: and if a man sin against the Lord, shall he not bear his sin Lev 5.17.
? who shall be his dayesman? shall not the judge of all the earth do right?
says Abraham Genesis 18.25.
. Now what more right, than that every transgression and disobedience receive a
just recompense of reward Hebr. 2.2.
?

them at his pleasure. What that Emperor once vainly va^ ^e^ is here fully
verefied, Julius Cas.
if God but stamp with his foot, he can raise an army of fighting soldiers;
yea, he can as easily u^^o^us, as bid it be done. If he say to any creature,
go, he go th, if come, he comm^th, if ^o^ this, he does it: as if he say*
peac^^^ be still, both wi^d^ and waves a^^ all ^^ey him, and cannot do us the
least ^u t or hinderance.

Ant. 3.6.
Away with that blockish assertion of the Stoics, that ascribed all ill
occurrences to inevitable destiny. Away with that fond dream of those
Astrologers, that (excluding Gods providence) make their fatal periods the
cause of all changes and crosse-accidents. Lastly, vanish here that bald and
bold fancy of such Atheists and Ignorants amongst us, Multi cum vitos Deo
acceptos acerbum quippiam pati viderint, anin o offenduntur ^ ignati quod hac
infortunia sint amicotum Dei, vel maxine. Basil. Selene. Orat. 40.
as doatingly deem it a thing misbeseeming and unworthy the good Lord, to
p^^^sh Man that Masterpiece of his handy-worke: and by punishing him, to
disturb (as they will needs have it) the fair order of Nature. That ^e should
deal so ill especially with good men, and religious, this they can least of
all brook or bear with: not considering that the best have their blemishes,
such as God may justly wash off with rivers of brimstone. God indeed made man
upright: but they have sought out many inventions Eccles. 7.29. Now if they
eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own devices,
Prove. 1.31. Whom have they to quarrel? Where will they lay the blame?

Act. ^.11.
: as the people did upon the Apostles at the Cripples restoration Act. 3 1^.
) as if they by any power of their own, could either help or hurt us? Help
us (I say) either by preventing evil, or delivering in the day of wrath? Asa
may trust to the Physitian^ 2 Chro. 16.^2.
, and Ahaziah send out to the God of Ekron 2 King 1.2. (...) si nequco supe^os
etc.
, but neither the one or the other shall come down from their sickbed,
because they sought not help of Iehova Rophe, the Lord that heals Exodus 15.26
. Lot may try conclusions, and think Zoar shall save him, when God appointed
him to the mountains: but when all was done, Zoar was too hot to hold him, and
he glad to escape to those mountains Genesis 19.30.
, whither at first he should have sted. Saul may go forth to seek asses, (and
we deliverance) abroad: but as he found them at home, after all Sam. 9.20.
, so shall we help in God or not at all. And the same we say of the hurt we
fear, or the smart we feel from any creature. Why look we so much upon the
malice of men, or rage of Devils, as if either of them were unlimited? Why
fault we so much this man's crossenesse, that man's carelessness, or lastly, our
own hard hap and misfortune; as if we had learned that language of Ashdod Neh.
13 24.
, It is a chance 1 Samuel 6.^.
: or as if that Heathen Idol were any thing in the world: or that things
casual to us were not fore-appointed by God, even to the least circumstance of
the greatest or least affliction? And yet, how ready are we to mistake the
grounds of our crosses, Te sacimus Fortuna, deam, o^ loque locamus. Iuvenal.
Vide Paschal. in Censura animi ingrati. cap. 1.
and to cast them upon false causes; or resting in the natural cause, to
neglect the supreme and supernatural. Jacob when he saw the Angels ascending
and descending, enquired who stood at the top of the ladder and sent them Genesis
28.13.
. David though he knew the second cause of the famine that fell out in his
days to be the drought, yet he enquired of the Lord what should be the cause
of that judgment 2 Samuel 21.1 Job could diseeme God, arrows in Satan's hand: and
Gods hand on the arms of the Sa^^a^ robbers. ^ea^.
. So should we do in like case; see God in all our afflictions; in the visible
means see, by faith, the invisible author. For although God may, and does many
tim^s make use of the Devil, and his impes to chastise his children; yet, it
is but one hand, and many instruments that he smites us with. He ever reserves
that royalty to himself of setting them their task, limiting them their time,
and letting out their tedder: Hitherto ye shall go, and no further. They can
do nothing (and their master to help them) without commission from heaven; no,
not so much as make a louse Exodus 8.18.
, or drown a pigge Matthew. 3.32.
. No: it is the Lord, says holy Hannah, that kills and makes alive: he makes
poor and makes rich: he brings low, and lifts up. 1 Samuel 2.6, 7
She was quite out, that laid the death of her son to the presence of the
good Prophet 1 King. 17.18.
. And as for the Devil, he has so little power over the Saints, that they
have power over him Rev. 12.11
, shall judge him at the last day 1 Cor. 5.3.
and have authority (in the mean while) to deliver some over to him, as St.
Paul did Hymenaeus, and as the Church of Corinth did then, and the true Church
does now, such as are scandalous and inordinate, for the destruction of the
flesh, that their Spirits may be saved in the day of Christ. Such honor have
all his Saints. 1 Cor. 5.5. (...).
As for themselves; their souls are set safe out of Satan's reach. And although
their bodies may be hurried Matthew. 4.
as our Saviors; yea and hurt by him too, as Jobs, Job. ^.
Paul's, 2 Cor. 12.7. (...). vide Muthesium in locum Antiochia ob singularem
visitationem Dei, (...) a Iustiniane Imp. cog^a^minata est Hippocrates pessem
(...) vocat In ^^^gnost.
etc. yet not without God: whose good providence in all afflictions is not
passive merely, but permissive and active, as the Saints have seen and set
forth to us in the Scriptures, and latter records, yea as purblinde Nature saw
cause to confess.

Thirdly, Is it God that afflicts? oh learn, then, when we smart, to return
to him that smites us. Send not out to Beelzehub with Ahazia, to the witch of
Endor with Saul, to them that have familiar spirits, that peep and that mutter
with those refractaries in Esaias. Esaias 8.19.
Should not a people seek to their God? from the living to the dead? that were
most absurd and abominable. Again, say ye not a confederacy to all them to
whom this people shall say a confederacy ver. 1^.
, ib.
says the same Prophet in the same place. Gad not to Ashur, run not to Egypt,
dig not broken cisternes, pursue not lying vanities, left ye forsake your own
mercies, 15.
lest ye stumble and fall, and be broken and snared and taken. 17.
But wait upon the Lord that hides his face from the house of Jacob: and by
faithful prayer draw him out of his retiring room, as the woman of Canaan
did, who brought Christ forth when he would have hid himself, Mark. 7.24.25.
She knew her daughters disease was a stroke of Christ's hand, such as none
could take off but the same that inflicted it. To him therefore she runs for
release, and had it: together with a high commendation of her heroical faith.
The like we may see in Hezekiah, He kissed Gods rod, Vna eademque ma^us etc.
under which he lay bleeding; and marking the hand that used it, chatters out
as well as he was able, O Lord I am oppressed, e^se me. What shall I say? he has
both spoken unto me, and himself has done it Esaias 38.14.15.
. Thus he. And indeed this is the only way to get off, when we are in
durance. Never look for ease (in mercy I mean) till we are come to this, but
more load of afflictions. The Syrians before and Philistines behind, and they
shall devour Israel with open mouth. A heavy case, you see, and yet behold a
worse matter. For all this anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched
out still Esaias 9.12.
. Why? what is the matter? For the people turns not to him that smites them,
neither do they seek the Lord of Hosts. Heathen Philistims shall rise up and
condemn such Israelites, nay such preposterous Christians; as run to Eli with
young Samuel, when God calls them, to King Iareb when God wounds them. Hos.
15.13. To the creature, I mean, when God summons them by his vocal rods, to
humble themselves under his mighty hand that he may lift them up. God sent mice
and Emerods of flesh to the Philistims, and they return him both those in
gold: 1 Samuel 6.5.
to imply, both that these judgments came out from God, and that they did
gladly give him the glory of that whereof he gave them the smart and shame.

Eli, let him do what seems him good 1 Samuel 3.18
. I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, says David, because it was thy doing
Psalm. 39.
. God (he was sure) as he might do what he pleased with him, so he would never
over-doe: his hand should not be further stretched out to smite then to save Is.
59 1.
; and therefore he sets down himself with that consideration. Pater est. Si
^^ter ^^nesses This cooled the boiling rage of the young man in T^^c^c^.
Go ye now, and do likewise. Say to your selves, shall I not drink of the
cup, that my father has put into my hands? stand under the cross that he has
laid on my shoulders? stoop unto the yoke that he has hanged on my neck Lam
2.^7.
* This is to fall ben^ath the stirrup of Reason: for the ox knows his owner,
and holds down his horns to the yoke he puts upon him. Yea, bears and lions
take blows from their keepers, and shall not I from the keeper of his Israel
Isal. 121.5.
? If I contend with my Maker, worse will come of it. I cannot ward off his
blow, nor mott my self up against his fire. The dint of his indignation and
displeasure I am never able to avoid or abide. What then should I rather do,
Levius sit patientia Quicquid co^^^gere est nefas. Horat.
then with meekness and silence buckle and how under his hand? and not make
my crosses heavier then God makes them by impatience and frowardness. I see
the bird in a gin, the fish upon the hook, the faster she strives, the firmer
she sticks. The child under his fathers rod the more he struggles, the more
stripes he gets. If he reach at the rod, he shall have enough of it: if he
grumble and growle he is taken up again. God will not give his over, till he
has broken their stomachs, and made them kiss the rod, which the wicked bite,
so adding impatience to their impenitence, and passive disobedience to their
active.

Ob.
If God would take the rod into his own hand, 'twould nothig so much trouble
me: ^ut h^ puts me into such men's han^s as fatastically hate me, Psalm. 8 2^
Ho^o homini d^^ on. Sol.
and are divelishly be^^ against me.

This is as if the child should say; If I (...) it choose my rod, I would (...)
to be whipped: or the condemned Noble-ma^, If I might choose mi^^ executioner, I
could be content to lose my head. What are our Enemies but Gods officers that
can do no more then is given them from above Ioh. 19.11.
? Gods Masons, to how us here in the mount, that we may be as the polished
corners of the Temple Psalm. 144.12
Gods scullions, to scour up the vessels of his household, that they may be
meet for the masters use. Let them alone (hardly) with their office (they are
but the men of Gods hand.) Psalm. 17.14.
and look up to the master that sets them aworke: raise not (...) the hangman,
but run t^ the in^^^. This will make th^e ^ay thy hand on thy in ^^h, when thou
art chasing rip, and ^^^^y to rave against the i^strument; to consider, that
tho^ that molest or malign us either with violent lands, o virulent tongues,
they are set a worke^y Gods good providence for our trial and exercise: and
therefore to let fly at them is to let fly at God himself. This will cool a
man better then the repeating of the Greek Alphabet, or any such remedy as the
moral Sages minister unto us. This thing is proceeded of the Lord, we cannot
therefore say neither good nor evil. Genesis 24.50.

come not out of the dust, grow not out of the ground Job 3 6.
, befall us not as it happens, or as our enemies would have it: but are sent us
in by a father, as tokens of his love, and seals of our sonship. God has not
only in a general manner preordained our afflictions, and left all the rest
to be disposed of by chance and fortune: but specially orders and rules them
with his most wise, just, and gracious providence, both for manner, measure and
continuance; making them ever, as inferior causes serve for his supreme ends,
which are his own glory, and our salvation. Afflicted then we shall be, (for
as no parent corrects another man's child, so no good parent but corrects his
own) but yet in judgment, not in fury Ier. 10.24.
: neither so little as we would, nor so much as we might: but so much only as
our heavenly father shall see meet. Who being only wise, and withal very
good, will not tempt us above what we are able 1 Cor. 10.13.
: but proportioning the burden to the back, and the stroke to the strength of
him that bears it, he will spare us as a man spares his own son that
serves him Mal. 3.17.
. The skillful Armourer tries not an ordinary piece with musket shot: the wise
Lapidary brings not his softer stones to the stithy. The good husband turns
not the wheel upon his Cummin, nor his staile upon his Fitches. But the
Fitches are beaten out with a staff, and the Cummin with a rod. For why? his
God does instruct him to discretion, and does teach him Esa. 28.26.27.29.
. Now the argument holds good from the taught to the teacher: such a teacher
especially as is not only wonderful in counsel, but excellent in working.
And how is that? wherein stands the excellent work of this wonderful
Counselor Esaias 9.6.
? Hear it from the same mouth; Behold, I have refined thee, but not as Silver
Esaias 18.10.
! because, having in them more dross than good oar; that is, more corruption
than grace; they would soon have been consumed in this fiery trial. Which to
prevent, the Prophet Malachie tells us, that God sits down by the fire Mal. 3.2.
to rend it, and to look to his Saints. Or, if he be upon any occasion urged to
be absent, the Prophet Esaias says, He flies and returns Esaias 31.9, et ult.
etc.
: yea, himself goes with them into the fire Esaias 43.2.
, using care, and taking course, that their ^ear be not too great, nor their
abode therein so long, as that any grain of grace should be lost, but rather
refined and enhanc'd, by a farther partaking of his Holiness Heb. 12.10.
. But I hasten.

As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten. Afflictions, then, are Gods
Love Tokens. That Is a second point issuing from the words. This was a Doctrine
preached by Solomon Prev. 3.11.
of old, and pressed after him (in so many words) by the Author to the Hebrews,
with an addition, that He scourges every Son whom he receives Heb. 12.6.
: I, and he shall take it for a favor too: for, If ye endure chastening,
Verse. 7.
says he, God deals with you as with Sons: for what Son is he whom the
Father chasteneth not? That Is the Apostles first Reason there, and shall be
ours (for where can we have a better?)

natural Son, Soli enim (...).
though he were sine corruptione, without corruption, yet not sine correptione,
without correction; for, The chastisement of our peace was upon him Esaias 53.5.
: and though he were sine flagitio, without a crime, yet not sine flagello,
without a scourge; for, By his stripes we were healed Ibid.
. The captain of our Salvation, by being Consecrated through afflictions,
brought many Sons to glory Heb. ^.10.
: conformed we are by sufferings to the image of his Son, Romans 8.29. that he
might be the firstborn among many Brethren. For as two pieces of Iron cannot
be so soundly foldred, and made fast one to another, The vessels, and
instruments of the Sanctuary were of beaten gold.
but by beating them both together in the fire: so, neither can Christ and his
Brethren be so nearly united, and fast affected but by fellowship of his
sufferings ^hilip. 3 10.
, whil^s they suffer together, that they may be glorified together Romans 8.17.
.

By subjecting our selves to the Father of spirits, in his corrections we live
Heb. 12.9.
. Now life (in any sense) is a sweet mercy, a dear indulgence, a precious
pledge of Gods singular love: for where he loves most, there he commands the
blessing, even life for evermore Psalm. 133. ult.
. Therefore, Abraham, when he would beg the greatest boon for his beloved Son,
Oh, says he, that he might live in thy sight Genesis 17.18.
. He that finds me, finds life, says wisdom Prove. 8.35.
. But where, and in what way is she to be found? Corrections of instructions
are the way of life Prove. 6.23.
. How can a natural Father better seal up his love to his child, than by
saving his life? and how is that done sooner than by a seasonable and merciful
use of the rod? for by nurturing him betime, he may keep him from the gallows.
If thou beatest him with thy rod, says Solomon, he shall not die Pro. 23.13.
. And again, thou shall beat him with the rod, and shall deliver his soul
from hell. Semblably, 14.
the father of spirits, when he would show his love to his untoward child,
whips him till he bleeds, bloods him till he faints and swoones again
sometimes; that he may let out his ill humors, and make him whole every wh^^
Ioh. 7.23.
, do a perfect cure upon his soul, make it return and live, for why should
any die in Gods house of Israel Ezekiel 18.31.
? There are centuries of diseases lying in wait for man's precious life, but far
more for his soul. There is the rympany of pride, the dropsy of covetousness,
the fever of ambition, the frenzy of passion, the consumption of envy, the
epilepsy of Apostasy, the lethargy of security, the plague of discontent, etc
Now affliction is Gods Ca holicon, the cross is the cure of them all. Gehezi
tells the praises of his severe master to King Iehoram 2 King. 8.4.5 Perussem
nisi perussem.
. Whence some conjecture, that his leprosy made him clear, that his white
forehead made him a white soul, that his disease cured him. See this further
set forth, Job. 33.14. to 31.

verily correct us for their pleasure: to ease their stomachs, vent their
choler, discharge themselves of that dipleasure they have conceived against
us. Not so the Lord: fury is not in m Esaias 27.4.
, says he, he is slow to anger and of great patience, and quickly repents him
of the evil Psalm. 103.8.
. It is certainly a fearful thing to fall into the punishing hands of the
living God Heb. 10.31.
: for who knows the power of his wrath Psalm. 90.11.
? but so the Saints do never: For as he afflicts not willingly Lam. 3.33.
, it is his work, his strange work Esaias 28.21. Vim Deo facimus iniquitatibus
nostris: prope est ut cum non permittamus ut parcat. Salvian.
? (We might, if we were oughts, live all the days of our life in his house,
and not so much as feel the weight of his hand) so when he must do it, (as no
remedy but he must, otherwhiles, to his grief) he nurtureth us as a father
does his own son Deuteronomy. 8.5.
. First, he stands and melts over us, and oh that he might not do it: How
shall I give thee up Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee Israel? how shall I make
thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? my heart is turned within me, my
repentings are kindled together Hos 11.8. Ier. 32.19.20.
. There Is all the pleasure he takes in correcting us. Then, when he has us
under hand, in the very midst of judgment he remembers mercy Hab 3.2.
. In humbling us, he remembers us, for his mercy endures for ever Psalm 136 23
Sit licet in natos facies austera parentum. Men's tamen aequa manet --
. The same hand that strikes us, supports us under the strokes. God deals by
us as Joseph by his brethren: he looked stern, and spoke harsh, but in the
mean while gave them meat without money, and sent them away in peace and with
comfort.

makes us partakers of his holiness here. Secondly, ver.
fills us with the peaceable fruits of righteousness in heaven. First,
Retentio excrementorum est parens morborum.
then he chastens us that he may impart unto us of his holiness: and that
first by removing the impediments. For, by this shall the iniquity of Jacob be
purged, and this is all the fruit, to take away his sin Isay 27.9.
. He plowes upon our back, and makes long his furrows Psalm. 129.3.
, that the weeds being killed, and the ground fitted for seed, we may sow in
righteousness, and so reap in mercy Hos 10.12.
. Secondly, Non quod afflict one proprie sanctifi^ent sed ad mini^^la sunt ad
san^i s^^tio^ci^. I^^.
He gives us by affliction the exercise, proof, and increase of says, hope,
and charity: together with sundry other principal graces; working by them
experience and patience, which serve for the beautifying, and perfecting of a
Christian. For let patience have her perfect work, says St James Iam. 1.4.
: intimating, that he is but an imperfect Christian, that wants patience; a
very little child in Gods house (if any at all) that cannot bear the rod.
Thus he makes us partakers of his holiness. Pareus.
And so he does of his happiness too, called here (is some judicious interpret
it) the quiet fruits of righteousness; as elsewhere, the crown of
righteousness^ 2 Timothy 4.8.
, the crown of life Rev. 2.10.
, the weight of glory, that farre-most-excellent exceeding and eternal weight
of glory 2 Cor. 4.17.
, wrought out unto us by the afflictions of this life: which being light and
momentary are not worthy to be reckoned Romans 8.18. Quo it alis praelentibus
durius deprimor, eo de futuris gaudiis certius praesumo. Greg.
, therefore, nay, not to be named in the same day with the glory that shall be
revealed at that day. Add hereunto, that by our crosses sanctified, weight is
added to our crown of bliss, since according to the measure of our afflictions
God meteth unto us of his graces, that we may be able to bear them: and
according to the measure of our graces, he proportioneth our glory and future
happiness.

this was Abraham's error in the want of an heir of his own body. When God
had said unto him, Fear not Abraham: I am thy shield, and thine exceeding
great reward; Lord God, says he, what will thou give me, seeing I go
childlesse, Genesis 15 1.2.
, etc. This also was the peoples weakness in the want of water. Is God say
they amongst us Exodus 17.7.
? as if that could not be, and they athirst. So Gideon in the invasion of the
Midianites. The Lord, says the Angel, is with thee, thou valiant man. But
Gideon said unto him, Oh my Lord, if the Lord be with us, why then is all this
befallen us Judge. 6.12.13 Psalm. 7 7. Buchelecius.
? The like we may say of David in that melancholy psalm of his, as one calls
it; and the whole Church in that her doleful ditty; I said, my hope, and my
strength is perished from the Lord, Lam. 3 18.19.
remembering mine afflictions and my misery, the wormwood, and the gall. I, but
who put in that wormwood and gall (might one have replied) into Gods cup? 'twas
never, sure, of his tempering; that is an ingredient of your own addition. It Is
true, there is a cup in the hands of the Lord, and the wine thereof is red, and
full of mixture. But what? shall all taste alike of Gods cup? No, no, the
Saints do only sip of the top; they drink only so much of it as is clear
and sweet, Illud solum quod suavius est et limpidius.
in comparison: but the dregs thereof, the wicked of the earth shall wring them
out, and drink them up Psalm. 75.8
: say there be some bitterness in that we suffer (as no affliction, for the
present, is joyous but grievous Heb. 12.11.
,) yet bitter potions bring on sweet health: and it is in great love, no
doubt, (however it be taken,) that the tender father medicines his child for
the worms, gives him aloes, or the like: The child cries out as if he were
killed, sputters and keeks as if he were poisoned; yet still the fathers love is
never the less: no more is Gods, for the gall he gives us. It is not fury but
mercy that sets God a wor^e in this kind. We are judged of the Lord, that we
may not be condemned with the world 1 Cor. 11.
. Now to make that an argument of his hatred that he intends for an instance of
his love, what can be more absurd and provoking? How would you take such usage
at the hands of your children? If they should make such akward and unkind
constructions, when you physic them for their good: or, if need so r^quire,
apply sharp corrosives, or hot trons to their flesh? How could you take it, I
say, if they should exclaim or but mutter; my father hates m^, is weary of my
company, desires my death, seeks to rid me out of the world? would it not gall
you to be so much mistaken? And what shall God do, think you? especially, Non
est argumentum aversi dei, quemadmodum diabolu^ interpretatur: sed potius
patern^e ipsius benevolenti^e. Lavat. in Pro. 3.11.
since herein we close with the Devil, and take part with him, against our
own souls. His work is to accuse God to man (as he did to our first parents
in Paradise) as if he envied man the best estate; and of very hatred holds him
to hardship, and feeds him (as Ahab did Michaiah whom he loved not) with the
bread of affliction, and water of adversity. Thus he suggested to Job by his
wife and three friends; leaving him his tongue untoucht (when all his body
besides, Chrysostom. To^um est pro vulnere corpus.
was but one great botch) as hoping that he, would therewith have cursed God and
dyed Job. 1. ult.
, or charged him with folly and cruelty p. So the tempter would feign have
persuaded our Savior, that he was no son of God, because he was afflicted
with hunger Matthew. 4.
. But against this temptation, forget not the consolation, which speaks unto
you as unto children; my son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord,
neither saint when thou art rebuked of him: for whom the Lord loves he
chasteneth Heb. 12 5.6. Non ita beatum paulum pu^o quod in coelum raptus quam
quod in carcerem conjectus. Chrysostom. in Ephesians. 3.1.
etc. whence the Apostle reckons affliction amongst Gods honoraries, and tokens
of respect: for, To you it is given says he, not only to believe (though
that is a great matter for he that believes has set to his seal that God is
true Ioh. 3 33.
, has subscribed to his truth, and given him a testimony) but also to suffer
Phil. 1.29. Act and non in page 1565
: which (says Father Latymer) is the greatest promotion that God gives in this
world. Job (good man) cannot but admire at it, that God should make so much
account of man, should so magnify and dignifie him, as to think him worth the
melting, though it be every morning, and trying, though it be every moment.
Job. 7.17.18.

My son despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, that is the first: neither
saint when thou art rebuked Heb. 12.5.
, that is a second. This is the Apostles own use of this point (after Solomon)
and this is as good an use as we can put it to.

First then, I. (...) Targum. (...)
beware you despise not Gods correction; count it not an ordinary thing, a
light matter, a common occurrence, such as comes and goes as the rain on our
clothes which after a while dries up, and all is as before. This is to elevate,
(...) Heb. 12.5.
and set light by Gods love tokens, to vilipend and undervalue his kindnesses,
to make no repute nor reckoning of his gracious expressions, and dearest
indulgences: whilst we thus lay them at our heels, and cast them into
by-corners, as things not worth our careful keeping, or kind acceptance.

To help against this extreme: Consider first, that affliction comes not out
of the dust, no not the least and lightest that does befall us: but though Man
be borne to trouble as the spark to fly upward, yet every Job will seek unto
God as the author, and purposely to breed true remorse in himself Ioh.
5.6.7.8.
: and every Naomi (in case of personal sickness or death of friends) will
say, the hand of the Lord is gone out against me Ruth. 1.13
: and every Israelite indeed collect, are not these evils come upon us
because our God is not with us Deuteronomy. ^1.17
? For neither is it for naught (in the second place) that God afflicts: but
ever there is some Achan in the army, some Sheba in the town, some Jonas in
the ship, some distemper, I mean, in the soul, some disorder in the life,
that God would have removed, and remedied. Thirdly, that he keeps count how
often he afflicts us, and what good use we make of his hand. Amos, 4.5.6.7.

Now shall God count our crosses, and we contemn them? shall he number our
lashes, and we neglect them? shall he lay them on in love for our good, and we
bear them off with head and shoulders, least they should do us good? The
hypocrite, says Elihu, cries not when God binds him, and does therefore heap
up wrath Job. 36.11.
. The wicked, says holy Hannah, are silent in darkness 1 Samuel 2.9.
, and shall therefore lie down in sorrow Esaias. 50.10.
: they shuffle over their crosses, and make some sorry shift to rub thorough
them, and think to wear them out as well as they can. Such were those in
Jeremy, woe is me for my hurt, my wound is grievous. There Is their moan at
first, but what after a while of pawsing? Truly this is my grief and I must
bear it Ier. 10.19.
. As who should say: There Is no remedy; it is that we all must look for, to
have crosses while we are here, when things are at worst they will mend again:
such and such have suffered the very same, and done well enough, and so I hope
shall I. God complains often of this stupidity, and senselessenesse in his
people, and threatens it sore with a succession of crosses Lev. 26.
; seven more and seven more, and seven to that, to the conversion of his own,
and the confusion of his enemies: for is it fit that he should cast down the
bucklers first? No: he is too wise, and too strong, to be overcome, or wearied
out by any means but strong prayer and humble yeeldance under his mighty hand.
Look to it therefore (I charge you) or look for a worse matter. God has his
rods sticking in every corner of the house: yea he has a swinging rod for them
that will not mend with a twig: or if a rod will not do, he will take up his
staff: or if that serve not the turn, he has scourges and scorpions. It Is
sure, if he take us once in hand, he will master us, and make us return to him
that smites us, or ere he give us over. Take heed therefore we be not of those
fools that will not grow wiser though brayd in a morte^ Prove. 27.22.
: of these drunkards that are stricken, and find it not; beaten again, and
feel it not Pro. 23.35.
: of those Stoics (stocks rather you may style the^) that, count it a virtue
to stand out all cross^^, and not be stirred thereat: that think if they may
escape afflictions, it is well; as if not, it is a destiny, they must ^eare it, they
were borne to it: and so as beasts or rather as blocks 1 Samuel 25.37.
they lie under their burden: and account it greatest valor to make least ado,
and lay it as little as may be to heart. But this is to cross God, who intends
me^ should take up their cross, Crucem ala^^es con^cen da^^^ Dull ces sunt
e^avi, tan e^si valde a^e by Na^iing.
not tread upon it: carry it on their backs, not make a fire of it; be active
in carrying it, and do it cheerfully, not because they can neither will nor
choose: be sensible of the weight of it, and not run away with it as Sampson
did with the gates of Gaza. I tell you, there is no standing before a lion when
he roareth Amos. 3.8.
: there is no bearing up our sails in a tempest, when it rages, nor contesting
with sovereignty, no resisting omnipotency. If ye mean to be Kings Sons, ye
must bring him the foreskins of an hundred Philistims, show him the fruit of
our former ^aff rings. For otherwise, he will construe it for a contempt, and
standing over us with his great rod, swinge us soundly, and say at every lash,
hear ye the rod, and who has ap^ointed it Mi^. 6.9.
. God tells his revolted people by Hosea, he will first be a moth to wast them
by some lighter affliction: if that affect not, he will be a worm to rot them,
then a lion to tear them, and last of all, withdraw himself from having to
do with them, till they see their sin, and seek his face, Hos. 5.12.13.14.15.

A second lesson the Wiseman takes us out from this point, is, Neither be weary
of his correction: (...) Spinae nomen hinc deducitur: Vnde Kabvenaki locum hunc
exponit, Ne ejus castigationes ut spinas quasdam existin es tibi molestas.
Psalm. 73.13.
that is, (as the word imports, and the Apostle interprets it) fret not at it,
faint not under it. Far be it from thee, to repent thee ever of thy repentance
with David in a passion; or to wish thy self eased of those Love Tokens,
which thou feel as thorns in thine eyes, and therefore startlest; and as
pricks in thy sides, and therefore winchest. This is to make an ill
construction of Gods kindness, as if he meant to kill thee therevvith: and to
upbraid him with his Mercies, as if they were Cruelties. He hedgeth us about
with his thorns Hos. 2.6.
, that he may keep us within compass: he pricks us with his briars, that
he may let out our ill humors. Oh happy thorns of tribulation, that open a
vein for Sin to gush out at! Only, let us not rage at the Surgion as madmen,
nor swoone under his hand as milke-sops; but frame to a peaceable and patient
behavior; chiding our hearts when we feel them fret, and shaming our selves
when we find them faint. Why art thou cast down, my soul, and why art thou
disquieted within me Psalm. 43.
? Why do thou cry aloud? is there no king in thee? is not the first dominion
come unto thee? is thy Counselor perished Mic. 4.8, 9.
? Surely, if (amidst so many privileges) thou faint in the day of adversity,
thy strength is but small Pro. 24.10
. Look through the Cloud, and see the Sunshine of comfort on the other side.
The time shall come, when thou shall see and say, That it was in very
Faithfulness, nay, in very Love, that God afflicted thee Psa. 119.75
: and that all things (even afflictions too) do concur and cooperate to our
greatest good Romans 8.28.
; such as we would not have wanted for any good. (...).
Be not ye therefore Murmurers 1 Cor. 20.10.
, neither be faint in your minds; but call up your spirits, and fortify your
hearts against whatsoever discouragements. For your help herein;

First, consider the good end God aims at, and attaines to in all our
afflictions; which is to humble us in the sense of our Sins; to give us proof
and experience of his power and love in preserving us in them, and delivering
us out of them; to purge out our dross, and take away our Tin; Esaias 1.25.
to greaten our Graces, and by making them more active and stirring, to make us
more able unto, and abundant in, every good word and work. God by affliction
separates the Sin that he hates, from the Son that he loves: and keeps him by
these thorns, that he break not over into Satan's pleasant pastures, which
would fat him indeed, but to the slaughter. And albeit we cannot, for present,
perceive any such benefit, but the contrary; yet wait a while, Vlricus Dux
Wuttemb ^^cus, Anno 1519 and Sucviae Confaederatu^ ducatu pellitur. Exul ad
Philipp: Hastia Lantgrav: consugit -- Vt sibi exilium leve d^ cret, and patrir
possessionem; si Evangelij luce catendum fuisset, pro da vno reputaret Scultes:
Annal. p. 419.
till God has brought both ends together, and you shall subscribe to this
truth. A Torch burns after a while, the better for beating; a young Tree
settles the faster for shaking: Gods Vines bear the better for bleeding; his
Spices smell the sweeter for powning; his Gold looks the brighter for
scowring. He that knows our frame, knows that we are best when we are
worst, and live holiest when we dye fastest; and therefore frames his dealing
to our disposition, and seeks not so much how to please us, as to profit us.

Secondly, set thy self to remember the consolations of the Scriptures: And
first, the precious promises, those breasts of Consolation Esaias 66.11.
which we are bid to suck, nay to oppress, till we get out the sweetness.
Do as the little Be does, she will not off the flower, till she has made
somewhat of it. Had it not been for this Aqua coelestis, David had surely
fainted in his affliction Psalm. 27.13. Psalm. 119.71.
: but this good word from heaven fetched him again, when he was ready to
sink. And another time, when he had reasoned himself our of all patience, at
the prosperity of the wicked, and his own harder condition; he went into the
house of God, and (by perusal of the promises) he received satisfaction and
settlement Psalm. 73.17.
. Secondly, the examples recorded in Gods Book on purpose, that we through
patience, and comfort of the Scriptures, might have hope Romans 15.4.
. There you shall find Job blessing the time that ever he was corrected Job 1.
: David acknowledging, that it was good for him that he was afflicted Psalm.
119.
: Jeremy praying for it, as a good thing he needed Iere. 10.
: a whole Church-full of people voting the same way, Lam. 3.27. Lazarus (though
Christ's bosome-friend) laboring under a mortal disease, and many souls
cured, and gained to Christ by his sickness. Behold, said she, he whom thou
love, is sick, Ioh. 11. Si amatur, says one, Aug.
quomodo infirmatur? If loved of Christ, how comes he to be sick? well enough:
Anno 1503. Frederi^^ ^lectori Saxoniae na^^eati vita est in dorio crent aureo
color salges etc. futuri un san omen ex alvo naterna secum tulit. Bacholeerus
in Chrea^^.
It Is nothing new, for Gods best beloved to be much afflicted. Qui non est
Crucianus, non est Christianus, says Luther, There Is not a Christian that
carries not his Cross. Nay, look into the eleventh of the Hebrews, and ye
shall see, that none out of the place of torment, have suffered more than Gods
dearest Saints. Wherefore, lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble
knees: and (since you run with so good company, and upon so good encouragement)
run with patience, the race that is set before you Hebr. 12.1.
. There Is nothing befalls us, but has befallen our betters before us.

Thirdly, Walk by faith, not by sense, 2 Cor. 5.7. and know, that Grace to
stand in affliction, and to gain by it, is better than freedom or
deliverance. It Is sure, S^pi^s opinione quam te la^o^atum. Senec. ^p. 13.
that a cross sanctified, fears us, more than hurts us: for it brings us
word, that we are such, as being loved of God, are called according to his
purpose Romans 8.28.
. Only, look not to the things that are seen, with the eye of sense: but, at
the things that are not seen 2 Cor. 4 18
, but by the eye of faith: the property whereof, is to believe what God says,
though sense contradict it never so much; and to bear a man up above all
afflictions, as blown bladders swim aloft all waters. Here then, silence your
Reason, and exalt your Faith; conclude, if you be one of Gods, whatever your
affliction be (how pressing or piercing soever) it is shot in love, as
Ionathans arrows, to warn you, not to wound you; to bid you escape for your
life, with David, since Saul, the devils will, is your utter destruction. And
although you cannot yet well see, how, Out of this Eater, can come meat Judge.
14.14.
, etc. yet you shall see shortly, that God humbles and proves you, to do you
good in your latter end Deuteronomy. 8.16.
. Say then to thine affliction, in the language of Faith, as Iehoram to Iehu,
Is it Peace? then march as furiously as thou will. Come thou in love? ride
on, because of the word of Truth: for thou art a good messenger; and bring
good tidings. He will not fail, in his good time, to make thee good unto
me, who is good, and does good Psa. 119.68
to all that trust in his goodness before the Sons of men. Mean while, I
will vvait patiently on him that waits to do me good, and should I dye in
the waiting condition? yet, Blessed (says the Prophet there) are all they
that wait for him, Esaias 30.18.

Romans 5.3.
, yea, to over-abound exceedingly with joy 2 Cor. 7.4. (...).
. Such an exuberancie of joy, as should break forth into thankfulness; not so
much for the afflictions themselves, (for in their own nature, certainly, they
are evils, Prove. 15.15. and strong temptations to Sin, Iam. 1.2. they are also
fruits of Sin, and part of the curse) as for the love of God to us in Christ,
altering their property, Genesis 50.20. and turning these curses into crosses,
that I say not blessings, and these testimonies of his wrath, into tokens of
his love. The cross of Christ, (like that Tree in Exodus, which Moses cast
into Marah) has made the waters of afflictions, of bitter and loathsome, sweet
and wholesome. Christianorsi propria virtus est, etiam in ijs quae adversa
putantur, refer gratias. Hieron. in Ephesians. 5.
Put them therefore upon the score of Gods favors, look upon them as his
Love Tokens, and be thankful. Hereby we shall approve our selves Sons, and not
Bastards; Subjects of his love, and not objects of his hatred; according to
that in the Text,

As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten.

The just man falls seven times, that is, often, says Solomon: understand it
chiefly of crosses and afflictions, as appears both by the context and
opposition, Prove. 24.16. There are six troubles, and seven, out of which a
good man may need deliverance, says Eliphaz, Job 5.19. yea, David rises yet
higher, and tells us, that Millions are the troubles of the Righteous Psalm.
34.19.
; so the words may be read and rendered, Psalm 34. And this you may see
exemplified in righteous Abel, first: of whose gifts, though God himself
testified Heb. 11.4.
, yet he came to an unhappy and untimely end: besides, he was the first that
ever tasted of death. Vix mii^ persuade^ hominem ex homine n^iteriorem ^atum
este, etc. Fun^cius Chron^l.
After him Noah a most calamitous person as ever lived, as the Chronologer
computes it. Lot had his righteous soul vexed from day to day by the unclean
Sodomites: Abraham had sore trials: and that bosom, wherein we all look to
rest, was assaulted with diverse difficulties. Few and evil were the days of
Jacobs pilgrimage, his whole life one continuate affliction. What should I
stand to tell you of Joseph, and Job, and Moses, and David, and Paul? The whole
Church is for this cause called a worm. Es. 41.14. and difference^ from all
other societies by this character, Oh thou afflicted and tossed with tempest,
that have no comfort! Esaias 54.11. and yet Christ loved the Church and gave
himself for it Ephesians. 5.25.
. Christ himself, the head and husband of the Church, was consecrated by
afflictions Heb. 2.
; and from his cradle to his cross he was the man that had seen affliction by
the rod of Gods wrath La^. 3.1.
: and yet he was the beloved son in whom the father was well pleased. And as
himself had his share in suffering (and a chief one too, for he had the worst
of it, whiles he received the sting of sorrow into his own person that we
might be free) so he foretold it of all his, twice in one Chapter. In the world
ye shall have tribulation: And again, ye shall weep and mourn, but the
world shall rejoice John 16.20, 33.
etc. And why his own more then others?

Not for any delight he takes in their trouble (I must tell you) for he
afflicts not willingly, nor grieves the children of men La^. 3.35.
. If he do, it is to his own grief first, Hos. 11.7, Ier. 31.19.20. In all
their afflictions he is afflicted Esa. 63.9. Ille dolet quoties cogitut esse
serox.
, and if the toe of Christ's mystical body be crushed in earth, the head cries
out from heaven, why hurtst thou me Acts 9.4.
?

Neither is it secondly, to satisfy his justice upon them, for that is done
already (once for all) by him who bore our sins in his body on the tree,
suffering, the just for the unjust 1 Pet. 2.24.
, and indenting for our freedom. See the articles of agreement fitly and
fairly drawn out by himself, Ioh. 18.8. If ye take me, let these go their
way. Gods acquittance we have to show under his own hand Matthew. 3. This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.

Neither yet thirdly, is it to show his sovereignty, whereby, as absolute Lord
of all, he might do with his own as he will, and use his creatures at his
pleasure Esa. 6.4, 8. Romans 9.20.
.

Nor lastly, is it merely (though mainly) for his own glory without any other
respect, that he smites and chastises: but even then when he principally
intends the promoting of his own ends in it, as Ioh. 9.3. yet semper aliquid
subest, there is something more in it then so, that moves him to do it. And
what may that be?

Romans 8.29. with Luke 24.26. 1 These. 3.3. 1 Pet. 2.21 why then should we be so
strange at the matter, 1 Pet. 4.11. or startle at the mention, Ioh. 11.8. of
that which we know was so long before determined, and is therefore inevitable?

Adams sin; secondly, sin inherent in us, This root cannot be plucked up till
we are transplanted.
that peccatum peccans as the schools term it, that common cause and impure
seminary of sin, original concupiscence: (...). Timon a^u^ La^^tium.
which the Heathen man also assigns for a cause of all our miseries. Thirdly,
sin issuing from us: our omissions, commissions, faylings in the manner, which
forasmuch as they exceed in number the hairs of our head, what marvel if the
best have their part in afflictions Psalm. 40.12.
? since sin and punishment are inseparable companions; Isidore the Monk was
out, that vanted he had felt in himself to motion to sin for forty year
together. So^tat. lib. 4.
they go tied together with chains of Adamant, says the Poet: like
individual twins they are borne together, live together, are attended the one
by the other, as the body by the shadow: where sin is in the saddle, there
punnishment is on the crupper. Whence it is that the Hebrews have but one and
the same word for them both: and blind Nature prompted those Mariners, to
demand of the obnoxious Prophet Jonah, what evil have thou done, Ion. 1.7.
that the hand of thy God does follow thee so close? and those Barbarians to
censure St. Paul for some murderer, whom, though he had escaped the sea, yet
vengeance suffered not to live Act. 28.4.
.

Ephe. 6.12.
. Gods people tread so hard upon the Devils head, that he cannot but turn
again, bite them by the heels, with Dans adder in the path Genesis 49.17.
, mischieve them, I mean, as much as he may, that if they will needs go to
heaven, they may go halting at least with Jacob; they may feel his fingers
with Paul 2 Cor. 12. (...).
, be sensible of his siftings with Peter Luke 22.31
. Hence it is that our way to Gods kingdom is strawd with crosses, an
afflicted way Math. 7.17 (...).
, like that of Jonathan and his armor-bearer 1 Samuel 14 4
, or that of Israel into the land of Canaan: because it lies thorough the
wilderness of this world, where we are sure to have tribulation John 16. ult.
: it being to the faithful christian not a paradise but a purgatory, not a
place of pleasure but of pilgrimage, not of triumph, but of warfare, of
confused noise, and of garments rolled in blood Esa. 9.5.
. What marvel then if in such a place as this, Nunqua^ bella bonis, nunquam
certamina desunt:

Et quocum certet men's pia semper habet.


we meet with conflicts and counter-buffes from the Dragon and his angels,
who hate us with a deadly hatred, as Cain did Abel, because our works are
better then theirs. Not to speak of that old enmity Genesis 3. (where begins the
book of the wars of the Lord Number 21.14
, such as shall still be in sighting, while the world shall be standing) ever
since which divine decree, The unjust man is an abomination to the just, and
he that is upright in his way, is an abomination to the wicked Prove. 29.27
. Whereunto may be added, that during our abode here (such is humane condition)
although we had no troubles of our own, yet should we have sorrow enough by
compassionating others; it being the usual lot of Gods best children, to have
their back-burden of both. See Heb. 10.32, 33, 34.

would we grow, yea, how wild and wicked? What would not Abimelech have
done, if God had not fastened him to his bed Gene. 20.17
? Whither would S. Paul have swelled, if Satan had not buffetted him? How far
would not Sampson have run, being once out, if God had not stopped him with the
cross? Next, Sinite virgam cor^iprentem ne se^^iatis malicum conterente Bu^.
for evil of pain, both that which is temporal, 2 Chronicles. 24.28. The staile
and the wind hurts not the wheat, but cleanses it from the chafe. Sop^,
though it be black, soyleth not the cloth, but rather at length makes it more
clean; so does the black cross help us to more whiteness, if God strike with
hi^ battledore. ^radford, Act. and Mon. ^. 1486
and that which is eternal, 1 Cor. 11.32. is prevented by affliction. But,
secondly, as it prevents evil, so it purges it: for as dross is with
silver, offall with corn, soil with cloth; so is corruption with our graces.
Neither is there any so pure, but needs fining. Affliction is Gods fire:
winnowing affliction is Gods fan, Iere. 4.11. washing affliction is Gods
soap, Dan. 11.35. Winds and thunder clear the air, so do Afflictions the
soul. Thus, in respect of evil, God has his ends in his peoples afflictions.
Secondly, for that which is good in them, first to try their sincerity, and to
know what is in their hearts 2 Chr. 32.31
; whether they love him, for himself, and will serve him without wages. The
carnal Capernaites followed Christ while he fed them John 6.26.
. Judas can be content to bear the cross, so he may bear the bag: but Job
will trust in God though he kill him Job 13.15.
: and David in deep^st distress or desertion, will hang on still; and be
persuaded, he shall yet praise him, who is the help of his countenance, and
his God Psalm 43 ult. Bradford.
A faithful wife, said that Martyr, is never tried so to be, till when she is
assaulted: nor a faithful Christian so approved, till proved by affliction.
Peace and prosperity hides many a false heart, as the Snow-drift covers an
heap of dung. But when affliction, like Simeons sword, pierces through the
soul, then the thoughts of many hearts are discovered Luke 2.35.
: then it plainly appears, that the love of Gods children was not
meretricious, nor their obedience mercenary. The trial of their Faith, being
much more precious than that of Gold which perishes (though it be tried with
fire) is found unto praise, and honor, and glory 1 Pet. 1.7.
. That a man is indeed that he is in trial. Secondly, God, as he tries the
good that is in us, by crosses and calamities, so he exercises and increases
it. What use were there of the Grain, but for the edge of the Sickle, the
stroke of the I laile, the weight of the Mill, the fire of the Oven? so, what
use were there (in comparison) of Patience, Faith, Hope, Humility, godly
Wisdom, Courage, Constancy, and diverse other Gods graces in us, should we
not fall into diverse afflictions, I^^n. 1.2, 3. Romans 5.3, 4. Rev. 13.9. Here is
the faith, and patience of the Saints, says Saint John, after that he had
foretold some grievous persecution: That is, Here is matter for excuse, Marcet
sinc adversa^io virtus. S^n.
and increase of these graces in them, which before, lay hid, and had not that
good occasion to work upon. Saul's malice serves but to inhance David's zeal:
The likelihood of losing Isaac, does both evidence, and intend Abraham's love to
God Genesis 22.12.
: Good m^n are like Glow-vvormes, that shine most in the dark: like juniper,
which smells sweetest in the fire: like Spice, which favors best when it is
beaten: like the Pomander, which becomes more fragrant by chasing: Inclinata
icsurgit.
like the Palmetree, which proves the better for pressing: like Camomile,
which, the more you tread it, the more you spread it: like the Rose, Pondere
sic pressus surgit acanthus humo. Caiveru^.
which yields sweet water when it is distilled: like the Grape, which comes
not to the proof, till it come to the press: lastly, like God himself, who
then does his best works, when men are at worst, 1 Pet. 1.5. 2 Pet. 3.3. 2 Timothy
3.1. David was never so tender, as when he was hunted like a Partridge 1 Samuel
26.20.
: Jonas was at his best, in the Whales belly Ion. 2. Vig^iabat in ceto qui
stertebat in navi
: Stevens face never shone so fair, as when he stood before the Council Acts
6.15.
. Who is it (says one) that has been in the purgatory of trialls, Hues of
Conscience.
but may acknovvledge more humility; a more narrow heeding of the heart, better
abilities in Prayer, more intimate communion with God, and sweeter experience
of his Fathers endeared affection, Romans 8. ult. And should not Gods best
beloved, then be much afflicted? But what use may this be put to?

Si in Hierosolymis ma^eat semtinium, quid siet in Babylone? Bernard.
Psalm. 68.21. Does he make bloody wailes on the backs of his children? what
will become of Bastards? does he deal thus with his Sons? what will he do
to his slaves? Cannot all the obedience of his people bear out one sin
against God (as we see in Moses, David, Zachary, others) where will they
appear, that do evil, only evil, and that continually Gene. 6.5.
? If involuntary weakness pass not unpunished, how shall wilful wickedness?
If they that cross the stream only, are corrected, those that still swim
against it, What will they do, when God rises up? and when he visits, what
will they answer? Job 31.14. This is an inference, than the which nothing is
more common in holy Scriptures: Ier. 25.29. and 49.12. Psalm. 11.5, 6. Prove.
11.31. Luke 23.31. 1 Pet. 4.17.18. Romans 11.29. Consult the places, and consider
of an answer.

These are but bug-beare-tearmes, devised on purpose, Ob.
to affright silly people: I sit warm, and feel no hurt.

Indeed because God holds his peace, Sol.
and his hands for a time, Men are apt to imagine him such a one as themselves
Psa. 30.21.
, an approver and abbettour of their evil courses, and carriages. And because
Judgment is not speedily executed, therefore the heart of the sons of men is
set in them to do mischief Eccles. 8.11
: But look to it betimes, and know that Gods forb^arance is no quittance. Cave
ne malum dilatum sia^ duplicatum. Buchol.
The Lord is not slow (as some men count slowness^) 2 Pet. 3.9. Or if he be
flow, Tarditatem supplicit gravitate compens^t.
he is sure, he has leaden heels says one, but iron hands: and the farther
he fetches his blovv, the deeper he will vvound, when he strikes. ^e that
has drunk poison, has his bane about him, though he fall not down dead in
the place. Be sure, says Moses, your sin will find you out Number 32.23
, as a blood-hound: and although, like Cains dog it sleep^ a while at your
doors Genesis 4.7.
, yet it will awake, and pull out your throat.

Ob.
Yea but I prosper in the m^ane while, and am in very good plight, my bones are
full of marrow, my breasts are full of milk, I want nothing, that heart can
wish. Sol.
Ease st^yeth the foolish Prove. 1.32.
, says Solomon, and prosperity (though the wicked see it not) is a piece of
their curse. Magna ira est quando peccantibus non i^ asciturdeus; sicut medicus
si cessaverit curare, desperate Hiero^y ^.
Indeed there can be no greater plague (out of hell) then to thrive in sin.
When God would lay the heaviest of his punishments upon Israel, he threatens
to leave them unpunished, Hos. 4.14. Hophni and Phineas had no disease nor
disaster, because the Lord meant to destroy them 1 Samuel 2 5
.

I have wealth to my health: Ob.
am well underlaid, have a fair estate, and the world favors me.

An ill sign: the better, Sol.
the worse (as he said of dancers) fatted ware is but fitted for the Shambles.
Diogenes.
God puts money (as some hoarders do) into these earthen-boxes that have only
one chinke to let in, but none to let out; with purpose to break them when
they are full.

I have worship to my Ob.
wealth, and high-place to my hoards of gold.

Sol.
God wrestleth with thee, Psalm. 18.26. Tolluntur in altum, ut lapsug^aviore
t^^ut.
and in wrestling, hoyseth thee from the ground (as Hercules did the
earthsprung Giant) that he may let thee fall with the greater poise. What was
H^man the better for his honor, while the King frowned upon him? or the
happier for being lift up the ladder, when he was to come down again with a
rope?

Threatened folk live long. I have seen so many summers, Ob.
and yet am in safety.

Sol.
Though a sinner do evil an hundred times, and his days be prolonged, yet
that is no supersedeas: Patientia Dei erga impios quo d^ru^nior, co minac^ot.
Buchole.
Eccles: 8.12.13. for it shall not always be well with the wicked, and so tell
him from me, says God, for the reward of his hands shall be given him, with a
woe to boot. Esaias, 3.11.

Ey, but when? Ob.


This very instant thou may hear that dreadful doom, Sol.
Iac. Revius, hist. Pontif. Roman. p. 177
that sorrowful summons, that Pope Innocent the fourth did as he was walking
in his palace, and was found dead in his neast the next day. Veni miser in
judiciu^, come thou wretch, receave thy judgment.

I may, and I may not. Ob.


Be not ye mockers, Sol.
lest your bonds be increased, Esaias, 28.22. 2 Pet. 3.3, 4. If thou go on in
sin, notwithstanding whatsoever has been said to deter thee, thou art
truly accursed even in this life, though not fully, Ioh. 3.18. Thy preservation
(in the mean time) is but a reservation, as it fared with Sol^m and her
sisters, who were reseued from the four Kings; that God might rain down hell
from heaven upon them: and Senacherib, who escaped the stroke of the punishing
Angel, that he might fall by the sword of his own sons, Esaias, 37.37.38. Say
then, that one woe has passed thee, Praesens indulgentia sutu^am poenam
accersi^. Isid. Pe^us.
there is a second and a third worse behind, Rev. 9. 12. and 8.13.

that no man knows either love or hatred by any thing that is before them.
And that, because all things come alike to all Eccle. 9.1, 2
. The sun of prosperity shines as well upon brambles of the wilderness, as
fruit trees of the orchard: the snow and hail of adversity lights upon the
best gardens, Scit^ Lactantius, si^nt ad verum bon^^ per falla ^a mala, sic ad
verum malam per tallacia bona pervenitur. Instit. 6.22.
as well as upon the wild wast. Ahabs and Iosiahs end concur in the very
circumstances: Saul and Jonathan, though different in their dispositions, yet
in their deaths they were not divided 2 Samuel 1.23


Let no man therefore so far delude himself, as to conclude his comfortable
condition, his good estate to Godward, from his outward prosperity: except his
soul prosper with Gaius, as well as his body 2 John 2.
. The men of this world (called other-where, the inhabitants of the earth
Revel. 12.12
, in opposition to the Burgesses Phil. 3 20. (...).
of the new Jerusalem) are those men of Gods hand that having their portion in
this life, have their bellies filled with Gods hid treasure, insomuch that they
are full of children, and leave the rest of their substance to their babes,
Psalm. 17.14. Their houses are safe from fear, neither is the rod of God upon
them. They are not in trouble like other men: there are no bands in their
death. Their eyes stand out with fatness: they have more then heart could wish
Psalm 73 4, 5, 7.
. They dance to the Timbrell and Harp, but suddenly they turn into hell, Job.
21.13. And so their merry dance ends in a miserable downfall. They swim
merrily down the stream of prosperity, as the silly fishes do down the
River Jordan, Solinus.
till anon they fall into the dead Sea, whereby and by they p^rish. God often
gives prosperity in wrath, as he gave the Israelites a King to vex them; as he
gave their forefathers quails to choke them: as Eutrapelus gave his enemies
wealth to spite them; Eutrapelus cutting, no ^e^e vulchat, Vestune^i^ da^^s
preciosa. Herat.
as Saul gave Michal to David to be a snare to him: or lastly, as Ebud gave
Eglon a present, that he might sheath his dagger in his panch. Nihil eo
infelicius, cui nihil in^elix contigit. Sen.
Why should any one then slatter and flesh himself in an evil way, as
favored of God, because he lives at ease in Sion Amos. 5.1.
, and feels no want of outward blessings? which, what are they else, (...).
Soph.
to such, but giftlesse gifts. Prove. 20.28? Blessings of the left hand, Prove.
3.16. thrown upon them in great displeasure, and committed unto them no
otherwise, than the bag was to Judas, to detect the rottenness of their
hearts? Permulta maximarum non expressa si, na, sed adumbrata virturum habuit
-- nec sumptui nec modestiae pepercit Vell.
Catiline whiles poor, had many seeming virtues; but having feathered his
nest, you could hardly say which he was most lavish of, his money or his
modesty. And yet it is a world to see, how men stroke themselves on the head as
the only happy, Gods dearest darlings, and chiefest favorites, because of
their immunity from crosses, and confluence of temporal contentments. Just
like Leah, God, says she, has given me my hire, (when he had given her a
fifth son) because I have given my maid to my husband Genesis 30.17, 18. (...)
Arist. Rhet. l. 2.
. She should rather have repented then rejoiced: but she was in the common
error, and considered not that God may be angry enough with a man, though he
outwardly prosper.

And as far wide is the world in the other extreme: when they judge a man hated
of God because rebuked, and chastened. Thus the Jews censured our Savior,
Esaias, 53.3.4. Those three good men misiudg'd of Job: the Barbarians of Paul:
and those, Luc. 13. of them that died by the tower of Siloam. This is to
condemn the generation of Gods children Psa. 73.15.
, whose portion here is sharpest affliction. In the world ye shall have
trouble, says our Savior, Ioh. 16. ult.
there is no avoiding of it. And all that will live Godly in Christ Jesus, shall
suffer persecution 2 Timothy 3.12.
, every mothers child of them. And through many tribulations we must enter into
the kingdom of heaven Act. 14.22.
. If any think to go another way to heaven, Erigito tibi scala^, Acesi, and
ad ^^elum solus ascendito. Socrat lib. 1. cap. 7.
the^ this, he must (as Constantine the Great once said to Acesius the Novatian
heretic) erect a ladder, and go up alone. Let no man therefore be worse
thought of for his crosses, if other wise godly, nor the better for his
prosperity, if a worker of iniquity. It is equally abominable before God, to
condemn the just man and to justify the wicked Pro. 17.15.
; upon such ill grounds especially. You see how the good husband deals with
his trees: those in his garden, he is ever and anon meddling with them, lopping
off the superfluous branches, paring of the moss, pruning of the root,
digging, and dunging, dressing, and using all good means to make them
fruitful. Those other in the field or forest, he lets alone, never looks
after them, never troubles them or takes pains with them, till at length he
comes with his axe and cuts them down to the fire. Lo such is Gods dealing
with the sons of men. His best plants have most pruning, his best trees most
dressing, his best children most whipping, when bastards shall go without. God
will not so much as foul his fi gers, with them, Es. 1.5. t^^ wrath come upon
them to the utmost. 1 These. 2.16.
Or if he wrap them up (both sorts) in one common calamity (as it sometimes
befalls) yet as corn is cut down with the weeds, but to better purpose; so
he makes a difference between the chastisements of his own, and the
punishments of strange children. Those he fanneth, to cleanse and gather them
as wheat, Matthew. 3.12. these with the fan of vanity to drive and scatter
them as chafe, Es. 30.28. The wicked he smites with his hand, the godly he
phillippeth with his finger. Or if he do more then so, it is with the palm of
his hand only, but the other with his clutch-fist: he lays upon them, as a
man does upon his slave (not as upon his son) he cares not how he smites, nor
where he hits. Has he smitten him, as he smote those that smote him, says the
Prophet? No: but in measure, in the bunches only will he debate with him Esa
27.7 8.
, the root shall remain untoucht. A Christians crosses reach oftimes but to
his flesh, Col. 1.25. he can call his soul to rest, when his body is full of
unrest. Still he has somewhat to uphold him, when he is at worst Habac. 3.17,
18.
, as David had in that great distress at Ziglag 1 Samuel 30.6
: and Iehosaphat at that dead lift, 2 Chronicles. 20.12. when he knew not which way
to look but to heaven: and those good souls in Micah, chap. 7.7, 8. Prisoners
they may be (with Joseph) in the pit of affliction, but they are prisoners of
hope: and shall come out of the prison by the blood of the covenant Zach. 9.9,
^1.
. Yea, as one hour changes Joseph's fetters of iron, into chains of gold, his
rags into robes, his stocks into a charret, his prison into a Palace, the
noise of his Gives into Abrech; so shall it be with Gods afflicted in the day
of their deliverance. Then shall Christ (the Judge) stand forth, and say to
those wicked, that here happily have flourished, while better men have met with
harder measure: Behold my servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry: behold
my servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty: behold my servants shall
rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed: Behold my servants shall sing for joy of
heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and howl again for vexation of
spirit. And ye shall leave your name for a curse unto my chosen: for the Lord
God shall slay thee: but call his servants by another name Esa. 65.13, 14, 15.
, handle them in another nature.



For the first of these: you see (all that will live godly in Christ Jesus)
what ye must trust to. God chastises every Son whom he loves. The Son of
his love was perfected by afflictions, He learned obedience by the things that
he suffered Hebr. 5.8.
: he b^re his Cross before he wore his Crown. He has begun to us, in the
cup of his fathers displeasure, and we must pledge him our part: we must
fulfi^l the residue of his sufferings C^los. 1.24.
. Hence the Church (which is mystical Christ 1 Cor. 12.1^
) is called Gods Threshingfloore, Isa. 21.10. because it is daily threshed, and
exercised with afflictions. Hence she is set forth by the Myrtletrees in the
bottom, Zach. 1.8. that lie open to all kind of ill weather: by a brand taken
out of the fire of affliction, Zachar. 3.2. by Noah's Ark, tossed to and fro
upon the waves of this world: by Moses his Bush Rubus ardens est sigura
Ecclesia, etc. Hieron.
, never without some fiery trial: by that white horse Reve. 6.^, 4
in the Revelation, that is ever followed and chased by a red. Hic veteres
c^ediderunt mystice sign sicari pios in hac vita per crucis malleo. and secures
expoli^i etc. Buchol^.
This also to set forth, the stones of the Temple were first hewn in the
mountain, before they were set into the building: the Sacrifices of the Law
were first slain, before they were offered; the vessels of the Sanctuary were
first to pass the fire, before they were put to any service: so must Gods
lively stones 1 Pet. 2 5.
, reasonable sacrifices Romans 12.1.
, vessels of honor 2 I^m. 2.2^
, pass the hammer, the knife, and the fire of affliction, before they can be
fit for the masters use. You see then your calling brethren, 1 Cor. 1.26. You
see your condition: no Christian is without his cross, no heaven to be had,
but by touching upon hell-coasts. Sit down therefore, and cast up the cost,
thou that intendest to build the tower of Godliness Luk 14.28
, lest else thou come in with a fools Had-I-wist, (...).
and be forced to give over with shame in the midst of the work. And having
once set thy foot toward heaven, and finding all fair before thee, bind not
upon any long continuance, Say not with Job, I shall die in my nest Job 29.18.
: or with David, I shall never be moved Psalm. 30.
: for, as sure as the night follows the day, a change will come; and this
calm will be followed with a storm: foresee it therefore in the clouds, and
provide for it: Let not the tempest take us without our cloakes, light upon the
bare, hit us on the blind side: but he wise, and expect that which will
certainly befall you: Provide double clothing against the cold of Winter,
which though it linger, and be long in coming, yet it never rots in the air.
Troubles foreseen, come never a whit the sooner, but far the easier: it is a
labor well lost, if they come not, and well spent if they do. Go forth,
then, by an holy Providence, and meet them on the Frontiers, as Lot did the
Sodomites before they came to his house. Encounter them as Jonathan did his
enemies, before they came into his country. Make them present, I mean, in
conceit, before God sends them in the event: for after the nature of the
Basiliske, they dye if they be foreseen: whereas, coming all on the sudden,
Nam levius ^^dit quicquid providetis ante.
they find weak minds secure, make them miserable, leave them desperate.

Next, is it the lot of Gods best beloved to be much afflicted? Have patience
then, and hold out; accept of the Chastisement of thine iniquity, Levit. 26.41.
and make not haste from under Gods hand. He that believes, will not make
haste Esaias 28.16
: that is, he will not get out by a back-doore, seek redress by unlawful
vvayes, lift up his soul to e^ill means, grow to those desperate resolutions
of the Jews in Ezekiel, If our transgressions, and our sins be upon us, and we
pine away in them, how should we then live Eze. 33.10
? but, buckling on his armor of Patience and Wisdom, he labors for a right
use, and then doubts not of a good issue. Yet a very little while, and he that
shall come will come, and will not tarry Heb. ^0 37.
.

Ob.
By, but when?

Sol.
When thy bottom-corruption is purged out; and till then (if thou be wise) thou will not desire it. Afflictions, like Lots Angels, Prapara anin^am tuam ad
omnem tolerantiam, and cito ea pressu a liberaberis. Chrysostom.
will soon away, when they have done their errand: like plasters, when the
sore is once whole, they will fall off; as till then, they will stick fast by
us. In the mean time, let this sustain thee, thy present estate is thy best
estate, how bad soever thou esteemest it. 2. Is it sit, with those Bethulians,
to send for God by a Post?

My crosses come thick, Ob. Fluctus slactu^ trudit. (...).
as Jobs messengers, or as waves of the Sea, one in the neck of another;
changes of sorrows, armies of afflictions, so that I have scarce time to
breath, to swallovv my spettle, to --

Spare your Rhetoric, Sol.
and see whom you have to thank for all your smart. If thou were not a
froward child, what needed so much whipping? if not a knotty piece, what
needed all this hewing? if thy disease were not complicate, and the matter of
it tough and viscous, an easier purge should serve the turn. Those that are in
a Lethargy or Apoplexy must have double the quantity given them, that others
have: to avvaken their dull senses, and arouse their dead spirits. So it is
here; God is a wise Father, and Physician; he knovves well enough, that hard
knots must have ^ard vvedges, that stro g eff^ctions must have strong
afflictions, and great corruptions, great crosses to cure them.

Ob.
My afflictions are not only strong and grievous, but longlasting and tedious.

Sol.
That Is because your disease has been long-growing on you, and will not away
hastily. P^ysitians, says one, to bring away sick matter more fully and
safely, are fore'd again and again to open the vein, taking away now some
matter, now other some, as the Patient may bear it. But for thy comfort, and
that thou may not grow weary of Gods correction Hebr. 12.5.
, though from thy youth up, thou should bear Gods terrors Psalm. 88.15. and
129.1, 2.
, with David: Consider first, that thou art afflicted less than thy Sins;
secondly, less than thy Savior, who endured many a little death all his life
long for thy sake, and at length, the painful and cursed death of the cross.
See Purcha^ his Microcosmus.
To say nothing of that soul of sufferings, which (...) suffered, when he
sweat clotty blood Luk 22 44. (...).
in the garden, and cried out on the cross as forsaken of his Father; after
he had been set upon, and laid at with utmost might and malice by the
infernal Spirits in that three-hours darkness Matthew. 27.45, 46.
. Thirdly, that it is a blessed thing to bear Gods yoke from thy youth Lam. 3.
: to be betime, and a good while, in Gods nurturing-house, and under his
discipline. It is most hard, and happy, not to grow worse with liberty: the
sedentary life is most subject to diseases. Fourthly, that these light and
momentary afflictions are nothing, if compared either to those vvoes we have
d^served in hell, or those joys we are reserved to in heaven. Look thorovv
the present cloud then, whatever it be, and see the Sunshine of comfort on the
other side: eye not the stream thou vvadest through, but the firm land thou
tendest to; and be not overhasly, nor think long of thy Sea-toile, so long as
thou can look up, and see thy place of arrival a little before thee. Master
thy crosses by Christian patience: He that delicately brings up his servant,
says Solomon, shall have him become his Son Pro. 29.21.
, nay, his Lord at the length. Afflictions, like fire and water, are good
servants, Fe^tur equis auriga, etc.
but ill Lords. Give them the head once, and there will be no hoe with them.
Remember the children of Ephraim; they growing weary of the Egyptian bondage,
sought to break prison before Gods goale-delivery, but had more weight said
upon them for their labor. They went for^h armed, and carried bows. says the
Psalmist, but they turned back in the day of battle, Psalm. 78.9. This fell out
about the birth of Aaron, while their father Ephraim was yet living, 1 Chronicles.
7.21. and the story is this: God had promised them the land of Canaan: but
they, impatient of the Egyptian bondage, not waiting Gods command, nor
tarrying out his time, would needs, in all haste, set upon the men of Gath,
that held a part of the promised Land; but they lost their hopes and lives
together: Hoc c^at importuno tempore p^ma ^uhu. ^^erba and ^^uda dec^^^e^c.
Cy^^es.
which made Ephraim mourn many days, because it went evil with his house,
and happily gave occasion to Pharaohs cruelty, according to that in Exodus 1.10.
Come on, let us deal wisely with them, lest they multiply, and it come to
pass, that when there fall out any war, they join also with our enemies, and
fight against us, and so get them up out of the land.

As many as he loves, he rebukes and chasteneth. We must frame a new Bible,
says one, e're we can find any color out of Gods afflicting us, to prove
that he does not love us. It is a very foolery to conclude after that manner.
Gods rod (like Ahashuerosh his seepter) is never stretched out toward any of
his, but in love: he never sends forth his armies to chastise us, but he gives
David's charge, Handle the young man gently for my sake. It is our Isaacs use,
first to handle us, and then to bless us. By afflictions we may understand
our fathers handling of us. And after we have suffered a while, then take a
blessing, my Son. Watch therefore against discouragements, and faint not in
thy good way. The way is not to be judged by the afflictions, but the
afflictions by the way: let not the outward distress drive us, either into
hard conceits of God, or heavy conceits of our selves.



Job? his story is a booke-case to answer this objection. Never any before or
since his time was so handle^; insomuch, as his friends said unto him, Call
now, if there be any that will answer: and to which of the Saints will thou
turn thee Job 5.1.
? as who should say, what good man was ever in so bad a taking? And yet ye
have heard of the patience of Job, and what end the Lord made with him Iam.
5.11.
.

Job had his trouble laid upon him for his trial, but I have pulled mine upon
my self by my sin.

Fools because of their transgression are afflicted, so that their soul
abhors meat (through extremity of sickness) and they draw near to the
gates of death: Psalm. 107.17, 18, 19.
yet they cry unto the Lord in their trouble, and he saves them out of their
distresses. See this exemplified in Jonah. How came he into the whales belly?
was it not by his own undutifulnesse? See it in David: whence came all his
trouble^ by Absalom, Amnon, Adonijah? was it not for his fondness, and
indulgence? See it in Jacob: what might he thank for all his afflictions,
whereof God gave him not a draught, but made him a diet-drinke: so that he had
scarce a merry day, for one trouble or another? Laban follows him, with live
and cry, as a thief: Esau meets him with four hundred cutthroats at his
heels; Rachel, and Deborah dye upon his hand: his daughter is ravished: his
sons are some adulterers, othersome murderers: the famine pincheth him, the
loss of Joseph afflicts him, etc. But whence all this? and whom had he to
thank for it? did he not thrust his own feet into the stocks, by that
threefold lie of his, uttered in a breath, to get the blessing? And yet before
he was borne, it was, Jacob have I loved: and before any of this befell him,
God said unto him, Be not afraid, I am with thee, and will do thee good Genesis
31.
. And so he did by his crosses: and that is my good, we say, that does me good.



Que enim in i^spes ant remedium est, qu^ ab usitata impuritate, ne^ miseriarum
ogestate, nec vitae extre^mtate revocantur? Salu^ au. de gub. Dei, lib. 7
for it is a sore sign of a man given up by God, when afflictions will not
work upon him. But secondly, it may be thou mistakest; and art bettered by
that thou have suffered, but see it not as yet, because thy soul is
bemisted, or imbittered, as those, Exodus 5.21. But thirdly, say it be as bad
with thee, for present, as is possible, yet despair not. Asa was not one pin
the better at first, for all his afflictions. God sent him a Prophet, and he
imprisoned him. God sent the gout to reduce him, and he put his trust in the
physicians, etc. But he lived, I doubt not, to see and retract his error: for
it is reported of him (and all in one verse) that the high places were not
removed, that, was his fault: yet the heart of Asa was perfect before God all
his days 1 King. 15.14.
. That Is thy comfort, it is certain there is no godly man but is or shall be
shortly a gainer by his afflictions: he shall exercise patience, prayer and
praise, and be daily more and more perfited and purified by this fiery trial,
1 Pet. 4.12. In a word. The God of all grace, who has called us into his
eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after that ye have suffered awhile, shall make
you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you. To him be glory and dominion for
ever and ever. Amen 1 Pet 5.10, 11.
.

FINIS.
THE AFFLICTED MAN'S LESSONS, Laid down to Him in a second Discourse upon
Revel. 3.19.

By JOHN TRAPPE, Preacher of the Word.

PSALM. 94.12. Blessed is the man whom thou chastisest, O Lord: and teach him
in thy Law.

Chrysostom. ad pop. Ant. hom. 17. (...).

LUTHER. Christianorum Theologia, Crux.

LONDON, Printed by RICHARD BADGER. 1637.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, his very good Lady and Patroness, the Lady Katharine,
Viscountesse Dowager Conwey; Late wife to the Right Honorable, Edward, Lord
Viscount Conwey, Lord President of his Majesty's most Honorable Privie-Councell.
MADAME,
IF deep engagements may warrant a Dedication, I have enough to patronize this
my bold attempt, in craving your Noble Patronage in this little Treatise. All
that I seek herein, is, to be reputed obsequiously thankful to your Honor,
for a great part of my little livelihood. All that I am able to return, for so
many real courtesies, is this poor Paper-gift. Had I a better present, your
Ladyship should be sure of it (...): ut non male ohm ille Gr^culus Augusto.
. But blind Nature saw, and could say, that Bounty consists not in the worth
of the gift, but in the will of the Giver Arist. Ethic. lib. 4. ubi au
liberalitatem metiendam este, (...).
. And the God of Nature has sealed to this truth in many sacred instances.
Noah's sacrifice could not be great, yet was greatly accepted. The Poore-mans
goates-haire takes as well at the door of the Tabernacle, as the Rich man's
purple: The women's Bracelets and Looking-glasses, as their husbands Gems and
Jewels. He that had not an Ox, might offer a Lamb: If a Lamb be not in the
power of his hand, a pair of Turtles shall excuse him. If he have not that, a
handful or two of Flower, with a corn or two of Salt, shall suffice Levit.
5.6, 11, 12, and 14.10, 21, 30, 31.
. So low does the Most High stoop to our meandness. The Widows two mites
went as far, as some other men's two millions. And those poorest of Christ's
people that were willing indeed, but never (alas) able to deal alms in all
their life, shall yet hear at their death, Come ye Blessed: for I was an
hungry, and ye fed me. The high heaven may be seen through a low lattise: and
so may a large heart in a little gift. Howbeit, who can call a thankful
acknowledgement (if heart-sprung) little, when all the Fee that our Savior
called for, for his cures was, Go, and tell what God has done for thee? This,
though I, and other your Honors Beneficiaries should fail to do, yet God is
not unrighteous to forget your work, and labor of love which you have showed
toward his Name, in the support of his public service; and in that ye have
ministered to the necessities of his Saints, and do also minister Heb. 6 10
. Go on, good Madam, to sow yet more of these good works, both of Piety and
of Charity, into Gods blessed bosom: the fruit and comfort whereof, you shall
be sure to reap in your greatest need. For he that sows bountifully, shall
reap bountifully, says that great Apostle. Now, God All-sufficient, make all
grace to abound toward you: that you always, having all sufficiency in all
things, may abound more and more daily to every good work 2 Cor. 9.6, 8.
. This, after S. Paul, is the constant, and instant Prayer of

Your Honors most humble Chaplein, and Remembrancer at the Throne of Grace,
John Trappe.

THE AFFLICTED MAN'S LESSONS. Laid before him in a second Discourse UPON
Revel. 3.19. As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten: be zealous therefore,
and repent.


WHo they are whom God corrects, has been said already out of that which
first offers it self in the text, As many as I love. Follows now Gods act
about this object, and that is double: first I rebuke; Secondly, I chasten. To
each of these something: (...). conser, Iobis 16.8.
and first to the first, I rebuke] That Is one signification of the word: but
there is more in it then so; I charge and cheek them for their undutifulnesse, I
evict and give evidence against them, I refute and refell their false
reasonings, I set them down, and overthrow them by plain demonstration, We
have no one English word capable of the whole contents of the two words in the
Original. D. Featly.
by unanswerable arguments, that is, by my fatherly chastisements, I do them
to know, I give them to see their sins (as in a mirror) the ground of all
their griefs, the source of all their sufferings: I expostulate with them
sharply upon this point, and secretly upbraid them with their wickedness, as
the root of their wretchedness, the original of all the evil that befell
them from their youth. and for their deserts that they are disciplined. Nostro
ergo merito instiguntur, Pareus
This is a truth undeniable: For first, God affirms it, Esaias, 57.17. Ier.
30.15. Hosea, 13.9. Secondly, his best servants confirm it, 1 Chronicles. 21.19.
Isay, 64.5. Dan. 9.7, 8. etc. Lam. 1.5.8. et 3.39. etc. Ezra, 9.13. Luke 23.41.

Thirdly, good reason makes for it, whether we look upon sin the procuring,
or God the inflicting cause of that we suffer.

John 8.44. 1 John. 5.18.
, as says the proverb of the ancients; Wickedness proceeds from the wicked
1 Samuel 24.13.
: from that wicked one. It is the spawne of that old Serpent, the birth of
hell, the vomit of the Devil: and is therefore fitly styled by St. James,
earthly, sensual, and devilish Iam. 3.15.
: yea it is worse then the Devil, who had not been a Devil but for sin:
worse then Hell; which is only contrary to the good of the creatures: but sin
is contrary to the good of the Creator; whom it dishonors in an high degree,
and so provokes him to dishonor us again 1 Samuel 2.30
, and to make us heavy with manifold evils 1 Pet. 1.6.
: for can there any good come out ^f such a Nazareth John 1.46.
?

Neither are the effects of sin less demonstrative of the point. hides God
from us, as a cloud Esaias 59.2.
: and with him all that is good. For he is the Father of lights, from whom (as
naturally and freely as light from the Sun) descends every good gift, that
is, temporal comforts, and every perfect giving Iam. ^.19.
, that is spiritual graces. These good things sin withholds from us, Ier.
5.25. or (which is much at one, upon the matter) it causes God either to curse
our blessings, Ier. 12.13. or to consume us after he has done us good, Josh.
24.20. And all this, for want of Gods gracious presence, whereof sin bereaves
us: for woe be unto you, says he, when I depart from you, Hos. 9.12. When God
was once gone from Saul, the evil spirit came upon him, the Philistines came
upon him, the Amalekites pillaged his country; all mischiefs came trooping and
rushing in upon him at once, and on every hand, as it were by a sluice, etc. So
in the ninth, tenth, and eleventh Chapters of Ezekiel, God makes diverse
removes, and still as he goes out, some judgment comes in. The same we may see
in Sampson, Ioash, Asa, and others. The Lord is with you, says the Prophet,
whiles ye are with him If ye seek him, he will be found of you: but if ye
forsake him, he will forsake you 2 Chro. 15.2.
.

Dalilah did Sampson into the hands of the Philistines. Sin gives Satan (the
father of it) advantage, both to accuse us, as Job 1.9, 10. and to lay special
claim to us, as those that bear his Badge, wear his Livery, do his works,
Ioh. 8. Now, ever the more work, the more wages; for, The wages of Sin is
death Romans 6.23. (...). Nazian.
, says Saint Paul: that is, all crosses and curses, Temporal, Spiritual, and
Eternal; even to the very Itch, as Moses sets forth, Deuteronomy. 28. God may justly
expose us, to his malice, whom we have served in his lusts John 8.44.
; for, Know ye not that his servants ye are, to whom ye obey Romans 6.16.
? Yea, he may turn him loose upon us, to afflict us with many sorrows, to
break in upon us, and leap over our hedge, Job 1.10. when once we take
liberty to break Gods mounds; and like the Heart that has leap't the Pale, we
are found wandering, and biting upon the devils Commons. Dinah fell into foul
hands, when her fathers house could not hold her; she lost at once, her
virginity and liberty: neither speed we better, when extravagant. David by
venturing, had his bones broken, Psalm. 51.8.

without a sensible check.

First therefore, he is an holy God; and this is Joshua's argument, chap.
24.19, 20. Ye cannot serve the Lord (says he, to those that had a mind to
make a mixture of Religions) for he is an holy God, he is a jealous God, he
will not forgive your transgressions, and your sins, etc. He is of more pure
eyes, says another Prophet, than to behold evil H^b. 1, 13.
with patience, though it be in his own. He hates it in any person, (his
only Son not excepted, who became a Sinner, first, by imputation; for, He
made our Sins to meet upon him; and secondly, by reputation; for, He made
his grave with the wicked Esa. 53.6, 9.
, and passed for a Malefactor) and worse than any thing, the Devil himself
not excepted: for he hates the Devil for Sins sake, not Sin for the Devils
sake. Now, Revenge is the next effect of hatred. And hence, Gods sword was upon
the man his fellow: (I mean, the Man Christ Jesus, (...), etc. Litan. Graec.
whose sufferings were unconceivable) and hence also, His hand is still upon
the little ones, Zach. 13.7. who fill up that which is behind, of the
sufferings of Christ (...).
, Coloss. 1.24. and are baptized with his baptism, Math. 20.22. plunged over
head and ears in the waters of Afflictions.

Secondly, as God is holy in his Nature, so he is true of his Word: and that
which he has spoken with his mouth, he will fulfill with his hand 1 Kin. 8.15
, as Solomon has it. Now, this is that which the Lord has said, I will be
sanctified in all them that draw near unto me Lev. 10.3.
. Who these are, see Psalm. 89.7. Omnes sancti in circuitu ejus.
and Psalm. 148.14. How he will be sanctified, hear S. Austin: Sanctified he
will be, says that Father, Aut a nobis, aut in nos, either of us, or on us,
one of the two. For this is one of Gods penal Statutes, and it is sure he will
be no loser by us. But lose he should (and in his glory too, that dearest
Jewel) should he wink at such things in his own, as he takes notice of,
and dislikes in others. Hence his fatherly severity. For, has he spoken the
word, and shall he not do it? As he cannot dye, so he cannot lie, He cannot
deny himself ^ Tim. 2.13
. Let God be true, and every man a liar Romans 3.4.
. For ever, O Lord, thy Word is stablisht in heaven Psa. 119.89.
.

Thirdly, he is just in his dealings; for, shall not the Judge of all the
world do right Gene. 18.25.
? Now, It is a righteous thing with God, to render tribulation and anguish upon
every soul that does evil: upon the Jew first, (because of his privileges,
according to that of the Prophet, You only have I known, of all the families
of the earth: therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities Amos 3.2.
) and also upon the Grecian Romans 2.9.
. For the evil there spoken of, is contrary, first to Gods Image, since he is
light, and in him is no darkness Romans 7.12.
: secondly, to his Law, which is holy, and just, and good Romans 7.12.
: so equal, and grounded upon so much reasons, that if God had not given it,
yet it had been best for us to have observed it. Now, no Lawgiver can
sustain, to see his own law broken before his eyes, and not proceed against
the delinquent (as is to be seen in the examples of Saul 1 Samuel 14.44.
, Nebuchadnezzar Dan. 3.13.
, Zaleucus Locrensis, etc.) much less the Lord; who, as he gave the Law in
fire Deuteronomy. 33.2.
, so in fire he will require it. And although the Law admit of an exception in
the Gospel to those that are penitent, who are not under the Law, but under
grace Romans 6.14.
; yet in regard of temporal scourges, the repentance even of a Moses Deuteronomy.
3.26.
, or a David 2 Samuel 12.10. and 24.15
, may come too late.

Lastly, God is good to his Children: hence he lasheth them in their lapses
now, that he may free them from a further mischief, that Wrath to come 1 These
1.10
. He delighted in the creature at first, Gen 1. and does still delight in that
habitable part of his earth, the Sons of men Prove. 8.31.
. How much more in the New Creature, that masterpiece of his work manship Ephe.
2.10. (...).
? for, He plants the Heavens, and lays the foundation of the Earth, that he
may say to Zion, Thou art my people Esai. 51.16.
. Hence it is, that although he can correct us, nay confound us, as an absolute
Lord: yet he does neither the one nor the other, without just ground of reason
in our selves. And albeit, Vel ad demonstratione^ debitae miseriae, vel ad
emendationem labilis vitae, vel ad exercitationem necessariae patienciae. Aug.
tract. in Joan. 124.
he chastise those whom he loves, sometimes for his own glory, Ioh. 9.3.
sometimes for their good, for Prevention, Probation, Purgation, etc. yet, still
Sin is the original. For this cause, many are weak (by chronicall and
lingering diseases) many sick (by sharp and violent maladies) and many
sleep, are dead outright: but all in love, Whiles we are chastened of the
Lord, that we may not be condemned with the World 1 Cor. 11.32
.

Pandora like) brought at first a curse upon the Creatures, and has made them
ever since unusefull and unserviceable; nay, pernicious and destructory (many
of them) to Man their first master. The very visible heaven and earth is
defiled with our Sins, and must therefore partly be dissolved, and partly
purged by the fire of the last day; as the Vessels of the Sanctuary were, that
held the Sin-offering. Hence our so many diseases, distresses, miseries,
maladies, Troubles without, terrors within; they issue only from our
defilements. It is this thief in the candle that wastes us, this Fly in the
box that corrupts us, this traitor in the heart that betrays and exposes us
to armies, and changes of trials, and afflictions. In which regard, it was a
sound and savory reply of an English Captain, at the loss of Callice: When a
proud Frenchman tauntingly demanded, When will ye fetch Callice again?
Pressely, and ponderously he was answered, Quando peccata vestra erunt nostris
graviora; When your Sins shall weigh down ours.

God strikes us for Sin, says one, Satan deals with us as the Jews did with
Christ, blindfold him, and then bad prophecy who smote him: so in
afflictions, we commonly grope as blind men; guessing at this cause, and that,
but seldom fasten on the right. Here then the method is, first, to find out
the Traitor; secondly, to bring him to condign punishment; thirdly, to banish
him the borders of our hearts, and to have no more to do with him, that has
done us so much seath, and caused us so much heartbreaking. First, learn
whenever ye smart, to gather your wits Zeph. 2.1.
, to summon your senses, to sift, canvasse, and unbowell, as it were, your own
hearts, to turn short again upon your selves, and make privy search for the
Sin God smites at; to find out the plague of thine own Soul 1 Kin. 8.38.
, the ground of that other stroke, what ever it be thou gronest under. Does man
suffer for his Sin? let him thank himself, says the Prophet. But, for help;
let him search and try his ways, and turn again to the Lord Lam. 3.39, 40.
. Let no man say with the Philistines, It is a chance 1 Samuel 6.9.
, a thing that comes by course, had a time to grow in, and must have a time to
go in, etc. This is, to be worse than ox and ass, who as they know their
masters crib, so the wild colt knows when the damme strikes it.

It Is sure; as there is no wind, but may blow rain if God will: so there is
ever something in the wind, when it blows in a crosse-point to our comfort.
Sinful men strike not their dogs, much less their children, without a cause.
The just God never smites, but he has some just reason: his judgments are
sometimes secret, says a Father, Aug.
always just. Wherefore lie thou on thy face? said God to Joshua, Israel
has sinned: Up, search diligently, etc Josh. 7.10, 11.
. What evil have thou done (said the Mariners to the distressed Prophet) that
this evil is come upon us Ion. 1.8.
? Let every such Jonas reflect upon himself and say, what evil have I done
Ier. 8.6.
? What sin have I committed, or admitted? what good have I omitted or
intermitted? No rod but has a voice in it, Hear ye the rod, and who has
appointed it Mich. 6.9.
. Something, surely there is a^^isse, that God would have amended. Search
therefore, and follow your work close. And that ye may work by rule. First,
set thy self in Gods presence, and there lay a charge upon thy conscience, to
deal truly with thee in the discovery of the traitor, to show thee where his
haunt is; for I tell thee, he will deal subtily 1 (...) 23.^2.
, as Saul told the Ziphites concerning David his supposed enemy. Our
consciences (says one) are like looking-glasses; which being ore-spred with
dust, show nothing: but if clean wiped, represent things clearly. And as
lines that are written with the juice of limmons, when they are held to the
fire, are made legible, but not otherwise: so conscience set before those
everlasting burnings (so God is called, Esaias, 33.14.) will bring us out our
sins: we shall be able to say of it as she said of our Savior, Come see a
man that told me all that ever I did John 4.29.
. It will bespeake us in the language of that Prophet. Have thou not procured
this unto thy self, in that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, when he led
thee by the way Iere. 2 17.
? Secondly, single out and set a jealous eye upon thy beloved sin, that
bosom-devill what ever it be: and suspect that, above other, for the sin God
strikes at. For as in every man there is some one element, humor, passion
predominant: so likewise some special sin that plays Rex in his soul;
turns him about as the rudder does the ship: has him at a beck, as the
Centurion had his servants: is to him as a right hand for profit, or a right
eye for pleasure. This the Devil studiously hides from us, as being his chief
hold, his castle, his throne; out of which if he be ejected, he loses his
kingdom, he falls as lightning from the heaven of men's hearts Luke 10.18.
. As therefore he set Adam to a contrary tree, that he might not eat of the
tree of life; so he would turn our thoughts from this to some other sin:
make us mistake as the Syrians did the King of Judah for the King of Israel,
that he may sit as sole King in our hearts, to our utter overthrow. You may
easily know it. It Is that (among other notes) which thou art lothest, and
would least be a known of: or if it be laid open before thee by God in his
word, or thine, own selfe-accusing conscience (that domestical chaplain)
thou art ready to color and cloak it, to plead and contend for it, to say of
it as Lot of Zoar, Is it not a little one? or as David of Absalom, handle it
gently for my sake 2 Samuel 18.5.
, or as Jacob of Benjamin, If he dye, I cannot live. In this the Lord be
merciful unto me etc 2 Kin. 5 18 Micah. 6.7.
. Oh that he would accept of rivers of oil for a dispensation. Or if he will
not, thou departest sorry (with the rich young Pharisee) that Christ should
call for that sin, which thou art not willing to part with. The true Mother
(such was her love) could not yield to see the child divided: no more can many
endure to be sundred from their beloved sin. This, their jealous God cannot
away with in his own; and therefore follows them with one affliction upon
another, till he have struck a parting blow between them and their paramour,
that peccatum in deliciis, their darling corruption. Men are sure to be met
with most and soonest in that which they make a corrivall with God.

Thirdly, take special notice of what kind thy cross is, and where it most
of all pincheth. It is Gods usual order to punish sin in kind. Thus Adams
desire of the Godhead was punished with mortality and misery: David's two sins
of adultery and murder were punished with Absaloms and Amnons incest, and
untimely ends. Yea for one life treacherously taken away, he lost four, Amnon
his eldest son, Absalom his next, Adoniah his darling, and the child borne in
adultery: according to his own sentence unwittingly passed upon himself, he
shall restore the lamb fourefold 2 Samuel 12 6.
because he did this thing, and had no pity. Jacob feigned himself the elder
brother for the younger, and is therefore couzened by Laban, in the elder
sister for the younger. Thus God comes home to us in our crosses, pays us
often in our own coin, over-shoots us in our own bow: Per quod quis peccat,
per 1. them punitur and ipse.
yea many times takes notice of the offending member to punish it. Thus those
blasphemers in the Revelation gnawed their tongues for anguish Reve. 16.10
. Dives ^lso was tortured most in his tongue, which he had most abused Quia
plus lingua peccave^at. C^pr.
. Abimelechs head had stolen the crown: and therefore in his head is he
smitten. Sampsons eyes were the first offenders, which betrayed him to lust,
therefore his eyes are first pulled out, and he is led a blind captive to Gaza,
where he first gazed on his curtisan Dalilah. Thus many times the child is so
like the father, that ye may safely say, such a sin was the father of such a
cross.

Fourthly, pray God to point thee to that sin he strikes at: cry out with
Job, How many are mine iniquities and sins? make me to know my transgression
and my sin Job 13 23.
. And again, I will say unto God, do not condemn me: show me wherefore thou
contendest with me Job 10.2.
: This is Elihus advice: surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have borne
chastisement, I will not offend any more. That which I see not, teach thou me:
if I have done iniquity, I will do no more Job 34.31, 32.
. Let God but hear such words fall from us, and he cannot but instruct as well
as correct us, Psalm. 94.12. He that will have sinful men join instruction
with correction, will himself much more, if we seek it at his hands.

Secondly, having by diligent search found out the traitor that God strikes at,
lay hold upon it presently, take it by the throat, drag it by the hair to the
place of execution; there, strip it by confession, whip it by humiliation, rip
out the heart of it by the practice of mortification. Afflict thy self with
voluntary sorrows, not so much for thy pain as thy sin, thy crosses and
losses as thy vices and lusts. This is that sorrow to Godward the Apostle
speaks of, (...).
that either removes the affliction or sweetens it, and is found in none but
those that have sorrowed to repentance 2 Cor. 7.9.
. It is for a Pharaoh to cry out of the plague as a man upon the rack, for an
hypocrite to howl upon his bod Hos. 7.14.
, as a dog tied up in his kennell, when he lusts but has not: when he kills
and desires to have, but cannot obtain Iam. 4.2.
: for a reprobate to bellow, like a baited bull at the head of every street
Iere. 50.11.
. It Is sin that most afflicts a Christian, when he pants under the stroke of
his fathers displeasure. David cries not Perij, but peccavi, not I am undone,
but I have done foolishly; Daniel complains not, we are reproacht and
oppressed, but we have rebelled and offended Dan. 9.5.
. It was not the malice of his persecutours, but the law of his members that
put St. Paul. to that piteous outcry. O wretched man that I am Romans 7.24.
etc. Nothing greives a good child so much as that he has grieved his father:
this pains him more than the sharpest whipping: so here. It is sin that puts
a sting into every cross. And as hell would be no h^ll but for the worm of
conscience there, that never di^s; this is worse to ^han then the fire that
never goes out: so troubles to Gods Saints would be no troubles; we could not
be properly said to be miserable in them, were it not for sin that sets them
on. You see then where to spend your greatest sorrows, and what to fall out
with, when things fall out otherwise then you desire. Have thou a right hand
that offends thee? off with it. Is it a right eye that troubles thee? out with
it. Say it be as dear to thee as Ismael was to Abraham, as Esau to Isaac, as
Benjamin to Jacob; send it away, discharge thy house, thy heart of it out of
hand. Is it not better do so then dye? Surely except we had lingered we had
returned twice by this, well victualled Genesis 43.10.
, as he said. Whereas if this be done to purpose, look how old Jacob met with
such joys as he looked not for, saw such sights, heard such news, was sent for
in such wagons as that his heart first fainted (for he believed it not) and
then revived Genesis 45.26, 27.
, when he found it to be true: so shall it be with us, if, for Gods sake, we
mortify our old sins, the cause of his high displeasure against us. We shall
have our delight in the Almighty, and lift up our faces unto God Job 22.26.
: we shall hear and see such things, (even in this life) as carnal eye never
saw, carnal care never heard, etc 1 Cor. 2.9.
. And although God should send for us into his Goshen which is above, by a
charret of fire, (some sharper trial) yet his very fire shall preserve us. It
is well observed, that both those charrets that came to fetch Eliah, and those
that came to defend Elisha were fiery. God is no less lovely to his own in
the midst of his judgments, L. Bish. of ^ixet.
then he is terrible to his enemies in the demonstration of his mercies.

Thirdly, beware of meddling any more with Sin, considering the after-claps, and
ill-consequents. Could we but fore-thinke what Sin would cost us, we durst
not but be innocent: for, Know thou not, said he, that it will be
bitterness in the end 2 Samuel 2.26.
? A man cannot bathe himself in the sweet pleasures of Sin, but he shall be
sowe'd as deep in the salt-brine of sorrow. Rebecca may make a Kid taste like
venison, but Death is in Sins pot. It may pretend and promise fair at first,
with Laban, but at parting it will show it self. Fawn upon us it may (as a
dirty dog upon his master) but it does but defile us with fawning; yea, such
deep spots it sets upon the soul, as nothing will fetch out, but the blood of
Christ, or fire of hell. Sin is a serpent in our bosoms, that cannot live but
by sucking out our lifeblood. Well it may, Serpent-like, glide smoothly over
the body, but at last it will bite like an Adder, and sting like a Cockatrice
Prove. 23.^2.
. Honey it may be in the mouth, but gravel in the maw Prove. 20.17.
: like Ionathans honey, of which he had no sooner tasted, but his head was
forfeited. Pliny tells of a certain country, where their honey is poisonous,
because it is sucked out of venomous herbs. Lo, such is the pleasure that is
plucked out of Sins botches. What should I say more? there is a deceitfulness
in Sin Hebr. 3.13.
, says the Apostle, trust it not: A lie in all these vanities I^^. 2 8.
, says the Prophet, believe it not. It will promise golden mountains, this
and that contentment, but it pays pro thesauro, carbones, instead of Mines,
Coale-pits. Sin promised Adam he should much mend himself, Achan he should
much make himself, David he should much satisfy himself. But, did ever any
oppose God, and prosper Job. 9.4.
? says Job: are there not large rolls of Enditement written on both sides
before him, full of sins and woes? Adam had no sooner bit, but he was
banished. Achan had no sooner touched the consecrated Gold, but he was a Son of
death. David had no sooner embraced the bosom of a Stranger, but he felt
himself in a deep ditch Pro. 23.27.
; such, as he that pleases God, shall be blessed from Eccles. 7.16.
. Be wise now therefore, O ye Christians: be instructed ye Godly of the earth;
serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling Psalm. 2.10, 11
. Tremble, I say, and sin not: Psalm. 4 14.
Commune with your own hearts of these things, and be still, or pawse, and make
a stop; since there is no safety in running forward. Kiss the Son, who has
^^^^ver'd you indeed from the w^^^^ to come; but yet, so as he can be angry if
yet ^^rish from the way; that is, wander out of it. And, if his wrath be
kindled, yea but a little Psalm. 2 11.
, he will so fall upon you, as that ye will account it greatest madness, to
buy the sweetest Sin at so dear a rate. The Judge, you know, besides the
block, or gallows, has lighter punishments for lesser Offenders: as the
Stocks, Little-case, Whipping-post, Pillorie, Jayle, etc. And so has God, for
such as he means not to damn eternally, he can load them with judgments,
not temporal only, in their Bodies, names, estates, friends, labors; but
spiritual also. Such as are; hiding his face from them in deep displeasure;
hardening their hearts from his fear Esa. 63.17.
; impenitent continuance in an evil course; punishing one Sin with another,
as in David, Solomon, Sampson, Peter, etc. excommunicating them from the power
of his ordinances; delivering them up to Spiritual wickednesses, to be lasht
and buffetted, till they return to themselves with the Prodigal, and recover
their lost wits again. For, Sin works such a distemper in the soul, that the
Scripture calls it, Wickedness of folly, even foolishness of madness
Eccles. 7.25
. Now, what should God do with his servants when they run mad, but turn them
into Bedlam? And, oh the bloody wailes that his rod has left upon the backs
of his best children, when they have returned again to folly Psalm. 85.8.
, till they bethink themselves, and repent, and make supplication, and say,
We have sinned, and have done perversely, and have committed wickedness, 1
King. 8.47. All which considered; what should we d^^, rather than shake off
any solicitation to Sin, as Saint Paul and the vip^r A ts 28.5.
; silence it, as our Savior did the devil in the Gospel Mat. 1.25. (...).
; say nay to it, as the vine and olive did to the rest of the tree in Iothams
parable Iu^^. 9.9.
; stoutly repel, and sternely reply upon it, as our Savior to the Pharisees,
Why tempt ye me, ye hypocrites Mat. ^2.18.
? as Naboth to Ahab, God forbid that I should part with my patrimony; as
Solomon to his mother, interceding for Adonia, Ask for him the Kingdom also 1
(...). 2.2^.
; or as the Witch of Endor to Saul, Why seek thou to take me in a snare, to
cause me to dye 1 Samuel ^8.9
? To multiply Sin, is to multiply sorrow Psa. 16.4.
: and to treasure up Sin, is to treasure up wrath Romans 2.5.
. Is not destruction to the wicked, says Job., and a strange punishment to the
workers of iniquity Job 31 1, 2, 3
? And this was that, whereby he frighted his conscience from further meddling.
So did David, Psalm. 119, 120. So did Paul, 2 Cor. 5.10. And for this it was,
that the Lord (knowing the canker of our natures, that we are flesh also, as
well as spirit; that the flesh is a slave, and must be terrified) has
purposely proposed to us thrice so many curses as blessings, Deuteronomy. 28. that
looking up, as David, and seeing the punishing Angel stand over our necks, we
may fear and forbear, and Sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto us Ioh.
5.14.
. Take heed therefore (that I may resume, and shut up this Exhortation) take
heed, I say, of Sin, if but for the evil consequents. Cast away all your
transgressions (as Moses did his staff, when once it became a serpent) For,
why will ye dye, O house of Israel Ezekiel. 18 31
? fortify your purposes against it, and stand unchangeably resolved against
Sin, against every sin, though never so dear or delicious. He that
favors any, though he forgo many, does but as Benhadad, recover of one
disease, and dye of another 2 King. ^.10
: yea, without timely repentance, he does but take pains to go to hell. Sin
ever ends tragically: Cavete^ Me^ampygo. Prin.
avoid it therefore, if but for the black tail of plagues and crosses it
draws after it.

bearing Gods indignation, because we have sinned against him Mic. 7.9.
. It is the wickedness of a man, says Solomon, that perverts his way, and his
heart frets against the Lord Prove. 19.3.
. Some secretly repine at Gods hand, like those horses, that digest their
choler by biting on the bridle. Others more boisterous, set their mouths
against heaven Psalm. 73.9.
; and like beasts of prey, having been long accustomed to the darkness of
corrupted Nature, they are more fierce and furious, and have brutish and fell
affections, full of rage and wrathfulnesse. When they are provoked by any smart
or pain, they fly upon God; and all that comes next to hand, as that raging
Turk did at the battle of Belgrade. Punccius. Chrysostom. in Math. Hom. 19.
This is to howl against heaven with the Wolf, when the sheep is dumb
before the shearer Esaias 53 7.
. This is to fly in the face of the fanner as chasse, when the heavier wheat
falls low at his feet. And yet there is a spice of this disease abiding still
in the best: they are not so wholly freed from their spiritual frenzy, but at
some times they are ready to play the mad men. Not to speak of David, and
Jeremy, 'twas Jobs weakness, cha. 23.3, 4. He challenges God into the
schools, as it were, and thought to have had the better of him. But he was
sharply reproved for his peevishness, chap. 40.2. and cried Peccavi, chap.
42.1, 2. and so must we. God will have us confess against our selves, our
Sins Psalm. 32.5.
, with David, and say, I know that thy judgments are right, and thou have
afflicted me justly Psa. 119.75
. Let no man say, when he suffers ought, what an hard case is this? how can it
stand with divine justice? but let God be justified, and every mouth stopped:
for it is not possible that he should wrong us, Qua^vis aspera and adversa
patiamur, minora tamen patimur quam merimur. Salvian.
were it worse with us than it is. Say then, It is of the Lords mercy that we
are not consumed Lam. 3.22.
; that we are any thing out of hell; that our affliction, what ever it be, is
not an execution, but a correction only; and that not in extremity, but with a
merciful mitigation. Why is living man sorrowful? says the Church. It Is Gods
mercy that he is alive amidst all his sorrows, especially since Man
suffers for his Sin Lam. 3.39.
, the just hire whereof, is death eternal Romans 6. ult.
. This David saw, and was thankful; Thou have chastened me sore, says he,
but have not delivered me to death Psa. 118.17 18.
. I shall not dye but live, and declare the works of the Lord Psa. 118.17 18.
. He that has deserved hanging, may be glad if he escape with a whipping.
Christ has already suffered the worst of it for us, the just for the unjust.
The good thief could say, We are here for our deserts Luke 23 41.
, but he is innocent: and yet he suffered willingly, for he could lay down
his life, and take it up again at pleasure. Now Christ on his cross, is a
Doctor in his chair, where he reads unto us all a lecture of Patience. How
should we take up David's words, and say. Lo I have sinned, and I have done
wickedly; but that immaculate lamb of God, what had he done? Let thy hand, I
pray thee, be against me 2 Samuel 24.17.
, etc. And what though it should be against us as long as we live, yet what is
that to the wrath to come 1 These. 1.10.
, from which he has delivered us? Howbeit, there is none of Gods afflicted
that has not his lucida intervalla, his intermissions, respites, breathing
whiles. Yea, so small a while does the hand of the Lord rest upon us, that
L^ther cannot get deminutives enough, to extenuate it: for he calls it a very
little little cross that we bear. So the Scripture in both testaments. The
Prophet calls it a moment, and a little moment; and says, the indignation does
not transire, but pertransire; pass, but over pass Esaias 26. (...).
. The sharp of it is but short and sudden, Nubecula est, cito transibit.
Mourning lasts but till morning. Psalm. 30 5.
and is therefore set forth in the new Testament often, by the travel of a woman
Ioh. 16.21.
: as she soon forgets her sorrow, so shall we remember our troubles, as
waters that are past Job 11.16.
. Yet a very little while, says the Apostle, even as little as may be, and he
that shall come, will come, and will not tarry Heb. 10.37.
: he will come leaping, as a Hind, over the mountains of Bether, (all lets
and impediments) to our release and deliverance. Our song, (...), tamillum
tantillu^, adhuc pusillu^,
after a while, shall be louder than our cries, as it was with Israel at the
Red Sea. Wait therefore patiently, and see the salvation of the Lord Exodus 14.13
. The red sea of affliction, 22.
that might justly swallow us, shall only preserve us; a wall it shall be on
the right hand, and a wall on the left, till we have passed thorough the midst
of it dry-shod, into the promised inheritance. Surely, in the floods of great
waters they shall not come nigh us, Psalm. 32.6. or if they do, yet we shall
be only washed, not drowned, as Paul was in the shipwreck. Troubled we are,
says he, on every side, but not distressed: perplex't, but not in despair:
persecuted, but not deserted: dejected, but not destroyed ^ Co^. 4 ^.9.
. Considering therefore, at worst, how well we are dealt with; and that God
has punished us less than our iniquities deserve, Ezra 9.13. fret not with
Ioash 2 Kin 6.33.
, but submit with Hezekiah Esaias 39 8.
. When Gods hand is on thy back, let thy hand be on thy mouth; yea, put thy
mouth in the dust, and say with Jacob, I am less than the least of thy mercies
Gene. 32.10.
, but worthy the worst of thy punishments. Righteous art thou, O Lord, and just
are thy jugdements, as that good Emperor (after David) cried out, Mauricius.
when the traitor took away his life, after his wife and children had bin
butchered before him.

And Chasten.
Or, I nurture, discipline, by chastening instruct, and put learning into them
by the rod. A metaphor from a fathers handling his children, whom he is bound
to bring up, in nurture and admonition, (...).
Ephesians. 6.4. and applied to the father of spirits, (...).
Heb. 12.7. and 1 Cor. 11.32. for when we are judged, that is, afflicted, we
are chastened of the Lord. The word signifies, we are dealt with as children,
that we should not be condemned with the world: like as the careful father
whips his young stripling, when he takes him tripping, to teach him more grace,
and to save him from the gallows. Castiga^e est cum fanctu corripe^e. P^gne^^s.
To chasten here, says an Interpreter, is more then to rebuke: and is
therefore set after it in the text, as a further favor; for it imports
instruction as well as correction, according to that of the Psalmist. Blessed
is the man whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and teach him out of thy law. Psalm.
94.12. what may we hence learn, but this?

Doct. Nocun e^ta, doctuncnta.
That Gods corrections are our instructions, his lashes our lessons, his
scourges our schoolemasters, his chastisements our advertisements. For, when
thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn
righteousness Esa^ 26.9.
. Hence those close connexions, Psalm. 94.12. Prove. 3.12, 13. Prove. 6.23. And
this to note, the Hebrews and Greeks both express chastening and teaching by
one and the same word, (...).
because the latter is the true end of the former, according to that in the
proverb, (...). Hes.
smart makes wit, and vexation gives understanding. The schoolmaster when a
lesson shall be learnt indeed, sets it on with a whipping. Now, Afflictions
are (...) as one calls them, Gods free-schoolemasters, cursed enough and
crabbed, but such as whereby he opens men's cares to discipline, and
commands them to return from iniquity. Then he shows them their work, and
their transgressions that they have exceeded Job 26.8, 9, 10.
. Hence affliction is said to have a voice, and men are called upon to hear
the rod, and who has appointed it. And hence it is, lastly, that some render
those words Heb. 12.7. If ye endure chastisement, Biblia Tabingent.
If ye persevere in discipline. And where we read ver. 5. My son despise not
the chastening of the Lord, the vulgar reads, the discipline of the Lord:
which although it be not all out so good Latin (as Beza there notes) yet the
sense is very good: it being the proper end and effect of Gods corrections to
mend and make us better, to teach us the knowledge of God and his will, our
selves and our duties.



us. For such, alas, is the hardness of men's hearts, that until the spirit
mollisie and make them malleable, Afflictions, Gods hammers do but beat cold
iron, little good is done, nay much hurt, by accident: for wicked men grow
worse for afflictions, as water more cold after a heat; as naughty boys more
stubborn or more stupid after a whipping. But now to Gods children his rods
are speaking as well as smiting: his corrections are not mute, but mingled with
instructions, his strokes may be strokes of war, yet his words are words of
peace, Psalm. 85.8. And though the Lord give you the bread of affliction, and
the water of adversity, yet shall not thy teachers be removed into a corner:
but thine eyes shall see thy teachers. And thine ears shall hear a word
behind thee saying, This is the way, walk ye in it Esaias 30.20, 21.
. What do thou here Elias 1 Kin. 19.9.
? Hagar, Sarahs maid, whence came thou? whither will thou Genesis 35.1.
? Arise Jacob, go up to Bethel, and make there an Altar Genesis 3.51.
, etc. What meanest thou o sleeper? arise, and call upon thy God Job. 1.6.
. Get thee up: wherefore lie thou thus upon thy face? Israel has sinned
I^sh. 7.10.
etc. Lo such, and to like purpose is that still voice and that sweet supply
of the Spirit of Jesus Christ, (...)
Phil. 1.19. whose office is to convince us, of sin, of righteousness, and of
judgment, Ioh. 16.8. who in chastening David instructed him every morning,
Psalm. 73.14. his reins also taught him in the night seaso^s Psalm. 16.7.
. Who guides gods people into all truth: for he shall not speak of himself,
(says our Savior there) but he shall take of mine, and shall show it unto
you, Ioh. 16.13, 14, 15. And hence it is that unto the upright there arises
light in darkness Psalm. 112 4.
, that the rocks power him forth water, that whether North or South blow, both
blow good to him, and make his spices flow out, Cant. 4.16. Hence it is, that
afflictions teach Gods children and not tire them: mend and not mad them: draw
them nearer to God, and not drive them further from God, and all because they
are taught of God. Ioh. 6.45.




Luther fitly calls affliction, Theologiam Christianorum, the Christian man's
Divinity,

First, they humble us, and so fit us for instruction; for the meek he will
guide in judgment, and the meek he will teach his way, Psalm. 25.9. Now
affliction and meekness have names alike, (...)
such as grow both upon one root in the holy tongue, because this is the
effect of the other. Hear and give care, says the Prophet, be not proud, for
the Lord has spoken it Iere. 13.15.
. As who should say, Let the Lord speak never so long, never so loud, till he
hide pride from man by afflictions, he shall but speak in the air, lose his
sweet words, prevail nothing at all with the sons of men, the best
discourses fall as rain upon a rock, when they light upon proud and unbroken
hearts. God speaks once, yea twice, yet men perceive it not, says Elihu. But
what? shall they carry it away so, and hear no further of him? No: God casts
them, says he, upon the bed of affliction, and scourges them with the rod of
his indignation. Thus he opens the ears of men, and seals their
instructions. And this done, then, If there be a messenger with him, an
interpreter, etc Job 33 19, 20.16. etc.
. He may have audience then, that before could have none, then he shall be one
of a thousand, that before was the least of a thousand: then men will lend both
ears to a good discourse, that before played the deaf adders to the wisest
charmers. Manasseh, that unruly beast hamper him once, and you may have what
you will: Feed the prodigal with husks, and no service shall be too base for
him, that before took scorn to be a Son. The Gallants of our time cannot be
staid in their gallop, till God (to cool the heat of their high-blood, and
rebate the edge of their furious resolutions) touch their soul with some
terror, Morbus vel coronas tibi parturit, vel arrogantiam reprimet. Isidor.
Pelus.
or their bodies with some sickness, turn their fools feathers into
kerchiefes, summon them by a disease, to death, and by death, to judgment:
tear off that covering, wherewith sloth and security have muffled their
consciences, and make them to possess the Sins of their youth Job. 13.26.
, and now you may talk with them, who before laugh't at instruction, as the
wild ass does at the horse and his rider Job ^9.18.
. The wild ass that is used to the wilderness, though she kick up her
heels, and snuff up the wind at her pleasure, so that they that seek her
will not weary themselves; yet there is a time when she may be taken, in her
month they shall find her, Ier. 2.24. Tullus Hostilius, Tanta adeo, cum
re^tipeida, reverentia divum Nalertu^ -- Sy^vius Ital. l. 7. Live. Decad. 1 lib.
5.
while he was well and lusty, thought nothing less fitting a King, than to
do sacrifice, as Numa had done before him. But pined with long sickness, he
yielded himself to all, both great and small superstitions; yea, he filled
the peoples heads with multitudes of Religions. This was Tullus: But we have a
better example. Saint Paul, I mean, that precious man, that elect vessel Act.
9.15.
. Him, when the Lord Christ would tutour, and teach his Gospel (for he
neither received it of man, nor was he taught it, but by the revelation of
Jesus Christ himself, the Arch-prophet, Gal. 1.12. with Act. 9.16, 18, 20.)
he met him on the way, as he was marching furiously to Damascus; unhors't
him, laid him low as earth, and yet lower in his own eyes, abaseth and drives
him down to the utmost, till he had not only withdrawn him from his bloody
purposes, but hid pride from him, Job 33.17. made him of a wolf, (that raving
wolf of Benjamin Sunt qui antumant parte^ illam prophetiae Iacobi, de Lupo
processuro e tribu Benjamin, Paulo applicarl debere. Beza ann. ad Act. 9.3.
, Genesis 49.27.) a lamb, Esa. 1.6. not once opening his mouth, unless it were
to crave direction, What will thou have me to do Lord? And the Lord said unto
him, Arise, go into the City, and it shall be told thee what thou must do.
Told thee? by whom? by Ananias? 'twas but a little, surely, that he told him.
It was Christ himself that told Paul in that three-dayes-darknesse, those
(...), words not sit to be uttered. For now is the time (as some learned
conc^ive) when he was rapt into the third heaven, Lud. Capel.
1 Cor. 12.2. At which time, lest he should be lifted up with the abundance of
Revelations, (so careful is the Lord Christ to keep his Scholars humble,
they shall sit down at his feet, every one to receive his words, Deuteronomy. 33.3.)
there was given unto him a prick in the flesh; that is, some violent
corruption edged with a temptation of Satan, to keep him low, and make him
pray.

And that is a second lesson we learn by Affliction, (since we are fallen
upon it.) It teaches us to pray, puts affections of prayer into our hearts, and
words of prayer into our mouths, Hos. 14.2, 3. Math. 26.41. makes us return
to him that smites us, to treat with him by hearty and affectionate prayer,
and to meet him with entreaties of peace. See this in Jacob Genes. 32.
, and Iabez, 1 Chronicles. 4.10. the Israelites in Judges, the Church in the
Lamentations, chap. 3.42. up go their hands and hearts and all, when they
suffered for their Sin. So Daniel, what an effectual prayer does he power
forth in that common calamity, and how does he be labor the business, while
he tugges with God, chap. 9.18, 19? So Jonas; he had scarce a breathing room
in the Whales belly, and yet he prays, yea, he cries in prayer, Ion. 2.2. So
Hannah; when her adversary provoked her s^re, to make her to fret, or to make
her thunder, (as the word there signifies) because the Lord had shut up her
w^mb, she was in bitterness of soul, and prayed unto the Lord, and wept
sore. And s^^e vowed a vow, 1 S^m 1.6.10.
etc. ^o David, Psalm. 116.4 and the Son of David, Heb. 5.7. And Paul, being
reviled, says he, we bless, and being defamed, we pray 1 Cor. 4.12 13.
. The sense of our present misery sets an edge upon our prayers, puts life and
spirit into them, yea, gives them wings to fly aloft, even to the throne of
Gods grace, and to offer a holy violence to his Majesty, till we have wrung
out of his hands, the blessing of deliverance. Oh how fervently have Gods
children prayed in affliction, how feelingly, how forcibly! Esa. 26.16. Master,
said those drowning disciples, carest thou not that we perish? Even Darius a
Heathen, can give order for prayers to be made at Jerusalem, for the Kings
life and his sons, when he had seen diverse of his children dye before him
Ez^. 6.10 Cresias.
In prosperity we are apt to think our selves men good enough, see not our
need of God, make not out after him, imagine we can do well enough without
him. Now the Cross comes, and confutes us clearly; shows us our dependence
upon God, our happiness in him, our nothingnesse without him: and so sends us
to him with earnest suits, issuing from our troubled souls, like strong
streams in narrow straits, that bear down all that stands in their way. Thus
the father of our spirits, the Shepherd and Bishop of our souls 1 Pet. 2.25
, sets these curres upon us when we are straggling, not to devour us, but to
drive us into the fold: turns these bug-beares loose upon us, that we may
fly into his everlasting arms Deu. 33.27
: sends out these summoners, and messengers to cite us first, and, if that
serve not turn, to compel us to come in, that his house may be full; as they
did that sturdy rebel Manasseh: Who prayed unto God, when he was in
affliction, yea, he humbled himself greatly, and besought the Lord his God,
and he was entreated 2 Chro. 33.^2, 13.
. For indeed there is no time for hearing of suits, like the time of trouble,
Zach. 13.9. And howsoever we cannot, to our thinking, pray at such a time, but
only chatter as a Crane, or mourn as a Dove ^sa. 38.14.
; utter some confused and broken Petitions, etc. yet God that searches the
hearts, knows what is the meaning of the Spirit R^m. 8.27. (...).
, then when the flesh with her murmurings, keeps such a dinne (as one says)
that we can hardly hear the spirits mixing with the fleshes roarings and
repinings, his praying sighs. He hears not only the prayers of his
afflicted, but even the sighs of his Prisoners Psalm. 79.11.
; yea, their breathing, out of the low dungeon, Lam. 3.55, 56. And hence our
recourse unto him in the day of distress, Psalm. 65.2. and hence the return of
our praises unto him, when he has turned again our captivity, as the rivers
in the South Psalm. 126.1.
: while the wicked gnaw their tongues for sorrow, Apoc. 16.10. or are silent in
darkness, 1 Samuel 2.9.

Thirdly, a Christian learnes obedience by the things that he suffers, grows
more buxom and pliant to the whole will of God, understands it more, executes
it better. There shall be only fear to make you understand the hearing, Esaias,
28.19. We hear and read much of the corruption of our natures, Vetus
Scriptura commentarine crux est.
odiousness of our sins, necessity of a Savior, sweetness of Gods love in
Christ, etc. but we never fully apprehend these things, or taste how good the
Lord is, till some sharp affliction. Paul's bodily blindness opened the eyes
of his mind: Jonas his sin had not been found out but for the tempest. A
man is occasioned by his cross, to enquire into sundry passages between God,
and his own soul, and to see such things to be sins, or duties, as before
he took no notice of They are Pillutae lucis, pills made on purpose to clear
the eyesight. Afflictio^es sunt lex practica. Pareus in Genesis col. 20 29.
. Afflictions, says a great Divine, are a practical law. When this law
comes, sin reviveth, as in Joseph's brethren: consent is also yielded to the
written law that it is good, Romans 7.9.16. yea that it is good for a man that he
has been afflicted, that thereby he might learn Gods statutes, Psalm. 119.71.
Many a good word is even worse then spilt upon us, till God set it on with his
rod. It lies asleep, as it were, like the husbandmans seed under a clod, till
God come with his clatting-beetle, and give it room to rise. All Elihues
sweet words were lost upon Job, till God had thundered him: then he is ready to
say, I have sinned, and perverted that which was right, and it profited me not,
I have borne chastisement, I will not offend any more. That which I see not,
teach thou me, etc Job 31.31, 32.
. So David, Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now I have kept thy word,
Psa. 119 67. Zipporah presently falls a circumcising her son, when she sees
her husbands life lies upon it. N^omi looked not homeward (nor we heavenward)
ti^l the Almighty had dealt very bitterly with her, yea the loss of her
husband and children set her former crosses a work; as in physic, a second
potion does a former, that lay asleep in the body. Thus God beats us, that he
may better us: and gives us to grow after an affliction, as children do after
a sit of sickness.

Afflictio ad patientiam instruit ac veiut inungit. Chrysostom. Cum inven^ret ista
patiente^, ad majora crudit. Chrysol. ^er. 110.
Fourthly, tribulation teaches patience, Romans 5.3. yea such a vvell-knit
patience, as makes a man suffer after he has suffered, as David did from
Shimei, but first, from Absalom. In this school of affliction Paul had
learned, in what estate soever he was, prosperous or adverse, therewith to be
content Phil. 4.11. (...) Sacris mitiatus sum.
. Yea we find, says a Father, that the Patriarchs, Prophets and all the just
ones which were types and figures of Christ, did keep nothing more to the
praise of their virtue, then this, that by all that they suffered, they had
learnt patience Inve^timus denique and Patriarchas, etc. Cypr. de bino patient.
fol. 105
. A man that has not been used to this bitter cup, will sputter at it: when
another that has, will cry out in Christ's language, O my father, if this cup
may not pass away from me except I drink it, thy will be done Math. 26.42
. And this said; he sits alone and is silent, because God has laid it upon
him, Lam. 3.28. he charge not God foolishly, but is in meditation, according
to that advise of the Preacher, Eccles. 7.14. If his soul begin to bustle, as
it will, he chides down his distemper, and prays himself patient: he
comforts himself in the Lord his God 1 Samuel 30 5
, and foreseeing his deliverance (though but afar off, as Abraham saw Christ)
he counts it all joy, though he fall into diverse temptations: knowing that the
trial of his faith works patience, Iam. 1.2, 3. and the patient abidi^g of
the afflicted shall not perish for ev^r, Psalm. 9.18.

Fifthly, as affliction teaches patience, so experience too, as it follows in
that Romans 5.3. It is a special help to experimental knowledge: And first, of
God, who is never so much enjoyed of us, as when we are in the deep with David
Psalm. 130.1
, as when we lie hardest with Jacob Gene. 28.12
, as when we are worst of all bestead with Iehosaphat 2 Chro. 20.12.
, as when we are slain all day long for his sake with the Martyrs. Then we are
given to see him with our eyes, as Job did, who till that time, had heard of
him by the hearing of the ear only. Then we come to know that the Lord he is
God with Manasseh, 2 Chronicles. 33.13. yea that he is our refuge and strength, a
very present help in trouble Psa. 46.1.
. Then we have a clear sight of first, his power, whereby he could as easily
have consumed as corrected us, Non erube^^o profiteri nunqua^ provectum me ad
tam sublime notiti^ Dei fast^gui quam hoc mo^bo attigi. Rollo^cus apud Melch
Adam. in vit. exter. Theol.
hurld us into hell, as held us a while over it, like as David told Saul, he
could as easily have cut his throat as he had cut his coat: and as Caesar
boasted to Metellus, he could as soon make him hop headless, as bid it be
done. It appears, we are no more able to stand before God, then a
glasse-bottle before a cannon-shot. Secondly, his wisdom and providence
appears in sitting our afflictions both for kind, such it shall be and no
other: for time, such a space it shall lie upon us, and no longer; and for
weight so much it shall be, and no more. He afflicts his, by line and by
plummet, according to their need and ability to bear it. 1 Cor. 10.13. And as
he carefully chose out their way out of Egypt, not the nearer but the safer: so
he does ours to the heavenly Canaan. Thirdly, we have experience of his love,
most seen and most sealed up unto us in afflictions, his season of showing
m^rcy, for man's extremity is Gods opportunity.

Next, as the cross gives us experience of God, how wise, seasonable,
merciful, compassionate he is, so likewise of our selves. It shows a man
first, the frailty of his matter. Some, says one, are more painted then some,
but all earthen vess^lls: some more clear then some, but all brittle glasses.
Job saw himself but dust and ashes when he was in affliction, that before had
dreamed some greater matter of himself, and made no other account but to dye
in his nest I^b ^^ 18.
. David, when gotten upon his hill, began to crow, that he should never be
removed Psalm. 30 ^^
: but when God hid his face, clang'd his hand, David was a worm, and no man,
(...)
and concludes him that is best underlaid to be very vanity, Psalm. 39.5.

S^condly, It shows us by exp^rience the sinfulness of our disposition, and
what is in our hearts, Deuteronomy. 8.2. what a deal of infidelity, impatiency,
techinesse, frowardness, faint-heartednesse, and insufficiency to manage the
smallest affli^tion; according to that of the wiseman. If thou faint in the
day of adversity, thy strength is but small. Prove. 24.10. A puddle seems
clear at the top, but stir it with a stick, and the mud will rise straight.
A Christian, whiles all goes well with him, is apt to think himself a jolly
fellow, reasonable wise, humble, patient, etc. till put to it: and then he
soon sees himself to be none of all these, nor any thing else that is good,
further, and longer then ^^ is upheld by God. A man ^nowes not where his house
is ill covered, till winter: a (...) finds not his want of skill, till he has
received a wound or two: so it is here. Crosses, says one, are like pinching
frosts, that will search us: where we are most unsound, we shall soonest
plain: and where most corruption lies we shall most shrink, Absol. (...).
when the burden comes. Thus we learn to know our selves by that we suffer.

Lastly, Affliction sanctified teaches what the world is, and gives us to know
by experience (that which we might better have taken Salomons or rather Gods
word for, without trying further conclusions) that all both persons and
things under the Sun are first v^nity, secondly, vexation of Spirit.

For persons first: take the best and likeliest of them to do us good, they
prove miserable comforters, physicians of no value. Surely men of low degree
are vanity: Jonathan was a ^ust friend to David, yet he calls to God his
Buckler.
and men of high degree are a lie: to be laid in the balance, they are
altogether lighter then vanity, Psalm. 62 9. This is while they live: it is
little or nothing they can do for us. And when death comes, His breath goes
forth, he returns to his earth, in that very day his thoughts perish Psalm.
146.4.
: even those glittering and golden thoughts and projects he had for thine help
and preferment, as the word there signify. Thus either our friends dye from us
in the height of our expectancies, or else their affections toward us dye;
especially when we are in adversity; as they dealt by Job upon the dunghill, my
kinsfolk says he, have failed, and my familiar friends have forgotten me.
Yea, all my inward friends (or the men of my secrets) abhorred me: and they
whom I loved, are turned against me. Job 19.14, 19. Lo, this is the worlds
kindness to their friends 2 Samuel 16.17.
; as he upbraided Hushai: and thus is a man served in the house of his
friends, Zach. 13.6. But what for the things of the world? finds the afflicted
any more solidity or constancy in them? Nothing less: The world passes away,
and the lusts thereof, says one Apostle 1 John 2.^.
The very fashion of this world, the hiew of it passes away 1 Cor. 7.31.
(...), a Mathematical figure. (...) 23.5.
says another. Will thou set thine eyes, says a third, upon that which is
not? It is heaven only that has a foundation, earth has none: God has
hanged it upon nothing, The glory of this world is ^^^an o^ im^^n, (...).
Matthew. 4 ^. the pomp of it a fantasy, Acts 25.23. (...): life it self an
imagination, Psalm. 39 6. Surely in an image walks each man.
and the things therein are a very nothing. Nothing, I say in themselves, and
yet full of power and activity to inflict vexation upon others.

And this, none can so feelingly say as the afflicted. He finds by experience,
the truth of that sacred Proverb, (for persons first) that Confidence in an
unfaithful man, in time of trouble, is like a broken tooth, and a foot out of
joint Prove. 25.19
The staff of such reeden friendship, will not only break under him that
leanes on it, but run into his hand and breed vexation of spirit, Esa. 36.6. To
him that is afflicted, pity should be showed from his friend: but he
forsakes the fear of the Almighty. My brethren have dealt deceitfully as a
brook I^ 6.14, 15
, says Job, The best of them is as a brier, says the Church, the most upright
as a thorne-hedge, etc. And th^ne^ ^nfers, Trust ye not in a friend, put not
confidence in a guide Mica. 7.4, 5
, lest he serve us as David's guide did him, Psalm. 55.13. (...) ^as Judas did
Jesus, who was guide to them that took him, Act. 1.16.



consists in the abundance of the things that he possesses Luke 12.16
. First, in the very pursuit of them is much anguish, many grievances, fears,
jealousies, disgraces, interruptions, discontentments, (for, be a man never so
well underlaid with the things of this life, yet while his flesh is upon him,
he shall be sorrowful: and while his soul is in him, it shall mourn, Job
14.22.) Secondly, they are far swe^ter in the ambition, than in the fruition:
for besides that, we are never sure of them for a day (whereupon they are
called riches of uncertainty 1 Timothy 6.17
, subject to vanity in themselves, and violence from others, Math. 6.19, 20. to
our great vexation; to see, that we can no more hold them, than a flock of
birds sitting in our garden: nor stay them, than the streams that pass by the
sides of a city) if we were sure of their presence, yet we could not be sure
of their comfort; because we cannot make our hearts delight in the same things
still. Not the world only passes away, but the lusts thereof 1 Ioh. 2.17.
also. And this is an evil which I have seen under the Sun, and it is common
among men, Eccles. 6.1, 9. though most observed by the children of affliction,
whose eyesight is more cleared by those sharp and smart waters. This made
David such a weaneling to the world Psalm ^31.
. God had by his manifold afflictions, laid such a deal of wormwood upon the
worlds dugs, that he had no mind to suck there any more. My soul, says he,
is even as a weaned child, Psalm. 131.2. And thus affected stands every one of
Gods afflicted to the things of this life. He knows them too well (and he
has paid for his learning) to trust them too far, or to meddle much with
them. His profession to the world is the same, that the Israelites was to
Sihon, Number. 21.21. Let me go thorough thy land: we will not turn aside into
the fi^lds or vineyards (trouble our selves more than needs about necessaries)
neither drink of the waters of the W^lls (lie sucking, like Flies, at those
botches of carnal pleasures, or earthly preferments) we will go by the Kings
highway (that good old way that God has scored us out in his Word) until we
be past thy country (until we be safe arrived at the key of Canaan, at the
Kingdom of heaven.) And this is that Experience that we get of God, our
selves, and others, both persons and things by that we suffer.

Sixthly, (for the afflicted man is still at his lesson.) Tribulation, as it
teaches Patience, and by Patience Experience, so by Experience, Hope: Rom 5.4.
while it puts a man to his proof, makes him look up his Evidences, what time
he is assaulted with these and these doubts and temptations of satan; who will
labor to leap over where the hedge is lowest; to oppose us then most, when we
are least able to resist. At which heavy times, a Christian finding by good
experience, that God supports by his sufficient grace, hears him, heales him,
sweetens and sanctifies the cross, gives him taste and experiment of his
mercy, when nothing else can yield comfort, this rivets him fast to God, and
makes him confident for the future. The Lord, says David, that delivered me
out of the paw of the Lion, and out of the paw of the Bear, he will deliver
me out of the hand of this Philistim 1 Samuel 17.37.
Lo, this was it that put so much courage into him in that most dangerous
encounter. So Saint Paul in like case, We were pressed, says he, cut of
measure, even above strength, insomuch that we despaired even of life. But we
had the sentence of death in our selves. And what did he make of i^? what good
instruction drew he out of this deepest affliction? that we should not trust
in our selves, but in God, which raises the very dead. i. e. reseueth such as
were appointed to dye. Who delivered us from so great a death, and does
deliver: in whom we trust, that he will yet deliver us 2 Cor. 1.8, 9, 10.
. God takes and puts a man sometimes past the help of all creatures, that he
may bring the glory of all our confidence home to his own door, where it is
only due: For till then (such is our untowardnesse) we seldom seek to him.
The Prodigal never thought of his Father till he had no more husks. The
Hemorroisse never made out to Christ, till all her money was gone. The
unreasonable creatures, many of them, never look homeward, till hunger-bit.
The widow that is left alone trusts in God 1 Timothy 5.5.
, says the Apostle: who while she had an husband, leaned too much upon him. I
will also leave in the midst of thee an afflicted and poor people: and they
shall trust in the name of the Lord Zeph. 3.12.
, says the Prophet: who till they were poor, trusted in uncertain riches.
Asa bore him self bold upon his forces, as being five hundred and fourscore
strong, till he was overmatcht with an army of a thousand thousand.
Aethiopians. This made him cry, Help us O Lord our God, for we rest on thee ^
Chron. 14.3, 9, 11.
. God crosses many times our likeliest projects, and makes the sinews of the
arm of flesh to crack, that being unbottom'd of the creature we may trust in
the living God who gives us richly all thing to enjoy, 1 Timothy 6.17.

Lastly, (to let pass many other wholesome lessons that Affliction learnes us;
as thankfulness upon blessings reobtained, the worth whereof we have now seen
best by the want: selfe-examination, and a setting all to rights betwixt God
and our own souls Lam. 3.40, 41.
: watchfulness and tenderness of Conscience, as in David, while an exile:
love to the like afflicted; misery breeds unity, as in Hooper and Ridley that
could agree well enough when they were both in prison: bowels of mercies,
kindness and compassion toward others in like case, as he that has had the
toothache, or has been poor and necessitous himself will pity such as are
so: see Exodus 12.21. heavenly-mindednesse, a breathing after the place of rest,
the day of refreshing, etc. David knew not so well what it was to be a courtier
in heaven, till he was a soiourner in Meshech. But (to let pass all these and
many more, I say, and to go on as we began with the Apostle) Affliction as it
teaches patience and by patience, experience, and by experience Hope, so it
works such a glorious hope as makes not ashamed, does not abuse, befoole,
disappoint us, as that of the Hypocrite: ar^ that because the love of God is
shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost Romans 5.5.
: who then especially rests upon us as a spirit of glory and of God 1 Pet. 4.14.
, when we are under the cross. God is never so much enjoyed of his children
(which was the end wherefore we were placed in the world) as in time of
trouble. Then we turn us to God, Math. 11.23, 24, 25.
as our Savior did, Matthew. 11. when tired out with the peoples obstinacy: then
we run into his presence, as the doves into their windows, hover and cover
under his wings as the chicken under the hens in a storm, hide us in his
bosom, rest us in his lap, shelter us under the hollow of his hand, until the
indignation be over-past Psa. 26.20.
. Our hearts are naturally full of harlotry, our live^ little else than a
spiritual fornication: there is nothing more common with us, than to forsake
the guide of our youth, and to forget the covenant of our God, Pro. 2.17.
disloyally to estrange our selves from him, and to run a whoring after other
lovers: We set our hearts upon earthly things (as the Be does his sting) with
all our might, and suffer them to carry away our most lively and tenderest
affections. Now our jealous God, that hates putting away Mal. 2 19. Du^ omnibus
humani praesidus vallatus esse ^, vix de Deo cogita^di d^batur spatium: nunc
omnibus illis exutus, solum De^m cogito, qui me, sat scio, invocantem exaudiet.
Wencesi^tus B^hem Rex ca^tivus, apu^ A^n Sy^ in hist. Bohem.
, though he may say, Plead with your mother plead, for she is not my wife,
neither am I her husband, Hos. 2.2. yet, not willing to lose us altogether,
Behold, says he, ver. 6, 7. I will hedge up thy way with thorns; that is,
with afflictions: and make a wall, that she shall not find her paths. And
she shall follow after her lovers, but she shall not overtake them: and she
shall seek them, but shall not find them: then shall she say (lo here the
happy effect of affliction sanctified) I will go, The Spouse in the Canticles
found not her beloved in the day of prosperity, but in the night of adversity.
^. bea^y.
and return to my first husband, to wit, God: for then was it better with me
than now. Thus the Lord arresteth us by afflictions, as by his Sergeant:
fetches us in, in our out-strayes, as the Shepherd does his sheep by setting
his dog after them: brings us into his presence, as Absalom did Ioab, by firing
his field: causes us to confess and covenant with that good Sheca^iah, We
have trespassed against our God, and have taken strange wives, yet now there is
hope in Isra^l concerning this thing. Now theref re, let us make a covenant
with our God, to put away all the wives ^za. 10.2, 3.
etc. And then, as lover^ ^re never great^r friends th^^ after sailing out: so
is it (...), Because he has set his love upon me, says God, therefore will I
deliver him: yea, I will be with him in trouble to deliver and honor him, with
long life will I satisfy him, and show him my salvation Psa. 90.14, 15, 16.
. Whereupon the good soul, inwardly warmed and enlarged with the sense of such
a love, reciprocates and replies, with utmost strength of all heightened and
indeered affection, Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon
earth that I desire besides thee. My flesh and my heart saileth: but God is the
strength of mine heart, and my portion for ever. Psalm. 73.25, 26.

And these, with many more, are the lessons God lays before his children by
their afflictions, and puts into them with his rod. There are also diverse
others (as is well observed) that the Lord by his servants troubles, would
teach the world. As first, that the evils chiefly so esteemed, are not so
indeed: since the Saints have share in them, who yet their are ^^eed from the
greatest mischiefs. Secondly, how such evil; should be borne, by example of
their patience. Thirdly, That there shall be certainly a Resurrection, Luke 16
25. Fourthly, to mark the upright man, and behold the just, for (whatever his
beginning or his middle be) the end of that man is peace Psalm. 37 37.
, etc. But I hasten to the Application.

do proficere in pejus, Sunt non^ulli qui molestiam quidem iust^nent, tamen
finctu privantur. Chrysostom. de Laz. conc. 3.
as those impostours in Timothy; grow down-ward, backward, are worse for their
crosses, drunk with affliction, as those, Lamentations 3.15. nay stark mad,
as Pharaoh, and Nero that monster of mankind, who threatened his Jove for
marring his Music with a thunderclap; and dared him to a single combat.
Such another was that stigmaticke Ahaz, 2 Chronicles. 28.22. the railing Thief,
that suffered with our Savior: the Sodomites, whose captivity by
Kedorlaomer, had not yet made ten good men in those five cities of the Plain:
those incorrigible and desperate sinners in Sion, those sacrificing Sodomites,
Esaias 1.10. of whom the Prophets cry out so much and often, that no means will
reclaim them. Let favor be showed to the wicked, yet he will not learn
righteousness. Let God lift up his hand, yet they will not see, nor startle.
See Esaias 26.10, 11. Ierem. 2.30, 31. and 5.3. Esaias 1.5. Sin has transformed
them, as it were, into those Bears in Pliny, that could not be stirred with
the sharpest prickles: Hist. Animal. lib. 4. c. 10.
or those Fi^hes in Aristotle, that though they have spears thrust into their
sides, yet they awake not. Into such a dead lethargy has Sin cast some men's
souls, that though they are put to pain, yet they profit not, Ierem. 12.13.
or if they be in travel for the time, yet they bring forth nothing but wind.
They are never the better when they come out of their affliction, no, though
they powered out a prayer when Gods chastening was upon them, Esa. 26.16, 18.
What is this, but to add rebellion to their sin? Job 34.37. and rebellion,
ye know, is as the sin of Witchcraft, 1 Samuel 15.23. But let such read their
sin, and their sentence at once: Ierem. 6.29, 30. The bellows are burnt, the
lead is consumed with fire: the Founder melts in vain, for the wicked are
not plucked away. Reprobate silver shall men call them, because the Lord has
rejected them. And surely, if God will walk stubbornely with his own people,
till their uncircumcised hearts be humbled; Leviticus 26.41. how much more with
his stubborn enemies, that stand out against his strokes, refusing to be
reformed, hating to be healed? Look how a stubborn man seeks all the hurt
he can to him whom he spites; shuts his care to entreaties of peace, and
rejoices to see his hurt: so the Lord, (but in a way of justice) finds out
plagues against these obstinate rebels; will not be pacified, till he has his
penny worths of them; laughes at their destruction, and mockes when their fear
comes, Prove. 1.26. With the froward man thou will wrestle, says David,
Psalm. 18.26. Now, if God wrestle with a sinner, the first that shall come to
the ground is his head; he is sure to have his neck broke, even the neck of
his soul, in the bottom of hell, Job 15.26. to the fire whereof he is
continually carrying a faggot to burn himself withal, Romans 2.5. In the
mean space, all he suffers here, is but a beginning of those sorrows, a
pledge of more in a worse place, a typical hell, a foretaste of that old
Tophet, an hell above ground. Well therefore might one cry out, Insoelices
autem q^^ nec verberibus ^em^llescunt. S^ultet. in Is. 1.5.
Oh unhappy persons, whom stripes amend not! They that will not bend by the rod
of Gods mouth, must be broken with the iron rod of his hand, Psalm. 2. or if
the rod will not rule them, his sword shall be drencht in their gall, and
bathed in their blood, Deuteronomie 32.41, 42. Or if they escape here, yet their
preservation from one, is but a reservation to seven, Leviticus 26. he will
surely pay them for the new and the old, and let them look for it. Saul lived
a long while after God had forsaken him, and you could see no alteration in his
outward condition: but says the Prophet (and it is most fearful) The
strength of Israel does not repent, 1 Samuel 15.29. I infer (for a second Use)
with that other Prophet.

Be thou instructed therefore, Oh Jerusalem, lest Gods soul depart from thee,
Ierem. 6.8. lest while he chasten thee with the rods of men, and thou be
never the better, he take away his mercy from thee, as he took it from
Saul, 2 Samuel 7.14, 15. Take heed ye be not truants in the school of
Affliction, but be diligent, and so ply your business, that your profiting may
appear to all men, 1 Timothy, 4.15. Seek it of him who teaches to profit,
Esaias 48.17. and gi^eth wisdom to his afflicted without upbraiding, Iam. 1.5.
Seek it, I say, by his in^an^s, and take it upon his term^s. First, see him
angry in every cross, and for nothing angry so much, as for Sin. For his
wicked covetousness I was angry with him, I hid me, and was angry, Esaias,
57.17. Secondly, see it a blessed thing to bear Gods yoke betimes, and
therefore be not weary in your minds: for in due season ye shall reap the
quiet fruit of it, if ye faint not, Galatians, 6 9. Blessed is the man whom
thou chastisest, and teach in thy Law. That thou may give him rest from
the days of adversity, etc. Psalm. 94.12, 13. Be sure, if there were any
other way to do us good, he would spare a labor of whipping us, Ierem. 9 7
but he knows, and so should we, that the cross will bear us to heaven,
when nothing else will If there be any way to heaven on horseback, it is by
the cross. Bradford.
. Gods cloud in the wilderness, staid sometimes a whole year or longer in a
place; to their grief, no doubt, but yet to their gain; that he might humble
them, and try them, and do them good in their latter end, Deuteronomie, 8.16.
as Moses has it. Thirdly, melt and mourn kindly before the Lord, as Josiah,
in the sense of your sins, Gods deserved displeasure, but especially his
infinite love in chastening you here, that you may not be condemned hereafter.
This is the only way to difarme GODS indignation, to get from under his
mighty hand, and to be rid of his rod, 1 Peter, 5.6. By such a course as this,
Jacob appeased that rough man Esau: Abigail diverted David from his bloody
purposes: the Syrians found favor with Ahab (that Non-such, as the Scripture
styles him) by an humble submission, 1 King. 20.13. And one of our Edwards
riding furiously after a servant of his that had displeased him, with a drawn
sword in his hand, as purposing to kill him: Si servulum tuum videas, peccata
propria consitentem, ultro offerre se poenae, instecteris, and ignosces: de
domini miseratione dissidis? Ambr. in Psalm. 37.
seeing him submit, and on bended knee sue for his life, was content to spare
him, and receive him into his favor Acts and Monuments, in Edw. 1.
. Lo, this is the way to make our peace with God, and this is the very course,
that he points and prompts us to in the text,

As many as I love, says he, I rebuke and chasten. But what lesson may we
hence take out? Be zealous therefore, and repent.

There seems to be an hysterosis in the words, q. d. repent thee of thy
remissness, laziness, luke-vvarmnesse, and learn by that thou suffer, to
be zealous of good works, fervent in spirit, serving the Lord. Or, (which I
rather incline to) it is a trajection; Be zealous and repent, that is, be
earnest and thorough in thy repentance, and each part thereof, contrition, or
humiliation, and Conversion or Reformation: The former is called in Scripture
Repentance for, or, of sin, (...).
2 Cor. 12.21. Rev. 9.20. The latter, Repentance from sin, Act. 8.22. Heb.
6.1. In both we must be zealous, doing them with all our might, as David is
said to have danced before the arc: and this, as at all times, so especially
when Gods hand is gone out against us and seems to thrust us down, as it
were, with a thumpe on the back.

For contrition, first, know that God will never leave pursuing thee till the
traitors head be thrown over the wall, till thou humble thy self to walk
with thy God. As one cloud follows another, till the sun consume them: so one
judgment after another, till godly sorrow dispels them. Gather your selves
Zeph. 2.1.
therefore, and call in your wits, that are wandering after vanity: turn your
eyes inwards, that you may see for what you suffer. And this done, I^sdem
quibus videmus, oculis flemus.
let your eye affect your hearts till they ache again, yea till they fall
asunder in your bosoms like drops of water: labor, and leave not, till you
feel your sins as so many daggers at your hearts, (...).
as Peter's converts did, Act. 2.37. yea as so many daggers at Christ's heart, as
those in Zachary, Zach. 12.10. that looking upon him whom ye have pierced, your
hearts may be like so many Hadadrimmons: you may weep over him that bled for
you: your eyes may be a fountain of tears Ier. 9.1. he se^mes to attude to 1 Samuel 7.6.
to wash his feet in, who has opened a fountain of hi^ own blood to bath
your so^^^s in, Zach. 13.1. In the twelfth Chapter, the Prophet seems to be at
a stand, knows not whence to borrow comparisons, sufficiently to set forth the
depth of their godly sorrow. They shall mourn for it, says he, as one mournes
for his only son (think here how great the grief was of that disconsolate
widow of Naim, Luke 7.13. of Jacob for his Joseph, of David for his Absalom)
and shall be in bitterness for it, as one that is in bitterness for his
firstborn: yea the lamentation of some one poor woman in her closet for her
sin, shall exceed that mourning at Megiddo, for the loss of good Josiah. Mary
Magdalen is a just instance hereof; whose eyes were a laver, and hair a towell
to wash and wipe the feet of Christ. Some others of Gods Saints have expressed
their hearty humiliation in time of affliction, by bowing down the head,
casting down the body, a softly gate, a lovv kind of language, like broken
men; putting sackcloth on their loins, and ashes on their heads, as those that
had deserved to be as far under ground as they were now above. Yea in a
time of common calamity the Lord called his people to baldness Isa. 22.
for sin, which in other cases was forbidden, Deuteronomy. 14.1. And Ezra
practiced it accordingly, when he rent his mantle, and his garment, and plucked
off the hair of his head and of his beard, and with knees bent, and hands
spread out, he cried, O my God, I am ashamed and blush to lift up my face to
thee, etc. Ezra, 9.3, 6. Yea David went further then this: for not content to
vvash his bed, even his under-bed with his tears which he had defiled with
his sins, he made a real resignation of himself and all he had into Gods
hands, as having forfeited all. If he thus say, I have no delight in him,
behold here am I, let him do to me as seems good unto him, 2 Samuel, 15.26.
So another time, when the Lord pleaded against him with pestilence and blood:
Ezekiel, 38.22. he stood forth and offered himself to the stroke of the
punishing Angel, with Me, Virg. A^ncid.
me, ego qui feci, in me convertito ferrum: 'Tvvas I, 'tvvas I, let thine hand,
I pray thee, be against me and my fathers house. 2 Samuel 24.17.
And the like must be done of us, in case of Gods displeasure justly conceived
against us. Let the glory be to him, take the shame and blame of it to our
selves, submit to any thing that he shall see good to inflict. Say, Here I am,
let him do to me as seems him best. If God will have my life, here it is:
if my goods, here they are; if my children, or any other dear pledge of his
former favor, I resign them freely into his hands. I am less then the least
of his mercies; I am worthy the heaviest of his judgments: I have deserved to
be destroyed, yea to be hurled into hell. This is that judging of our selves
that the Scripture calls to: and this is that submitting our selves to God,
that Saint James presses with such variety of expressions: chapt. 4.7, 8, 9,
10. Draw nigh to God, says he, and God will draw nigh unto you. Come near
unto him, as Judah did once to Joseph, and say, O my Lord, let thy servant. I
pray thee, speak a word in my Lords ears, and let not thine anger burn
against thy servant, Genesis 44.18.

Josh. 24.19.

Cleanse your hands, ye sinners; purge your hearts, ye double-minded: not
your hands only, with Pilate, but your hearts also, with David, Psalm. 51. who
washed himself so thoroughly, that he became clear as the picked glass, and
white, as the snow in Salmon.



Be miserable (says the Apostle:) so ye are, but feel your selves to be so,
^vo unto mourning. Nay, dwell upon it so long, till ye draw tears from your
eyes; yea, tears of blood from your hearts, if it were possible. Sin in the
soul, is like the head of a bearded arrow in the body; and is thereto compared
(as some of good note conceive) in that 2 Corinthians, 12.7. (...).
which will not be pulled out, without pain and bloodshed. Poenite^tia q.
punientia.
Afflict your selves therefore, (be active in it, for some are humbled, but not
humble; low, but not lowly) and mourn and weep: or if thou can not weep,
let it be the fruit of thy constitution, and not of thy corruption; in which
case, dry sorrow may be as good as wet. But, weep if thou can; yea weep,
till ye can weep no longer. They which will not weep here, shall have their
eyes whipped out in hell: they that will not wail among men, shall howl among
devils. For your help herein, Let your laughter be turned into mourning, and
your joy into heaviness: As who should say, Call off your thoughts and
affections from matters of mitth, and set them all aworke upon sorrowful
objects. Make use of all means, improve all occasions, turn all the streams
into this one channel, for the driving of that mill may grind the heart.
Thus, Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, and be ze^lous in it,
(...) 1 Pet. 5.7.
and he shall lift you up in due time. As in the mean while, this zeal in
repenting, shall speak you sound and serious in your godly sorrovv, one effect
whereof is Zeal, 2 Corinthians, 7.11.

But then, secondly, our sorrow must be, (as that of those Corinthians was)
unto a transmentation, (...).
or inward change. Our Contrition must be joined with Conversion, else all is
lost, for this latter is the consummation of the former, and the seal of its
sincerity. Here then, you must set to work again, and be zealous in it. Let
your crosses teach you, to cast away all your transgressions, Ezekiel, 18.31.
to turn from all your wickedness, Acts, 8.22. repent of all your dead works,
Hebrews, 6.1. put off all the fruits of the flesh, Colossians, 3.9. Spare no
sin, but least of all thy beloved sin, thy familiar-devill: pitch thy
hatred chiefly upon that, fight neither against small nor great in comparison
of that: say of it, as Haman of Mordecai, What availes me any thing so long as
that lives? but that once dead, the rest will soon follow, as all the
servants attend the masters funeral. Let Ioab dye, though it be by the horns
of the Altar. Let Adoniah loose his head, though Bathsheba intercede for him:
bring out the dead carcases of these Arch-rebels out of the palace of your
hearts, thorough the dung-port Neh. 3.13.
of your mouths: yea spet forth that filth with utmost indignation. And as
Amnon put away Tamar with extreme distaste, after he had abased her: so let us
deal by our sweet sins. Affliction sanctified will soon reach Gods Israel to
pollute the idols which themselves had perfumed, and to say to the works of
their own hands, Get thee hence: Isay 30.20, 21, 22. What have I to do any
more with Idols? Hoseah 14.8. those idols of mine own heart? said Ephraim,
after that he had bewailed his own untamednesse with tears, and upon
corrections of instruction smote upon his thigh. Jeremiah. 31.18, 19: as that
Publican upon his breast, who would as willingly have been knocking upon the
sin in his heart, and giving it the blew eye 1 Cor. 9.27. (...).
that Saint Paul did, if he could have come at it. This then is that we have
all to do: and this the Lord looks for at our hands (specially) when we are
in any affliction; to cease from our own works, Hebrews, 4.10. to keep us
from our own wickedness, 2 Samuel 22.23. and not turn after the way of our
own hearts, Esaias, 57.17. to purge our selves from all filthiness of flesh,
and spirit, (as the Viper, when he is lashed, casts up his poison) and to
perfect holiness in the fear of God: 2 Cor. 7.1. For else, all our pretended
contrition, if it be not attended with Reformation, is but as the crouching of
a fox; which being taken in a snare looks lamentably, but it is only to get
out. It was a grievous complaint God made of his people. Isay, 53.17. I hid
me, and was angry, yet they went on frowardly in the way of their own hearts.
And again by the Psalmist; whiles he slew them, then they sought him, yea
they returned, and enquired carely after God. Nevertheless their heart was not
right with him, neither were they steadfast in his covenant, etc. Psalm, 78.34,
37. While God was in whipping them, they cried, as children. I Will do no more,
I Will do no more: but when the rod was removed, and the smart a little over,
their promise was forgotten, and they as bad as before: Like as a dog when he
comes out of the water, shakes his ears, and as a swine when washed, returns
again to the guzzle. How much better David? He swear (and he would stand to
it) to keep Gods statutes. Psalm. 119.106. And when did he swear, but in the
time of his affliction? Remember David, Lord, with all his afflictions. Who
swear unto the Lord, and vowed unto the mighty God of Jacob, etc. Psalm. 131.1,
2. And this he performed as well Psalm, 66.14. and. 61.8. for he knew 'twas
better not to vow, then to vow, and not to pay, Eccles. 5.4. Hence his f^rvour
and fidelity. He knew the Lord takes no pleasure in foole^, ib: such as though
they be brayed in a mortar, yet will not ^ut away their folly. All Gods
children are the better for whipping, the brighter for scouring, the purer for
fining, the healthier for physicking. If the outward man decay, the inward is
renewed, 2 Corinthians, 4.16. the winter of the one, is the Spring of the other.
If they be pruned by afflictions, they bring forth more fruit, John 15.2. If
launced by Gods hand, the very blewnesse of the wound purges out evil;
Proverbes, 20.30. If they pass the Flaile, Dei s^^mentum sum, and bestiarum
dentibus molor, ut puius and sincerus panis repe^iar. Ignat. John Careless in a
letter to M. Philpot.
Fan, Millstone, Oven, it is all but to fit them for the Lords own tooth, as
a sweet meate-offering in a clean vessel, Esaias 66.20. You know, (said that
holy Martyr) the vessel before it be made bright, is soyled with oil and
other things, that it may scour the better. Oh happy be you, that you be now
in this scouring-house: for shortly you shall be set upon the celestial
shelfe, as bright as Angels. Every affliction sanctified, rubbs off some rust,
melts off some dross, strains out some corruption, ( Job 10.10. God strains
out our motes, whiles our hearts are powered out like milk, with grief and
fear) empties and evacuates some superfluity of naughtiness, benums our
lusts at least, (as winter does the Serpent) that they cannot do us so great
hurt: makes us partakers of some more of Gods holiness: brings forth some
quiet fruit of righteousness, to them that are thereby exercised. Some good is
ever done; the least that can come of it, is to do good duties better, with
greater zeal, and larger affections, Esa. 26.11. raked out of the ashes, 2 Timothy 1.6. (...).
and kindled by this coal from Gods altar, whereby we become more active, and
ready to every good word and work. Some blessing it ever leaves behind it; as
the river of Nilus, which by overflowing the land of Egypt, fattens and fills
it with flowers and fruits. What though the Saints lie drowned (as the fertile
meddowes do, under the floods) all winter long? the comfort is, God sits upon
the floods, Psalm. 29.10. and shall shortly set them upon a rock that is higher
than they, Psalm. 61.2. out of the reach of trouble. Nube solce pulsa candidus
ire die^.
As certain as is the vicissitude and interchangeable course of Winter and
Summer darkness and light, Evening and morning; so certain shall. the change
of the godly be. God will bring them from Marah to Elim, Numb. 33.9. from a
place of bitterness, to springs of sweet water; from a dry and barren
wilderness to a pleasant station. He will remove them ere-long (after they
have suffered a while 1 Pet. 5.10
, and paid a little for their learning, under this stern and sharp
schoolmaster, Affliction) into an higher form in Christ's school, Q^^s non
patia ^ur, ut potia tur?
yea to the University of Heaven; Where the Arch-prophet himself shall teach
us immediately with his his own mouth, and show us great and hidden things
that we knew not, Ierem. 33.3. such as Saint Paul heard in his heavenly
rapture: and such as those good souls are ever in hearing, which came out of
great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white in the
blood of the lamb, Revel. 7.14. Here we are but learning our A B C, and our
lesson is never past Christs-crosse (as that Martyr phrased it) and our walk
is still home by the Weeping-crosse: but then, the Ransomed of the Lord shall
return, and come to Sion with songs, and everlasting joy upon their heads:
they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away,
Esaias 35.10.

FINIS.
PErlegi tractatum hunc, dignumque judico qui typis mandetur.

THO: WYKES R. P. Episc. Land. Cap. Domest.


