THE SAINTS HVMILIATION. Being the Substance of nine profitable Sermons upon
several Texts.

Viz: 1 The nature of a Fast; on Judges 20.26. 2 The Christians Watchfulness;
on Mark. 13.37. 3 Gods Controversy for sin, on Hosea 4.12. 4 The Remedy of
Distress; on Genesis 32.9.11. 5 The use of the Covenant and Promises; on Genesis
32.10. 6 The Broken Sacrifice; on Psalm 51.17. 7 Good wishes for Sion; on
Psalm 51.17. 8 Motives to Repentance; on Math. 3.7.8. 9 An exhortation to
Repentance; on Math. 3.7.8.


First Preached and applied by SAMVEL TORSHEL, Minister of Gods Word at
Bunbury, and now published for the common good.

AMOS 5.16. They shall call such as are skillful of lamentation to lament.

LONDON, Printed by John Dawson for Henry Overton, and are to be sold at his
Shop at the entering into Popes-head-alley out of Lumbard-streete. 1633.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE NICHOLAS RAYNTON, Lord Major of LONDON, Master of the
Society of HABERDASHERS: And to the Worshipful Wardens of that Honorable
Fraternity.
Right honorable and right worshipful,
EXcellent is the wise and faithful use of entrusted power in placing of able
men in Ministry. The work is honorable, peaceful, promising, commonly
attended with suiteable success, through Pastors pains in peoples profit.
Choosing power should so issue as reflecting evidence of truth, and tenderness
in discharging a duty that so nearly concerns souls welfare. Among those
that herein have worthily deserved, a portion of honor accrues to you:
Instance is the Author of these ensuing pieces, for whom the Church of God is
your debtour. He is one that minds and labors it is good, for the which all
such fixed Stars should so shine in their spheres: should spend and be spent.
His first fruits were yours, by himself presented as due, by whose light
directed I have led up these second. Things are most beautiful in their
season, these Sermons preached in a time of Humiliation, wanting nor then
theirs, may again in some measure hereafter be the same in reading, on the
like requiring occasion, and profitable in present; the ends of their
publication. Presuming of their speeding in the common advantage, and knowing
your right in the Authors person and pains, by many obligements yours; I crave
leave of making them first yours in special by dedication, then others in
general by use. If God by them be glorified, the Church edified, and my poor
service accepted, I have my aim in wishing, helping, and procuring the
publishing, as the Author in preaching. For you his worthy Patrons, still well
may ye fare, with the honor ye gain, by your love to divine truth. Ever may
your pious intentions be answered, in plentiful issue of heavenly light and
heat in peoples hearts and lives: to the which end, the God of all grace guide
you in all undertakings of this nature, and give you the honor and comfort of
a well employed Talent, with the precious prayers and blessings of many
savingly blessed by you.

Your Lordships and Worships in all Christian observance, A. B.

The Epistle to the Reader.
AS God is the Author of all blessings, so likewise of all judgments;
prosperity and adversity, sweet and bitter waters, both these proceed from
the same fountain, but in a different manner: he begins with blessings, and
then only proceeds to judgments, when these are not answered with dutiful
obedience, he does not first come in storms and tempests, but in the still,
and gentle voice of his mercies, because he would rather have men to magnify
the riches of his mercies, than complain under the severitie of his
judgments; accounting it more glory to be loved for his goodness, than feared
for his greatness: besides the blessings of God, they have no motive to stir
him up to the bestowing of them; but within himself and in his own nature,
but his judgments have their original and foundation in man's sin, blessings
and judgments they come from God, as honey and the sting do from the Be; the
Be makes honey naturally, but stings not unless she be provoked; so it is
suitable and connaturall to the goodness of God, to communicate it self in the
bestowing of blessings; but not to inflict judgments unless he be provoked unto
it, He punishes not willingly, neither takes he delight in afflicting the
children of men. LAM. 3.33. and the reason is, because the bestowing of
blessings it is his proper work: Quod in Deo est sufficit ad completam ejus
rationem, as the School speaks, all that is required for the exercise of it
is in God himself, no merit or motive at all in the creature: but the
inflicting of Judgments, it is his strange work. Esai. 28.21. It is opus suum
alienum, so his work that another also has a hand in it, it cannot come from
him alone, but by occasion of the creatures disobedience, and it is the common
fault of men in times of visitation, when the hand of God is upon them, and his
judgments abroad in the world, that they do not receive such impressions on
their souls, as those passages of Gods providence toward them are apt to
beget, but are either secure and sensles of the hand of God which is out
against them; or neglectiue in using the means for the removal of it, till
they have outstrayed prevention, and it be too late. Of the former sort are
those who are taken with a sleepie Lethargy of sin, and cannot be awaked; or
rather with a dead Palsy, as men that have no use of their spiritual sense
and feeling, they sleep securely in the midst of the Sea, and on the top of
the Mast: when they are smitten they perceive it not, and when they are beaten
they feel not the smart; Pro. 23.24. Of such the Prophet complains to God;
Thou have smitten them, but they have not grieved; thou have consumed them, but
they have refused to receive correction; they have made their faces harder than
a stone, and have refused to return; Ier. 5.3. Of the latter sort are those,
who never think of preparing to meet the Lord with submission, and
supplication, with prayers and tears, so long as the Judgment hangs in the
Clouds, or falls besides themselves, or does but lightly touch them, till God
make way through their bowels for his own praise, and out of the ashes of
their ruin raise up glory to himself. So it was with the Israelites, God
forewarned them of his wrath, and set his judgments daily before them, but
they stopped their ears, and would not hear, they hardened their hearts and
would not be reformed, till unavoidable judgment fell upon them, and there was
no remedy: 2 Chro. 36.16. O mark and consider well, that expression; there
was no remedy! If the Israelites would have laid it to heart before, there was
a remedy, they might have prevented it by timely repentance; but now the
sentence being past, and the decree put in execution, there was no remedy; So
it was with the old world, notwithstanding all the warning which Noah had given
them of a future Judgment, they neither humbled themselves, nor reformed what
was amiss in them, till the Flood came and swept them all away, and there was
no remedy, so that Judgment threatened, it may be neglected so long, till it
become unavoidable, and there be no remedy. Two things there are then which
God especially aims at when his Judgments are abroad in the world first to
give them notice that himself is highly displeased with their sins;
secondly, that it is now high time for them to think of agreeing with their
Adversary, and making their peace with him.

1. When God wars out of Zion, and reveals his wrath from heaven against the
sins of his people, it is a sign he is highly displeased with them; for God
is known by executing Judgment. Psalm. 9.16. That is, he makes it known to
the sons of men, how he stands affected to them, and to their sins, and
therefore Gods visitations are termed Judgments, because they do not come
casually but Iudicially; there is great cause moving him to it, because men are
deaf against all the sweet charms of his mercies, and secure against all the
thunder of his threatenings, and therefore he is constrained as it were to
speak unto them in a strange language, even the language of his hands; to
speak words that may be felt, even swords, famines, plagues, pestilence, that
men might know that his Word of threatening it is no vain Word, but as he has
said unto them, so he means to deal with them; according to that of David,
Psalm. 48.8. As we have heard so have we seen in the City of our God. (It is
true both of his mercies and judgments, God will not alter the word that is
gone out of his mouth, whether it be a word of promise or commination,) such is
the hardness of men's hearts, that though they hear the Word daily sounding in
their ears, and telling them that the wrath of God is revealed from heaven
against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men. Romans 1.18. Yet they will
not believe it, except they see some real examples of it, they are ready to
say of Gods threatening, as Thomas did of Christ's Resurrection, Ioh. 20.24.
Except I see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my finger into his
sides, I will never believe it; therefore God stretches out his hand against
them, he powers his wrath and indignation upon them, that when they lie
bleeding under his hand, then they might be sensible of his high displeasure;
when they feel the sharpness of his arrows, then I might say with the
Prophet; Who can stand before his indignation? Who may abide the fierceness of
his wrath? Nah. 1.6. When they see his lips full of indignation, and his eyes
sparkle out flames of fire upon them; then they might call to mind that of
David; As we have heard, so have we seen in the City of our God; as we have
heard his high displeasure threatened, so have we seen it executed.

2. When God is up in Arms (as it were) against his people, it is to let them
know, that it is now high time for them to think of returning to him, and
making their peace with him, and that considering the season, that it is now
high time they should awake from sleep. Romans 13.11. There is no time
unseasonable for the duties of repentance and humiliation, but when the face of
Heaven begins to frown upon men for their unthankfulness and disobedience,
when his Judgments are seen abroad in the earth; then it is high time to
reform what is amiss, and return unto him, because this is the last means
God will use for their good; if they will yet stand out and not submit
themselves; if they will not for all this come in and lay down their weapons
of rebellion; if they will not only fit out his mercies, but his judgments
too; then he will be to Ephraim as a Lion, and as a young Lion to the house of
Judah: He will tear and break in pieces; He will carry away and none shall
deliver; Hos. 5.14. And therefore when God begins to draw forth his glittering
Sword, and his hand lays hold on Judgment; When he begins to speak in his
wrath, and say; Thus will I do to thee O Israel, O then let every one think
it high time to prepare to meet the Lord his God; Amos 4.12. It is his great
happiness that through Gods mercy, he can say, it is yet time, that it is not
yet too late; that as yet it is not without hope to return; God might have cut
him off long ago, and if he had done so, it had but been justice on Gods
part, and desert on his own; but the door of mercy yet stands open, God is
yet willing to receive his people, if they would be reconciled unto him; for to
that end he speaks to them, to that end he deals with them, to that end he
expostulates the matter with them on this manner; Is there no hope? Will
nothing work upon you? No means? no mercies? no threatenings? No Judgments?
will ye not fly from the wrath to come? O why will ye not? why will ye die
O ye house of Israel? Will ye not return unto me? Oh my people why will ye
not return? What have I done unto you? Wherein have I grieved you, that ye
should be so unwilling to lay down your weapons of rebellion that ye have
taken up against me? These and such like expressions from God; what do they
imply? but that there is yet a time of mercy, even while the heavens seem to
be clouded over with indignation, that when nothing but wrath shows it self,
there is yet a time wherein mercy may be found if it be sued for; if ever
there be a time that should bring men upon their knees, and make them earnest
in sueing for mercy, surely then it is high time above all other times to cry
mightily to God, because this is the last time that ever he will wait to have
mercy upon them; and never do men show themselves more unlike to men, that is,
to reasonable creatures, than to stand out when God summons them to come in,
and submit themselves. What more unreasonable then to make him an enemy, who is
the fountain of all that good which they have, or can hope for? What more
unreasonable then when they have provoked him to wrath and made him their
enemy, and now even lie at the foot of his mercy, then to capitulate and
stand upon terms with him? yea, with him who when he might let loose his
hand, and dispatch them at one blow; yet offers to spare them, if yet at last
they would even now close with him. There be two sorts of arguments whereby God
convinces his people of the unreasonableness of their sinful courses; First,
by sending them to the Heathen, who might be thought the most unreasonable
amongst men; and yet even they would be ashamed, and think it most
unreasonable to deal so with their Idols, as many do with the God of Heaven.
Go ye now to the Isles of Chittim and behold, and send to Kedar and take
diligent heed, and see whether there be any such thing; has any of the Nations
changed their Gods, which yet are no Gods? But my people have changed their
glory for that which profits not; Ier. 2.10.11. Secondly, not finding any
amongst men so unreasonable with whom he may sort them; he seeks amongst the
unreasonable and senseless creatures, to see if there be any there with whom
he may suit them; he compares them to the bruit beasts, and if there be any
more brutish than others, it is to those bruits that are most blockish, to the
Horse and Mule, to the Ox and Ass: Psalm. 49.20. Man being in honor
understands not, but is like the beast that perishes: and it is no small
disparagement to man's nature to be matched with the unreasonable beast, for to
be like unto a beast in that sense is worse then to be a beast indeed; to be a
beast indeed it is without any fault in the Creature, it was God that made it
so, but to be made a man and to be like a beast, that is not without his own
fault, without his great sin; which makes him a reasonable beast, or rather an
unreasonable man; yea such is the unreasonablenesse of men in their sinful
courses, that they are not only compared to the bruit beasts, but those
unreasonable creatures preferred before them; Isay 1.3. The Ox knows his
owner, and the Ass his Masters crib; but Israel has not known, my people have
not understood. God sets men to school to the very bruit Creatures, that they
might learn of these how to carry themselves. Pro. 6.6. Go to the Pismire O
sluggard, behold her ways and be wise. These silly and contemptible Creatures,
they are set before men as patterns, they are set over them as Tutors, to
teach them wisdom. Yea more, when God finds none amongst bruit beasts so
unreasonable in their carriage as obstinate sinners be, he goes one step
further, and tryes amongst the insensible creatures, if there he might find any
prints or footsteps of such demeanure, and there he finds them more sensles
than stocks and stones; for the stones cleave asunder, and the rocks are
moved when God is angry; yea the hills melt and the mountains shake and
tremble before him, and yet many men though they both hear and see the
Judgments of God; though there be enough spoken many times both to the eye and
to the ear, to cleave the very rock asunder, and to move and affect the very
mountains, if possibly they were capable of any moral impressions; yet are
they no more moved and affected with it than the very stones and earth which
they stand upon. And when men are thus far degenerate and gone from
themselves, that they come not only below the nature of men, and of bruit
beasts, but even of stocks and stones and sensles creatures; Is it not high
time for man to return into himself, and to return unto God with submission
and supplication; that God may repent him of the evil and turn from his fierce
wrath that he perish not? And this is the sum and substance of this ensuing
Treatise; which is spent upon some special portions of holy Scripture, whereby
these sacred Exercises may be actuated and enlivened: of the Author himself,
being no further known to me, than by his Labors and the reports of others, I
will say nothing, but leave his Works to praise him in the gates. The several
passages of the Discourse being drawn into a Table, and laid out in their
general Heads, prevents my labor in showing the use and profit that may be
made of it; the matter it self as it was seasonable and proper for the time
and places in which it was delivered, so being spent upon those common Theames,
of Fasting, Watching, Prayer, Repentance, Humiliation, etc. which are the daily
employments of penitent sinners, it cannot be unseasonable for any time; nor is
it any prejudice to the Treatise that diverse have written of the same subject
upon other Texts and portions of Scripture; for the diversity of gifts,
phrases, and expressions is most suitable to the diversity of several men's
dispotions, that will suite well with one that likes not another; It is no hurt
to a man that comes into a Cooks shop, to have his choice of several dishes,
the variety of dressing is no hinderance to his nourishment, he may feed upon
that which likes him best; If a man were to provide a suit of apparel, it
were no hurt to him to see diverse patterns, out of which he may please
himself in his own choice; even so he that would provide a mourning suite for
his own sorrowful heart, it is no hurt to him that out of the diverse
patterns of godly men's Labors, he may make choice of those which are most
suitable to his own desires. Amongst which, this model may happily sort
better with thy affections (Christian Reader) than some others; bless GOD for
the variety of his goodness in this kind; out of this variety make thine
own choice, and the God of Heaven give a rich blessing unto it for thy souls
good.

Thine in the Lord, R: MADEN.

The Contents drawn into Tables for the understanding of the Method.
1. THE preparation to a Fast; where of the nature of a Fast; from Judges
20.26. Where we have; 1. The History Paraphrased. 2. The Text opened, and all
the parts drawn to an Head: That fasting in a right manner is a powerful
means to prefer our suites to God. Which head is; 1. Explicated. 1. What is
the right manner of Fasting; where, 1. Who are to fast. All. 2. The manner how;
1. An outward exercise, to abstain; from, 1. Food. 2. Sleep. 3. The Marriage
bed. 4. Delights. 5. Costly apparel. 6. Labor of Callings.
2. An inward substance; which consists, 1. In the Abasing of our selves; 1. In
the sense of our sin. 2. In loathing of our selves. 3. In bewailing our
estate. 4. In condemning our souls.

2. In Prayer; 1. Confession. 2. Petition. 3. Deprecation. 4. Renewing the
Covenant. To which add Alms.

3. The place: The house of God. 4. The time of continuance: The time of a
Sabbath. 5. The occasions; 1. To prevent or remove evil. 2. To procure good.

2. How this is powerful; not through merit, but by virtue of Ordinance.
2. Confirmed; It is powerful; 1. Because it is the means appointed to
prevail. 2. Because suiteable to those Relations we stand in unto God. 3.
Because by it, Prayer is made more fervent; for it remoues the Impediments: 1.
In the understanding. 2. In the will. 3. In the affections.


3. Applied; 1. To condemn; 1. Such as contemn and neglect Fasting. 2. That
urge it as Meritorious.
2. To exhort us to a conscionable use of so holy and powerful an ordinance.
2. The fast it self; which consists of three parts. 1. An enquiry after the
approach of Judgments. 2. The sense of a present Judgment found. 3. The
means used for removal.

An Enquiry after the Approach of Judgment.
1. An enquiry after the approach of Judgment; from our Saviors exhortation
to watchfulness, Mark. 13.37. where; 1. The Text is opened. 2. The chief
matter is drawn unto a head: That it is the duty of every one to watch: which
is, 1. Explained according to the diverse acceptations of the word. 2. Applied.
1. To condemn. 1. The careless of their souls. 2. The secure that fear no
danger. 3. Such as reproach. 1. Them that are careful of their lives. 2. Them
that are fearful fore-seers of evil.

2. To exhort unto the duty; not to the keeping of Canonical hours, which
superstition is discovered and opposed: but to be watchful. 1. Concerning our
selves: where, 1. Direction to be careful and watch 1. All that enter, lest
we be conquered. 2. All that goes from us, lest we be betrayed.
2. Motives. 1 It is convenient, in respect of our Relations: who are 1
Pastors. 2 Warriors. 3 Sentinels. 4 Servants.
2 It is necessary. 1 Because our tenements are ruinous. 2 Because our
Landlords day is uncertain.
3 It is profitable. 4 The neglect is full of danger

2 Concerning the approach of Judgments, where are discovered the signs of
approach: 1 Extraordinary. 2 Ordinary. 1 The joint warning of the Ministry. 2
Those grounds from whence they give their warning. 1 The observation of those
sins which have in them a suteablenesse to judgment. 2 Mercies abused. 3
Offers and shows of Judgments. 4 Seeking to God, and resting in the work
done. 5 The withdrawing of Gods presence which we take notice of; when, 1 When
he denies virtue with the Ordinance. 2 When there is scarcity of sanctified
knowledge 3 When we find a defect of holiness with unity. 4 When we want his
protection in public causes.



3. To bring it near whom it may concern; 1 Ministers. 2 All others; 1
Magistrates. 2 All people, who must observe and give notice: 1 Privately. 2
Publicly.








The sense of a present Judgment found.
2. The second part of our fast, is after our enquiry, the sense of a judgment
found; applied in a parallel, from Hos. 4.1.2. where; 1. The Text is explained
in the parts; 1. The Preface. 2. The Message. 1. That there is a controversy.
2. The parties; God and Israel. 3. The cause; where, 1. Their sins. 2. The
aggravations.


2. The sum of all the parts drawn to an head; That sin causes Gods
controversy with a Land: which is; 1. Proved. 1. By Scriptures. 2. By grounds.
1. Sin breaks Covenant. 2. It undoeth Love-tyes. 3. It is offensive, an
action of trespass.

2. Applied. 1 To discover the reason of Gods strokes upon us, where comparison
is made of our condition with that of Israel. 1. In our sins. 1. Of omission.
1. There is no truth in our dealings. 2. No mercy in our hearts. 3. No
knowledge of God among us.
2. Of commission. 1. Against truth: there is 1. Swearing. 2. Lying.
2. Against mercy: there is 1. Killing. 2. Stealing. 3, Committing adultery


2, In our Aggravations. 1. Our boldness in sinning. 2. Our multitude of
sins. 3. That we are Israel, the people of God. 4. That we are Inhabitants
of a good Land.
2. To exhort us to a conscionable endeavor to end the controversy, that the
suite against us many be laid down; and God appeased by our submission.





The means used for removal.

3. The third part of our fast is, the means used for the removal of the
Judgment; 1. Prayer in four Sermons. 2. Repentance in two last.

I. Prayer; which is, 1. For our selves: where, 1. Of prayer it self. 2. Of
the arguments in prayer. 3. Gf the qualifying of him that does pray. 2. Of
prayer for others, for the Church.

II. Repentance: where, 1. Of Arguments to repentance. 2. An Exhortation to
repentance. Of these severally.

Of Prayer.
1 Of Prayer it self out of Jacobs example. Genesis 32.9.11. where: 1 The History
is followed with observations; 1 Of Jacobs encountering with Angels. 2 Of his
Embassy to his Brother. 3 Of his fear at the return of his servants. 4 Of
the means he uses for his defense. 1 The division of his family. 2 Prayer.

2 The principal matter, drawn from the Instance to this conclusion; That
Prayer is the remedy of our distresses. Which is, 1. Explicated. 1 What Prayer
is, which is described and further cleared in five essentials of it. 1 That we
must pray to God alone. 2 That we must pray in the name of Christ. 3 That we
must pray by the assistance of the Spirit. 4 That we must pray in a right
manner. 1 Generally the person must be right. 2 Particularly: there must be 1
The Attention of the mind. 1 To God. 2 To the work, to pray: 1 With
understanding. 2 With faith.
3 To our selves, that we be not distracted.
2 The Intention of the will: there must be; 1 A pouring out of the soul: that
is to pray, 1 With reverence. 2 With humility.
2 A lifting up of the spirit: that is to pray 1 With fervencie. 2 With
continuance.



5 That we must pray for things lawful.
2 How Prayer yields Remedy, as that Medium which has appointed to intervene
and fetch supply.
2 Confirmed by Scripture, and by Instance. 3 Applied. 1 To instruct us; 1 Why
the godly pray so much, because they see the virtue of it. 2 Why God corrects
so long, because we do not pray.
2 To reprehend; 1 Such as use other remedies, and rest in their use. 2 Such as
neglect prayer: whose pretenses are answered and removed.
3 To exhort us to set upon the exercise.




2. Of the Arguments in Prayer; drawn from the same example of Jacob; Genesis
32.10. Where; 1. The Text is again prepared. 2. The Arguments are severally
handled: 1. An argument from the Covenant, the Instance of Jacobs use, brought
to a doctrinall Conclusion; That in Prayer we must draw Argument from the
Covenant: This is, 1. Confirmed by a double reason; 1. Because we shall not
else be heard. 2. Because by the Covenant we are Interessed in Gods attributes.
2. Applied in a double Exhortation. 1. That we would enter into Covenant. 2.
That we would make use of it.

2. An Argument from the Promise; which is made Doctrinall; 1. In the
Hypothesis, that Jacob and others did use this argument; which they did; 1.
Because the promises were given for their strength. 2. Because they would honor
God by their faith.
2. In the Thesis; That Gods promises must be the ground or strength of our
prayers. Which is; 1. Confirmed by a twofold reason. 1. Because no prayer can
be made else, with faith, with boldness. 2. Because though God freely promise,
yet he performs his promise upon our seeking.
2. Applied; 1. In a Direction how to make use of promises; that is threefold;
1. How we must conceive of them; 1. Concerning their nature; 1. That the
kinds differ. 2. That they are often subordinate. 3. That they are firm in
themselves but often hid in the fulfilling.
2. Concerning their Exhibition. 1. That all are to the Elect. 2. The Date of
promises is often unknown.
3. Concerning their Intention; 1. Every general promise is applyable to
particulars. 2. The same promises may belong, though diversely, both to godly
and wicked.

2. How we may collect them? as they are propounded; 1. Expressly; 1.
Generally. 2. Particularly.
2. Implicitly; 1. In examples. 2. In prayers of the Saints.
3. How we must apply them, 1. In regard of their nature; 1. The Absolute,
absolutely. 2. Without anticipation. 3. With the dependence of Faith.
2. In regard of their Exhibition; 1. As seeing our selves in Christ. 2.
Waiting for Gods time.
3. In regard of their Intention; 1. Seeing our selves reduced to their
condition, to whom the promise was given. 2. With confidence of earthly
provisions.


2. It is applied in an Exhortation; 1. To treasure up the promises. 2. To make
a constant use of them; 1. Of general promises. 2. Of particular; 1.
Pertaining to this life; 1. Concerning the spiritual estate; 1. For
Justification. 2. For Sanctification.
2. Concerning the temporal; 1. For supply of good. 2. For removing ill.

2. Pertaining to the life to come.










3. Of the Qualification of him that does pray, found in David's expression,
Psalm. 51.17. Where; 1. The Psalm Analyzed. 2. The Text opened. 3. The parts
severally handled; 1. The truth delivered; in two observations; 1. That a
broken or contrite heart or spirit, is Gods Sacrifice. Which is; 1.
Explicated; 1. What is the heart and spirit; The soul. 2. What it is to be
broken; the Inward humiliation. 3. How it is Gods Sacrifice; that which God
requires.
2. Proved; 1. Because God is the Author of such Service. 2. Because it is
suiteable to God. 1. Because sincere. 2. Because humble.
3. Because it specially honors God; 1. That we give our hearts. 2. That we
give them broken; which expresses sorrow; 1. Appretiatiue. 2. Intensiue.


3. Applied; 1. To discover a mystery of lawful commendable manslaughter. 2.
To condemn, such as bring not their hearts, or not Broken; 1. Such as are
insensible of sin. 2. Such as are not open to Confession. 3. Such as are not
shivered into pieces.
3. To exhort us, to bring this Sacrifice; that we would break our hearts: 1.
As the ground is broken for seed. 2. As stones are broken for playstry. 3. As
Beasts were broken at the Altar, or the Incense.

2. That such a Sacrifice, God will not despise. Which is; 1. Proved by
testimony and example. 2. Applied; 1. To discover the difference of Gods and
the worlds Censure and affection. 2. To encourage us, to draw near with our
Offering. 2. The manner of the Delivering; 1. In a Meditation. 2. In a sudden
Ejaculation.








2. We have heard largely of Prayer for our selves; now of Prayer for the
Church, Ruled in the pattern of David: Psalm. 51.18. Where the parts are
severally followed; 1. Who it is that prays; David. Which circumstance is made
useful in three Observations: 1. That the spiritual state has its changes.
This is; 1. Instanced. 2. Confirmed; 1. Because the ground of distemper
remains. 2. Because we meet with changes from without.
3. Applied; 1. To instruct us; 1. How the regenerate and carnal differ. 2.
Who are of the best temper. 3. A little to discern of Heaven.
2. To reprove; 1. The unwarrantably bold. 2. The apt to Censure. 3. To
encourage the infirm that are sincere. 4. To exhort us to live physically.

2. That the assurance of mercy for our selves, makes us confident to beg mercy
for others. Which is cleared and applied; 1. To show the reason of our method
in prayer. 2. To show the unprofitablenesse of carnal men. 3. To exhort that
we labor for assurance.
3. That mercy to our selves makes us compassionate to others. This is, 1.
Proved; 1. Because mercy is tasted. 2. Because graces are not alone.
2. Applied; 1. To show why godly men often pray. 2. To discover the
uncompassionate to be unpardoned. 3. To press our Imitation.


2. For whom he prays; for the Church: whence is an observation; That it is fit
the members of the Church should pray for the Church. This is, 1. Confirmed, 1.
Because so they pray for themselves. 2. Because to that end they are members.
2. Applied; 1. To reprove the senseless. 2. To press the Duty; and that
from consideration of the Church under the names in the Text, in the moralized
History; 1. Of the situation; 1. In the middle, noting perfection. 2. Hilly,
noting safety. 3. United, noting the now common faith.
2. Of the privileges; 1. Of Soveraigntie. 2. Of Holiness. 3. Of Love; 1.
There God dwells. 2. There he appears. 3. To that he makes gracious promises.



3. What he prays for; 1. The Churches Restoration; whence two Observations;
1. That sin is of so public harm it reaches to others. This is instanced
and applied: 1. To show the heinousness of sin. 2. To exhort that we hurt
not society.
2. That David who sind, prayed: applied: 1. To condemn, that dare sin, but
are careless to pray. 2. To exhort the imitation of David's justice.

2. The continuance of her peace. Where is observed; 1. That the Church stands
in need of walls: Which, 1. Condemns, 1. That trust in the bare name. 2. That
pluck down her walls.
2. Exhorts to show our selves the Churches friends.
2. That the Church is still unfinished, and wants some of her beauty, which
exhorts us to pray; 1. That it might be still increased. 2. That her full
glory may be hastened.

4 To whom he prays, to God: which notes; 1 That God is the Churches safety.
2 That to God we must have recourse.
5 How he prays; In thy good pleasure: which observes; 1 That Gods motive is
himself. 2 We must use that motive when we deal with God; And then we pray; 1
Wisely. 2 Humbly.







II. Of Repentance, which is the other remedy; and here: 1 Of the Arguments to
Repentance, afforded by the Baptist, Math. 3.7. where; the parts are followed;
1 To whom he preached; to the Pharisees, Sadduces, and Multitude: which gives
us to observe; 1 That the Church is a mixed Assembly. 2 That there is a secret
hypocrisy: which will appear by considering of these; 1 What they were; 1 The
Pharisees, separated men: 1 Separated from ordinary 1 Commerce. 2 Habits. 3
Delights.
2 Separated unto extraordinary holiness. 1 They washed before meat. 2 When,
from Market. 3 Their vessels. 4 Eat not with sinners. 5 Touched them not. 6
Made broad fringes. 7 Were much in mortification.


2 The Sadduces were just; 1 Precise in their name. 2 Precise Scripturists.

2 What they did; they came to the Baptism. Both which gives us cause equally
of fear and trial.
2 The Sermon it self; Hortatory to repentance: where first the Arguments;
they are two. 1 Their sinful state: which gives us to observe: 1 That
Hypocrites are a generation of vipers. 1 They are full of venom. 2 Eat
through the womb. 3 Specious in the skin. 4 Their teeth hid with gums. 5
They run to waters.
2 The consideration of this is a motive to repentance. 3 John to that end
discovers it.
2 Their unsensiblenesse of danger: where; 1 The place is opened. 2 Conclusions
are drawn. 1 That there is wrath to come. Which is, 1 Explicated, how wrath is
in God, according to the similitude of the effect. 2 Confirmed. 1 From the
being of sin. 2 From Gods truth. 3 From Gods equity. 4 From Gods glory.
3 Applied. 1 To remove our ungrounded murmur. 2. To exhort us to believe this,
that so we may fear Gods wrath in Judgment, 1 Temporal. 2 Eternal.


2 That the wrath to ceme may be fled from: which is; 1 Proved by Instance and
reason. 2 Applied, 1 To show that escape must bc by flight, not, 1 By denial.
2 By traversing the Indictment. 3 By pleading immunitie. 4 By trusting others.
2 To direct us to escape by flight. 1 Not Corporal. 2 But Spiritual; to
avoid; 1 What dishonors God: 1 Neglect of his due. 2 Contempt. 3 When dishonor
1 By base. 2 By vassals.

3 When dishonor before; 1 Contending for glory. 2 His Rivals. 3 His retainers.

2 What has been punished. 1 Profaneness. 2 Envy. 3 Selfe-seeking. 4
Ungrateful rebellion. 5 Siding with Gods enemies.
3 What causes eternal damnation; Infidelity and stubbornenesse against the
offer of grace.

3 That wicked are insensible both of wrath and flying; which discovers the
reason why they live so securely. 4 That to be sensible of both these is an
argument to repentance; which exhorts us to be sensible; 1 Of wrath. 2 Of the
remedy; To see both sin and mercy alive.








II. Of the Exhortation to Repentance, grounded upon the Baptists Sermon in the
former place, Mat. 3.8. Where the parts are; 1. The Inference. 2 The
Exhortation; Whence two Conclusions; 1. That there are fruits worthy of
Repentance. 1. Cleared; 1. What Repentance is; examined, 1. In the name; 1.
(...). 2. (...).
2. In the thing; as it is taken; 1. Less properly. 1. Synechdochically, for
Contrition. 2. Generally, for Reformation.
2. More properly, for new life. 3. Improperly, for external profession.

2. What fruits are; The shoots of that which lives. 3. What meet fruits are;
1. A proportionablenesse of Repentance unto sin. 2. A manifestation of the
truth of our repentance; 1. The Synechdochicall, by sorrow. 2. The general, by
Reformation: so of the rest.


2. Confirmed; 1. Because God commands them. 2. Because true Repentance lives.
3. Because men's lives do witness it.
3. Applied: 1. To discover and condemn dead forms of Popish Penance. 2. To
give us Trial of our Repentance; which, 1. If taken for Contrition, the sign
is sorrow for sin, which if sincere; 1. Is more for sin than punishment. 2.
If not sensitiuely, yet intellectiuely greater for offending God, than any
other displeasure.
2. If taken for general turning; the signs are, 1. Hatred of sin, which if
true, is; 1. Universal. 2. Constant. 3. Implacable. 4. Vehement.
2. Purpose to leave sin, which approues it self: 1. By striving for the
present. 2. By industry in the means. 3. By opposing the impediments.
3. Reformation of the whole man.
3. If taken for Conversion, the sign is a new life. 4. If taken for outward
profession; the signs are, 1. Outward Contrition. 2. Confession. 3.
Satisfaction.

2. That it is our duty to bring forth fruits meet for repentance. This is, 1.
Proved: 1. Because there is precept for it. 2. Because we are decreed to it.
3. Because it is the end of Gods dealings with us.
2. Applied: 1. To condemn; 1. The Barren, such as bring no fruits. 2. The
sinfully fruitful, that bring not forth meet fruits.
2. To exhort; which has two parts; 1. A Direction; 1. How to Repent; 1.
Consider rightly of sin; to that end meditate; 1. Of the Majesty offended. 2.
The Bonds violated. 3. The wrath incurred. 4. The good hindered. 5. The evils
felt. 6. The death of Christ.
2. Consider the necessity of a new way. 3. Be broken in Confession. 4. Look
from the depth to the promise. 5. Resolve in the strength of God. 6. Avoid all
entanglements.
2. How to bring forth fruit; pray that God would give; 1. Moisture in the
Ordinance. 2. The heat of love. 3. A sanctified use of every Condition.

2. An Exhortation; 1. To proportion our penitence unto our sin. 2. To live
agreeable to our new spiritual life.









Nine Sermons of Humiliation.
IVDGES 20.26. Then all the Children of Israel, and all the people went up, and
came unto the house of God, and wept, and sat there before the Lord, and
fasted that day until even, and offered Burnt-offrings, and Peace-offrings
before the Lord.


YOu all know, that the Lord is fighting against three neighbor Counties, the
Arrows of his pestilence are abroad, and besides that bleeding Preston, many
other Towns are wounded: now this County intends it self for the Skirmish;
and to fight with Gods weapons, against Gods judgments. Fasting days are
days of pitched Battle; God fights, and the Supplicants fight; prayers are the
shafts, which are delivered flying to heaven. There must be the Mustring and
Training of the Soldiers, before the day of the set Encounter, that we may
know our Postures, and the use of our weapons. I have therefore for this Time,
altered my wonted travail in those divine Lectures of St. Paul, and that I
might deliver my self very plainly for your preparation, I have bestowed some
thoughts upon a plain Story. It is the story of Gibeahs sin, Benjamins
patronizing of that offense, and at length the just revenge, of both Gibeah and
the whole Tribe: for upon that Stuprum, and the wronged Levits complaint,
Israel wars, and at last overcomes. It was a disorderd government, when a
Levite by corrupt Custom and Connivence held a Concubine, (ill governed times
when Levites are so scandalous) but she that was light is also inconstant, and
runs from her Levite to her Father. The Levite follows, and after five days
delay and feasting, he returns with her, and though benighted on the way, yet
his zeal against Gods enemies will not let him lodge in Iebus, but he travails
on, though late to Gibeah; where he found, what he feared in Iebus, though not
strangers to Israel, yet strangers to Humanity; in their heat of lust they
both abuse and murder the wanton Concubin. The Levite grows cruel, that he
might be just; he divides the carcass, and sends those morsels of horror to
plead his cause against the foul City. Israel purposes revenge, signifies
this to Benjamin, in which Tribe, Gibeah was seated. Benjamin quarrels the
design as a disparagement to themselves, and resolve to patronize the Actors,
where they should punish the sin. Both sides prepare to battle; Israel in an
holy quarrel, Benjamin in an unjust; yet Benjamin twice prevails, and
triumphs in the double field. Israel sets a new day for a third fight, and the
better to prevail they humble themselves with fasting and prayer, then they
have the day, and the insulting Tribe is foiled. Though I have speeded over the
Story, I keep you too long from the Text; There is no difficulty in it: so
far as for the present occasion we may make use of it, we may consider
these particulars..

1. Who they are, that are in this preparation: All the Children of Israel, all
the people.

2. What they did: 1. They wept. 2. They fasted. 3. They prayed and sought
reconciliation; They offered burnt-offrings, and peace offerings before the Lord.

3. Where they assembled; Before the Lord, they went up, and came into the
house of God.

4. The time of their continuance in this preparation; They sat there before
the Lord, and fasted until even.

5. When they used this preparation: Then (i.e.) after their double overthrow.

Lastly, The issue of this preparation, they had a gracious hearing, an answer
full of encouragement, and at length Victory.

There is enough cut out, for more than an hour, but I intended the choice,
not to insist upon it; only as a Ground to build some thoughts upon, which for
the present may be suiteable to you, and the occasions we are shortly to meet
about. So that what I shall now deliver, I will draw to this one head, from all
the circumstances of the preparation, and the event;

That Fasting in a right manner, is a powerful means to prefer our Suites
to God.

This Truth I shall, 1. Explicate. 2. Confirm. 3. apply.

1. In the Explication, there are two things need clearing:

1. What is the right manner of fasting?

2. How it is powerful?

1. That we may know the right manner of Fasting, we must distinguish the
right Fast from others, by separating, the Natural, the Civil, the
Miraculous, the Constrained, the Quotidian, to touch at any of which were to
spend the time with wast. It Is the Religious Fast we prepare for; and it is
called Religious. 1. Because set on by Religion, yet not as a part, but a
Medium of divine worship. 2. Because disposing to the extraordinary exercise of
Worship, yet disposing only by remooving impediments whereby divine worship
might be hindered. I Will not enter upon the Commonplace farther then the Method
of the Text leads me to it, which affoords enough to our satisfaction.

1. The persons who are to fast. All the people came up. So was the Statute,
Levit. 23.29. Whatsoever soul shall not be afflicted that day, shall be cut
off from among his people. The Prophet Joel is more particular in the instance,
by removing Pretenses which might seem to exempt: The drunkards that live
mirthfully and carelessly in their mirth must mourn; Awake ye Drunkards, howl
ye drinkers of Wine: Joel 1. verse. 5. The husbandmen that are secular and that
live upon their labors; Be ashamed O ye husbandmen, howl O ye
Vine-dressers: verse. 11. The Priests; verse. 13. The Elders; verse. 14. The
Children and Sucklings, the Bridegroom and Bride, Cap. 2. ver: 16. As he calls
for it, Iehoshaphat performs it, All Judah stood before the Lord, with their
little ones, their wives and their children. 2 Chro. 20.13. Though by their
traditionall doctrine, all that were sick, and children under nine years of
age were exempted: as was then received, and after taught by their Rabbis.
Maimoni, in Treatise of Rest of Tenth day, cap. 2. sect. 10.

2. The manner of the exercise of the fast: They wept, fasted, offered, that was
the external part; the internal was denoted in the quality of their
Sacrifices; Burnt-offrings and peace-offrings: which are made clearer to us in
the Ordinance, Number. 29 11. One Goat-buck, of the Goats for a sin-offring,
besides the sin-offring of Attonements, and the continual Burnt-offring, and
the meate-offring of it, and their drinke-offrings. The Atonement was a lively
figure of our reconciliation to God, by the death of Christ; and the afflicting
of their souls, figured their repentance and humiliation for their sins. In
proportion to that of theirs, we find there must be two things in our fast.

1. The Outward corporal exercise.

2. The Inward spiritual substance.

1. The outward exercise, is an Abstinence from the Necessities and delights of
Nature; so Nyssen calls it, (...), We must abstain;

1. From food; so did Esther, Est. 4.16. So Ezra, chap. 10.6. It Is not a
beggarly Rudiment, not a Childish, but solemn Ordinance: so God diets us for
the Race. Bellarmine here disputes a double Controversy; That there is respect
to be had to the choice of meats; and that especially we are to abstain from
flesh. For the former of these, they had need to plead for their own
delicacie. Such as so far departed from the true and most ancient use of
fasting, as to dare the allowance of eating twice; to keep the shadow of a
Fast were enforced to bring in the choice of Meats, and in this only, the
Popish Fast differs from the Common Table. This corrupt Custom, was not
brought in but by degrees. First, the violent Onset of the Ebionites,
Encratites, and Manichees, was too blasphemous and odious to be entertained.
Secondly, others more subtly, not daring to condemn the nature, endeavored
to cut off the use of Meats. The Montanists were in this, the first and the
chief Agents. It was followed by Eustathius the Armenian Monk, who is
Censured in Sozomen, (...), that by his much austeritie of living, he fell into
absurd observations: as appointing Fasts more usual than nature could endure.
When this Custom grew more grievous, they invented choice of Meat to be in
stead of Abstinence. The Papists now dote on those observations, and are as
various as in their sects, all shunning flesh, but differently things
proceeding from flesh: So they cast snares on the Consciences of their people,
and abuse their weakness. But the Scripture is direct against such a
difference: Mat. 15.10.11. Luke 10.8. 1 Cor. 10.25.26.27. Col. 2.16.20. and 1 Timothy 4.1.2.3.4. Nor does the practice of the Ancient Church oppose, for this
all may observe that are but smally acquainted with Antiquity, that the Church
decreed nothing, that if some abstaind, others did not, that such as did
abstain from choice, did it freely not by a Law, that they condemned not one
another for abstaining or not, which are all contrary to Popish tyranny, and
that peremptory sentence of Cardinal Bellarmine, in his fourth Tome, lib. 2.
cap. 9. Mirari non debent Lutherani, si dicimus, eos Christianos non esse, qui
carnibus vescuntur in quadragesima: The Lutherans ought not to wonder, if we
say, they are no Christians, who eat flesh in Lent. I might urge against him,
the famous and known examples of Spiridion out of Sozomen, of the great
Marcianus, as the Historian calls him, out of Theodoret, and of the severe
Alcibiades reclaimd from his unjust abstinence by Attalus out of Nicephorus,
instances that the Jesuit may quarrel against, but cannot answer; but I meant
not to follow the controversy, and have kept you too long upon this.

2. We must abstain from sleep: 2. Sam. 12.16. Esth. 4.3. at least to
separate some time of our ordinary Rest, to the work of our humiliation.

3. From the use of the Marriage Bed; Joel, 2.16. 1 Cor. 7.5.

4. From Music and delights of that nature, Dan. 6.18. 2 Samuel 12.20.21.

5. From costly apparel; Exodus: 33.4.5. put off thy ornaments from thee, that I
may know what to do unto thee. They wore Sackcloth; and King David went
bare-foote up the hill, weeping as he went. 2 Samuel 15.30.

6. From ordinary labor, the labor of our ordinary Callings, Lev.
23.28.30.31.32.

2. This is the outward observation, but secondly, the maine is, the more
inward and spiritual substance; which is also declared by externalls, but all
tending to this, that the soul may be afflicted; as besides that place in
Leviticus, the phrase is usual, Psalm. 35.13. it is rendered in a clearer
expression, I humbled my soul with fasting; But Ezra uses the very word, Ezr.
8.21. I proclaimed a Fast, that we might afflict our selves before our God.
This afflicting or humbling, is in two things.

1. The abasing of our selves, to make our souls low, and grovelling, in a true
dejected posture, which is; 1. In a sight and sense of our condition. 2. In a
loathing of our selves for what we see and are sensible of. Eze. 6.9. Eze.
36.31. 3. In a bewayling of our selves, with the stamping of the foot, Eze. 6.
and smiting on the thigh. Surely I have heard Ephraim bemoaning of himself;
Ier. 31.18.19. 4. In a judging and condemning of our selves; 1 Cor. 11.31.
(...). Yea what indignation, yea what zeal, yea what revenge have ye found? 2
Cor. 7.11.

2. Prayer, that is also serviceable for the breaking of our souls; and is to
that end used, 1. In Confession, Ezr. 9.6. etc. which must be; 1. naked, Pro.
28.13. 2. humble, Job 42.6. Dan. 9.7.8.9. And must be, 1. express and
distinct; when the Conscience loaded, desires to be eased: an explicate
confession better affects us, makes us more serious in our desire of remission,
and opens the way more plainly to Reconciliation. 2. But how ever at all times
tacit and implied, prayer being an act of Religion; where always submission
and dependancy must be manifest.

2. In petition, by the religious and humble representation of our desires
before God, for impetration.

3. In deprecation, by petitioning against evil, or for removal.

4. In renewing the Covenant; Neh. 9.38. Jonah 3.8.9. which is ever required at
least implicitly in regard of the purpose of the will.

To all these must be joined Alms; else God distasts the Fast: Is is such a
Fast as I have chosen? A day for a man to afflict his soul? Will thou call
this a Fast, an acceptable day to the Lord? Is not this the Fast that I have
chosen? To loose the bands of wickedness? Is it not to deal thy bread to the
hungry? Esaias 58.5.6.7. It Is else a customary form, and not a sacrifice; Did ye
fast unto me, even unto me, says the Lord? Zach. 7.5.6.9.10. It was the
Angels message to Cornelius, Ast. 10.4. Thy prayers and thy Alms are come up.
Prayer comes up, it flies to heaven, like a Bird it flies upward; the Bird
cannot fly without wings; the wings of prayer are Fasting and Alms; if one
wing be wanting it flutters only, it cannot fly: Thy prayers and thy Alms
are ascended.

3. The third branch in the method of the Text, the place of the Fast, where
they assembled, They came up unto the house of the Lord. In the more private
performance of the duty, we are not astricted to the circumstance of place;
but speaking of a Fast public, and in aggregato, the house of prayer is
designed the fittest place for the house of mourning. Herein the Papists are
miserable in their superstitious doatings, while they tie Fasts, and the
different manner of fasts, unto particular places. Where a Cathedral Church is
dedicated to the name and memory of the blessed Virgin, there only the people
may eat flesh on Saturdayes. I might add more of these triflings, but I
favor both you and my self.

4. The next is the Time of Continuance; They sat there before the Lord, and
fasted until even. Yet the time has not been by all equally observed; David
keeps it till the Sun go down, 2 Samuel 3.35. Hesther and her maids three
days and nights, Est. 4.16. But in the Statute, the time is set, from even to
even: Lev. 23.32. So to measure the Fast, as God has measured the Sabbath.

5. The last circumstance in the Text, is the first word, Then; The time when
we are to fast. The Papists have their Stata Iejunia, and distinguish of set
times, when it is lawful, when unlawful, when indifferent to fast; but contrary
to Scripture, Col. 2.16. Gal. 4.9.10. contrary to the v^ry nature of a fast,
which is occasional, and being an afflicting of the soul, suites most with a
time of afflicting, Mat. 9.15. And contrary to the state of the more ancient
Church. That is a full testimony of Saint Augustine, in his 86. Epistle, upon
what days we ought not to fast, and upon what we ought, I find not appointed,
by the precept of our Lord, or of the Apostles. All that Bellarmine answers to
this, is by leading us to another Question, that though it were not commanded
in a written Scripture yet it might be in a Tradition, which answer is to
answer nothing unless that Question were granted to their side. But Eusebius
in the fifth Book of his Ecclesiastical History, faceth the Author out of the
accusation of Apollonius, Montanus the heretic was that new Master, who gave
Laws to fasting: What have the Papists now to glory in? Or the Jesuit to
plead? But to the thing: The Israelites when overcome, have recourse to this
Ordinance: There are two general occasions.

1. To remove or prevent evil; So Iehoshaphat usd it, when Moab and Ammon were
Confederate against Judah, 2 Chro. 20.2.3. So Esther, when the decree by the
procurement of Haman came forth against the Jews; Esth: 4.3. So the Ninevites,
when destruction within forty days, was threatened against their City.

2. To procure and obtain good, whether temporal, so Ezra proclaimed it, that
he might have good success in his journey; or spiritual, so it is, to subdue
the flesh, to sharpen prayer, to exercise our graces. This is the right manner
of the fast, rightly performed to right ends.

2. The second thing to be cleared, is, How this is powerful. The Papists give
it a Merit; They say it is satisfactory, because penal, that they prove from
the fact of the Ninivites, Ion. 3.10. They say it is meritorious, if from
charity, that they prove from the words of Christ, Mat. 6.17.18. But to the
fact of the Ninivites, I answer, by distinguishing of a thing penal; it is
taken Properly for the punishment of a former sin; but sophistically for that
which is laborious. In this latter sense, it is not all one, to be penal and
satisfactory; for there may be labor which is no punishment, and where there
was no precedent sin. In the former sense, Fasting cannot be said to be penal:
A punishment is properly imposed by the Judge, not by the offender; but fasting
is arbitrary, and by the offender taken up. Nor does the Scripture in any
place, call fasting a punishment. Neither will that Story of the Ninivites
prove it either a satisfaction or a punishment. To that of Matthew from our
Savior, I answer by denial, that every thing is meritorious to which a
reward is given, for there may be a reward of Grace, as is disputed strongly
against the Papists by many, in the Question of merit. The reward is to the
prayer, therefore but by accident to the fast, but neither is the reward to
prayer as of merit, for when we pray, we supplicate and acknowledge our selves
unworthy; therefore to fasting much less is the reward of due. We conclude it
then, that Fasting is not a part of worship, but a Medium; and in the New
Testament, not properly a Medium, either to effect, or signify any thing, but
to dispose unto the extraordinary exercise of prayer; and so it is said to be
powerful; an help to that, to which the Scripture gives testimony that it
does prevail; The prayer of the righteous prevails much if it be fervent. But
of this more, in the second business which we proceed unto, the proof of the
Doctrine.

2. Secondly, for the confirmation of this Truth, the Prophet Joel is very
express and comfortable: Turn unto me with all your heart, with fasting,
with weeping, and with mourning, rent your heart, and not your garment, and
turn unto the Lord for he is gracious, who knows if he will return and
leave a blessing behind him? Blow the Trumpet in Zion, sanctify a Fast, call
a solemn assembly: Then will the Lord be jealous for his Land, and pity his
people. Joel 2.12.13.14.15.18.19.20. I might be large in instances, your own
knowledge of them, may spare me a labor not needful. I shall rather spend
that time, to confirm it by some Arguments.

1. It is powerful with God, because the means which himself has appointed
to prevail. Nothing can be powerful with God, but as under the relation of an
Ordinance: God puts efficiencie into every thing, as being the first mover of
the wheels in every engine. That God may be pacified, he must tell us, how he
will be pacified, and we cannot fail, when we go in the way of his own
appointments. Turn unto me says the Lord; There Is the Ordinance; Then he
will pity his people; There Is the issue of the Ordinance.

2. It is powerful with God, because most suiteable to those Relations we
stand in toward God, the Relations of Subjects, Servants, Supplicants,
Offenders. We know that lowliness has an insinuating and winning force; and
Great Spirits are soonest made ours, by stooping to them; as Tacitus notes
judiciously concerning the great Augusta, though she maligned the prosperous,
she was pitiful to the distressed, though an enemy. God has been pleased to
manifest himself such, and so appeased; That he will resist the proud, but
give grace unto the humble. But in our fasting, we fall low before his
footstool, we crouch unto our Sovereign, we supplicate of our Judge, we
beg, and plead not, and prevail.

3. Prayer that prevails is hereby made more fervent. Prayer is the Tool,
fasting gives the Tool an edge, makes it sharper, and then it cuts more
smoothly: It specially remoues the impediments that make prayer slow:

1. There are impediments in the understanding, it helps to illumine that. The
crammed body is not so fit an organ for the purer soul to actuate it self
within: we see that abstemious men are of more quickened apprehensions. Thus
the outward abstinence is profitable, but more the inward spirit of a fast,
that is to be Humble; and to them is the promise of a cleared Intellect, He
will guide the humble in his way.

2. There are impediments in the will, it helps to elevate that: the will
comes thus to be weakened in its resistance against God, and is made more
speedy in its better motions; as the Hawke or the running dog, are better for
the flight and speed, when slenderly fed. The will is Bird-limed with the
earth, and fasting does unintangle it; then it becomes more apt for prayer: As
it was a witty note of Ambrose, concerning Elias, He went up to heaven by the
ladder of fasting, before he ascended in the Chariot of fire.

3. There are impediments in the affections, they are often out of order, and
disquiet our devotion; it helps to bridle them. Affections are ordinarily
wanton, and then they grow imperious. When Hagar was entertained with respect
she despises her Mistress, but when checked, she grows modest. Fasting gives
the correction to our too saucy servants, then they become serviceable, and
wait upon prayer. Saint Paul learnt this method, while he professes, That he
keeps under his body and brings it in subjection. Thus it adds speed unto
prayer, and there is prevailing. Which leads us to the third business, to the
application; in a double use.

3. The Application is;

1. To condemn the folly and injustice, of such as contemn or neglect, so
powerful a Duty. There are cursed Edomites that say of Jerusalem, Down with
it, down with it even to the ground: and do envy the prosperity of Sion.
Fasting and prayers build up a wall, but the Horonite, the Ammonite, and the
Arabian, Sanballat, Tobiah, and Geshem, laugh at the work, and labor to
hinder it. There are some that dare say; What needs this ado? Wherefore are
these intended assemblings? Thus they oppose their own safety, and endeavor
against that with which God both is pleased, and pacified. Nay, some are so
mad; that, we use for a remedy or prevention, they esteem and accuse as the
means to bring in the pestilence. How far at length will the malice of Satan
extend? But the Papists take us off from this reproof, while they tell us, we
are fitter to ward, then give the blow: They accuse us, as in our doctrines and
practice, enemies to fasting. Unjust slanders! For our doctrine, let them hear
it, and see what they can object. Besides what has been said, let them hear
him whom professedly they are wont to oppose, Calvin, in the fourth Book of
his Institutions, in the twefth Chapter: Seeing fasting is an holy exercise,
why should we less use it, then of old they used in like necessity? We
read, not only that the Israelitish Church, which was framed and constitute
by the word of God, but also the Ninivites who had no other preaching but that
of Jonah; fasted in sign of sorrow: What reason is there, we should not do
the like? But it is an outward Ceremony which together with others took end in
Christ. Nay, but at this day, (as it always was) it is a profitable help to
the faithful, and an useful admonition to the awakening of themselves, lest
with their too much security and sloth, they more and more provoke God. We
assent to the very words of that great Calvin. What can be more express? more
plain? But they cavil at our explications. We receive it not as a part of
Religion, and accidentarily only religious: and considered solitary and by it
self, we count it either no way pertaining to Religion, or if pertaining,
(because it respects the body only) superstitious. Such are the Popish; we
reject them, and justly because so: yet from hence is the ground of their
slander. But do we condemn fasting, because we condemn theirs? The holy
Christians of old, condemned the fasts of the Gentiles and Marcionits, yet were
not enemies to Fasting. But slanderous are the mouths of Salmero and that
Teasty Coster, who teach their abused people, That as the Devil, (who knows
that all sorts of Devils are cast out by prayer and fasting) labors by all
means to rob Christians of those weapons; so the Heretics (so he is pleased
to brand us) oppose fasting as a superstitious thing, contrary to Scripture and
divine will. They are the words of that foul Jesuit. You saw all the ground
before: But whither will not impatiency the daughter of prejudice carry men?
This for our doctrine; concerning our practice they are more impudent. They say
we plead only for the flesh, and please our bellyes: That we give our selves
to surfeiting and drunkenness, neglecting fasting. Ah Beloved! let me by the
way complain, before I make Apology. How do our sins rise to our shame,
that the Adversaries take such notice of them? Oh that our carriage were so
holy, that our lives might be our Arguments, to prove the truth of what we do
profess! Your profaneness and irreligion, weakens our disputings against
Popish superstitions. But chiefly let me entreat you of this Parish, (who live
mixed with so many Papists, as no where more in the whole County) let me
entreat you to apprehend it, lest your profanenes strengthen them in their
errors, and weaken me in the end of my preaching. Let them take no notice of
your oaths, your reelings, your disorders, your profanations of the Lords day:
your thronged Alehouses, your unwatchfull behaviors make your Popish
neighbors to despise our Religion, and the common Gospel. But though I accuse
you from the Pulpit, I may dare notwithstanding to plead against the enemy;
There can be no prejudice to our doctrine, though the lives of our people, be
unanswerable to what we teach them. But again, if we compare with theirs, I
may defend and prefer our own practice. Why are they blind? Why are they
wilfully blind, to their own shame? They allow, nay, they appoint set
Bacchanalls. And for their fasting, there remains among them but a mere
shadow of it. That you may see, I neither malice nor belie them; take it from
the Pen of their own Peresius, Holy Fasts are in use amongst us, only
according to a certain outward Ceremony; for we think we fast, if but once
a day we dine, though even unto surfeit, well tipled and better crammed;
taking meat not only for the sustaining of nature, or only for one day, but
in such a quantity, as might for three days suffice that famed Milo. I speak
not of the quality and difference of your meats and sawces: For now, neither
the Sea, the earth, the air, nor Fish-mongers can satisfy our appetite. A fit
zeal of a Papist against Papists. But he goes farther: And, (says he) it were
more tolerable, if the Laics were only thus diseased, but it has crept upon
many Priests of our order, upon religious orders, and Prelates of our Church;
whom I see so studious of this matter, that you may rather say, they were borne
to devour, then to imitate the Apostolic modesty; to the deceiving of the
poor, and the destruction of their chastity, which together with holy Fasts,
has seemed to have forsaken the earth. A fitter zeal of a Jesuit against his
own shaue-lings. These are Papists; these are their Fasts: Now let them if
they can triumph. Thus being rid of them, I might renew the application, but I
proceed to a second.

2. Let us be exhorted, because it is so powerful a means, to make use of it.
Neglect not so great an advantage: Let us use it in any kind of need. In the
evil of sin; if we would gain power against any lust, if strength against
any corruption, if work out any spiritual disease; have recourse unto this
remedy. I think it is Ambrose that notes it from the Naturalists; That the
fasting spittle of a man kills a Serpent; His allusion is apt, this destroys
the power of the Devil. Prayer is as the spittle, but it must be fasting: And
our Savior tells his Disciples upon occasion of a man possessed brought to be
cured, That this kind of Devil goes not out but by fasting and prayer. Let us
use it also in the evil of trouble; So stand in the Gap: This course Ninivie
took; Let neither man nor beast taste any thing, let them be covered with
sackcloth, and cry mightily unto the Lord; And God repented of the evil that
he said he would do unto them, and he did it not. Ion. 3, 8.9.10. When the
news came that the multitude was in Hazazon-Tamar, Iehosaphat feared, and set
himself to seek the Lord, and proclaimed a fast. Then Iehaziel brings a
better news from the Lord, Be not dismayed at this great multitude, the Battle
is not yours but Gods. 2 Chro. 20.3.15. See 1 Samuel 7. Let us use it also for
the obtaining of good. The tender and true-affected Nehemiah, that for the
turning away of reproach from the desolated Jerusalem, he might gain favor in
the sight of Artaxerxes, fasts and prays. Neh. 1.4.11. When favor was
obtained and a journey granted, Ezra professes he gained safe conduct from
God; So we fasted and besought our God for this, and he was entreated of us,
Ezr. 8.23. We may be assured some way to prevail; When we come to God, we
must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently
seek him: Heb. 11.6. We have a promise to give us that assurance; When thou
fastest be not as the hypocrites, and thy Father which sees in secret, shall
reward thee openly: Mat. 6.18. How ever we shall have the mark, and God shall
challenge us his; Eze. 9.4.6.

Oh set upon the Duty, thus we may be helpful to the Church. Men be
differently helpful, according to their different advantages; some have the
advantage of strength, and may help with their Arms, some of riches, and may
help with their purses, some of wisdom, and may help with their counsels;
This is the common advantage, and all may be helpful. Let us join our hands,
and unite our flames; the fire will be more forcible; and the burden more
easily remooved: Judgment is a burden which lies upon a Country, that burden
which one cannot move, many hands may cast off; help to unload the Country,
and the rather because the Devil strives to strike away our hold, and to
hinder our indevours this way; When Ieschuah stands before the Lord, Satan
stands on his right hand to resist him, Zach. 3.1. When Paul goes forth to
pray, the possessed Damsel meets him: Act. 16.16. Oh be not wanting wherein
ye may be powerful, make use of these opportunities to seek reconciliation,
and to be helpful to our wounded neighhours, while ourselves enjoy the
advantages of continued health, and frequent assemblings.

MARK. 13.37. And, what I say unto you, I say unto all, Watch.


THe City or Shire-Towne of a County, is as it were, the whole Counties
Watchtower. Chester is the fittest place, and Watchfulness the fittest work
to begin our Fast: and therefore I have chosen to you, what our Savior fitted
to all; an exhortation to be Watchful. In it there are three parts;

1. The Exhortation; Watch. The word in Peter is (...), 1 Pet. 4.7. (...)
signifies both to watch and to be sober. And that other word sometimes used,
(...) of (...) a Torch, is very expressiue to denote the quality of our Watch.
But the word in the Text, is (...), and (...) is such a Watch as signifies
waking. Be awake, and open-eyed.

2. To whom the Exhortation is given;

1. More strictly; What I say to you; that referres to the third verse, the
company that was present, Peter, James, and John, and Andrew.

2. More largely; What I say to you, I say to all; either all the Apostles, as
some Expositors, or all people, as most and the Interlineary Gloss.

3. How the Exhortation is inferred, in the first word, But or And; which
referres to a double argument;

1. The uncertain hour of the Masters coming, Verse. 34.35.

2. The certain danger of secure sleeping, Verse. 36.

It needs not a farther division nor explication, as having neither confusion
nor difficulty; but yields in a natural order these four Conclusions.

1. Watching is Gods Ordinance, and our duty. It Is grounded at least by
intimation, in the Command, Watch.

2. Those that know Christ must watch: What I say to you. Peter and John, tho
endeared to our Savior, are not exempt from the Duty.

3. All must do it; a common both exercise and duty, what to you, I say to
All.

4. Therefore they and all must watch, because of the uncertaintie of time, and
the danger of neglect; And what I say.

I should trespass on the time to follow this Method, and therefore shall
reduce all to one head, and a plainer.

That it is the Duty of every one to watch.

The Scripture urges it: Mat. 24.42.43.44. Mat. 25.13. Mat. 26.41. Romans 13.11.
2 Timothy 4.5. 1 Pet. 4.7. It were easy to abound in Quotations, a Concordance
does it to our hand. But there are some expressions in those named places,
which show us what it is to watch, yet I Will rather take others. When Ezra had
weighed unto Sherebiah, Hashaebiah, and their brethren, the silver, and gold,
and precious vessels, he gives this charge, Watch ye and keep them: Ezr.
8.29. To watch as we do a treasure, which is worthy of care, and may be
endangered by Theft. Job compares the behavior of the violent, to wild Asses
in the Desert, who watch to the prey, or rise betimes for the prey; Job 24.5.
To watch as the industrious do, who will not lose the advantage of
opportunities. David has it in another sense; Except the Lord keep the City,
the watchman waketh but in voine. Psalm. 127.1. To watch as they that fear the
Invasion and a^ult of an enemy. Which differs but in a little from that of our
Savior; If the Good Man of the house had known in what Watch the Theife would
come, he would have watched, and not have suffered his house to be broken up.
Mat. 24.43. To watch as men that stand in fear of sudden dangers. The former
may have relation to a man in respect of his soul, the two latter in respect
of judgment: To watch our selves by carfulness and industry; To watch the
coming of Judgment by wise foreseeing.

I intended my self wholly for the application, in a threefold use.

Use 1. If it be every ones duty to watch, it justly and seasonably reproues,
such as watch not, such as reproach them that watch.

1. It condemns such as watch not: The careless, and secure.

1. The careless; the careless of their souls state; that as if their hearts
were of little worth, have no mind or thought of them. Solomon speaks of the
field of the sloathfull, that he passed by it, and by the Vineyard of the man
void of understanding, and ^^e, it was ^ne over with Thorns, and Nettles had
covered the face thereof, and the stone-wall thereof was broken down. Such may
our notice be, when our observation passes upon some men; overgrowne with
ranker weeds, vices and disorders which are of an easy growth; for they are
sluggards, and neglect their Watch. Is the soul no more precious? That we
bestow no Culture, no Tillage, no weeding? Men let themselves roue upon
variety of deceiving objects; and wander as Harlots upon every green hill.
The soul in the fallen estate is a loose and ungovernd wanton, yet we are not
wary to restrain it; and though every temptation has a bayte upon it, and a
hook under it, we are careless of the danger. Nay, some are grown to such
dullness, they excuse sin with sin; The swearer beats off a seasonable
reproof of his rash oath, and pleads, He did ntt heed it. That plea is an
accusation, the sin is doubled; to sin, and to be careless how we sin.

2. The secure. Ah Beloved, we are fallen asleep! it is a sleeping age, a dead
sleep when calls do not awaken us. A man that sleeps soundly hears not,
though the voice be both shrill and near. God has called us, he has called often
and loud. While mercies spoke, he called with a sweet still voice; now he calls
with a voice of Thunder, Judgment has a loud peircing voice: yet we hear
neither. We say we shall have peace, though we walk in the imaginations of
our hearts. But it is an higher madness; when we dare say with those in the
Prophet; when we threaten judgment due and deserved against sin, they say,
Let him make speed, and hasten his work that we may see it, and let the
Council of the holy One of Israel draw nigh that we may know it: Esa. 5.19.
But there is a threatening of very terrible judgment against such, and the
judgment shall be more severe, if the threatening be despised: If any when he
hears the words of this curse, shall bless himself in his heart, saying, I
shall have peace though I walk in the imaginations of my heart, to add
drunkenness to thirst; the Lord will not spare him, but then the anger of the
Lord, and his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the Curses that
are written in this Book, shall light upon him, the Lord shall blot out his
name from under heaven, and the Lord shall separate him unto evil: Deuteronomy.
29.19.20.21. God will make the punishment suiteable to the sin; The sin of
the secure is, They put far away the evil day, therefore the punishment is
fitted; They shall go captive, with the first that go captive: Amos, 6.3.7.
The judgment which security puts off, shall for that cause be brought on with
more speed. The like is observed by Esaiah, Because ye have said, we have
made a Covenant with death, and with hell are we at agreement, when the
overflowing scourge shall pass thorough, it shall not come unto us, for we
have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid our selves;
therefore, the hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies, and the waters shall
overflow the hiding place: Esa. 28.15.17. Security is contented with weak
defenses: What aid can they give us in the day of visitation, when Judgment
shall be like a storm and flowing tempest, bearing down all before it, much
more those trifling Refuges built and strengthened by lies and fals-hood. But
me-thinkes that of the same Prophet strikes with a deeper wound; The Lord did
call to weeping and to mourning, and behold joy and gladness, slaying Oxen,
and killing sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine; Let us eat and drink,
for to morrow we shall dye; And it was revealed in mine ears by the Lord of
hosts, surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you till you dye, says
the Lord of Hosts: Esa. 22.12.13.14. God is jealous of his glory, and will not
endure himself abused in his goodness and patience. But because security is
ordinarily, if not grounded upon, yet much strengthened by the prophesying of
lies; therefore the threats are usually more severe against the Prophets, who
rock the Cradle, and lull and sing the people to their sleep. They have
healed the hurt of the daughter of my people slightly, saying, peace, peace,
when there is no peace; therefore they shall fall among them that fall: Ier.
6.14.15. The Prophet that heales a people truly, makes them sensible of the
wound; but to please, is to heal it slightly: So some do heal our just
fears; Alas! say they, there is no such cause of so much fear, all shall be
well, they are but puling malcontents that talk of dangerous time: But hear
their doom; There shall be a falling, and these shall fall among them that
fall. More largely of this, Ier. 23.16.17.21.25.26.30.31. And yet more
expressly, Ezekiel. 13.10.11.12.13.14. etc.

2. It condemns such as reproach them that Watch.

1. Such as watch over their lives; these reproachers are professed enemies to
the abused and despised holiness. They call them precise, whom they observe
careful, and entend to blemish them with that imputation. Oh what
discouragements has Religion now, in a time when Religion is on all hands at
lest saluted! And though all know, how men ought to run, yet they wonder that
we run not with them into the same excess of riot. This has ever been the
portion of the Saints; I Will instance but in David's Complaint, and in an instance
fittest to the present business: When I wept and chastned my soul with
fasting, that was to my reproach, I made sackcloth also my garment, and I
became a Proverb to them; They that sit in the Gate speak against me, and I
was the song of the drunkards: Psalm. 69.10.11.12. But dare ye oppose a known
goodness? If it be a duty enjoined, how dare ye, how can ye reproach it?

2. Such as reproach the watchful fore-seers of judgments. Jeremiah bare such
rebukes; from the injurious blind Courtiers; The Princes said unto the King,
we beseech thee, let this man be put to death, for thus he weakneth the hands
of the men of war, and the hands of all the people, in speaking such words
unto them, for this man seeks not the welfare of the people, but the hurt:
Ier. 38.4. There are some that have the Garb of wise ones, that cavil at our
plain and necessary preachings, and endure not our fore-warnings of the
people. These speeches, say they, breed fears and discouragements to sad and
disquiet the minds of people; and this is to seek their hurt, rather then
welfare, by weakening their hands. But how can they be weakened by being
forewarned; rather, a people is never so strong, as when it sees it self
weak, and is kindly humbled. It Is likely the profane and al-readie drowned
Inhabitants of the old world, mocked at the provident Noah, and wondered to see
him spend so much both time and cost, in building so strange a Vessel; but he
saw and provided against the Flood. And the Sodomites might gaze with wonder at
the busy Lot, who carries away a poor remainder of his goods, and in haste
conveyes himself and his, from so pleasing an habitation: but he saw also and
provided against the sto^me of fire. Those still wonder, and speak their
wonder: What ado is here? What an unnecessary ado? What needs this fasting?
These assemblings? This frequencie? The plague is far enough from us; or if
nearer, yet why all these provisions? They are unjust murmurs of men blinded,
and not able to discern Gods ways. But the Scripture doomes them: Because ye
have set at naught all my Counsels, I also will laugh at your calamity; I
will mock when your fear comes; when your fear comes as desolation, and
your destruction comes as a whirlewinde, when distress and anguish comes
upon you: Prove. 1.25.26.27.

Use 2. The second use, is the more close applying of the words of the Text, in
a serious exhortation; let us, since it is our common duty, be watchful. The
Papists wrest this Scripture to their own superstitions, so they do the
Exhortation; and upon this, compared with the thirtie-fifth verse, do ground
their observation of their Canonical hours, and their night-Watches: So they
make the thing merely a Ceremony, and elude the entendment of our Saviors
Sermon. The Jews divided their night into four Quarters, which they called,
four Watches, and every Watch had three hours, the third hour which
terminated the rest, was called, the Watch. The first began at Sunset, and
ended at the third hour of night; this was called, the beginning of the
Watches, Lam. 2.19. The second began at the third hour, and ended at the sixth;
this was called the middle Watch: Iud. 7.19. The third began at sixth, ended at
ninth; was called, the third Watch, Luke 12.38. The fourth, beginning at the
ninth, ending at the twelfth hour, was called, the morning Watch: Exodus 14.24.
Mat 14.25. These had sometimes other names, as they are all most expressly
mentioned in this Text, 1. (...). 2. (...). 3. (...). 4. (...). Ye know not
when the Master comes, at even, or at midnight, or at Cocke-crowing, or in
the morning. Now accordingly the Church of Rome, besides the greater hours of
the day, observes four Watches of the night; 1. The Vespertine, at six a
clock at night. 2. The Completory at nine. 3. The Nocturne at midnight. 4.
The Mattins, at three in the morning: But with manifest superstition; as being
expressly contrary to the Rule of the Apostle, and the rule of our freedom, not
to observe times. Besides, Marcellus Francolin, Bellarmine has handled the
Question fully, but we will a while examine how strongly. First, he urges the
lawfulness and convenience of those Vigils; from examples in holy Scripture,
Psalm. 119 62. Psalm. 5.3. Psalm. 63.6. Neh. 9.3. Dan. 6.10. Luke 6.12. Act.
16.25. Psalm. 55.17. Psalm. 141.2. Act. 10.9. But what will all these places
prove, but what we easily grant them? both that it is very imitable to be much
in prayer, and that the Jews had such a distinction of time. You may confer
the Scriptures, and save me so easy a labor, and find that no more can be
drawn from them. Neither is that place any stronger, Act. 3.1. That Peter and
John went into the Temple at the hour of prayer, being the ninth hour. For,
(besides that Drusius has noted it out of David Kimchi, that the Jews had but
three hours of prayer, which at least gives a Touch upon and against their
observation:) Peter and John intended not themselves to the evening Sacrifice,
which by the true paschall was abolished; therefore though the ninth hour,
were the hour of prayer to the still-blind Jews, yet not to them: or, to draw
the most from it; we will acknowledge it profitable for Christians, that some
set hours be appointed certain for the better assembling together; yet we
reject them, as we know the Papists mean them, as necessary and parts of
divine worship. Secondly, he alleges the testimony of some Fathers: but
though my few years have afforded me but small acquaintance with their
writings, yet I cannot but observe; That most of them, while they seem to
intimate some set times then in use, yet they purpose only the commendation of
frequencie in prayer. So St. Cyprian, as much as any versed in the external of
worship, yet drives but at this, the continuance of our devotion, Qui autem
etc. But we that are in Christ, that is, always in the light, let us not in
the night times cease from prayer. And what else is in that rule of Ambrose,
concerning the six times of prayer, when we rise, go abroad, before dinner,
after, in the even, at our bed time: but that any void of superstition may
admit of? Nor is there much more, in St. Hierom, either in his funeral praises
of Paula, or in his directive Epistle to Laeta, for the instituting of her
daughter: or if more may be found in any, we may without much wrong to those
Ancients whom we honor, impute it to superstition which crept on fast in those
times. But thirdly, he presents his reasons: Reasons unworthy the learning of
so famed a Scholar. 1. The Watches are on Ternaries of hours, (all the third
hours, which terminate the Watches being called the greater hours) and this
in the honor of the glorious Trinity. But what can be more vain, then to
trifle divine worship with numbers? 2. The nocturnes are to signify the future
resurrection, which shall be in the night. We grant, 'twere pious to be much in
such meditation; but there is no ground to separate set time unto it. 3. They
boast of this as strongest; That these conserve the memory of our Redemption
They instance chiefly from Athanasius, (if that were his) in his book of
Virginity: Learn the Psalter and the Psalms; let the rising Sun see that
Book in thy hand. In that manner he proceeds, to set them on prayers and
praises; after the third hour, because then the Cross was brought, at the
sixth, because then Christ was lift upon the Cross; at the ninth, because then
he dyed. Well, admit the rule were his, might not Athanasius be superstitious?
might not Basil? might not Cassianus? Why do they obtrude upon us from humane
authority, what the Scripture-Canon builds not? I might make you merry with
another argument, yet the Jesuit delivers it soberly, and perhaps believes it;
That an Angel gave the appointment of some Canonical hours to some devout
ones. And that in Dioclesians persecution, a celestial psalmody was heard at
those Canonical vigils, about the relics of some Martyrs. It is wonder, that
John Cocklaeus, put not these into his Manuscript Amalarius, especially having
himself the command of such a Print-house? But I keep you too long upon this
discourse; but having cleared the way, I may better go on, to the Exhortation
as the Text means it, according as the Doctrine was explicated, To be
watchful.

1. Concerning our selves.

2. Concerning the approach of Judgments.

1. Concerning our selves; let us be watchful over our better parts, our
souls; let us observe to keep the precepts diligently, Psalm. 119.4.5. and to
keep our hearts with all diligence; Pro. 4.23. Solomon seems to allude to
such a Watch as is over a besieged City, to observe, 1. All that enter, what,
whence they are. This must be our care to keep the Ports and Entrances of the
soul. Every sense is a several gate, and by every one the enemy may be
admitted; enticements may pass through the eye, by the ear suggestions; and
by the smell, touch, and taste, what may easily infect the heart. Oh keep the
portalls closed, and with that holy Job, let our Covenants keep the Watch; I
have made a Covenant with mine eye, why then should I think upon a maid? Job
31.1.

2. All that go abroad; attend our cogitations, speeches, actions: There may
be treasonable practices fom within; those are the Inhabitants, if they be
false, let them not go abroad to betray our peace. Therefore the same Solomon,
when he exhorts to keep the heart, he would not have us neglect the mouth, the
lips, the feet; Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are the
issues of life; put away from thee a froward mouth, and perverse lips far
from thee. Prove. 4.23.24.25.26.27. David knew such dangers, and resolves, Psalm.
39.1.2. I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue, I will
keep my mouth with a Bridle. The greatest enemy is within; The inside does
undo us. There must be that double Watch, of such as enter from without, of
such as from within depart from us; to keep the heart from extravagancies, and
the enemy from approaches: for when nature and occasion meet together, they
never meet without some harm; like two lustful wantons equally heated, they
depart not without infection. And therefore as we must be watchful over, so we
may pray against our selves, and sing his Letanie, A me, me salve, Domine; Lord
keep me from my self. Give me leave to press this first part of the
Exhortation with some motives; It Is convenient, necessary, profitable; the
contrary is dangerous, of these four but briefly.

1. It is convenient we should be watchful; convenient in respect of our so
many relations. 1. We are pastors, and it is a convenient thing for Pastors to
attend their flocks. When the Angel-like news was brought, the Shepherds
were abiding in the fields, keeping Watch over their flock by night: Luke 2.8.
Every man's a pastor. The King has a larger fold, so have Magistrates
accordingly as stationed, so have Ministers in their Cures: And every one,
though of hid condition, and not sovereign to any, yet has a flock. All men
have souls to attend; the soul is the flock, though we stand in no other
Relation. 2. We are warriors, and it is convenient for Soldiers to fear and
attend the onset. The Midianites that lay in Camp, had set the Watch; Iud.
7.19. Our enemy will wait the opportunity of a sleeping Camp. 3. We are
Sentinells; their name is from their Watch: we must be extra cubantes, and
being Scout-Watches may not keep our beds. 4. We are servants; it is fit for
such to attend their Masters eye and command. Let us with Samuel, rise from the
place where we are laid down to sleep, and be ready to answer; Speak Lord,
for thy servant hears. 5. We are infirm by Lethargy; Waking must be our
Cure, and therefore convenient.

2. It is necessary we should be watchful; necessary, 1. Because our
Tenements are ruinous. We would fear to lodge in weak tottering buildings,
chiefly in tempestuous blustering nights, lest our covering might bury us with
the fall. These carcasses which we carry with us, are such weak buildings,
earthly Tabernacles, 1 Cor. 5.1. houses made of Clay, Job 4.19. and are easily
blown down. We have seen strong able bodies crushed with a little
sickness, and some whom a few sits of an Ague have blown into the grave. Let
us watch against the storm, that unprovided and on a sudden we be not
overwhelmed and covered with our own dust. 2. As our Tenements are ruinous,
so we know not our Landlords day. For our habitations here, we know the date
and period of our leases; but of our life we know not. That lease, if it be
one, which God has seemd to make general, is but a short one; The days of
our years are threescore years and ten, if by reason of strength they be
fourscore years, yet is their strength labor and sorrow: for it is soon cut
off, and we fly away. Psalm. 90.10. But we have no lease, but are at will, and
in a moment may be cut off from the Land of the living.

3. It is profitable we should be watchful; after the Vigil is the festival
day; and Blessedness is pronounced to such, Luke 12.37. Blessed are those
servants, whom the Lord when he comes, shall find watching. And there is
Blessedness too, in via, while we watch, we have the company of our Lord;
God is present, the Spirit is present with them that wake. You know, sleeping
admits not of company, though an hundred lodge in the same room, and all
sleep; though the place be full, they are all alone: but company is to them
that wake, because waking makes use of company. When we are unwatchfull, God is
gone; but when we watch, Christ watches with us, or we with him, Mat. 26.38.
Tarry here, and watch with me.

4. Not to be watchful is full of danger. We are near the enemy, his onsets
are ready: that roaring Lion goes about seeking whom he may devour: and when
asleep, we lie open to invasion. When the Amalekites were carelessly easing
themselves, David overtooke them with a bloody slaughter; So did Laban Jacob,
on mount Gilead, in monte deliciarum; upon the hill of pleasures; as Ierom
renders it, at lest wittily if not fitly. While we scatter our selves upon
Temptations, we are snared by them; and therefore must specially be careful,
that we wander not upon the green hills.

2. The other part of the Exhortation is, That we would be watchful concerning
the Approach of Judgments. We will lay this ground, and you cannot deny it,
That there may be a knowledge of evil coming on. The Baptist intimates, there
may be a fore-warning to flee from the wrath to come: Mat. 3.7. So our Savior
Argues; When it is evening, ye say it will be fair weather, for the sky is
red; and in the morning, it will be foul weather to day, for the sky is red
and lowering: O ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky, but can
ye not discern the signs of the times? Mat. 16.2.3. Look up, look up,
Beloved; can ye discern nothing? do ye not perceive a lowering sky? do ye
not see, how some black Clouds gather, and threaten a storm? Godly men have
ever had sharp eyes, and have foreseen evils. The rod of the Almond tree;
and the seething pot from toward the North, are both beheld by Jeremiah. Ah!
we see what we tremble at; and if you inquire, What we see; I shall endeavor
to spend the remainder of the time, to help you in your Watch, by discovery of
such signs by which you may judge of a coming Evil.

Signs are of two sorts:

1. Extraordinary; then is God wont to preach real Sermons; and Christ speaks
of such, Luke 21.25. I might instance in this kind, those known examples of
Ierusalems warning; The ayery apparitions, the voice Migremus hi^c, the
iterated woe proclaimed by Ananus son; but they are known Stories, and
therefore, (though God also has afforded us some such witnesses in our own
Land and time) I Will not defer you, from matter more profitable, because more
ordinary.

Two ordinary signs, these I Will reduce to two heads.

1. The joint warning by the Ministry.

2. Those grounds from whence they take their warning.

1. The joint consent of the holy Ministry in giving warning, is an assured
argument that warning had need be given. There runs the vein of the
propheticke spirit through the holy Ministry. This is Gods ordinance; for thus
has the Lord said, Go set a watchman, let him declare what he sees. If we
ask: behold he sees a charet with a couple of horsemen; and he hearkens
diligently with much heed; he cries, a lion, a lion: I stand continually upon
the watch tower in the day time, I am set in my ward whole nights; and behold
here comes a charet with a couple of horsemen. Esaias 21.6, 7, 8, 9. God still
has provided these Sentinells and Trumpets: Noah warded in the old world,
before the flood; Lot in Sodom: The Ministers now. God has fulfilled the
promise, Esaias 62.6. I have set watchmen upon thy walls oh Jerusalem, which
shall never hold their peace, day nor night. Will ye not attend to the vision
of your Seers? To the trumpets of your Watchmen? When the Watchman that stood
on the Tower of Iezreel, had spyed the marching of Iehu, and cried, I see a
Company, Ioram takes warning, and sends out an Horseman, 2 Kings 9.17. So David
believes the voice from above the gate; 2 Samuel 18.24, 25, 26. Why are we
entrusted by God with such sacred dispensations, if we may not be credited by
you? Are we unfaithful or unskilful, that ye misdoubt the notice? We either
are, or should be higher, then the rest of the people, and therefore may see
farther; climing often up to the mount of contemplation, and being much in
prayer. This sign none but may observe, for the mourning voice of Turtles is
every where heard: from the pulpits of godly Preachers in every corner of the
Land, we are made acquainted, that some wrath may be expected. Can we think
so general and full a consent of united voices portends nothing? If we should
see one fired Beacon, we would mistrust somewhat, but when every where that
we turn our eyes, we should behold those blazings, it would make us
tremblingly fear Invasion. Beloved, the Beacons round about are set on fire,
Preachers flame from their pulpits; some enemy is ready to enter upon us. This
were enough notice, if we were enough obedient: yet that your security may be
yet more removed, you shall see the second sign.

2. The grounds from whence they take their warnings which they give to you; I
might name many, but will only insist on five.

1. The first ground. Judgment is suitable unto sin, but may chiefly be
expected, when such sins abound, as have the direct rule of Counter-passion.
See the rule cleared by an Instance: Mich. 1.5, 6, 7. What is the transgression
of Jacob? Is it not Samaria? Therefore I will make Samaria as an heap of the
field: all shall be burnt with fire, for she gathered it of the hire of an
harlot, and they shall return to the hire of an harlot. We find then that in
Idolatry is the rule of Counter-passion, therefore Idolatry will bring
destruction. There are some sins left to Nemesis, to the revenge of a severer
justice; and God threatens to retaliate. Their sin was in Samaria, the high
places; and Samaria their strength shall be overthrown. They were adulterous
and loosed in their affection to God, they increased in those braveries, which
were provided by their Idolatry as the hire of an harlot, therefore they shall
be made nothing, of so little worth and value, as the contemptible hire of an
harlot. Again, Zeph. 2.8, 9, 10. I have heard the reproach of Moab, and the
revilings of the children of Ammon, whereby they have reproached my people:
This shall they have for their pride, because they have reproached, and
magnified themselves against the people of the Lord of hosts; Surely Moab shall
be as Sodom, and the children of Ammon as Gomorrah. We find again that in the
pride of a Kingdom, is the direct rule of Counter-passion, and therefore a
suteablenesse to judgment. It Is a very profitable work, when Preachers
collect out such sins, as have been punished in other times and people, to
make comparison and application to ours; but especially this way is most
convincing, when such sins are proposed as have this rule express upon them.
God make us sensible of what sins we may find among our selves, and may
justly and truly read unto us our own doom.

2. The second ground. Mercies abused are warning-peices of severitie. All
sins offend God, this dishonours him more directly; then he proceeds with
indignation, with that fury which abused patience is wont to turn unto. I
might be plentiful in the instances of mercies, for God has afforded plenty,
and our abuses of them, are as frequent as his bounties. Your own observations
may store you with thoughts in this kind, and therefore I rather leave it, to
proceed.

3. The third ground. The offers and shows of judgments are the Trumpets of
following judgment. Lesser judgments without repentance, threaten greater. So
Aegypts plagues were methoded; God went in steppings, till that fatal night
when every house sent out a corse to an untimely and lamented burial. In that
threatening, Levit. 26.21, etc. ye shall see the path, and order of Gods
journey. I will break the pride of your power, and make you few in number,
your ways shall be desolate: but if you will not be reformed for these, I
will punish you yet seven times for your sins; then I will bring a sword,
which shall avenge the quarrel of my Covenant; And if ye will not for all
this hearken, I will walk contrary to you in fury, and will punish you yet
seven times for your sins. God has begun in his way, ye may perceive the
footsteps where he has trod; in the touches and removalls of almost every
ordinary judgment. Famine is a great judgment; there was this last year an
offer of that, though in this Northern part we felt it not so sensibly; in
other places, the faces of the poor children began to gather blackness, and
children cried, bread, bread, when there was none to be broken to them: but
this is now removed. Pestilence is a great judgment, there has been diverse
years together offers of that; it is still carried up and down, as being Gods
visitation, and removing Camp: but this, at least from our chief City, is
removed. Homebred Conspiracy, is a great judgment; there have been many
offers of this: witness the treacheries and contrivings of the Priests, and
Jesuits, the Incendiaries of the State in the time of Queen Elizabeth, and our
late famed King: but this, or atleast we hope it, is removed. Civil
State-earthquakes is a great judgment; besides former lamented times, there
was an offer of this, this very Summer in the begun insurrection of the
Westernes: but God was favorable to the Gospel, and this is removed. Foreign
hostile Invasion is a great judgment; there was an offer of this in the proud
Armado from Spain, which themselves untowardly christened Invincible: but this
by Gods breathing was removed. What need I weary you, with the remembrance of
our frequent Rebellions, of our bloody civil wars, of our Rome-bred
treasons, of that hellish powder plot, of your own late fears the boldness
of the common enemy on these neighbor Seas, the Western Seas, and the
frighted state of the Irish shore? All show that God intends to visit, being so
often coming on. They are like the offers and flourishes before a Duel; but
are such remoues, as do argue a stroke, though with an unwilling hand.

4. The fourth ground. We may fear judgment, when we seek God for the
prevention, and rest in the work done. It Is that happily which you will not
easily admit, that seeking God should be the way to lose him; But see it
confirmd and cleared in the Prophet; Ier. 14.10, 12, 13, etc. They have loved
to wander, they have not refrained their feet, the Lord does not accept them:
There is the ground, now hear the censure; When they fast, I will not hear
their cry, and when they offer burnt offerings and an oblation I will not
accept them, but I will consume them by the sword, by the famine, and by the
pestilence. Who does not wonder at such dealing? Will God destroy them that
fast, and seek him in his own ordinance? Who would not dispute it, and
complain with Jeremiah? Ah Lord God! behold the Prophets say unto them, ye
shall not see the sword, but I will give you assured peace. Who thinks not,
but the Prophets might well conclude that to the peoples comfort? But says the
Lord, do the Prophets give them such assurance? The Prophets prophecy lies in
my name, I sent them not, neither have I commanded them; they prophecy the
deceit of their heart, by sword and famine shall those Prophets be consumed. A
heavy doom! Who shall have encouragement hereafter to come unto thee, if they
that humble themselves before thee be rejected? But let us not plead, for God
is just. They fast, but they love to wander, they have not refrained their
feet. If they had sought rightly they should have been accepted; but now
resting in the work, they rather hasten, then prevent their fear. It is our
case, we settle our selves too much on the performance; when we have separated
a day to more solemn humiliation, we think we have done enough: and are
careless of the after duty. But this is to mock God, and God, because
mocked, will be more terrible. So it comes to pass, the day and business
which we intend for removal, brings a more assured sign of approach. Oh,
think not that it suffices to have fasted, unless the feet be refrained
from wandering.

5. The last ground which I purpose to present unto you, from whence you may
take notice of approaching evil, is, the withdrawing of Gods presence from
us. When God is pleased with a place or people, he shows his presence there;
He went before Israel in a cloud by day, and a pillar of fire by night, to
direct and safe conduct them in their journey. But when God had said, I will
not go up in the midst of thee; the people mourned at these evil tidings. We
may best find, when Gods presence is with-drawne, by acquaintance with the
signs of his presence.

The most ordinary, are the word and Sacraments duly and rightly administered;
thus we have what to rejoice in: but to deal more particularly, I shall
instance unto you four other signs.

1. Where God affords his presence, there is his Spirit in the ordinances; a
converting power accompanies the preaching of the word. But when the word is
without power, or men are rather made worse by preaching of it; then God is
withdrawing himself, and a storm follows. Behold, their ear is
uncircumcised, and they cannot hearken; Behold, the word of the Lord is unto
them a reproach, they have no delight in it, therefore I am full of the fury of
the Lord, I am weary with holding in, I will pour it out: Iere. 6.10.11. Oh!
it is the joint complaint of Ministers every where faithful and painful, that
they find not that spirit, and life, and powerfulness in the ordinance; but
men hearing, hear not, they despise the word, and few or none are converted by
it; which occasions their fear, that God purposes to be gone.

2. Where Gods presence is, there is abundance of sanctifying knowledge; so the
Covenant is, Ier. 31.34. They shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and
every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord; for they shall all know me from
the least of them, unto the greatest of them, says the Lord. But now we are
either generally ignorant, or unsanctified in our knowledge. The common number,
though after so much light, so many means, are yet as brutes before God;
Surely, they are poor, they are foolish, for they know not the way of the
Lord, nor the judgment of their God. Ier. 5.4. The Gentry that are heightend
by education, yet are generally skild only in the language of an horse or dog,
but are strangers unto saving mysteries. And for such as do know much, how
little do they know of Christ; while studious to spend their searches, upon
things rather curious than necessary? May we not fear, that the house exalted
above the hills shall be removed? Because the Nations flow not to it; nor
according to the promise, say; Come, let us go up to the mountain of the
Lord, and he will teach us of his ways: Esa. 2, 3.

3. Gods presence is attended by Holiness with unity. When a Church is in the
flourish, (as a Church does ever flourish, while the Beams or Radij of divine
presence are direct,) Holiness has a fresh beauty, and unity does attend on
Holiness; The Wolf and the Lamb feed together, and the Lion eats straw like
the Bullock. The united spirits of the faithful meet with the same affection
at the same worship, and as they serve one God, they serve him with one heart.
But we can now better lament, than remedy the want of these. Despised holiness
is embraced by few, and by them fearfully, not with a daring forehead: and
though men know it safe, to be holy, they think it a reproachful thing to be
counted holy. But besides our distraction is as general as our profaneness;
men that dare kneel upon the same threshold to beg mercy, are yet void of
mercy to one another. Love, Christian love, spiritual love, is abundantly
wanting. I would this City of yours did not witness it: that your now
customary and almost naturalized sidings did not fill your Preachers mouths
with complainings, sometimes their eyes with tears. But it is the disease of
every place, and can we look, that the holy God should abide with contemners
of holiness? That the God of peace should stay with us, when we agree not with
our selves?

4. Lastly, that I name no more, nor too much weary you; God manifests his
presence by his protection of a people, he spreads his garment over them for
their covering. Heretofore we have been the gaze of other Nations, all stood
admiring at our peace, that we might sing that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 76.1.
with but the change of names; In England is God known; His name is great in
our British Isles. We, we were long under the wing; but of late we have
found, that God is much gone from us; We have not seen him in our Counsels,
in our Armies, But I love not to press with an hard finger upon a sore; only
would entreat we would make use of these observations. Step out, see what ye
can discern, whether ye can yet discern the storm: I Will deal as Elijah did,
for I hear a sound of abundance of rain: let me desire you; Go up now,
look toward the Sea: Is there nothing? Go again, again seven times, be much
in observation, frequent in watchfulness. Can ye at length see the little
Cloud out of the Sea like a man's hand? That is warning enough: The heavens will
soon grow black with Clouds and wind; prepare the Charet, have, that the
rain stop not. If we find a sign, though but a little Cloud; let us make use
of that advantage by our watchfulness, labor to escape, and be hid with God.
Why do ye sit still? Assemble your selves, and let us enter into the defenced
Cities; Ier. 8.14. Let us make use of our privilege; If a storm rise, God
blows it; and there is shelter only in God. Are there any among the vanities
of the Gentiles that can cause rain? or can the heavens give showers? Art not
thou he O Lord our God? Therefore we will wait upon thee, for thou have made
all these things. Ier. 14.22. Be watchful, be watchful, see the Approaches:
But to what end, if we cannot escape? But watchfulness is the means to
escape, to be hid in the day of the Lords anger; and the believing watchful
have escaped; see the examples of Noah, Lot, the signed, Ezekiel 9.4. Of Jeremiah,
Ier. 40.3.4. Of Ebedmelech, Ier. 39.18. Or though we may be wrapped in the
judgment which we see, we shall yet be hid from the evil of the judgment;
Psalm. 91.10. for God has promised a special watch; we are graven on the
palms of his hand, Esa. 49.16. We shall not be forgotten, we cannot be lost.
I will not any further lengthen this Exhortation; but end with a third use.

Use 3. Let me apply it, as our Savior does, What I say to you, I say to all;
let all set upon the Duty, Watch. I cannot pass without a word in defense of
Brentius, who justly objects that Custom of the Church of Rome, that not all,
but only their Monks and Clergy are bound to observe (as they speak) the
Canonical hours. Bellarmine cavills at that objection, and would prove that
such only are to watch; 1. Because some are to be separated from other men to
preach, why not also to watch; chiefly considering the people busied in other
occasions cannot attend it. But his argument manifests, that he either
understands not, or will not, the nature of our holy vigilance. Though we
grant, Ministers are more specially, yet all are bound to it, as we have
explained it. 2. He reasons by similitude. A City has Sentinells purposely
appointed; so must the Church. But the similitude proves nothing: Are not all
bound to attend their souls, and not to neglect general care, to keep off
evil, so far as it lies in our power to prevent by prayer? I Will not stay you,
to examine Gratian, or the Canons of those two Counsels, that of Mentz, or
that other of Lateran under Leo the tenth, the matter is not worth the stay;
but will hasten with the method; 1. To you. 2. To all.


1. To you. Peter, James, John, and Andrew, the Ministers must watch. We must
be often upon the Tower, and then what we observe we must tell, to lift up
our voices like Trumpets, and to take all advantages to bring people to
Repentance.

2. To all. 1. Magistrates must believe the warning from the Ministry, and
being warned, use means of prevention. 2. All people generally; 1. In private;
They must observe, take things to heart, be seasonably humbled, be much in
prayer. 2. In public; They must by gestures and words give warning to one
another, that the Watch may the better be maintained. God hearkened and heard
it, They that feared the Lord spoke often one to another, Mal. 3.16. We must
exhort one another daily, lest any be hardened through the deceitfulness of
sin, Heb. 3.13. We must waken them that sleep, that they be not overtaken
with the Tempest; What meanest thou, O sleeper? Arise call upon thy God: Ion.
1.6. So Mordecai gave notice to Esther, and Esther to the Jews. This guard we
must put upon the places of our habitation, and it will be more safe, then the
Warding at your Citie-gates. For this conscionable practice, will be your
defense, and shall make your City strong, like that City in the Prophet, Eze:
48.30. etc. There shall be safety round about, and upon every Gate shall be
written, The Lord is there.

HOSEA 4.1.2. Hear the Word of the Lord, ye Children of Israel: for the Lord
has a Controversy with the Inhabitants of the Land, because there is no
truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the Land.

By swearing and lying, and killing and stealing, and committing adultery, they
break out, and blood touches blood.


WE have been upon the Watchtower, and have seen a Cloud from the Sea: The
signs of a coming Evil have easily been discovered and observed. We find
the Lord is displeased, for he has expressed his anger; now a good Method and
our own wisdom will both lead us, to find the cause of his displeasure; for
he is just, and will not be offended, unless provoked. Here is a Parallel; God
is at Controversy with Israel, and the reason of that Controversy.

The Sermon was preached at that time when blood touched blood, (if we may so
interpret that phrase in the second verse) when they did bandy for the Scepter,
and the Kingdom was gamed for by the sharpest weapon; that time, when they
waded through the blood of one another to the Throne: as the Tragical History
of Zachariah, Shallum, Menahem, Pekahiah, Pekah, Hoshea, is recorded, 2 King.
15.

It Is a judicial Act, the Prophet has a faciall office, and is besides a
pleader, God sits Judge, and pronounces sentence. The form of proceeding is
like process ecclesiastical; 1. The Citation, verse the first. 2. A threefold
accusation, in the four first verses. 3. The sentence given, in the fifth and
the verses following.

But I will not uncover more than I purpose to make use of, the two first
verses:

In them we have;

1. The Preface. It is some great thing, Hosea entends to deliver, that he
ushers it with such a form, Hear the word of the Lord ye Children of Israel.
Some Casuists move the Question, Whether a Preface may be used before a Sermon?
And answer, that ordinarily it is not convenient, as being not valued by
Orators more solid, as being the empty brag of men rather glorious than full,
as being if beside the purpose, against judgment, if agreeing with it, against
the Rule of Method. I consent, and like not the childish flourish, when by
selecting a Proverb, Apophthegme, or Story, men think they cast a better dye
and beauty upon the truth to be delivered. That common usual way of stopping
the mouths of Cavillers, by a few set speeches, and well compact phrases,
gathered out of witty Poets or applausiue Orators, may happily betray wit, but
will together betray a weakness unfit for the Majesty of divine doctrine;
Chiefly when a Preface is used, as a Trumpet before a Puppet-play, the
expectation makes it worse, so much the worse as the Trumpet was louder. Yet I
would not deny brief and occasional insinuations, fit explications of
Connection and dependancie, and it cannot be unlawful sometimes Captare
benevolentiam, to widen the entrance for the message; So does this Prophet
endeavor to make them attent, before he makes them acquainted with his Sermon.
He had argued against their sin, he had foretold them of their danger, they
continued secure, now he Cites them to Gods bar, and while he calls them
Children of Israel, he seasonably renews the memory of the Covenant, that the
Preface might render them, not only attent, but humble. There may be sometimes
a good use of Oratory and Preface; St. Paul beckens with his hand for silence,
and the Liturgy of the primitive Churches began with (...), to move the people
to attend, and continue reverent.

2. The Message. In that we consider these particulars;

1. There is a Controversy: Hear ye the word of the Lord, for the Lord has
a Controversy. It is not I, but the Lord that expostulates with you; There is
a suite of the Kings peace against you. God has his action, or suite, or
process, or plea, against us; all those words are expressiue: and God himself
speaks in such a form, My spirit shall not always strive with man. Genesis 6.3.

2. The parties in the Controversy; God with the Inhabitants of the Land. That
gives at least an oblique and tacit touch upon their ingratitude, and Gods
goodness, they were still Inhabitants of that Land which they had forfeited.

3. The cause of the Controversy: Because there is no truth, nor mercy, etc.
The form is thus, in the Civilians instance; Titius and Maevius contract and
agree, Maevius breaks the Articles contracted, Titius sues him. God had
covenanted with Israel, Israel stipulated; The Covenant on the part of God was
performed, They were Inhabitants at present of the promised Land; on Isreal's
part it held not; The breach is objected.

1. Their sins.

2. The Aggravations.

1. Their sins; of omission and commission

1. Of omission;

1. No truth, that is, no civil Faith; for Emeth is not taken Metaphysically
here.

2. No mercy, that is, no inward pittifulnesse, or outward relieving; for
Chesed signifies both mercifulness and beneficence.

3. No knowledge of God, that is, neither fear nor reverence. So Thargum
Ionathae renders it, Neque qui ambulent in timore domini; This sums up the
other sins, they break the Law, as if there were no God; there is no truth,
nor mercy; in a word, to give the ground of all, there is no knowledge of God
in the Land.

2. Of Commission.

1. No truth, but,

1. Swearing.

2. Lying: Both to color fraudulent and untrue dealings.

2. No mercy, but,

1. Quoad corpus, in respect of life and safety; Killing.

2. Quoad bena, in respect of goods and estate, stealing.

3. Quoad famam, in respect of credit and reputation, Committing adultery.

2. These were their sins, secondly, we have proposed the aggravations of
their sins;

1. Their boldness in Sinning; They break out, they do Transire terminum, as
the word notes, they go over or beyond their bound. No hedges of Law or
Discipline could keep them in order or quiet obedience.

2. The multitude of their sins; Blood touches blood; (...), as in the
translation of the Seventie. Ionathas gives a double sense; Generam filios ex
uxoribus proximorum suorum, and aggregant peccata peccatis. Aben-Ezra would
restrain it to the sin of frequent murders, the blood of one slain man
touching the blood of another slain. But while the Thargum enterprets it of
Incest, Aben-Ezra of Murder, they are both too strained; but the mind of the
Prophet seems rather to denote their multitude, that sins were chained
together, heaped upon one another, which is to have the hands full of blood,
according to the phrase of another Prophet. Esa. 1.15.

I have kept you too long in the clearing of a Text not difficult, all that I
entend to make use of in it, I shall reduce to one general head;

That sin causes Gods Controversy with a Land.

The Scripture abounds in the proof of this doctrine. Hear ye, O mountains,
the Lords Controversy, and ye strong foundations of the earth, for the Lord
has a controversy with his people, and he will plead with Israel. But
wherefore is the suit? or how occasioned? The Lord does not quarrel, but their
ingratefulnesse and rebellion, forces a Complaint: Oh my people, what have I
done unto thee! and wherein have I wearied thee? testify against me. Thus we
find Hosea's Sermon in the mouth of Micah, Mic. 6.2.3. And before that, the
same Hosea had delivered the same message: Plead with your mother, plead: for
she is not my wife, neither am I her husband; and the reason was, because her
adulteries were between her breasts. Hos. 2.2. And though Jeremiah laments
Gods stroke, he cannot challenge Gods Justice, but every where cleares that:
For the multitude of her transgressions, her children are gone into Captivity.
Lam. 1.5. The joy of our heart is ceased, our dance is turned into mourning:
the Crown is fallen from our head, woe unto us that we have sinned. Lam.
5.15.16. David is express: Fools, because of their transgression, are
afflicted. Psalm. 107.17. ^e not press more testimonies, yet they are not
unneedfull, to answer proud man's Question. Rebellious man, sometimes questions
Gods dealings, and God answers, If thou say in thy heart, Wherefore come these
things upon me? For the greatness of thine iniquity, are thy skirts
discovered, and thy heels made bare. Ierem. 13.22. But we shall see it more
confirmed, if we touch at the grounds of this Truth.

1. Sin breaks Covenant, and therefore no wonder it procures a suite. When
God Covenants, he Articles with man; He sets a Law, and Articles for obedience;
sin is, (...), a transgression of Articles, a departure from the Set-Law; and
God must needs be offended at such a Breach.

2. Sin breaks love-tyes, and when sacred relations are slighted, it not
barely occasions but provokes unto a suit. For the bond of friendship, for the
sake of a known amity, God would not have sin entertained of his Leaguers:
but when sin is welcomed, it separates God; Your iniquities have separated
between you and your God; he was you God in an holy relation, but iniquity
has put a distance, he becomes a stranger, that was wont to entertain you
friendly; he that was wont to afford a smiling face, now distasts you, your
sins have hid his face from you: Esaias 59.2. Gods dealings with man are
expressed in his own expression, of his carriage toward Ephraim, Hos. 11.4. He
draws us with cords of a man, with bands of love, deals gently with us, not
tyrannically; he is to us, as they that take off the yoke, he is wise and
pitiful to ease us when over-wearied; and he lays meat unto us, he is
plentiful and provident for our necessities: these are ties of love; and God
so speaks, as if he were not at quiet within himself, as being just, yet loath
to be severe; How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee,
Israel? How shall I make thee as Admah? Ephraim has deserved Sodoms
destruction, but the Lords repentings are kindled together. What then Shall
Ephraim? Shall Israel be secure? Nay, if we are bent to back sliding from him,
He will have a controversy, as is plainly enough discovered in the second
verse of the twelfth Chapter of the same Hosea.

2. Sin is offensive unto God, and so it becomes an action of trespass.
There are bonds of neighborhood, and in respect of the keeping of these, we
are said to be righteous unto one another, and an offense against these, is
called an unrighteousness, as being a trespass against the rights of another;
now the plea that arises from this, is called an action of trespass. Sin is
not only an (...), a transgrossion against Covenant, but also an (...), an
unrighteousness, that which offends God. God is holy, sin makes us nastie;
God endures not such, but has his controversy, his action of trespass
against them.

4. Sin dishonours God, that as it were he loses by it, and therefore has an
action of damage. The damage is that which the Jurors give up in their
verdict, as an expense recoverable. That word which is used among some parts of
our English Nation, skath, seems to come of the Germane word, Schad; and that
of the Hebrew (...), schadad, he wasted. But thus properly it cannot be spoken
concerning God, for as our goodness extends not to him, so our sin can make no
wast upon him. We cannot make him less excellent, or less glorious; so that
on the part of God, there cannot be expensaelitis, as the Civilians speak; God
can be no looser, yet unto our judgment of things, he complains that he is
dishonored, that he is wearied by our sins. I have not caused thee to serve
with an offering, nor wearied thee with incense; but thou have made me to serve
with thy sins, thou have wearied me with thine iniquities, Esaias 43.23.24. In
this sense, God is dammaged, and has his action. I hasten to the application
in two uses.

1. Use. If sin be the cause of Gods controversy with a Land, we have then
found the reasons of Gods stroke on ours. We cannot but see that God is
offended, he has often cited us, sometimes attached us with arrests, and
proceeded against us. A little observation will tell us, and we need no more
knowledge then the Egyptian Magicians had to discern and say, This is the
finger of God. And we may fitly use that speech of Moses, Numb. 16.46. There is
wrath gone out from the Lord, the plague is begun. There is much wrath gone
out, many plagues: decay of trading in a time of peace: general poverty in all
parts of the Land: great houses empty and decayed: distractions at the Holme:
absence from public employments: errors in obtruded tenants. I will not
unbutton Marius before the Senate to show more skars; to show which, were in
stead of oratorie, Quid opus est verbis ubi vulnera clamant? wounds speak with
a peircing Rhetoric. Only take notice of the pestilence, it is much abroad,
and now come near to us in these more Northern parts. Is God unjust? or have
we not merited what we feel? Nay; we will clear him, while we condemn our
selves: For the transgression of Jacob is all this, and for the sins of the
house of Israel, Mic. 1.5. Sin and punishment are inseparable; and to
righteousness and sin does Solomon resolve the exaltation and ruin of a
people; Pro. 14.34. Righteousness exalts a Nation, but sin is a Reproach to
any people. I know that no time has been without Complaints, and every age
has still been thought the worst, so that it has been the glory of every
one that has thought himself eloquent and able to speak, to speak against
the time. I love not peevish and unnecessary aggravations, for it is easy to
accuse and make a Satyr. Yet it is not lawful to cover our sins, neither is
it more unlawful than unprofitable, for he that covers his sins shall not
prosper; The rule is no less true of national than of personal sins; oh
that we could so take notice of sins, as to grieve for them! so to discover
them as to remove them. Every age has been accounted worst, ours is truly
so. You will consent unto it, if you turn over the leaves of Histories, the
Records of former times, and compare age with age, sins with sins; What
care, what light, what means, have we sinned against? Our Dunghill has sent
forth a greater stench, a worse savor, by how much the Sun has more and
longer shone upon it; and we are therefore worse, because we might have been
better. It were profitable to spend sometime upon History and Comparison, but I
cannot entend that work, because the method of the Text leads me to another;
to the discovery of our sins, by those of Israel; and in that same order,
first of our sins, secondly, of the aggravations.

1. Our sins of omission, parallel, if not much exceed theirs.

1. There is no Truth; Terras Astraea reliquit, sweet Truth together with
righteous dealing has well-nigh forsaken us. Where shall we seek for Truth,
with hope or encouragement to find it? Not in the Court, there they tread upon
one another breasts to rise; not in Cities, there they bargain away their
Consciences; Not in the Country, there the plain have learned to deceive, and
more easily to deceive because more plain; we cannot find Truth in fields,
in shops, nay (which is the heavy misery of Apostatizing times) scarce in our
Pulpits. Ah! Beloved, how unanswerable are we to the Gospel of Truth, to the
way of Truth made known unto us? Our tongues have little Truth in their
ordinary expression, it is the only age of Complement and formal
protestations, when men sell words at a cheap price, and think it enough to
speak well, as if man were made for nothing but a promise. There is as little
in our hands, why else do we handle the false measures and balances of
deceit? But the heart is the storehouse of unfaithfulness, men are of double
minds, and therefore no wonder if of double dealings; rather Foxes than men,
full of craftiness and deceit.

2. There is no Mercy. Mercy which is that sweet bond of amity, and fastens
man to man; That which has the promise, To the merciful thou will show thy
self merciful; That which our Savior commended in the Parable as highly
pleasing unto God, Mercy is neglected. There is no mercy in our Censures, while
we sit Judges over every man's actions, and tax them, yea condemn them without
hearing. It is commonly the disease of weak unbusied people, who being not
furnished with ability for other employment, nor with conscience to be much in
their own watch, delight to be doing what is most easy, to censure others.
Who shall live free and untainted, if such undiscerning men have the chair,
and give the sentence? There is no mercy in our Reports, we care not how we
wound the reputations and tear the credits of men not offending. There is but
little charity, where there is an aptness to entertain all loose and
scandalous reports, and to scatter them as busily, as we greedily entertaind
them. There is no mercy in our dealings, witness the poor neglected,
miserably neglected by you that have the charge and power in your hands to
relieve them, notwithstanding his Majesty's late Injunctions, and the extreme
necessity; that I name not other kinds of unmercifulness, wherein men show
themselves Tigers and Wolves, rather than men.

3. There is no knowledge of God in the Land. It is a knowing time, and men
abound in Science; but who knows God rightly? The profane know him not, else
they would not dare to profane him in his Name, in his Ordinances, in the time
of his worship. The merciless know him not, they would else extend their
bowels of mercy. The deceitful know him not, they would else follow Truth.
But briefly, our want of obedience argues our want of knowledge of him; and
therefore the Apostle joins them, and explicates the one by the other, 2 These.
1.8. The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven in flaming fire, taking
vengeance on them that know not God, that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

2. Our sins of Commission are likewise in the parallel.

1. Against Truth:

1. There is swearing. Men vie oaths with words; and are then most witty, when
they can swear with the best invention. The godly man's Character is, that he
fears an Oath, Eccles. 9.2. But your ordinary use witnesses, you do but too
much love them. Foul mouths! that dare with those tongues blaspheme God, which
were given therewith to bless him. Oaths, new, invented, high, rash, solemn,
against Conscience, are every day heaped. May we not fear the truth of that
threat, Ierem. 23.10. Because of swearing the Land shall mourn?

2. There is lying. Sure the Papists learned much doctrine from Plato, and more
specially in that, That a lie might be lawful, to save a Citizen, or deceive
an enemy. Nature easily subscribes to this, and allows of dissimulation as a
necessary virtue for a man of business; so our dealing is more dishonest than
Machiavels rule, That fraud is detestable in other actions, but in War
laudable. Unjust men count it laudable in every action, and dare dissemble, not
with men only, but with their own souls, with God; and think they never
work wisely, but when, as it was the brag of Tiberius, they walk invisibly.
Dissemblings are real lies; there is another distinction of them, Merry,
officious, hurtful; Some are patronized by some, but by strict rule they are
all unlawful. But because I know the disease of the place where I speak, I
will rather touch that, the witty malicious lie of report. Men are like the
Athenians still desirous of new matter, and are witty only in inventing.
There are a busy gadding generation, that are the Incendiaries the firebrarnds
of Parishes and neighbour-hoods, what they hear at one house, they broach at
another with mixture and additions of their own, to the breach of charity and
that peace, which we labor to build up, by the Gospel of peace. This is the
wicked man that walks with a froward mouth, frowardness is in his heart, he
devises mischief continually, he seweth discord. Prove. 6.12.14. But God will
contend with such, for he hates them: Of those seven things which are an
abomination to the Lord, five meet in this man; A lying tongue, An heart that
devises wicked imaginations, Feet that be swift in running to mischief, A
false witness that speaks lies, and he that sows discord among brethren:
So Solomon reckons and discovers them: Pro. 6.16.17.18.19.

2. Against Mercy:

1. There is killing. The Land reekes with blood, many unseene and unrevenged
murders lie upon us. Blood has a voice; The voice of thy brothers blood
cries unto me from the ground, Genesis 4.10. said God to the guilty bloud-staind
Cain. What should I speak of the murders of the heart, unjust anger, hatred,
envy? Of the outward murders of the tongue, brawlings, revilings, cursings,
slanderings? Of the hand, the murder of the body, the murder of the souls of
others? neither time, nor I think the Text would admit of enlargement upon
such a method. It is the shedding of blood is here indicted.

2. There is stealing. Thefts are as various as men's businesses, and inventions
to pervert and abuse business. It were not unfit on a day when we are before
the Bar, to arraigne the noted theife, the civil theife, the Church theife;
but it were to be witty rather than serious, and the majesty of a Sermon
admits not of triflings. Only I would such whom it concerns would in the
fear of God take notice, how both odious and dangerous, deceit in our
Callings, and oppression, are. A false balance is an abomination to the Lord,
Prove. 11.1. But more expressly in the Prophet Amos, Chap. 8.4.5.6.7. Hear
this, O ye that swallow up the needy, even to make the poor of the Land to
fail; saying, When will the new Moon be gone, that we may sell Corn? and the
Sabbath that we may set forth Wheat, making the Ephah small and the Shekel
great, (selling a little measure for a great price) and falsifying the
balances by deceit? That we may buy the poor for silver, and the needy for a
pair of shoes; yea and sell the refuse of the Wheat. But hear and tremble at
the doom; The Lord has sworn by the excellency of Jacob, surely I will
never forget any of their works: shall not the Land tremble for this? Let
oppressors be warned, that are wont to grind the faces of the poor.

3. There is committing Adultery. The breach of Chastity is by many ways:
uncleanness is that filthy, yet general sin that makes the Land yield a
stench into the nosthrills of God, multitudes of families being polluted with a
bastard brood. It would offend you, to be led with Ezekiel into the Chambers;
and it cannot but be irksome to know, that in a Land where the pure Gospel is
taught, there should be stews, like the close Cells of Tyberius in his filthy
obscure Capraea. It Is a sin too much neglected, by them that have power to
punish it, but however, such shall not go unpenanced; for God has threatened,
Whore-mongers and Adulterers God will judge. Israel joined himself unto
Baal-peor, and the anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel. Number. 25.3.
Baal-peor is thought by Origin, Ierom, Isidore, and some others, to be that
unclean Priapus, and called by the Latins Idolum Tentiginis: I rather consent
to that opinion, (besides the whole Story which is plain to prove it,) because
of that word in the verse, Israel joined himself: the word (...) signifies
such a joining as in the yoke, and therefore the Apostle having respect to this
word, renders it, (...), be not unequally yoked, 2 Cor. 6.14. yet it is taken
also to express filthiness: and therefore the Prophets in detestation of this
Idol, use another word, and call it Shame; Hos. 9.10. They went to Baal-peor,
and separated themselves unto that Bosheth, unto that shame. Which the Thargum
Ionathae renders yet more plainly; And separated themselves Ad illud pudendum
Idolum. So we have the word likewise Ierem. 11.13, Ye set up Altars to that
shameful thing, even unto Baal. And the Greek Translators read that place, 1
King. 18.25. Elijah said to the Prophets of shame. Thus it appears, Isreal's
sin besides Idolatry was uncleanness; But does God suffer it? It is added;
Israel joined himself unto Baal-peor, and the anger of the Lord was kindled
against Israel. It Is that sin which he will revenge, and severely. So the
forenamed place, Hos. 9.10. may be read in this sense, to signify the
punishment which God will inflict: They went to Baal-peor, and separated
themselves (...) to shame, that is, to their own shame. I the rather enlarged
my self upon this, because the sin has some pleaders and patrons, as if it
were venial, and not so heinous as severer Preachers seem to make it. But as
it was spoken in another case, Ah! Let Baal plead for himself. To defend
unchastitie in the least measure, were to be a Baud to prostitutes. They are
loose, ungovernd, wanton times; we may fear God may send a sweeping
destruction, to make clean a loathsome, nastie, foul-spotted people.

2. Thus we see in them the parallel of our sins; secondly, let us now take
notice of their, of our aggravations.

1. Our boldness in sinning. We break out, no bonds, no Law, no discipline
restraines us: But as we have seen a mighty furious Torrent, when the proud
waves grow strong with the addition of new waters, it swells over the banks,
makes breaches, and rushes over what ever lies to hinder the course; So, and
much more are we mad after sin, and neglect all Law made to oppose or curb
our violence. I think that it is the Metaphor, the Prophet here uses, They
break out. Job has another, and a fit one, of the Horse prepared to the
Battle, it cares not for the noise of the Trumpets, for the clattering of
weapons and armor, for the confused Cries of men wounded, but ventures on
without fear; So the bold sinner rushes upon evil, and cares only to sin,
without fear of an after-reckoning. Men are not now bashful to offend, but
though wicked works are called works of darkness, they are committed in the
day, in the sight of the Sun. It aggravated the fault of Absalom, that he lay
with his Fathers Concubines before all the people; That Zimri and Cosbi
worshipped Peor before the face of Moses in the sight of all the Congregation.
Heretofore men blushed when they sinned; I have heard men say, that the
extortions of griping Officers were called Gratuities for expedition, but now
those Worms dare speak loud the language of Elyes sons: If any say, Fail
not to burn the fat presently, and then take as much as thy soul desires:
They are ready to answer, Nay but thou shall give it me now, and if not I
will take it by force. 1 Samuel 2.16. The Apostle intimates, that shame attends
sin, What fruit had ye then of those things whereof ye are now ashamed?
Romans 6.21. But where is that ingenuitie which Paul found among the Romans?
Where that modesty? Men are not ashamed of whoring, drinking, swearing,
envying; but as the Apostle in somewhat another sense, Gal. 5.19. Now the
works of the flesh are manifest. Men sin with courage, with confidence, with
violence; They break out.

2. Our multitude of sins, Blood touches blood, a general profaneness has
spread it self. The sins of former times were but as drops, or as small
gliding brooks; ours as Torrents, broad deep Chanells by the confluence of
many waters. Some men that are not old, remember, when Drunkards were as Owls
gazed on and hooted at by boys, now every Alehouse has a full crowd, and
(which I would the Magistrates that are present would take notice of) the
Benches there are thronged, when sometimes the seats here are more empty.
Oaths were more rare, now they are vied with words, in a neglectiue manner men
use them and forget that they use them. It were not an easy matter to name
those many sins that with ease are committed: wastfulnesse, pride,
wantonness, worldliness, contempt of the Word, slighting the Ordinances, and
other the like, are beyond Arithmeticke. I cannot marshall them into their
ranks, because of the throng; Blood touches blood.

3. We are of Israel; El is the name of God; The name of God is named upon us.
It were not so much for enemies, for strangers to offend; but as we are, to
offend, is not only to displease, but to reproach our God. It Is the relation,
that makes the dishonor redound to him. A foolish son dishonors his
father, and is a shame to his mother: and therefore a shame, because a son.
We all have indignation at it, that we hear of some about us that live
disordered, but it does not more particularly touch us then others; but if the
son of any of us, should lead the disorder, this would touch with discredit,
as well as indignation. It is our profession, our religion, which we are
unanswerable unto, that dishonours God and aggravates our sin. Here is the
strength of the aggravation, and motive to repent; The name of Solomon is named
upon the Shulamite; and therefore, Return, return O Shulamite, return,
return. Cant. 6.13. God is named upon his people; Hear the word, O Israel.

4. We are Inhabitants; and what does more aggravate sin, then to sin
against strong engagements; the Lord challenges such unkindnesse of
unnaturalness, and exclaimes against it to the witness of insensible
creatures; Hear O heavens, and give ear O earth; I have nourished and brought
up children, and they have rebelled against me. Esaias 1.2. Bounty tyeth us to
the observance of a benefactor: what Land, a Land made happy by the Gospel,
and a continued peace together with the Gospel, yet we rebel. This is the
last aggravation in the Text, The Lord has a controversy with the Inhabitants
of the Land. I have done with the first, and proceed to a second application.

2. Use. As we have found out, so let us endeavor to remove the cause of
wrath. Punishment is the shadow while sin stands unremoved; and if that be
removed, this continues not. The controversy is Gods, and it is not possible
for us to resist God, he has many ways to plead his own cause; to accomplish
his fury, as himself speaks and uses that phrase. Ezekiel. 6.12. He that is
far off shall die of the pestilence, and he that is near shall fall by the
sword; and he that remains and is besieged shall die by the famine; thus will
I accomplish my fury upon them. To prevent such fury, men have usually recourse
unto their several strengths, for all men frame unto themselves some strength
where they may refuge themselves from danger. The Idolaters strength is his
Idol, but that cannot deliver from God; and therefore it follows in the
thirteenth verse; Then shall ye know that I am the Lord, when their slain men
shall be among their Idols round about their altars, the place where they did
offer sweet savor to all their Idols. We cannot prevail by standing out; as
God has his action against us, so his processes to fetch us in. There is a
capias, or exigi facias, in causes of treason or felony, and God pleases to
keep a legal course in his writs; he begins with a venire facias, if we
answer not, he sends a capias pluries; but (not to triflle or play with the
metaphor) I mean, we cannot be out of Gods reach. And when we appear, there
is no contending, for he is Judge of the cause, and the Court is his; and shall
we contend with the Judge in his own Court? We are sure to be cast: yet he
is not unjust to make a partial decision; but we are therefore sure to be cast
out, because he is just. How then? or what course shall we take? We must first
work on his will (which I would have entertained in the sense I mean it, and
shall explain it,) and after upon his power. We cannot overcome the Lord,
unless the Lord be pleased to show which way he may be overcome: so Samson
dealt with Dalilah; (if it be not presumption to compare this matter with such
a type,) Samson was strong beyond the Philistines power, till at length himself
told where his strength lay, and how the otherwise weak might overcome him.
God has revealed the way to make us conquerors, we must meet him by
humiliation and repentance. This is our wisdom to be submisse; By submission,
God winnes of us, and we of God; God quarrels but for his glory; he strikes
us to make us humble, that we acknowledge him our Sovereign; when we are
submisse, God has tamed us, and we give God challenges, his honor in our
subjection and obedience.

That which we strive for, is our safety, submission prevails for that, for
God leaves to strike when we leave to be stubborn: By this means, both are
Conquerors, and both Triumph. Let us set upon this remedy: Gather your selves
together, before the decrees bring forth, before the day of the Lords anger
come upon you, seek ye the Lord all ye meek upon the earth. Zeph. 2.1.2.3.
The meek or the broken, (for so the word sounds like the Hebrew (...) Match,
attrivit or marcuit) must seek the Lord, they shall be hid in the day of the
Lords anger. Observe what God promises to our encouragement, Levit.
26.40.41.42. If they shall confess their iniquity, that they have walked
contrary unto me, if their uncircumcised hearts shall be humbled, and they
accept of the punishment of their iniquities, then I will remember my Covenant,
and I will remember the Land. If our untamed hearts could bow and relent
before him, God would lay down the suite. Will ye see what he will do, in
what he has done? The instance is in the Prophet; Iere. 31.18.20. I have
surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus; Thou have chastised me, and I
was chastised as a Bullock unaccustomed to the yoke, turn thou me and I
shall be turned, thou art the Lord my God. Is Ephraim my dear son? Is he a
pleasant child? For since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him
still, therefore my bowels are troubled for him, I will surely have mercy upon
him, says the Lord. Look back into the Scriptures, upon the triumphs of
humble supplicants; see David remooving the pestilence, Iehosaphat the
invasion, the Ninivites their destruction; and then learn manhood in the
Combat. Oh that we could be truly humble! that we were truly reformed, that
Magistrates would cleanse the Augaean stable, that Ministers would be like the
Baptist, burning and shining Lights, burning as well as shining, that all
people would be answerable to the means they have, to the Gospel they
profess; that we would try God in the due performance of a right Fast, that
we might hope that in Haggai might be spoken to us, From this day I bless
you: Hag. 2.19. Let us meet the Lord, send forth to meet him, that he may be
pacified. The Lord is marching on, and he drives like Iehu furiously, learn
Iorams wisdom; Ioram said, Take an Horseman and send to meet him, and let him
say, Is it peace? 2 King. 9.17. Let us send out, while God is in the way, in
the way of his judgments; let us enquire what he means by these visitations,
that he comes so near us; let us enquire, Is it peace? Is it peace? And
because we are sure to receive that answer, not so much harsh as righteous;
What peace, so long as the whoredoms of Iezabel remain? Therefore let us cast
out Iezabel, the ground of the quarrel; and not go forth to resist God, but
go forth to fall down before him. It was a good policy in that servant, Mat.
18.27. When his Master commanded payment should be made, the servant unable to
pay, and more unable to contend, fell down and worshipped him, saying, Lord
have patience with me, and I will pay thee all. We only fail in that, we
cannot promise we will pay him all; we can only beg, Lord have patience
with us. When God maintains his action and proceeds, let us propitiate him by
lamentation, Lord we submit, we yield the cause; where proud rebels would be
stubborn to plead for Rights, we only are wife to beg for favor. This must
be our way; let us lament; and as the phrase in Amos is very expressiue, Let us
call the skillful in lamentation to lament; Amos 5.16. As in other things,
there is a skill in the performance of holy duties; many Fast and yet prevail
not, because though they do the work, they find not the right way to do it;
he laments skilfully that laments humbly; thus shall our Fast be profitable,
God appeased, and the Controversy laid down.

GENESIS 32.9.11. And Jacob said, O God of my Father Abraham, Deliver me I
pray thee from the hand of my brother.


IF man have a Controversy with us, it is because God has one; yet this is
the Christians advantage, to have recourse to God though at controversy, to
have relief against another suite. The Text is in the eighth Section of the
Hebrew Doctors Lectures, beginning at the third Verse of this, and continues to
the end of the thirtie-sixth Chapter. This part of the Parashu is the Story of
what befell Jacob in his way, the relation of two dangers, His fear of Esau,
His wrestling with the Angel. While we live, we are upon our journey, and
while upon our journey we are in the war, and have Catenata certamina, new
on-sets, frequent Encounters. Jacob had hot Combatings, he fears Esau, and
thinks himself forsaken, he wrestles with an Angel, and apprehends God as an
enemy, yet he continues in the field and prevails in both. I Will not touch upon
the Story, to lead you on to what I have chosen, and mean to dwell upon; The
first part of the Story, is Jacobs going home-ward; we may observe in it.

1. His meeting of the Angels, ver. 1.2. Jacob went on his way, and the Angels
of God met him; There were an Host of men with Esau, and here an Army of Angels
with Jacob; God every where affords defense unto his own: O taste and see that
the Lord is good. The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear
him, and delivers them. Psalm. 34.7.8. Gods Host is a sure guard, Jacob called
it Machanaim, The place of two Armies; there is safety upon either hand,
defense upon both sides, for them that trust in God. As God divided the red
Sea, so he does his Army; The waters were a wall upon the right hand, and a
wall upon the left; so, because dangers are on every hand, on the right hand
from prosperity, on the left from trouble, therefore every place is Machanaim
to the godly, a place of two Camps. Mercy proportioned unto danger, a
compassing mercy, He compasses with mercy as with a Shield.

2. His Embassy to his brother Esau; verse. 3.4.5. Whether is he more wise or
humble? He was to pass through his brothers Country, and fears lest perhaps
as yet he was not reconciled, and therefore makes trial and prepares his way
by a message; It Is a message of great and imitable modesty. Let us deal so
toward one another, chiefly with our offended God, send to him and propitiate
him with such a present as may be acceptable to him.

3. His fear at the return of his messengers, ver. 6.7. His servants tell,
they had no answer to return, unless what they observed were a return of
answer; We only saw great alteration upon our message, they make preparation
of great Forces, Esau comes forth to meet thee with four hundred men. They
spoke much in such an answer; And Jacob feared greatly. Jacob had newly
escaped Laban, and now he fears to fall into the hands of Esau; What
inconstancy is there in humane condition? What variety of Changes? Vices
rerum instabiles. Yet that he feared greatly, was his infirmity. The Saints
have many infirmities, there were two great sins, in this one carriage, too
much suspicion, and too much fear. It was his sin to be so suspicious,
specially of a brother; He comes forth with four hundred men; might not the
great preparation be intended as well for Jacobs honor as destruction? What
did Jacob know, but his brother meant to grace him with a large entertainment?
Charity is favorable in its interpretation of other men's dealings. Yet if he
had cause of suspicion, what cause had he of so much fear? Esau comes with
four hundred men; But what are four hundred men, to two hosts of Angels? His
power was greater than the adverse power, if he could see it and make use of
it. Had he already forgotten Machanaim? The immoderatenesse of our fear and
distrust arises from this, that we see not God near and able, a present
help in the time of need.

4. The means he uses for his defense; they are two.

1. The division of his family; verse. 7.8. A good and commendable policy;
only here is some scruple, he seems to have forgot or neglected the right
method, he first divides his family and then prays, who should first have
prayed and then divided his family. It Is true. God first is to be sought, that
Heathen saw it from whom we had the rule, A Jove principium; yet some sudden
businesses sometimes admitting not delay, though they cannot defer our
ejaculatory, they may our solemn prayers. Thus Jacob neglected not the better
remedy, which was,

2. His prayer, verse. 9.10.11.12. Where we may observe for the present, to the
purpose that I entend; 1. That he prays. 2. His Arguments in prayer.


1. That he prays. Jacobs fear puts him upon any course for safety, but his
Religion directs him to a lawful course; his wisdom to the best, And Jacob
said, O God of my Fathers, Deliver me I pray thee. I could not easily take my
self off, from the sweer meditation on the former passages; but there I meant
but to gleane as I passed; but the field where our work lies, where the
harvest is, Is this Conclusion; That prayer is the remedy of our Distresses.

Jacob fears and prays. When he has divided his family, yet he has not done
enough, his refuge is prayer, there he rests.

I Will follow this Conclusion with this method, explication, confirmation,
application.

1. In our first work, explication; two things are to be cleared.

1. What Prayer is. 2. How it yields remedy.
1. What Prayer is; I confess it is a task not so fitly afforded from this,
as some other Texts; yet without much transgression of art, we may enlarge our
selves upon the discovery of the nature of prayer, specially on a day of
prayer. The internal essential common nature of prayer, is, that it is a
religious motion unto God; It is religious because ex charitate, for Religion
it self is ex charitate, as in that the School has well expressed; and that it
is a motion, is concluded; some say of the understanding, Ascensus intellectus;
some say of the mind, Mentis ascensus: what needs that difference; It is the
souls motion, the motion of the will. But that is not full enough; I like that
description of our Countriman in his Medulla; Prayer is the religious motion or
representation of our will before God, that God may as i^ were be affected with
it. So hearing and praying differ, in hearing, our wills are moved; in praying,
as it were Gods; but that we shall clear here-after. For the farther
explication of the present, I shall only make use of some recollected
thoughts, which I affoorded to my own Congregation, the afternoon of the last
Sabbath in the ordinary way of my Catechizing, to speak of the Essentialls to
prayer, which are principally these five.

1. That we must pray unto God alone. 2. That we must pray in the name of
Christ. 3. That we must pray by the assistance of the Spirit. 4. That we must
pray in a right manner. 5. That we must pray for things lawful.
1. It is essential unto prayer, that we pray unto God alone. Prayer is, In
auxilium vocare; when we pray, we seek for help without our selves; now God
only suites unto that. He that we pray unto, must be infinitely knowing, to
see all that spread abroad their hands, to hear all supplications; and
infinitely powerful, to help all that need and call. In regard of the one,
God has a name from it, God that hears prayers; O thou that hear prayer,
to thee shall all flesh come. Psalm. 65.2. In regard of the other, God
challenges our prayer, Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will
deliver. Psalm. 50.16. It was nature which taught this to the heathen Mariners,
They prayed every man to his god, and call unto Jonah that he should cry unto
his God. Ion. 1.5.6. But this need not stay me for it is granted on all hands,
but where Covetousness has invented a doctrine of gain.

2. We must pray in the name of Christ; it is of necessity, else we pray but
as Creatures, not as Christians: The creature (as a creature) has recourse to
the principle of being for the Been esse, and continuance of being; But the
Christian has his approach in Christ, In whom we have boldness and access
with confidence by the faith of him. Ephesians. 3.12. This is our confidence in our
access, for the promise is to this; Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my
Name, he will give it you, hitherto ye have asked nothing in my Name, ask and
ye shall receive. Ioh. 16.23.24. Some think, Daniel who saw the mystery
though the Clouds, made use of it, in that form, Dan. 9.17. O our God, hear
the prayer of thy servant, for the Lords sake. We all know it, and with such
forms are wont to conclude our prayers, but we are not real in it to mind
it truly in all our petitions. The Law is in Leviticus, That if a man kill an
Ox, or a Lamb, or a Goat, and bring it not unto the door of the Tabernacle
to the Priest, blood shall be imputed unto that man. Though the offering be
good in it self, an Ox, or a Lamb, yet if it be not brought unto the Priest
to offer, God is so far from accepting it, that he accounts it a murder
rather than a sacrifice. When in our prayers we express our selves sorrowful
for our sins, truly humbled in the sense of them, earnest and importunate
for pardon and cure; These are good, but not enough; if we come not in the name
of Christ, all the rest is to offer without the Priest, and then neither we
nor it are accepted; for Prayer is Gods Ordinance unto us as we stand in
Covenant with God, and we can only come unto him as in the Covenant. How then
without Christ? But in his name confidently; Lord, here I bring my sacrifice, I
am unworthy to offer it, accept it only from the hands of the Priest, in the
name of my Christ, in whom I am bold to draw near and offer. This only
presents us with acceptance; It is not the excellency, or the fervency, or the
holiness of our prayers, (if these could be imagined possibly to stand without
Christ,) but Christ that makes them accepted. So is the Law in another place of
the same Book, Levit. 5. from the sixth verse to the thirteenth, That if a man
bring a Lamb, a Kid of the Goats, the Priest must offer it; or if not able to
bring a Lamb, he bring two turtle Doves or two young Pigeons, the Priest must
offer them; or if not able to bring two turtle Doves, if he bring the tenth
part of an Epha of fine flower, the Priest shall offer it, and it shall be an
atonement. The Lamb is a richer offering, yet it is not accepted without the
Priest; But with the Priest, a poor small offering, a small measure of flower,
the tenth part of an Ephath, is an atonement. Conceive all the excellencies of
a prayer, the composure of words, the weight of matter, the heat of delivery;
all are despised things without Christ; but in him, our essays and offers, our
un-artfull and untaught stammerings and groans are pleasing. When the
Sacrifice is laid down, Aaron must cast the Incense upon the fire, that the
Cloud of the Incense may cover the Mercy-seate. Levit. 16.12.13. When we pray,
so much imperfection accompanyes our prayer, that the fume may be offensive
unto Gods nosthrills, but Christ casts in the Incense, his Intercession makes
what we offer, sweet. This is our privilege which we must make use of, We
have an advocate with the Father; for there is one Mediator between God and
man, the man Christ Jesus. 1 Timothy 2.5.

3. We must pray by the assistance of the Spirit; God promises that
assistance; I will power upon the house of David the spirit of supplications;
Zach. 12.10. Neither can we pray, nor will God hear without him. The spirit
helps our infirmities, for we know not what we should pray for as we
ought, but the spirit it self makes intercession for us with gronings which
cannot be uttered, and he that searches the hearts knows what the mind of
the spirit is, because he makes intercession for the Saints according to the
will of God. Romans 8.26.27. God knows the mind of the Spirit, he takes notice
of that; for a spiritual prayer is his own work, the voice of God; but a
prayer from our own spirit is the voice of flesh, and that God hears not.
Nature may pray, the flesh may cry to God for what it needs to the sustaining
of it self; But God terms this rather howling than prayer. They assembled
themselves for Corn and Wine; and they have not cried unto me with their
heart, when they howled upon their beds. Hos. 7.14. All these three, Saint Paul
has couched and taught in one sentence, Ephesians. 2.18. Through Him we have both
an access by one Spirit unto the Father.

4. We must pray in a right manner. The Spirit teaches this, for he makes
intercession for the Saints according to the will of God. Romans 8.17. Which is
the command, and to which the promise is, 1 John 5.14. This is the confidence
that we have in him, that if we ask any thing aecording to his will he
hears us. The general rule in the Preacher, Eccles. 5.1.2. is most appliable
to this; Keep thy foot when thou go to the house of God; be not rash with
thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to utter any thing before God, for
God is in heaven, and thou upon earth, therefore let thy words be few. And that
the heart may not be hasty, we must fix it by preparation, that we may say
as David, O God wy heart is fixed, Psalm. 108.1. But I Will tell you of the right
manner.

1 Generally. In general, the person must be right, for then there is
acceptance; according to the Psalmists manner of arguing, Psalm. 4.3. But know
that the Lord has set apart him that is godly for himself: the Lord will
hear when I call unto him. We have audience by virtue of the Covenant, and
therefore have particular grants because we have Christ, that is to be in
general in the Covenant, and such a one the Scriptures call a righteous man:
this man prevails, The prayer ((...)) of a righteous man, prevails; ((...))
prevails much, Iam. 5.16.

2. More particularly, there must be to the right manner, attentio mentis, and
intentio voluntatis.

1. The attention of the mind, the mind of him that prays must attend.

1. Unto God, unto whom the prayer is directed: we must see supply in God, and
enough supply; we must see goodness, wisdom, power in God, and solely in
God; that he is, and only is good unto them that call upon; wise to set the
best ways for our good, able to remove all disadvantages that might hinder our
good; and so of his other attributes.

2. We must attend unto the work; to pray.

1. With understanding; of which St Paul has taught the necessity. If I pray
in an unknown tongue, my spirit prays, (I exercise my gift) but my
understanding is unfruitful; (they that join with me are not bettered by my
gift: What is it then? I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with
understanding also, 1 Cor. 14.15. The Papists do but count their beads, they
do not pray; and the ignorant are like the Papists, they do but say the words.

2. With faith: this honors God and makes us bold, for in Christ we have
boldness and access with confidence by the faith of him; Ephe. 3.12. And how
shall they call on him, in whom they have not believed? Romans 10.14. The rule is
in James; If any man lack wisdom, let him ask of God, and it shall be given
him; but let him ask in faith nothing wavering, for he that wavereth is like a
wave of the sea driven with the wind and tossed, let not that man think he
shall receive any thing of the Lord. Iam. 1.5.6.7. Faith ballasts the soul,
without it the soul floats; sometimes it thinks it has a promise, and then
it rises to a vain height, the height of presumption; sometimes it is driven
off, and then it sinkes. Moses his hands were sometimes up, and sometimes they
fell down, till a stone was put under them, then continued praying, and
prevaild against Amalek. Exodus 17.12. The heart must be established upon
something; we must have faith in the providence, and faith in the promises: and
then the heart grows quiet, as it is said of Hannah; She spoke in her heart; it
was not a formal lip-prayer, and her countenance was no more sad. 1 Samuel
1.13.18. When she had poured forth her soul before the Lord, she was quiet,
she then rested. Desire, and hope, and fear, are usually extremes and are
full of pain; but faith attends with ease and knows assuredly, that enough,
that is, so much of the promise as is fit shall be performed.

3. We must attend unto our selves, that we be not distracted in prayer. To
that question, whether the defect of this attention do frustrate prayer? The
Schoolmen have answered, That not an actual, but a virtuall attention is
ever necessary. I cannot altogether reject that answer, for though an actual
attention in every prayer, and in every part of prayer is very commendable, and
that which we must endeavor for, yet the virtuall attention which is to
persist in the disposition to attend, is that which is necessary. I shall
clear this by distinguishing of our wanderings. The soul is apt to gad, and
those wanderings from the duty which are by our own neglect, these make our
prayer to be sin. If otherwise they are not ours, but Satan's injections,
they frustrate not our prayer, though they may somewhat hinder our comfort. It
is the Archers fault if he hit not the mark, if himself were careless of his
posture, of his aim: but if he aim rightly, and intend his shaft to the
mark, and another purposely jogge his arm in the delivery of the Arrow, it is
the fault of the other, not his. Here is our trial; do we intend the mark,
to send the shaft of prayer to heaven rightly? then the malice of the
stander-by shall not hinder our entrance and audience. But however, because of
our weakness, and the Devils maliciousness, we must be the more upon our
watch; and like the wiseman of whom Solomon speaks, we must have our hearts
in our hands: that is, always in a readiness for every holy duty that we
set about. The heart must accompany prayer, and therefore we must attend, that
it be within our reach; for it is apt to stray, and then we are dull and
without life in prayer. We must keep our hearts in tune, that when we strike
upon the strings of that instrument, there may be melody to God, who may
delight to hear. This is the attention of the mind.

2. There must be the intention of the Will; and this is the Exhibition or
representation of the Will before God: which I shall best show you what it is,
by two phrases of Scripture which describe prayer, A pouring out, and a lifting
up of the Spirit.

1. A pouring out of the soul. The phrase is used by Hannah, 1 Samuel, 1.15. and
Psalm. 62.8. Power out your heart before him. It usually signifies to deal
freely with any one; yet without straining, there are two things in the phrase,
Reverence and Humility.

1. We must pray with reverence, which is so necessary, that Religion it self
is described to be, Actus Reverentiae. When we pray we come before God, and
when we come before God, we stand upon holy ground, and in that case the
command was unto Moses that he should pluck off his shoes. We must be of a
speaking gesture, our posture and carriage before God must witness our
reverence, that we tremble at the glory of his presence.

2. We must pray with humility; we have a pattern in Abraham, his very
forms are imitable, I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord which am but
dust and ashes; Oh let not my Lord be angry and I will speak; Oh let not the
Lord be angry and I will speak but this once. Genesis 18.27.30.32. He attends
every petition with apology. So our Jacob whose story we are now upon; I am
not worthy the least of all thy mercies. And that poor dejected Publican gives
us an example of admirable humility; he comes unto the Temple, for his
devotion brought him thither, and he dares not neglect a duty though he be not
worthy to perform it; but when he is come there, how does he behave himself?
how humbly? how sadly? He stands afar off; as not daring to press nearer to
a glorious presence: he weuld not lift up so much as his eyes toward heaven,
as ashamed to behold that against which he had sinned: he smites upon his
breast, with remorce and fear and indignation; and all that he can bring out
at last is no more but this, God be merciful to me a sinner. Luke 18.13. And
this is the acceptable prayer, though he durst scarce speak, God readily heard
him, he went away justified: so that we may say with David, Psalm. 10.17. Lord
thou have heard the desire of the humble. There are two Original words that
do lively express this unto us; (...), which in Greek signifies to pray, is
of (...) the knee: and the Hebrew word Berecha prayer, is of (...) Berech,
Ingeniculando fudit preces: both importing, the bowing of the knee in prayer.
Humility is so necessary that the promise is to it; 2 Chro. 7.14. If my people
shall humble themselves and pray, then I will hear from heaven. And, Esa.
66.2. To this man will I look, even to him that is poor and of a contrite
spirit. This is the Sacrifice that God accepts, when sacrifices and
burnt-offrings will not please him. This is the pouring forth of the soul: the
oother phrase is;

2. A lifting up of the spirit; the phrase is used, Psalm. 25.1. Unto thee O
Lord do I lift up my soul. And it signifies also two things, fervency and
continuance.

1. Fervency. We must have zeal and heat in our prayers; Iam. 5.16. The
effectual fervent prayer avails much. Zeal puts the heart into a good
temper and apts it for motion, which cannot be without an heat: besides it
helps on prayer, and makes it speedy. Prayer is the weapon with which we
fight, zeal gives that an edge, for we are easily dulled and need that
whetting. And to use another expression; prayer ascends as the fire: the fire
moves unto its own place, to the element of fire in the hollow of the Moon,
and that it may pass the better without hindrance, it goes up like a pyramid
spirewise, sharpe-poynted, the more easily to penetrate: zeal is the
pyramidall or poynted flame of prayer, and wings it up freely till it come
before God, and peirces with a kind of violence till it gain an entrance. It Is
a fit Story which St. Augustine has, I Will repeat it to you; When he came as a
visitant to the house of a sick man, he saw the room full of friends and
kindred, who were all silent, yet all weeping, the wife sobbing, the children
crying out, the kinsfolks lamenting; The good Father suddenly utters a prayer;
Domine, quas preces exaudis, si has non exaudis? Lord, what prayers do thou
hear if thou hear not these? A prayer not so much artfull, as vehement,
has a kind of violence in it. And the Scripture sets it forth by such like
words; To cry, To wrestle, To strive, all arguing an holy importunity.

2. Continuance. True zeal continues, it is a fire, not a flame only; and
according to the Apostles Rule; We must pray always. 1. In the constant
disposition of heart. 2. In act at all seasonable opportunities, all fit times,
as is interpreted by St. Paul in the very choice of the Word, (...), not (...).
So we read that Mephibosheth eat continually at the Kings table; 2 Samuel
9.13. And that Anna departed not from the Temple, but served God day and night;
Luke 2.37. that is, when ever the time was seasonable and opportune. We must
continue to pray, though we find our selves indisposed to prayer, and
therefore we must continue because indisposed. The Devil sometimes teaches
our sloth to object, That we are dull and dead and unapt, and were therefore
better not pray at all, then pray without life. But it is with our souls, as
sometimes with some part of our bodies; If a man lean long upon his Arm
without motion of it, it becomes so benumbed that it is made unfit for motion,
but we continue rubbing of that part, till we bring the blood to the same
free course again: Such dullness and distemper by our own neglect often grows
upon our better part, but we must be constant in the warming and rubbing of
the soul; when we are dull, to pray against dullness; and not to leave the
work, till we find our former life running freely, and spirit in our veins.

5. The last particular that I propounded for explication of the Essentialls to
prayer, is, That we must pray for things lawful. The promise is, that Good
things shall be given to them that ask them; Mat. 7.11. The highest good is
Gods glory, then our good and the Churches. Our good is spiritual and
temporal. Spiritualls are so far to be asked as they are promised, so far
as necessary to salvation; That we should have grace is absolutely necessary,
and therefore we pray absolutely for it: Degrees and measures are not
limitedly necessary, therefore for limited and set measures we may not
absolutely pray; yet for necessary measures absolutely, because absolutely
necessary. Temporalls may be prayed for, and with determination of what we
petition, for Licet orare, quod licet desiderare. Some have thought we may not
pray for Temporalls but only in the general and conditionally. I think they
too much streighten us; for a conditional petition does petition nothing, nor
does a general: If a sick man pray in such a form, Lord send me what thou
know fit for me; I discommend not the form, yet the sicke-man prays not
more for his health then the continuance of his disease. I think it lawful,
and not only lawful, but fit, that he determine and particularise his prayer,
Lord send health; yet still in this sense it is conditional, though we
determine the petition, yet ever to use an express or tacit subjection to
Gods will, and wisdom. These are the essentialls to prayer, in my
Catecheticall Method the other day to my own, I followed likewise the
Accidentalls to prayer, and more largely, but here meant only to make use of
what is necessary to our present purpose; and have sufficiently showed what
prayer is, in the second part to be explicated I shall be briefer, which is; 2.
How it yields remedy. When we pray and determine upon this or that particular
thing, we do as it were apply Gods will unto it, and when that application is
made, we are said to prevail. Now we cannot apply Gods will by commanding of
it, that were blasphemy to imagine, nor by a familiar postulation, that were
not less then blasphemy, but by a submisse representation of our will unto
him. Therefore some have expressed themselves thus; When we pray unto men we
move and affect them with what we say, but when unto God, our selves are
rather moved and affected, the change is in us, we are fitted for a grant.
But I think we may admit of more, That God honors this ordinance as declaring
himself affected by it, because it is that medium only by which being
intervenient or interceding God imparts much unto us. Not that God is any way
ignorant and needs this representation of our wills, for he understands our
thoughts a-farre off; Psalm. 139.2. Nor that God of nilling is bowed and made
willing by these representations, for with him is no variableness, neither
shadow of turning; Iam. 1.17. But only that it is his way, that ordinance
which himself has appointed, and we only impetrate what we believe him to
will. So that our prayers do argue no change in God, neither does the
firmness of eternal providence hinder our prayers, but we only use Gods
way, and entreat what we believe him to will, as it is clear in that of the
Apostle, 1 Ioh. 5.14. This is the confidence that we have in him, that if we
ask any thing according to his will, he hears us. And more clear in an
example, that of David's prayer for the establishing of his house; Let the house
of David thy servant be established before thee, for thou have told thy servant
thou will build him an house, therefore thy servant has found in his heart to
pray before thee, and now O Lord, thou art God and have promised this
goodness, now therefore let it please thee to bless the house of thy servant.
1 Chro. 17.25.26.27. I have done with the explication; It follows,

2. The Confirmation of the truth. The very explication is proof enough,
prayer is our remedy in distresses, for our remedy lies in God, and prayer
mooues to him. It is not our strength that prevails, but the Covenant; and
when we are in that we succeed; The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous
man prevails much. Elias was a man subject to like passions as we are, and
he prayed earnestly that it might not rain, and it rained not for the space of
three years and six months. Iam. 5.15.16. It was not Elias that prevailed,
he was subject to the same infirmities with us, but Elias rightly made use of
the ordinance and prevailed in that he sought. I might instance unto you the
many examples of Scripture, what glorious things are said of prayer, and how
often it has won the victory; but I will only present two unto your memory;
That of Peter's deliverance, recorded, Act. 12. Which in the fifth verse is
resolved into this; Peter was kept in prison, but prayer was made without
ceasing of the Church unto God for him. The Church would not suffer Peter to
remain imprisoned, but with prayer they burst open the prison-gates, with
prayer they file off his load of irons. The other is this of Jacob, in the 28.
verse of this Chapter, he has a triumph after the Conquest; He that wrestled
with Jacob said unto him, Thy name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel,
for as a Prince have thou power with God and have prevailed. Because of this
power, they that pray are said to Help together, God delivered us and will
deliver you also. Helping together by prayer for us. 2 Cor. 1.11. Therefore the
same St. Paul the mighty Apostle, yet when he was for journey to a Jerusalem,
entreats the assistance and safe conduct and Guard of Supplicants; Now I
beseech you brethren, that ye strive together with me in your prayers to God
for me, that I may be delivered from them that believe not in Iudaea. Romans
15.30. The word (...), is rendered by the Vetus Interprets, Vt adjuvetis me, I
beseech you that you help me; but it is more; He requires such an Aid as
Soldiers do when they are to encounter with a stronger enemy; I am to
entertain a business full of difficulty in it self, full of danger because
of opposition, now I beseech you, strive, fight, skirmish together with me by
your prayers. I Will add no more for confirmation, nor need I to those that have
but tried it; but descend briefly to application in a threefold Use, to
instruct, reprove, exhort.

1 Use. If prayer do remedy our distresses, it instructs in a double truth:
1. In the reason why the godly pray so much, so frequent: The blind throng
wonder at the usual and often assemblings of Gods people, but they usually and
often assemble because they know the necessity and efficacy of that business
for which they assemble; they pray much, because they know prayer prevails
much.

2. In the reason why God corrects so long, why the stroke remains upon a
people. It Is no wonder the burden lies, when the wearied are not careful to
heave it off; for they shall smart still that seek not diligently after God.

2 Use. If prayer be the remedy, it then justly reprehends;

1. Those that seek for other remedies and rest there; In this instance of the
pestilentiall disease which in these parts we fear, we disallow not the use of
antidotes, the warding of our Towne-ships, the warrantable removal from our
houses; but these are not enough, nor such as can give us confidence. They that
trust upon these idolatrously abuse an empty creature, they lean upon a
bruised deceitful bull rush.

2. Those that neglect prayer. In the practical notion we do not easily
distinguish between the neglect and contempt of holy duties; therefore they
add unto their sin that plead for their neglect, I have not time to answer
objections; briefly;

They say, God cannot be changed by our prayers, what need we pray?

But that weapon wounds themselves: for therefore must we pray because God
cannot change; it is his unchangeable will to give us what we need, and it is
his unchangeable will that we should pray that he would give it.

They say, good things may be had, are had without prayer.

But if they be good, whether are they sure? But those good things which we
receive by prayer are called sure mercies. Besides, good things are bestowed on
the wicked either not for themselves, or they were better without them.

They say, men have often prayed and not obtained that they have prayed for.

Besides those answers, that God often hears when we apprehend it not, or if he
delay hearing it is because he is infinitely wise, not because he is any way
unmindfull or uncarefull: I would only oppose this; Let us resolve our not
hearing, to our own not praying rightly, when we do not obtain, let us see
whether, nay be consident of it, that we prayed amiss.

Saint James has resolved the case, Ye ask and receive not because ye ask
amiss, that ye may consume it upon your lusts, Iam. 4.3. Let us make that
trial, it is safest to lay the blame upon our selves. These are weak and
false pretenses, and such as shall not refuge our neglect, against which the
Scripture is terrible: Pour out thy fury upon the heathen that know thee not,
upon the families that call not upon thy name. Ier: 10.25. They that know God
will call upon him, and when we neglect to pray unto him we forget him, and
then we cast off all fear; as Eliphas the Temanite spoke a truth though
unjustly in the application unto Job: Thou castest off fear and restrainest
prayer before God, Job 15.4. They that fear God, do pray unto him not only
publicly, for so a carnal man may be drawn unto a form, but privately with
frequent secret whisperings, for so the Hebrew word in the text signifies. When
we neglect this Mussitation this low, humble, submisse representation of our
wills, then we cast off fear, then we express pride; but by it we gain a
strong adversary, God will resist us, for, He resists the proud, and gives
grace to the humble; Consider this ye that forget God. I Will end with an
exhortation.

3 Use. Let us set upon the exercise of prayer, let us make use of our
privilege. It is nothing to have the happiness and advantage to prevail in
Court, if we possess such a favor, let us not lose or neglect our power. Are
we serious when we pray, or is it worth the having which we pray for? then we
may conceive what it is to be heard. How does it discourage a poor client to
wait long and have no access? But if we pray rightly, God lets us in; for so
is the promise, God is near unto them that call upon him, to them that call
upon him in spirit and truth. It is all one not to have a privilege, and not
to use it; as I should never account a miserable wretch that denies himself
necessities, to be wealthy, though the master of a crammed hoord. Prayer is the
key that opens treasures, let us often turn it, it is our own fault if we be
not stored. Let us not neglect so rich a blessing, for by the blood of Jesus
Christ we are made near there is a wide entrance made; let us press near it
to get in through Christ. Without Christ we are a far off, but in him we
have boldness and access, so that we shall not be challenged for intrusion,
but with confidence may get near to the throne of grace, and like servants in
special favor may have entrance both private and ordinary. Beloved, we
under-value such a mercy, we under-value Christ, if now we neglect prayer. Let
us not neglect our selves, let us not neglect the Church, let us not neglect
the blood of our Savior. The times, the danger of the times, the Churches
abroad, the Church at home, our own necessities call for our prayers. Let me
remember you a story from the Gospel which may lead us. When our Savior with
his Disciples were upon the Sea, a storm arose, the ship was endangered;
whereupon the Disciples hasten to the Cabin where Christ slept, and awake him
saying, Master save us, we perish; then he rebuked the wind and the sea, and
there was a great calm. The Ship of the Church is in great danger, the winds
are loud, the ways rise high, there is a great tempest abroad, the waters
beat against the Vessel: now our remedy and safety lies in God, let us
imitate the wisdom of the Disciples: it is likely that the other Mariners used
other means, some at the Anchors, some at the stern, some at the pumpe, some
at several gables; but the Disciples they only run to Christ, and throng
about the Cabin-doore, and cry out amazedly and vehemently to him, Master save
us we perish. It may be other men in danger will have recourse unto other
means to their own likelihoods; but it will be our Christian wisdom to
throng about the throne, to seek God by prayer, Lord save us we perish. It Is
our advantage, the Lord will not be offended at our importunity, we may all
throng, though in these and the like assemblings, but one man employes his
tongue unto God, yet the whole Congregation may press unto the Cabin-doore:
Let our hearts draw near, and kneel all together on the threshold of the
Sanctuary; that God may take notice of a multitude of Clients, and may hear:
that the storm what ever it is may be appeased, and there may follow a great
calm, especially in the German and British Seas, abroad and at home.

GENESIS 32.10. And Jacob said, O God of my Father Abraham, and God of my
Father Isaac, the Lord which said unto me, Return unto thy Country, and I
will deal well with thee. -- Deliver me.


JACOB was in danger, and Jacob prays; Prayer is Gods ordinance for our
remedy: yet we sometimes pray and speed not; I have therefore now again taken
up this Text to show what arguments we must use in prayer, for as Amos speaks
of the skillful in Lamentation, so there is a skill in prayer. I followed the
Story with a paraphrase, where I began the Text in another assembly; here I
will only show from an hill the way that I lead that other Congregation, and
in which way we are now to go forward. We observed in his journey; 1. His
Encounter with the Angels. 2. His Message to his brother. 3. His fear at the
return of them he sent. 4. The means he used for his defense; 1. The division
of his family. 2. His prayer. In that we noted;



1. That he did pray. Upon that I have spent a discourse already, and now am
to proceed to the second.

2. The arguments he used in his prayer; they are two;

1. From the Covenant; O God of my Father Abraham, and God of my Father Isaac.

2. From the promise; O Lord which said unto me, Return and I will deal
well with thee; The Text needs no other either division or explication; and
therefore I may proceed to the arguments particularly.

1. The first Argument is from the Covenant, and it strengthens his prayer
thus; O God, thou art the God of my Fathers, and therefore mine; thou have
entered into Covenant with them, and therefore with me, for the Covenant is to
them and to their seed; I am the seed of Abraham and Isaac; O God of my
Fathers Abraham and Isaac, deliver me. The head that I will speak of, is, in
Hypothesi;

That Jacob prayed with an argument from the Covenant.

But, in Thesi, and more proper and profitable for us;

That in prayer we must draw argument from the Covenant.

The Scripture will give us precept and instance, I will only confirm it by a
double reason.

1. We shall not else be heard, we must have the general Covenant before we
have particular hearing: for all is offered in Christ, we must come in him, in
whom alone we challenge all. A thing must be ours before we pray for it, ours
in Gods Covenant to give it us, else though we do pray for it, we shall
never obtain it. Now the Apostle has told us, how all things are ours, 1 Cor.
3.23. All things are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. The
Covenant promises, but the promise must be firm, else we cannot be confident
to receive; Now the same Apostle has again told us how the promise is firm;
2 Cor. 1.20. All the promises in him are yea, and in him are Amen. Therefore
we must come in Christ, and to come in Christ is to come in the Covenant.

2. By the Covenant we are interessed in Gods Attributes, which we honor by
our prayer, and from which we expect benefit. We acknowledge God, able, wise,
good; for otherwise we should not pray unto him. But hence is our comfort,
that in virtue of the Covenant, his strength, power, goodness, wisdom, are
ours. Iehoshaphat was confederate with the King of Israel, and thereupon tells
him; I am as thou art, my people as thy people, my horses as thy horses. 1
King. 22.4. There was a League between Iudahs and Isreal's King, therefore the
Strength of Judah is Isreal's aid: and Ahab doubts not of Iehoshaphats company
to Ramoth Gilead. To contemplate God, and to know him in himself glorious,
might indeed ravish us, but rather with wonder than affection: But this both
equally cheares us and emboldens us, that as he is such in himself, so he is
such to us; and that is by the Covenant, wherefore we must use that argument
when we require his aid. I shall hasten from this, and only make use of it
in a double Exhortation.

1 Use. Prayer has strength from the Covenant, let us therefore enter into
Covenant. Christ is offered; when we take him as he is offered, we then enter
into Covenant. We must lay hold on him, not to part with him for any thing; to
give our selves up unto him, to be his. Thus let us take Christ, let us
entertain the tender, the offer, and upon the terms of the Covenant; then the
league is made, Christ is ours, God is ours, and we may pray.

2. Use. When we are in Covenant, let us make use of it; let us be wise to
catch at such an advantage. It was the wisdom of the Syrian Ambassadors from
the distressed Benhadad; 1 King. 20.33. They come with humble entreaties to the
King of Israel for King Benhadads pardon, and did diligently observe whether
any thing to the advantage of their suite would come from him, and did hastily
catch it. When they had presented the Message, Let thy servant Benhadad live:
Ahab answers; Is he yet alive? He is my Brother. They catch the advantage, and
reply; Thy brother Benhadad. When we pray, we may hear as it were God
speaking in the Covenant, They are my servants, my sons; be wise upon the
advantage and answer, Thy servants, thy sons, Let us make use of those
glorious relations, let us make use of those gracious attributes, of power,
wisdom, goodness; in a word, let us manifest that we enjoy God, by making
use of God. Acquaint thy self with him, and be at peace, thereby good shall
come unto thee; says that experienced Job, Job 22.21. And as it follows, Then
shall thou have delight in the Almighty, and shall lift up thy face unto God.
Beloved, It is our great weakness that we cannot enough delight in God; it
argues that we know not his treasure and his ready hand; let us therefore
Acquaint our selves with him, that we may not only know him, but by an
intimate knowledge may in all conditions make use of our God, our Father, our
friend. It shall suffice to have spoken so much of this, for that which I would
say of the second argument challenges my time from the former.

2. The second argument is from the promise. In that uncomfortable night when
the weary Patriarch was forced to rest himself upon the ground, accompanied
only with his own solitary musings; God appeard and made him a promise of
Company and defense: This Land whereon thou lie will I give to thy seed, and
behold I am with thee, and will keep thee in all places whither thou go,
and will bring thee again into this Land, for I will not leave thee till I
have done that which I have spoken to thee of. Genesis 28.13.14.15. This promise
he now makes use of, and with it strengthens his prayer; O God which said
unto me, I will deal well with thee, deliver me: I now am confident to beg
safety and protection, for thou have said it, and I know that thou art true.
Besides this instance of Jacob, we have it also in the practice of others.
When the wrath of God waxt hot against the idolatrous people, and had threatened
to consume them; Moses remembers this argument, and prays; Remember Abraham,
Isaac, and Israel thy servants, to whom thou swarest by thine own self and
said unto them, I will multiply your seed; Exodus 32.13. David intended to
build an house to the glory of the Name of God, but is told by Nathan that such
a work should be reserved for his son to a time of peace, but however God
had accepted his intention, and promises to build up and establish his house:
according to that David frames his prayer for the flourishing continuance of
his family: Let the house of thy servant David be established before thee, for
thou O Lord of Hosts have revealed to thy servant, saying, I will build thee an
house; and now O Lord God, thou art that God and thy words be true, and thou
have promised this goodness unto thy servant, therefore now let it please thee
to bless the house of thy servant. 2 Samuel 7.27.28.29. Thus David encouraged
himself in the Lord his God, as it is noted of him in another History, in
another case; 1 Samuel 30.6. I might give you more instances that this argument
has been used by the Saints; and for good reason; for,

1. The promises are given for our strength, therefore upon them they have
supported themselves while they have prayed. Affliction deadens the spirit, and
would lagge prayer, unless there were a Word; but says the Psalmist, Psalm.
119.50. This is my comfort in my affliction, for thy Word has quickened me.
The promise quickens, and stays up a lagging yielding fainting Christian; and
like some strong warming liquor put into the mouth of a swounding man, it
recovers the almost perished heat and reviues the halfe-dead spirit. When the
word of the Gospel says, Son be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven;
Then the soul begins to look up thorough the eyes, and breaths and gaspes,
and shows now that it lives again. So it bears up in trials likewise;
therefore Saint Paul doubting least the Hebrews might be wearied and faint in
their minds; at least he intimates this to be the cause; Ye have forgotten the
exhortation which speaks to you as Children, my son faint not when thou art
rebuked, for whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, if ye endure chastening, God
deals with you as sons: Heb. 12.3.5.6. When a man is corrected, it is no
wonder that he faints, for it is no pleasant thing to be under the rod: yet this
inables to bear the lash, to remember, That to be corrected is to be dealt
withal as sons. Therefore the Saints have exercised their faith upon the
promises, whereas else they could not so easily have given obedience to the
Commands; for when the Command burdens, the promise lifts at the burden and
makes the way smooth. You shall see the difference of the Command and promise
in one example of Gideon. Iud. 6.14.15.16. God means to deliver the Israelites
from the Midianites oppression by Gideons hand, and therefore sends a Message
to him; Go in thy might, save Israel, have not I sent thee? The command
startleth him though he were a valiant man. He shrinkes, and expostulates; How
shall I do it? my family is poor, in a small Tribe, and I the least in the
family: how shall I deliver Israel? Now the promise follows the Command; Surely
I will be with thee, and thou shall smite the Midianites as one man. This puts
a life into him, and now only when upon trial he is sure, it is a promise, he
has courage enough to be an undertaker of that great Commission. For this
reason have the Saints remembered the promise, and used it in their prayers as
an argument, because it is their strength.

2. They knew, God must be honored if they would expect that God should honor
them with hearing: Now to use the promise is to honor God; It honors his
goodness that he should please to be so respective of man, it honors his truth,
that he will surely make good his word, it honors his power, that he is not
less able to do than say, it honors his wisdom, that he could beforehand
fit his people with conveniences. I Will not stay you longer upon the Hypothesis,
that Jacob did, that the Saints have done so: But, in Thesi, we may draw this
useful and comfortable Doctrine;

That Gods promises must be the ground or strength of our Prayers.

To omit other proof, we may confirm this with a double reason.

1. No prayer can else be made with faith, with boldness, with comfort: for
we must see the thing made ours by promise before we ask it: This is our
confidence if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us: 1 Ioh.
5.14. And, Ephesians. 3.12. The promise being made in Christ, in him we have
boldness and access with confidence by the faith of him. For what have they
to do with God or Gods fullness, that are strangers from the Covenant of
promise? Ephesians. 2.12. Such can challenge nothing, and though they hold up a
petition, they cannot look to have it sealed, or Gods Fiat subscribed under
it. But David comes to beg as it were for his own, which was only treasured
up by God against his use; Lord where are thy former loving kindnesses, which
thou swarest unto David in thy Truth? Psalm. 89.49.

2. Though God freely promise, yet he will not ordinarily perform his promise,
till it be sought by prayer. This desolate place (says God) shall become like
the garden of Eden, I the Lord have spoken it, and I will do it. Thus says
the Lord God, I will yet for this be enquired of by the house of Israel to do
it for them: Ezekiel. 36.36.37. This same method is cleared by Jeremiah in that
great work of the Jews return from the Babylonish Captivity; God will do
it, but they must pray; They must first pray and then God will do it. After
seventie years be accomplished at Babylon, I will visit you, and perform my
good word toward you, in causing you to return to this place; then shall you
call upon me, ye shall go and pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you,
ye shall seek me and find me, when ye shall seek for me with all your
heart. And I will be found of you, and will turn away your Captivity. Ier. 29
10.12.14. Esa. 43.25.26. God will have this course taken, that when we receive
the promises, we may acknowledge them to be as they are, gifts rather than
debts, bestowed not earned.

I have hastened my self to the application. Let us make use of this argument;
let us move upon this ground. Motus must be super immobile; It Is ruled in
Philosophy, That Motion must be upon some firm thing, something that is
immovable. Now prayer is a motion, in it the soul ascends to God, and
therefore it must be firmed upon some steadfast thing; such is the promise, as
David said in his last words, 2 Samuel 23.5. He has made with me an everlasting
Covenant, ordered in all things and sure. The foot slips not when it treads
upon this, it is sure ground. Let us walk upon this ground, let us use this
argument, we shall speed and prevail. Quintilian giving some rules for
Oratory, tells us, That if our arguments be not weighty, we must then heap
many little ones together, like a bed of sand, where though every particular
grain of dust could not be discerned, yet the whole heap makes a great bulk,
Congregandasunt quia minima: but we need not say so of this argument, for it
has strength in stead of many; he brings an heap of arguments that prays
with a promise. But that I may proceed in this discourse to your benefit, I
will divide this application into two parts.

1. A Direction how we may.

2. An Exhortation that we would make use of the present argument.

1. In the Direction; These three particulars.

1. How we must be rectified in our judgments concerning the promises.

2. How we may collect them.

3. How we must apply them.

1. How our judgments must conceive of the promises in their nature,
exhibition, and intention, I shall clear in several propositions.

1. Concerning their nature.

1. The kinds of promises differ; Some are absolute, some only conditional;
So are temporals; for we find Job afflicted, Lazarus poor, Christ himself
tempted: yet there are promises against disease, against poverty, against
temptation.

2. The Promises are often times subordinate, and as they are made, so also
performed in order, succession, and dependence. The Lord is a Sun and a
shield, the Lord will give grace and glory to them that walk uprightly: Psalm.
84.11. First grace, then glory, there is the order, the subordination.

1. The Promises in themselves are certain and firm, but in their performance
often hid and undiscernable, and such as come not to pass but by Gods wisdom
and power. The promise is, The redeemer shall come to Sion, Esa. 59.20. That
the Jews shall be converted, is in it self a certain word; but a divine
Power must bring it about. The Jews are rebellious, and because of their
infidelity are cut off; God spared not the natural branches; But says the
Apostle; If they abide not still in unbelief they also shall be graffed in,
for God is able to graffe them in again: and so all Israel shall be saved, as
it is written; There shall come out of Sion, (or to Sion) the deliverer, and
shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob: as Paul applies the Prophet Esaiah,
Romans 11.23.26.

2. Concerning their exhibition.

1. All promises to the Elect, are made and performed in Christ; they were
purchased by him, and by him are administered. Therefore St Paul thus pleads his
integrity; As God is true, our word toward you was not, yea and nay; for the
Son of God Jesus Christ, who was preached among you by us, was yea; for all
the promises of God in him are yea, and in him Amen: 2 Cor. 1.18.19.20. And
more directly, Gal. 3.16. Now to Abraham and to his Seed were the promises
made: he says not, unto Seeds, as speaking of many, but as of one, And to thy
Seed which is Christ. Which is, either because they are made for his sake and
merit, or because unto us in Him as our head; To Him properly and primarily,
but In aggregato, and so to us; we have else no interest in them, nor any
title to them.

2. The time of promises is often unknown and long dated, and as Habakkuk
speaks, The Vision is yet for an appointed time. Hab. 2.3. Abraham was but
seventie five years old when he had a promise of Seed; Genesis 12.3.4. But he was
an hundred years old before he had a son: Genesis 21.5. And though there were a
promise of the Messiah when the Scepter was departed from Judah, yet under the
Empire of Caesar there was an old man Simeon waiting for the Consolation of
Israel. Luke 2.25.26.

3. Concerning their Intention.

1. Every promise whose medium is general (though made to some particular
person) is general, and appliable to all. The promises are Centered in Christ,
and therefore all that belong to him, have all those promises belonging unto
them. At the dedication of the Temple Solomon made a prayer, and among other
petitions, this; If there be in the Land famine, if there be pestilence, if
their enemy besiege them in the Land of their Cities, Then hear thou in
heaven. 1 King. 8.37.38. God promises Solomon to hear. The promise was to
Solomon; yet when the multitude of Confederate enemies from Moab and Ammon were
encamped at Engedi; Iehoshaphat makes use of that answer for his own safety.
2 Chronicles. 20.8.9. Compare also the Lords promise to Iosuah, Josh. 1.5.6.7. With
the Apostles application to the Hebrews. Hebr. 13.5.

2. The same promises may belong to the godly and wicked, but diversely; to
those by Covenant, to these by common bounty. Though all have possession of
promises, yet not the Tenure: wicked men have no Right but only a general
providence, therefore the intention of the promise is not from particular
engagement. Thus our judgments must be rectified; Lets now see;

2. How we may collect them. We must so collect the promises as God has made
them. In reading the Scripture we shall find the difference; they are
sometimes propounded;

1. Expressly, and then it is more easy to gather what is plainly delivered;
and these;

1. Generally. So the promises are ordinarily made; with such general terms
of Every one, or, Whosoever, or the like, that all that are qualified may with
that ease collect them; as the Israelites gathered Manna which was scattered
about all their Tents.

2. Particularly; such as were made to some particular men, as Abraham, Iosuah,
David, or the like; these we may collect if we find our selves in their
condition; for then they are intended unto us, as being made to the condition
rather then the man.

2. Implicitly; these being ours more darkly, are not embraced with so much
ease; but these also we may two ways collect.

1. In the examples of the Saints; what we find really performed to any of
them, being of a general Medium; is a real though not written promise, and
we may collect it to our use, that God will do so with us as with them, if
necessary.

2. In the prayers of the faithful; when they have petitioned for any thing,
and have been heard; their obtaining of their Suite is a tacit promise unto
us; Such were heard in what they sought for, and we know, God is alike ready
to hear.

3. We have learned what to judge of the promises and to gather them. It
remains to know, how we must apply them. The direction unto that, follows upon
the ground that we have formerly laid.

1. In regard of their nature.

1. Because the kinds differ, we must differently apply them; The absolute
absolutely, Conditionally the conditional. The promises of Justification, and
of sanctification in a measure fit for our journey, we may absolutely apply;
because the spirit of life and grace is given to all that must be saved. But
that measure of grace which our alone-Conceit reaches at, and special
temporalls with their measure, we must apply but with limitation.

2. Because promises are subordinate, we must not Anticipate them in the
application. Though that of St. Paul be true, 1 Timothy 4.8. That godliness is
profitable unto all things, having promise of this life that now is, and of
that which is to come. Where the forenamed order is not observed; yet our
Savior has interpreted it and confirmed the subordination in that admonition;
Mat. 6.33. But first seek the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all
these things shall be added unto you. We must take the promises in Connection;
first Christ, then safety; first grace, then glory; Will ye have safety and
not have Christ? Or can we look to be glorified before we are sanctified?
There must be a seeking of Gods kingdom first, and then temporalls are added.

3. Because the promises (though firm) are sometimes hid in their performance;
therefore in the applying of them, we must live not so much by reason but by
faith; and because a divine power brings them to pass, we must measure Gods
truth by his power, because we know that to be infinite we must believe this
to be sure. Our doubting of Gods truth, proceeds from this, that we are not
enough persuaded of his power; and therefore the Jews reason against that,
when Moses brought a promise from God, that they should be satisfied with
meat: They spoke against God, saying, Can God prepare a table in the
Wilderness? Behold, he smote the rock that the waters gushed out, Can he give
bread also? Psalm. 78.19.20. They acknowledge God could do much, but they
limited him in his infinitenes, and therefore hardly can believe Moses. So when
the Prophet promised the next days plenty, the Courtier disputes the power;
Though God should open the windows of heaven, yet how could this thing be? 2
King. 7.2. But we must not measure God by our selves, his power by ours, for
he is able to put life into the dried bones, as he taught it to Ezekiel in a
Vision: Eze: 37.10.11.12 13. We are ready to say in our despair; Our bones are
dried, our hope is lost, and we are cut off for our parts; But thus says the
Lord, Behold I will open your graves, and put my spirit in you, and ye shall
live. We must so look upon the promises and upon our selves, when they seem
to be lost, and we hopeless; God can accomplish them and quicken us.

2. In regard of their Exhibition.

1. Because the promises are made and performed in Christ, therefore we must
be in Christ that we may apply them. The promise is the Saints inheritance,
but the inheritance is ours not so much as we are heirs as Co-heires together
with Christ, in whom our happiness is founded; and the promise of life and
justification is to the unrighteous that thirst after the righteousness of
Christ, and resolve to obey him. Therefore we must be found in him if we make
any claim, or desire an application.

2. Because the time is not always set but with a long date; we must
therefore wait for the performance, because though long, yet the Word is sure;
as the Prophet speaks in the place before alleged: The vision is yet for an
appointed time, but at the end it shall speak and not lie; though it tarry,
wait for it, because it will surely come, it will not tarry. It was
presumption for the Disciples to ask; Lord will thou at this time restore the
Kingdom? And therefore they are checked by our Savior now to ready to ascend;
It is not for you to know the times or the seasons which the Father has put in
his own power. Act. 1.6.7. It was enough for them, that they had been charged
before, That they should wait for the promise of the Father. We must stay the
time; Ye shall reap if ye faint not, says the Apostle: Promises are not
presently ripe, we must stay till the harvest. Grudge not that the wicked
flourish, that the Antichrist of Rome is still exalted; there is a promise of his
fall, and when the Harvest comes he shall be cut down. Murmr not at wants,
or that the cause of the Gospel not enough flourishes, there is promise of
mercy, when the harvest comes it will yield a full crop. See an excellent
resolve in David; Psalm. 119.81.82.83. My soul faints for thy salvation: but
I hope in thy Word. Mine eyes fail for thy Word, saying; When will thou
comfort me? for I am become like a Bottle in the smoke, yet do I not forget
thy Statutes. He had longing expectations, languished, and almost dried up with
a delayed hope; yet still he stays the time of the promise.

3. In regard of their Intention.

1. Because that promise which has a General Medium, is General; though it
were made to some particular person; therefore we must see our selves reduced
to the condition of such particulars for our application. If a promise were
made to David, if to Paul; that promise is ours if we in the same condition.
And the promise being made, not to their merit, but to their want; therefore if
we be in David's or Paul's streite and necessity, though we have not so much
grace, yet having as much merit, (that is, none:) and being in that case we
may apply it.

2. Because the promises of Temporalls do belong unto us the Elect, not only
by common bounty as to the wicked, but by special Covenant as being made ours
by Christ's purchase; therefore we may so apply them. Thus outward things being
accessions to us, we may confidently look for enough of them; and make use of
our Tenure, for we hold them by a good claim.

2. I have done with the former part of the Use, Direction how to use this
argument of the promise; This other is an Exhortation that we would make use
of it.

1. Let us make this Use, to store up the promises against the time of our
need: let us treasure them as oil in our Lamps, that we may not want light
with the foolish Virgins. Learn to possess the Word, and make it our own,
that it may dwell with us for our constant assistance. Men keep their
Conveyances and Assurances, and Deeds, with a great deal of care; let us be so
wise for our Souls, for our comfort, that the Word may dwell richly in us in
all wisdom. Col. 3.16. That was David's care; Thy Word have I hid in mine
heart. Psalm. 119.11. Solomon advises us to that, and gives us good reason:
Bind them continually upon thine heart, and tie them about thy neck; When thou
go it shall lead thee, when thou sleep it shall keep thee, when thou
awakest it shall talk with thee: Pro. 6.21.22. He spoke it generally of the
Word, but it is principally considerable of the promise, that will lead us on
with a gracious safety, that will keep us with happy security, that will
talk unto our memory with sweet and pleasing Communication. Let us enrich our
selves with such a treasure, and hoord up all, though we see not the present
use of some, yet let us be wise in our choice, as well as provident in our
heap, to store up specially, the most precious, the most fundamental.

2. Let us make a constant use of what we have stored up, and to that end
learn clearly to discern their truth and their goodness, that the promises
are not vain nor in vain. It was the witness of Samuel concerning his
Prophecies, That Samuel grew, and the Lord was with him, and did let none of
his words fall to the ground: 1 Samuel 3.19. God will not let his word fall, to
be scattered or lost; nor let us loose a promise. Have we the full Breasts of
Scripture, and will we be wanting to our own comfort? Rather let us deal as
we have seen some Children hang at the Dug, and being hungry and therefore
full of appetite, and strong and therefore not soon wearied, have rather
tugged than sucked at the breast, not giving over till they have drawn that
natural vessel dry; So, according to the Prophets allusion, Let us suck and
be satisfied with the breasts of Consolations, that we may milk out and be
delighted: Esa. 66.11. Our comfort is, we cannot draw the Scripture dry; there
is milk enough; promises of every kind.

1. General promises; lay hold on them.

2. Particular;

1. Pertaining to this life;

1. Concerning the spiritual estate;

1. Promises for Justification and forgiveness. Son, be of good cheer, thy
sins are forgiven thee. Mat. 9.2. Apply it. Lord, I drooped upon my former
apprehensions of sin and wrath, I was left then without all comfort; But this
voice makes me look up cheerily, when I hear a word in my Conscience, That my
sins are forgiven me. Again; Let the wicked forsake his way and the
unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will
have mercy upon him, and to our God for he will abundantly pardon. Esa. 55.7.
Apply it. Lord, I have many sins, but thou have more mercies; my sins would
carry me with despair from thee, thy mercies invite me to return to thee; I
have been abundant in my sins, and thou have promised abundantly to pardon.
I have multiplied my sins, but thou art rich in mercy, I dare now oppose a
treasure against a treasure, the treasure of thy mercy against the treasure of
my sins. I am confounded to see my sins heaped up to heaven, but thy Mercy
is high as the Heavens and over-tops them.

2. Promises for sanctification and our cleansing, I will sprinkle clean water
upon you, and ye shall be clean, from all your filthiness and from all your
Idols will I cleanse you; a new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit
will I put within you, and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh,
and will give you an heart of flesh. Ezekiel. 36.25.26. Apply it. Lord, thou have
promised, not only to justify my person, but to sanctify my nature, I am
unholy, do thou make me clean by the sprinklings of thy grace, I am old, do
thou renew me by thy spirit, I am hard and perverse, do thou make me soft
and pliant to the motions of thy will. Again; I will heal their backsliding,
I will love them freely. Hos. 14.4. Apply it. Lord, thou have promised, to
forgive mine iniquity, and to cure my diseases; thou can as easily change my
heart and make me holy, as bid me that I should be holy. Take away my
crookedness and reluctancie, give me a connaturalnesse to thy Commands, a
strength to obey thy will, that I be no back-slider.

2. There are promises concerning the Temporal estate.

1. For supply of what is good. Seek first the Kingdom of God and his
righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you. Mat. 6.33. Apply
it. Lord, thou have promised supply of Temporalls to the subjects of thy
Kingdom. Outward things are but Accessions; will thou give us the maine, and
deny us what is less worthy? While we have the Inheritance, we are confident
of these things, together with the Inheritance. Thou will not see us perish
with poverty, with want, because we are Subjects, because we are sons.
Again. Ye shall dwell in the Land that I gave to your Fathers. I will call
for the Corn and will increase it, and lay no famine upon you, and I will
multiply the fruit of the tree, and the increase of the field. Ezekiel.
36.28.29.30. Apply it. Lord, thou have promised plenty besides necessity. I
may now quiet my self in every condition with firm expectations for
provision, for if thou call for the Corn I shall have abundant increase.
Riches, honor, friendship, health, safety, are at thy Command. If thou
command it, the tree, the field shall be fruitful.

2. Promises also for remoovall of all things evil. Call upon me in the day
of trouble, and I will deliver thee. Psalm. 50.15. Apply it. Lord, thou art my
Sun and my Shield, affoording not only light and influence, but safety, but
refuge. The same Command of thine both calls for good, and drives away evil.
This present pestilence is thy servant, Command it that it neither come near
our dwellings, nor stay in the dwellings of our neighbors; for so thou have
promised to deliver when we call.

2. There are promises pertaining to the life to come. He that believes, and
is Baptized, shall be saved. Mar. 16.16. My sheep hear my voice, and I know
them, and they follow me; and I give unto them eternal life, and they shall
never perish. Ioh. 10.27.28. Apply them. Lord, thou that give faith, do
promise life, and have methoded grace and glory; when I have ended my walk
here, lead me to eternity.

I might instance these Applications more largely, but I rather leave but only
Tastes; only let us endeavor to encourage our selves with the like, and learn
to enjoy God. Some do promise what they cannot make good; so did Satan to our
blessed Savior when he showed him the glory of the world: Some promise
deceitfully what they mean not to perform; so Simeon and Levi dealt with
Hamor about their sister Dinah. In God there is neither impotencie nor
faithlesnesse, he is able to make good to the utmost, and he will not deceive
our hopes. Phocion in an Oration at Athens compared Leosthenes in his promises
to the Cypress Trees, which are fair and fruitless. Some men are like those
tall, straight, and beautiful trees, of splendid and promising tongues and
behaviors, that draw men's eyes and expectations on them; but deceive, and when
we come near them they appear mere emptinesses. But confidence is not
frustrate which is placed upon God. Another Fig Tree, (like that our Savior
saw and cursed on the high way) when we come to gather fruit, may send us away
with hungry appetite. But faith while it plucks at Scripture, receives to
satisfaction, that tree though the fruit be ripe it still hangs for the weary
passenger, and in Winter when other trees are naked, robbed of their beauty,
it continues to have fruit and leaves, food and shade, a suiteablenesse to the
conditions of the afflicted, whether they be hungry to give them nourishment,
or weary to give them refreshment. Oh let us trust the promise what ever it be,
for now God that is abundantly free, yet has made himself a Debtor, that we
may now not only beg, but challenge. If we would pray and speed, neglect
not such an argument which gives quietness in and continuance to our prayers;
and in the want of other Rhetoric and Oratory, urge this with repetition,
Lord, Thou have promised; Thou have promised.

PSALM 51.17. The Sacrifices of God are a broken spirit; a broken and contrite
heart, O God, thou will not despise.


IT IS a known Text, but fit to our occasion and method. The Remedy that I am
now teaching, and we are all practicing, is Prayer: But prayer must come from
such an heart as is fit to pray; God loves rather broken expressions, than
expressions of Oratory, and they flow most rightly, most naturally from a
broken heart; which was the reason of my choice of this, to show how our hearts
must be affected in our Supplications.

This Psalm, for the matter of it, is (...), Paenitentiall; for the frame of
it, (...), Precatiue. It contains a double petition. 1. For himself. 2. For
his Kingdom.

1. David's petition for himself; which has two parts; 1. The petition it
self, which is double; 1. That he might be restored to the state of grace; for
he had lost much of his assurance, and at least his actual claim, by so foul
a sin of filthiness and blood. This from the beginning of the Psalm to the
eleventh verse. 2. That he might be continued in the estate of grace, to which
he desires to be restored; that he might not be cast from Gods presence, but
upheld with his free spirit. Verse. 11.12.
2. The promise of religious service upon the granting of his petition; from
verse. 12. to verse. 18. In which we may observe. 1. What service he promises;
that he would be ready to improve himself in the service of God; to teach
others, and to sing his praises. A Moral Service. Verse. 13.14.15. 2. Why he
promises such service rather then other; that for a double reason. 1. Because,
if not Moral, not acceptable; a Ceremonial service of Sacrifices and
Burnt-offerings, as being more empty shadows; would not please God. Verse. 16.
2. Because, if Moral, he knew it would be accepted; as being the truth of
other Sacrifices, and that Offering which God would not despise.




We have found the Text, to be a reason of David's promise of a Moral service:
and without other Division, taking it separated in it self, it has these two
parts; 1. The truth delivered; which is at least double; 1. That a broken and
contrite heart or spirit is Gods Sacrifice. 2. That such a Sacrifice God will
not despise.
2. The manner of delivering that truth, in the order of a meditation and
ejaculation; first meditation, The Sacrifices of God are a broken heart: then
ejaculation in a sudden rising upon that thought; Such, O God, thou will not
despise.


1. We will begin with the truth delivered, which as it has two parts, will
afford them to us for doctrinall observations. The first is this;

That a broken and contrite heart or spirit is Gods Sacrifice.

This will appear very useful, when we have it explicated, confirmed, and
applied.

1. Concerning the explication of it, three things are to be cleared.

1. What is the heart and spirit.

2. What it is to be broken or contrite.

2. What is a sacrifice, or how this is called Gods sacrifices.

1. The Text will not allow a large and Philosophical discourse of the heart
and Spirit, that were to wrong the intention of the place, and the time that I
have to spend; but for our present purpose it will be needful to know but
thus much;

1, That the heart notes the Sovereign power of the soul; it sits with a
scepter and commands the whole man; it not only sets on work, but seasons all
our works, and therefore the rule is, that every work has tantum virtutis
aut vitij, quantum voluntatis. And the very place of its residence shows its
government, being seated in the middle of the body; if at least that conceit of
a great Etymologist be warrantable, that (...) the contract of (...) be
derived of the hebrew word keneb, Medium.

2. The Spirit notes the active power of the soul, that which executes the
resolutions of the former; and therefore in our usual way of speaking, we call
an active man, a man of spirit. But here I think both words do signify one
and the same thing, the soul of man, whether we consider it organically, and
so call it the heart; or in-organically, and so call it the spirit: but
howsoever we express it, it is the soul of man which must be fitted for Gods
service, to be such a sacrifice.

2. The soul must be broken and contrite; which though in a curious notion
they may be distinguished, yet I here conceive them to express the same thing,
the thorough humiliation of the inward man. You will all discern that the
words must not be taken properly, for none will imagine that that fleshy part,
the heart, must be divided or broken in pieces or bruised, for that were to
make a dead man, in stead of a living Sacrifice; we must necessarily then
understand the speech to be figurative, and that David uses a metaphor; that
the soul in respect of its humiliation before God, must be as a thing bruised
and broken into pieces. Or it may farther signify the degrees of humiliation;
there must not only be a breaking, but a contriting a pounding unto dust. The
heart is naturally stony, proud, stiff, and rebellious, but it must be beaten
from its own height, and laid level and flat before Gods footstool; it must
be wounded and lie bleeding before God, it must shake and tremble at his
presence, and therefore the Italians have a word that is apt to express this,
Scheggiare, of Scheggia, a loose lease, or a paper by it self when the book
is unbound. The soul must be as it were unbundeled, it must be shaken and
loose; a scattered and shivering thing before God.

3. The soul, when it is thus separated into peice-meales, then it is Gods
Sacrifice. Sacrifices were Gods service in the Jewish manner of worship; they
were divided and broken when they were offered; But these were Ceremonial
Services; the Moral service that God now requires is rather a broken heart
then a slaughtered Beast, yet there is a resemblance in this unto that, and it
is called Gods sacrifice, because it is such a Service as is suiteable unto
him. Offerings in the Law, were either Expiatory or Dedicatory, our true
humiliation in some sense is both, while we weep over Christ, who is our
Expiation, and dedicate our selves to God in a full entire and sincere service.
The inward man must be truly humble, and this is Gods service, the Sacrifice
that we offer.

2. Having thus explained it, we are to confirm it by Argument;

1. Such humiliation is, and is called Gods sacrifice, because God himself is
the Author of it, he only breaks us and fits us for his own Altar. It Is true,
that Crosses may make us lie down, they may humble us, but God must make us
humble. Unless God sanctify the affliction, we may be stubborn under the
burden, and fret against that hand which we should at once see and
acknowledge with submission. Ye know the Story that a rock gushed forth
waters, it was strange, that waters should flow out of an hard stony Rock; but
the rock was smitten, and then it flowed. But could a stroke break a Rock?
or could the Rod cause the dry stone to yield forth moisture? Nay, the cause
was Gods Command; God bid Moses strike and then the waters flow. When the power
of God accompanies the affliction, and sanctifies the suffering, then the heart
of man breaks kindly; and that may well be called Gods, when he prepares his
own sacrifice.

2. This humiliation is suiteable to God, and therefore both is Gods sacrifice,
and is so called.

1. Such service is suiteable, because it is sincere, because spiritual: The
giving of the heart notes truth in the Offering, and that is it which God
requires, which he taught the Jews when he commanded them to give him the fat
and the intrals of Beasts that were slain. The heart notes unfainednesse; for
the body may be personated in taking on a different shape, the heart cannot: a
man may appear to be another man by the variety of his garments, but he is
the same man inwardly in his heart and in truth what ever his habit speak
him. He that gives his heart, offers a fit Sacrifice; suiteable, because both
spiritual and unfeigned.

2. As the heart is suiteable in regard of sincerity, so brokennesse is
suiteable, in regard of the manifestation of humility: And it is convenient
that we should fit our selves unto those relations wherein we consider God,
to come into the presence of our Lord and Sovereign bending, into the presence
of our Judge, trembling; into the presence of our justly-offended yet
gratiously-accepting God, bleeding, wounded, broken.

3. For a third reason it may also be called Gods sacrifice, because it does
him special honor; in a double respect.

1. What we give him; Our hearts, our spirits. Whom we honor, we present
with gifts, and by the greater gift we express the greater honor; and what
greater present can we give him than our selves. The Christian offers more to
God, than the Jew was wont. It was no such great matter to offer a Lamb, or a
Ram, or a Bullock; they that were rich might spare them, the poor in many
cases were not enjoined to it; but however they did but offer somewhat out of
their fold; we offer what is of greater price, and brings God more honor; The
better part of our selves, our very selves, our hearts and spirits.

2. How we give them Broken. It is not so much the gift as love and esteem in
the gift, that honors, now we do witness our love by our sorrow; and
according to that distinction which the School has afforded us, we express
a twofold sorrow, appretiatiue, and intensiue.

1. Our Appretiatiue sorrow discovers it self to the honor of God; when we
show at what a rate we set Gods favor, that to revenge our selves for losing
of it or losing at least our actual apprehension of it by our sin; we
roughly and severely handle our best part, and wrecke our displeasure upon that
which we hold dear and precious.

2. The Intensiuenesse of our sorrow honors him and is witnessed; that we not
only afflict our hearts for the dishonoring of our God, but do afflict them
with deep wounds, even to brokennesse and contrition.

I Will not longer stay upon Confirming of this truth, but descend easily to the
Application.

1. Use. If the divided wounded spirit, the broken heart be Gods sacrifice; we
learn a mystery, That there is a Manslaughter lawful, not only lawful but
profitable, but convenient. Esteem it no Paradoxe, for I call not for
selfe-murther, nor Preach like some of those Romish Incendiaries for Blood; but
in this slaughter, there is no cruelty, no inhumanitie. I bid you not kill
your selves, as that dreaming Platonist, or the more desperate Pseudo-Messiah
in the parts of Transylvania; but call for that death whereby you may more
comfortably live. We must be so broken, in the apprehension of the breaking of
Christ's body for us, as if we were under the same wrath; this the Jews
learned, who were commanded to lay their hands upon the head of the Beast which
was slain, as a witness that the desert was theirs, and that in justice their
own blood should be drawn by the Sacrificers knife.

2. Use. If the Broken heart be Gods Sacrifice, it condemns the unbroken in
heart as being no fit Offerings. There are many that come unto these businesses
of our public fasting and humiliation, that bring not their hearts with them;
for if the heart were present there would be affections present with the heart,
suiteable to the business we have in hand. Where men have no sense of their
misery, no sorrow for their sin, no hungring after pardon; it is an argument
their hearts are not present. If your hearts were here, there would be moisture
in your eyes, tenderness in your Consciences, zeal in your prayers. Where is
your sensiblenesse, your sorrow, your sighing, your zeal, nay where are your
hearts? If such as bring not broken hearts are condemned, much more such as
bring not their hearts at all; such only come for company, and fill the Church
with dead Carcasses, that have no life in their service, no heart unto the
work that they perform. Will ye mock the holy presence? Will ye come to
Gods Altar without an Offering, without a Sacrifice in your hands? As if while
Aaron were killing a Beast, the people should throng about him, and gaze on
merely for Curiosity. So ye deal when ye press hither, if ye bring not
your hearts with you, ye have nothing to do here; either bring Offerings or
crowd not the Altar. But I meant not to deal purposely with these, but with
such as if they do bring their hearts, yet unbroken, so it Reproues;

1. Such as are insensible of sin, that though many blows are laid upon
them, yet feel them not, but remain still hard and unbroken, like Anvils that
endure the Hammer. When we discover sin, and denounce judgments against the
sins that we discover; we bestow our blows upon the Consciences of
offenders, and purposely that we might Hammer them to another shape; but there
are many though they lie under the stroke, and are directly under the
reprehension, yet are not made sensible that those sins are theirs, that
those threatenings are to them, that they are the men. If men were broken, they
would be sensible, as Josiah was when he heard Shaphan read the Book of the
Law which the Priest Hilkiah gave him; he rent his Clothes, sent his Courtiers
to enquire the farther declaration of the Writing, because he saw that great
was the wrath of the Lord.

2. Such as are not open to Confession of sins argue that there is no breach
made upon their spirits. You know, a Vessel though it be full of liquour, yet
if there be no breach it lets none run forth, but if it be broacht it has a
free vent. Man is a vessel that contains much, and is filled with a filthy
pudled poisonous water; some of that remains in such as are sanctified and
washed by regeneration, therefore it is their continual care to empty
themselves, and make wide leakings that they may freely power themselves forth
before the Lord. But I fear I may too justly accuse you; who is it that in
private can lay out his sin in the presence of God? Confessions come hardly
from men in the public; we that are your mouths in these more common solemn
duties cannot freely enough confess your and our sins enough to the shaming
of our selves, doing it as if we would rather show our memories in the
Catalogues of sins, and our wit and Oratory in painting them; then our true
and unfeigned Contrition in being affected with them; But if sometimes we spend
a larger time upon this necessary and neglected duty, you soon grow weary of
our length, and by your carriage discover that you think us tedious, and that
less time might have been spent with more profit. Ah! Beloved, how justly may
our private devotions be suspected, when we dare show our selves weary in the
public? Which of us is wont to spend an hour or more upon our knees in the
acknowledgement of those many corruptions which we might easily acquaint our
selves withal, when there is no witness to observe it but the eye of God? I
call your Chambers, your Closets, your beds to witness against you, your
unbroken hearts. For if we were truly broken, there would be vent both
frequent and forcible; so David powrd himself out in this Psalm, when the
sense of his double sin had made a Breach upon his spirit.

3. Lastly such, as, though Broken, yet are not contrite, not shivered into
pieces. Men may be bruised and yet not so divided that one piece is taken from
another, that the frame is dissolved. The Devils may believe and tremble: Iam.
2.19. And wicked men have often trembled; So did Pharaoh, so did Baltasar, so
did Faelix; but the frame of their evil hearts was not taken asunder; they
returned again after the fit to be the same men that they were before, Pharaoh
returned again to his rebellion, Baltasar to his Cups, Faelix to his fingring
of Bribes; they were tough and remaind whole still. Some men are sometimes
startled at a Sermon, when we speak judgment, and lay it home close to the
Conscience, they wake and begin to look up; but like men half asleep and
half awake, they soon fall again to their slumber. A Drunkard that upon such
an occasion as this, hears the odiousness of that sin laid open, together
with the danger; may for the present begin to bethink himself, what a course
he run, and whither it is like to lead him, upon this he startles, and
begins to resolve, He will follow that sin no longer. The resolution it may
be holds as long as the fast holds, or it may be till the next day or longer;
but then he meets with some known Companion, falls to his sin again,
forgets that he was yesterday at a fast, or that he ever heard that
Drunkenness was a sin. Here was a little breaking, but no shattering of the
heart; the frame of the sin was not broken; the pieces, the joints, were not
taken asunder from one another; and therefore he easily returns to what he
was, and is after the Sermon, after the Fast, just such a one as he was before
it. These all come under the second application, the reproof of such as are
not brokenhearted.

3. Use. If the broken-heart be Gods Sacrifice, let us be exhorted to this
labor, to labor for broken and contrite hearts. The people of God have been
of such a temper, to omit other examples see one, in the Prophet Jeremiah, and
in his own words: Mine heart within me is broken; because of the Prophets all
my bones shake; I am like a drunken man, and like a man whom wine has
overcome; because of the Lord, and because of the words of his holiness; for
the Land is full of Adulteries: Ier. 23.9. If Jeremiah in the apprehension of
the sins of others, were so tender, that he did shake with horror, and
staggered as not able to retain his strength; how ought we to be moved with
the consideration of our offenses against almighty God? Let us witness to our
selves the unfainednesse of our humiliation, by the intensnesse of our sorrow,
by the breaking of our hearts; which that we may the better be guided in, I
shall set before you the several Metaphors which without straining we may
conceive the mind of David may be applied unto; The breaking up of ground, the
breaking of stones to dust, the dividing of their Sacrifices.

1. The phrase of a Broken heart, may refer to the breaking up of a stiff
ground, and the Harrowing of it for the bruising of the Clods. Let us plow up
our hearts, according to that of the Prophet; Break up your fallow ground, and
sow not among thorns: Iere. 4.3. And according to the same of another Prophet;
Sow to your selves in Righteousness, reap in mercy, break up your fallow
ground. Hos. 10.12. Let us use good Husbandry upon our selves, and bestow
Tillage, that we may bring forth fruit to God. We are naturally stiff
ground, and full of stones; barren and unfruitful. Beloved, there is a
necessity of this Husbandry, for ye cannot be profitable hearers of Gods
Word, unless ye be brokenhearted. If a man should throw abroad his seed,
before the plow has made furrows to receive it, he should loose all that he
does scatter; if the ground be hard the seed enters not, but lies open to be
pecked by every bird. Men are deaf to Gods Commands, till their hearts be
opened. Pharaoh had a stiff disposition, and though so many judgments came in
a throng, he was not broken by any of them, and therefore hearkens not to the
message of the Lord, but peremptorily rejects it, Who is the Lord that I should
obey him? But the Broken heart has an open ear; which we observe in men in
their several conditions: While a man frolicks away his time and life in a
pleasant way, enjoying health and vigor, not being acquainted with sickness
or other infirmities; he puts off the thought of death and an account that must
be made, and thinks that such sad meditations and admonitions are not fit for
a man of his activitie and resolution; but when God casts him upon his bed, and
makes him begin to apprehend that he is a man, a poor, weak, frail, sickly
man; and that he now at length sees what it is that follows upon sinful
pleasure, but especially when he looks into the grave where he fears himself
must shortly be laid, and sees under the grave Hell and Torment; then he
breaks, and now he can find an ear; if Ministers, if religious friends
discourse unto him, he hearkens, and begins to learn what those new and
unthought-of mysteries mean. This is lively in the example of the converted
Iaylour; Act. 16.29.30. When God had broken his heart; Then he called for a
light and sprang in, and came trembling, and fell down before Paul and Sylas;
and brought them out, and said, Sirs, what must I do to be saved? It is likely
that the Iaylour if he had not been a rough man in his natural temper, yet his
very calling might make him rough; before that time Paul might speak long
enough and he not regard him, Paul and Sylas might sing in the prison and he
take no notice, unless to threaten them and command their silence; but now
that God had shaken him with the Earthquake; he is now greedy of instruction.
His mind did not formerly run upon it, how he might come to Heaven; but now
hastily, violently, tremblingly, he enquires it, What shall I do to be saved?
Natural men care not for preaching, they wonder that people should go so much
to Sermons, should be so much in Conference; but when they come to be broken,
to be wounded in their Consciences, Then, Oh what instruction? What comfort can
ye give us? Let this be our care, to stir the earth, and let the Harrow
follow the plow, break the stiff clods, the proud thoughts that are built
against the Kingdom of Christ; then ye are fit for seed. We are Gods
seedesmen, and when we preach we scatter the seed upon a Congregation; but
we lose our labor where we meet with stony hard ground: plow up your hearts,
that the Word may the better fructify.

2. The second Metaphor may be from the breaking of Stones, and pounding them
to dust, to make a plaistry work. A man cannot alter the fashion of an hard
stone with his hand; but when it is made into plaster the Mason can make it
into any frame. We have seen the shape of a Lion, or an Horse, or Bear, or
any thing else made of stone, when it has been first broken and made and
tempered into a soft Mortar. We are naturally stony, men of stony hearts, and
are not pliant to the Image of grace, till broken into small pieces, and
grounded unto small powder. But, says Jeremy, My heart is broken within me;
and then he was fit to lament for sin. We must use Masonry as well as
Husbandry, we must be soft for impression. A man cannot make the print of his
Seal if he set it upon an hard wall; but the stamp leaves it self upon a
piece of Wax: Now we must be Wax in the hand of God, and Wax you know is
Ductible; if I held a round flint, I could not by crushing it with my hand make
it flat or square, or draw it out unto a length; but a piece of soft Wax might
be molded to any fashion, made round or flat, or square, or drawn out to any
length. If ever we have Comfort, we must be of ductible, following
dispositions, to be such as Gods dealing is toward us, to be fashioned by his
rod unto humility and submission, by his mercy unto thankfulness and praises;
To be, not what we are, or of our selves would be, but willingly what he will
have us be.

3. But lastly, The phrase in the Text does principally allude to the Breaking
of the Sacrifice; and we may find the Metaphor in taking notice of two Offerings.

1. The Offering of Incense, where the Command was that the Ingredients should
be beaten to powder, Exodus 30.36. A perfume smells sweetest when it is bruised
or crushed; and when we are stamped before God in the sense before declared,
we yield a pleasant savor to his Nosthrills.

2. The Sacrifice of Burnt-Offring; the Beast was cut in pieces and burnt unto
ashes. There must be a dividing of the heart, as we read of Abraham, Genesis
15.10. That he divided the Sacrifices and laid one piece over against another.
Our service of humiliation must be open and sincere, that nothing may be hid
from God, as the Beast though we cannot see it within, while it is undevided,
but when cut asunder we may perceive all the intralls and the heart and the
liver, and all the secreter bowels, whether the Sacrifice be sound. Oh let us
manifest our selves so truly humbled, that the blood of our Sacrifices may be
powered out before God, such a sacrifice was that Congregation, Act. 2.37. of
whom the Story witnesses, that they were Compuncti cordibus, pricked in their
hearts: Peter had preached unto them Christ Crucified; Now when they heard
this, they were pricked in their hearts and said, Men and brethren what shall
we do? Sin runs freely in the veins of every man, too abundantly freely in
them that are of a plethoricke state, and therefore Bloodletting cannot but be
profitable. Let me prescribe you that Physic now, and what ever Physicians
will tell you of the extreme heat of this present weather, and of the sign,
yet take the word of a Divine for the prescription, who dares warrant ease unto
your souls in this course. I have done with the first Doctrine that I
propounded, That a broken heart and contrite Spirit is Gods Sacrifice: The
second is this:

That such a Sacrifice of a Broken-heart,
God will not despise.
There is more in that phrase than the words seem to deliver, God will not
despise, that is, God will accept. He is pleased with such a bruised Offering,
as we have it confirmed in a comfortable promise in the place before alleged
concerning the Incense; The pure and holy perfume must be beat very small, and
put before the Testimony in the Tabernacle of the Congregation, where, says
God, I will meet with thee: Exodus: 30.36. The Septuagint reads it, Whence I will
be known to thee; And the Chaldee Paraphrase thus; Where I will appoint my
Word unto thee. Both setting out Gods gracious acceptance of such a Service.
Besides, the Word of the Text does enough confirm it; The broken heart is
called Gods Sacrifices, the construction is better in Divinity than in
Grammar, a word of the Plural is used, as if he would show us, that this
contrition and humiliation is in stead of all other legal Sacrifices. Will ye
see it yet clearer in a word of promise; Joel 2.13. Rent your hearts and not
your garments, and turn unto the Lord your God, for he is gracious and
merciful, who knows if he will return and repent, and leave a blessing
behind him. But if this leave it doubtful, that of the Prophet Esaiah will
remove our fears; To this man will I look says the Lord, even to him that is
poor and of a contrite spirit, that trembles at my Word. Esa. 66.2. They are
happy upon whom God looks, where he bestows the eye of his favor. That
great God who beholds the proud afar off, as if he knew them not; he looks
after the Contrite, or looks to him, (as the word is in the Prophet) he
affords acquaintance and has respect unto his state. And because the
Brokenhearted are cast down and dismayed in themselves; therefore another
promise is express; For thus says the High and lofty one that inhabiteth
eternity, whose name is holy, I dwell in the high and holy place, with him
also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to reviue the spirit of the
contrite ones. Esai. 57.15. The tears of Magdalen were received and praised;
The Publicans humble striking of his breast was observed at the door of the
Temple; The bitter weeping of Peter after his sin was remembered; God
despises not such; did he accept the possessed Magdalen, the notorious
Publican, Peter the denier, when they were now blubbered, and had no other
beauty, but that beauty which their tears gave them? And will he reject us?
Will he reject us when we come in the same posture? Nay he will not despise
such Sacrifices, such Sacrificers. It needs not a farther proof, I hasten to a
brief Application.

1. Use. It learnes us how God and the world differ in passing their Censure
and affection. Carnal men make sport at the brokenhearted, and deride their
contrition. While David mourned like a Dove on the housetop, you may hear
himself complaining how he was abused; Psalm. 69.10.11.12. And in another
Psalm, he pictures forth in his own case the very lively image of a man
mortified; That he was powered out like water, and all his bones were out of
joint, that his heart like Wax was melted in the midst of his bowels, his
strength was dried up, and his tongue cleaved unto his jaws; he was so
macerated that they might tell all his bones. Now he was a spectacle for gazing
worldlings; as he was his own torment, he was their wonder, they knew not what
to make of him; They look and stare upon me, says David; and when he was now
down, they were ready to devour him, and gaped upon him with their mouths,
with words both of scorn and threatenings. But in this case, God otherwise
esteems him, as himself professes it; He has not despised nor abhorred the
affliction of the afflicted, neither has he hid his face from him, but when he
cried unto him, he heard. Psalm. 22.14.15.17.24. God deals not as a false
friend who hides away his face from his brothers extremity, or is deaf to his
Complaints when he is brought low: but favorably respects and cherishes those
that walk sadly in the apprehension of their sin.

2. Use. It affords us great encouragement to draw near with our Offering,
when we know that God will not despise it. We are now equalled with the
Richest who can bring most into Gods Treasury, and are able to bring the
fairest and fattest Sacrifice to Gods Altar, theirs shall be but accepted, and
ours which is the same privilege, shall not be despised. He that has nothing
to give but himself, if he give himself, gives what God requires of him: for
he calls for the Heart, and the Apostle has told us what we may present; Romans
12.1. I beseech you that ye present your bodies a living Sacrifice, holy,
acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service. But chiefly this
Offering is acceptable, when the heart is contrite, for says the Lord, to him
that is poor will I look. Let not our unworthiness discourage us, to
maintain these or the like Scruples: Will God look upon such poor abject
worthless Wretches? If I should offer any Service, would he not contemn both
it and me? If I were more worthy, I would then draw near him: as I am I dare
neither sue for entertainment nor expect it. Away with such proud reasonings,
such shows of humility: would we be challengers rather than beggars? But if
we truly see our selves vile, and are as low in our conceits as our words
pretend; we shall have the speediest access; and shall soonest receive
because we beg. Thus much of the first part of the Text, The truth delivered.
The time calls me off, that I can add but a few words of the second; which
also if I had time, would not naturally afford many.

2. The manner of delivering of that truth.

1. In a Meditation; The Sacrifices of God are a broken heart.

2. In an Ejaculation; A broken and contrite spirit, O God, thou will not
despise.

He contemplates a comfortable passage, and then rayseth up himself in a
quick and speedy recourse to God. Let us so learn to Read, to Hear, then
we shall read and hear with profit, and not more with profit than with
comfort. Read and Breath toward heaven; God has breathed on the Scripture, if
we would be acquainted with the divine will, we must breath again to God.
Our ejaculatory prayer may have a constant and speedy intercourse between God
and his revealed will; when we hear a Message from heaven in our ordinary
attendance upon Preaching, we may speed to God in the very Act of Hearing,
that God would clear such a mystery, fasten such a notion, lay near such an
application. When we read the Scriptures, let us meditate, and pray, that
what we meet with which may be suiteable to our condition, may be closely
applied and made ours. Methinkes it fits the state and life of a Christian to
be much in meditation, and as much in prayer, specially in this use of it, The
darting of the thoughts, for it argues acquaintance. The solemn prayer may be
for a form only, and so we may deceive our selves in exercising of it; but
this shows we are acquainted with Heaven, when our recourse thither is
familiar and frequent. When we are to deal with strangers, our Negotiation is
attended with Ceremony of behavior and speech; But upon all occasions we can
visit and speak to an intimate friend. I would not have reverend and
trembling demeanor neglected in our most private Accesses to the infinite
Majesty; yet let us use our privilege, to be often with God, to live much in
Heaven, to be sparkling upward; winging up our souls in an heavenly
conversation, at once bestowing our thoughts upon what is holy, and our prayers
to the Holy One.

PSALM. 51.18. Do good in thy good pleasure unto Sion: Build thou the walls of
Jerusalem.


PRayer is likely to gain Audience, when we come stored with arguments from
the covenant and promise: when we come qualified in our selves with such
contrition. But there is still another duty which refers to this head, that as
our wisdom leads us to prayer for our selves; so our charity must direct us to
pray for others, without which we cannot be assured that we shall be heard in
our suits. I have therefore now again attended upon David, in the method of
his double petition.

1. His petition for himself, and the promise added; Verse. 17. Of which I
spoke elsewhere lately, and in the hearing of most which are now present.

2. His Petition for his kingdom, in the Verse which I have chosen and read, in
which (to come presently to the matter) we may observe these particulars.

1. Who it is that prays; David.

2. Whom he prays for; Jerusalem, Sion, the Church.

3. What he prays for; 1. The Churches restoration, Do good. 2. The
continuance of the Churches restored happiness; Build up the Walls.

4. To whom he prays; Thou.

5. How, the manner of his prayer; In thy good pleasure.

Here is much work laid out for a little time, and therefore that I may not
injure the Text, nor defraud you of any part which naturally flows from it; I
shall endeavor to follow every part: and because every part, therefore very
briefly.

1. He that prays, is David; upon which circumstance I have given my thoughts
leave to please themselves with three Observations, natural and useful.

I. Observation or Doctrine; that, The spiritual estate has its changes.

That same David who was formerly so dejected that he scarce dared to pray for
himself, now has gotten courage to pray for others. Who could speak more
droupingly, more abjectly, than he in the former part of the Psalm? He calls
for mercy, and having no hope in any thing but mercy, he only is bold because
he sees a multitude of mercies, and those tender ones likewise, According to
the multitude of thy tender mercies. But now he is raised from that
dejectedness, and dares look up to God in the behalf of others. He was often
acquainted with such changes; sometimes we hear him saying, as if he were
already dead with the fear of death; I shall one day perish by the hand of
Saul: at another time we may hear him triumphing, as if he had a strength
beyond his strength; I will not fear what man can do unto me. It was
likewise the case of Job, sometimes languishing under his torments he curses
the very day of his birth, and chafes with every one that speaks; at other
times, conquering his pain, he can dispute stoutly against the uncomfortable
Arguments of his froward Visitants. I Will instance but in one more, in Peter;
he is ready now in the strength of his faith to leap overboord to walk upon
the Water, but presenly begins to sink, and then he trembles, because of
little faith: at one time he is courageous for Christ, and draws his weapon in
his defense; at another time, he shamefully denies him. So that it is with our
souls as many times with our bodies; sometimes we find our selves full of
life, active, apt for business, merry, witty, pleasing to our selves and
others: sometimes dull and indisposed, unapt for any thing but sleep,
troublesome to our selves, and a burden to our company. So, sometimes we can
pray with life and zeal, at other times fitter for a slumber than Devotion: so
also in other duties. And the Reason may, among others, be double.

1. Because the ground of distemper remains in every Christian; a relic of
nature, and a principle of grace, which strive against one another, and from
that conflict is this distemper, this change. That as where the vigor of
youth, and the remainder of a disease continue in the body of a man, he is
often sickly and often again well; not kept in his bed, because of his vigor
and natural strength, yet not in perfect health, because he is still
struggling against the disease; so is the Christian, there are in him contrary
principles, both are working; in some things nature prevails, in some other,
grace; and the man for the present changes to the side that has the victory.

2. Because besides that ground within, he meets with changes from without.
When we so much use the Creature, that we surfeit upon the use, then we grow
distempered in our better part, we grow very dull in our holy service; but
when again we awaken our thoughts, and set our joy on God, then we are more
lively to his service. The soul apprehending sin, grows sad, apprehending
mercy, it then takes comfort; so accordingly it walks dumpishly or cheerfully.
When we meet with strong temptations, which not only foil but overthrow us,
we go on dismayed, yielding, yet ashamed of the conquest; when we meet with
powerful encouragements, we find our selves lightened, and now, if not able
yet willing to live as Angels rather than men.

The use of this will be profitable, for instruction, reprehension,
encouragement, and exhortation.

Use. 1. It instructs us in three profitable truths. 1. In the difference of
the estate of men carnal and regenerate. Men merely carnal are always
diseased, and their disease continually working; but the regenerate, though
they have some qualmes, yet the sincerity that is within, works forth the
distemper again. Sickness in an old man overcomes him, because there is not a
native heat to encounter it; but though sickness may befall a young able lusty
body, the natural strength encounters and prevails against it. Such a
principle of grace is strong and working in the regenerate, that drives out the
poison which may be any way received; and sincerity (like a fire under a
Vessel of water) boyles out and purges away the scumme.

2. It instructs us to the discovery of those who are of the best temper, such
namely as have the fewest Changes in their spiritual estate. It argues much
health and an excellent temper and furnishment of grace, when we are
constantly disposed unto good; for so much distemper as there is, so much
nature. Those Christians then are very happy, that are still equal, that have
a scale of their passions which are equally and proportionably balanced in all
conditions, whereas in some the scales are never or seldom even, but sometimes
their fear weighs down the rest, sometimes their sorrow, sometimes their joy,
sometimes their anger. But they are happy that have a sweet and even tune
ableness, and come nearest unto perfection; as, if there were an exact
symmetry and proportion of Elements in Elementates, there would not be a
dissolution.

3. It gives us a little to look after the happiness we shall have in heaven:
there we shall have no ill health, no distemper; but shall meditate and praise
God freely, cheerfully, as the Angels do. Here we complain often, our Heads,
our Teeth pain us, our bellies, our all parts are afflicted; so we complain
of blindness in our understandings, of deadness in our affections, of
rebellion and perverseness in our wills; that we can do nothing as we ought to
do, as we desire to do: But there shall be no complaining, no cause of
complaining, we shall be freed from changes, from the grounds of our changes.

Use. 2. It reproves two sorts: 1. The unwarrantably bold, such, as if their
strength could not be overcome, nor they change, dare venture upon any
temptation. Like young men that were never acquainted with sickness, they will
go in any weather without fear of the extremities either of heat or cold,
and venture upon any dish, what ever the Physician prescribe, pretending their
stomachs are hot and able to digest them. Such are the forward venturings of
some, upon any businesses, upon any company, upon any recreations, not
considering how easily they may distemper themselves, and, if not lose their
integrity, yet forfe it their comfort.

2. It reproves, such as are ready to censure others for their faylings, that
censure them for no Christians, because not lively or strong ones. Men may be
dangerously sick, and yet still alive; let us be charitable toward our
Brethrens infirmities, for they are not to be concluded dead as soon as
diseased.

Use. 3. It speaks encouragement to them that are sad-hearted when they find
not themselves answerable to what they should be, to what they have been. Some
fear their estate is not good, because not always right; They complain, they
could have wept at a day of humiliation, trembled at a judgment denounced,
rejoiced in a comfortable promise: but now they cannot, or at least not
sometimes. Indeed, here is matter for our humbling, for our deeper humbling,
but not for despair; for though there be distemper, there may yet be life:
which likewise proves it self by this, that we are but sometimes so; whereas
if we were dead there would be no stirrings at all.

Use. 4. Lastly it exhorts us to live physically, to be much in observation
what our temper is, how we are disposed: let us be careful and fearful of
our selves, laboring to be much acquainted with the state of the soul, how
we thrive, or whether we impair in our health: let us not venture on such
things as may be hurtful for us, but choose what is wholesome; that we may be
good Physicians to our selves, and as much as may be, hinder our distempers.

II. The second observation is this; that, The assurance of mercy for our
selves, makes us confident to beg mercy for others.

David was almost afraid to prefer his own suit. He begs humbly, but he begs
in faith, and believes his sin is pardoned, as may appear by the very manner
of his praying, and continuance in it; but now he spends not all in his own
behalf, but remembers Jerusalem, and becomes her advocate in the same Court.
So Abraham, because he was Gods friend, that was his assurance; therefore he
entreats for Sodom and her profane and impious inhabitants. Then, we may be
bold, till then, not: and for this Reason.

Because there is no ground of confidence for others: for while sin lies upon
the conscience unpardoned, it makes men tremble. Can a Malefactor pray for a
Malefactor? With what face could a thief indicted at the Bar, entreat the
Judge to be favorable to another thief that stands at the same Bar with him?
We must have Relation to, and Interesse in him to whom we prefer a suit of
that nature. If we were to deal with a Stranger, to make request to him about
any matter, we first use the mediation of an acquaintance or friend to make
our entrance; much more when we negotiate with an enemy. How shall they that
are Strangers, that are adversaries to God, hope to speed? Let me apply it
briefly.

Use. 1. This shows you the reason of that method which you may observe to be
ordinarily used by Ministers and others in their prayers, especially on such
occasions as these of our meeting to fast and pray; We first humble our selves
unto the dust, and call for pardon upon our unfeigned sorrow and repentance; and
then we proceed to remember others, to pray for the Church, to beg mercy for
the distressed, then we entreat for Lancashire and our other neighbor
Counties, for whose sake we assemble.

Use. 2. It shows us what unprofitable, unserviceable men those are that are
carnal and unregenerate; they have no interesse in heaven, they have no
encouragement to appear before God, and therefore have no confidence to be
helpful to their brethren. They often make a great show in the world, as if they
were able to do somewhat; but they are like some vainglorious Courtiers, who
when they come down into the Country, talk what power they have with my Lord
Keeper, my Lord Treasurer, with my Lord, my Lord, and fill their speech with
great names, and sometimes of the Kings Majesty himself; but indeed they are
obscure unknown men, they have no interesse in his Majesty, they have no power
at Court at all: Such are Unregenerates, they have no knowledge, acquaintance
or power in the Court of Heaven, they cannot prefer one Suite if we should
need them. Such, upon whom God has mercy in the pardon of their sins, such are
the only powerful ones. We pray for plenty, and they consume: We pray for
continuance of health, and they enjoy it: they are of themselves unprofitable
to the neighborhood and Country wherein they live; nay, very hurtful, such
as would bring down plagues and judgments, if God were not merciful to the
elect, and unto them for their sakes.

Use. 3. Let us therefore labor for assurance of God's favor, that our sins
be freely pardoned, that so we may be profitable to others, and with
confidence may pray for them; which we cannot unless our selves be righteous,
for the promise is but to such; that the prayer of the righteous man prevails.

III. The third Observation is this; that, Mercy to our selves makes us
compassionate toward others.

David might have ended his prayer at the seventeenth Verse, but having
received mercy, he is merciful to Sion. Gods children desire not to fare well
alone, but would have mercy imparted. Which they do;

1. Because they apprehend by their own case how sweet and behoovefull mercy
is.

2. Because graces are not alone, but where a living faith is, there is a
working charity: where there is faith to lay hold upon mercy, there will be
charity to desire others may be partners in it: I Will but touch at an
application.

Use. 1. It shows us the reason why the godly pray so much for others; they
are often in their family prayers: in their more private prayers, they pray for
their family, for their children, for their servants, for their friends, for
the Parishes wherein they live, because they know what mercy is, whereas
carnal men are senseless of it. They have tasted the sweetness and comfort
of having sin pardoned, of having Gods favor; and therefore cannot but desire
that such whom they love, might feel and enjoy the like.

Use. 2. It discovers the uncompassionate to be unpardoned. If ye can live in
a family, and never pray for it; if ye can beget children and never pray for
them; it is a great sign that you your selves never enjoyed true mercy, but
still lie in your sins, without either pardon or peace.

Use. 3. Let us therefore as an argument of our own happiness, and for the
increase of our true comfort, follow the example of David, be merciful unto,
and mindful of others. I have ended my thoughts on the first circumstance
employed in the Text; who it was that prayed.

2. The second part is, For whom David prays; for the Church, set forth by
these two names, Sion and Jerusalem: They were distinct, yet when the Scripture
names One, it understands Both; and when Both, but One and the same thing, the
Church: which David being a member of, prays for. That Observation which I
would make useful to you, is but this one:

That it is fit the members of the Church, should pray for the Church.

The Saints have been wont to do so, as I might show you by many instances,
if it were not an unnecessary spending of the time, to them that are acquainted
with Scripture Story; but I will rather confirm it by Reason.

1. It is fit, because so while we pray for the Church, we are wise for our
own particulars, and pray for our selves; for in Homogeneous bodies every part
is the same with the whole.

2. We are to that end members, that we might be serviceable to the body. The
Commissures, Joints, Nerves, Tendons, are all to this purpose; the Bonds and
Relations, Religious, Civil, Oeconomall. It is so in the natural body: The
members that are fitted to that service, according to the measure received, do
communicate. The stomach receives nourishment, concocts it, is nourished it
self, casts out excrementitiall matter, sends much to the Liver, which
disperses what it receives, when it is made fit for distribution; and the whole
is fed. This the Apostle expresses fully: The whole body being fitly joined
together, and compacted by that which every joint supplyeth, according to the
effectual working in the measure of every part, makes increase of the body
unto the edifying of it self in love, Ephesians. 4.16. Where there are two words
used by the Apostle very significative; (...), and (...); that there is a fit
order, and a close. The members are proportioned and compacted, and therefore
should supply to each. We may make use of this.

Use. 1. For reprehension. It deservedly reproves the senseless, that though
they name themselves members of the body, yet are not sensible of the bodies
pain. A piece of wood may be proportioned to the shape of a leg, and so
fastened to the body, that it is used as a member, but it feels no pain though
the whole body be diseased, no, not if you prick the thigh or knee, the
nearest parts unto it, yet it feels not, because it is but a wooden Leg.
They manifest themselves such, that are not afflicted with the Church, or not
affected, men that live but only to themselves. It is a bad Motto, Sibi natus,
sibi vivit: for they are but mere pieces of earth that are borne to themselves,
that live only to themselves. Yet such is the course of the carlesse among us,
they mind only their profits, or their sports, attending either wholly to the
Plough, or, which is worse, to their horses, to their dogs, or to their pots,
and in the mean while have no care or thought of the Church, or how it goes
with the common cause.

Will ye take notice of that fearful imprecation of the Prophet David? If I
forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning. If I do not
remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, If I prefer not
Jerusalem above my chief joy. Psalm. 137.5, 6. How justly might that curse
befall our forgetfulness and neglect? We deserve that these hands of ours
which we stretch to heaven, should wither, and be made unable for any motion:
that these tongues with which we speak to one another, with which we complain
our wants, and call to heaven for mercy, should be made dumb, and cleave (for
want of moisture) to the roofes of our mouths: that seeing we neglect to
speak for Jerusalem, we might not be able to speak for our selves. But that of
the Prophet Esaiah deals the blow more home to the unsensible; who are
careless of the Churches glory and increase: The Nation and Kingdom that will
not serve thee shall perish, yea those Nations shall be utterly wasted. Esa.
60.12. We are bound to do service unto the Church; and as we may fear that
our Nation shall some way be smitten if it put to no hand to the public cause
which is likely to gain something by Swedens Forces and the confederacy of the
Saxon Elector; so we may fear that particular places must bring in their
accounts how they have been helpful: if we send not over at least the joint
forces of our prayers to attend upon the Armies, we cannot assure our selves
of that we pray for here, the staying and preventing the present mortality;
for the Nations that serve not the Church shall be utterly wasted.

Use. 2. If it be the duty of the members, let us be exhorted to the duty,
to be mindful of the Church in all our prayers. O! pray for the peace of
Jerusalem; they shall prosper that love thee. Peace be within thy Walls, and
prosperity within thy Palaces, Psalm. 122.6, 7. So David prayed, so let us pray
with David, especially having so great an encouragement; They shall prosper
that love thee: which was the motive that Jeremiah used, that they should pray
for the civil estate of Babylon; Seek the peace of the city, whither I have
caused you to be carried away Captives, and pray unto the Lord for it, for in
the peace thereof shall ye have peace, Jerem. 29.7. But it is most certain
concerning the City of God, In the peace of that, we shall have peace, without
it, none: and therefore be affected as the Church is affected; Rejoice ye
with Jerusalem and be glad with her, all ye that love her; Rejoice for joy
with her, all ye that mourn for her. Esa. 66.10. But that I may not depart
from the Text, I shall urge this by no other motives, than such motive as may
be had from the consideration of the Church it self under the names used by
the Psalmist, Sion and Jerusalem, in the moralizing of the hystory; 1. Of the
Situation. 2. Of the Privilege.


1. The moral consideration of the Situation of Jerusalem will give us some
motive to remember it.

1. It was sited (though not exactly, yet in the general account) in the
midst of the holy land, and the known world. That may note the perfection of
the Church, the Center to which is a confluence of all other lines from the
Circumference, The Sun that cuts the Equator, and in the midst of the
Firmament is the worlds beauty, The heart that being principal in its
sovereignty has a principal place for its operations, The navill that ties and
knits together the veins and carrying instruments which meet there; all
tending to express the perfection of the Church, which if for no other reason,
yet challenges our memory; besides, that all who shall be saved must meet
together in the bosom of the Church, without which there is no salvation.

2. It was Hilly, therefore called Mount Sion, and the phrase is usual of
going Up to Jerusalem. So is the Church in the time of the Gospel described by
Micah; But in the last days it shall come to pass, that the mountain of the
Lords house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and it shall be
exalted above the hills, and the people shall flow unto it; and many Nations
shall come and say, Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, and
he will teach us of his ways; for the law shall go forth of Sion, and the word
from Jerusalem, Micah 4.1, 2. So likewise, Psalm. 87.1, 3. His foundation is in
the holy mountains: Glorious things are spoken of thee, O City of God. But
that which is our motive is in this, that because hilly, therefore it is strong
above the reach of malice, and we may find safety in it; for the Hill of God,
is as the hill of Basan, an high hill as the hill of Basan: and in another
Psalm; He has built his Sanctuary like high Palaces, like the earth which
he has established for ever, Psalm. 78.69. Our safety lies in this, that we
are in the Church as in a defenced place, and must endeavor to preserve it as
a fort or garrison wherein we lie entrencht. Besides, it is that high safe
Road, which leads us unto heaven; that as the Valley of Gehinnon lay under
Jerusalem; so, the way of life is Above to the wise, that he may depart from
Hell beneath; as Solomon applies it, Pro. 15.24.

3. They were formerly two several Cities, One was in Benjamins Lot, the other
in Judahs; Sion which was Judahs, continued in the Jebusites hands till David
was King, who by conquest made them both one; according to that in the 122.
Psalm, Jerusalem is builded as a City that is compact together. The Church
likewise is now but One, since Christ came, the Conqueror; there is no
partition wall, but Jebusites and Jews both inhabit together; as the Apostle
speaks; Now in Christ Jesus, ye who were sometime far off, are made nigh by
the blood of Christ; for he is our peace, who has made both one, and has
broken down the mid-wall of partition between us, Ephesians. 2.13, 14. All have
now an interesse in the Church; and it being but One, we are bound to pray for
it by one common bond.

2. Beside the Situation, the prviledges of Sion and Jerusalem may afford us
some motives: the privilege; 1. Of Sovereignty. 2. Of Holiness. 3. Of Love.


1. It had the privilege of Sovereignty, it was Caput and Seeds Imperii, the
Metropolis of the Land, Whither the Tribes go up, the Tribes of the Lord, for
there are set Thrones of judgment, the Thrones of the house of David, Psalm.
122.5. The Church has such a Sovereignty, the Chief of all Societies, the
Princess of all other Monarchies: for, all that are of the faith, wheresoever
they dwell, yet are free of that, as the mother City. The Reubenites, Gadites,
and Manassites, who had their inheritance beyond Jordan, were fearful, lest in
time to come, the rest of the people of Israel should say, What have ye to
do with the Lord God of Israel? Therefore they build an Altar in remembrance
of this, that they might not lose their right in Jerusalem, that they were
free, and of the kindred, though they had their dwelling beyond the flood, Jos.
22.22, 23, 24. The Church is the head City to which all the Nations flow,
built upon Common ground, and to which all believers have a claim, as Saint
Paul speaks; Ye are no more strangers and forreiners, but fellow-Citizens
with the Saints, and of the household of God, and are built upon the foundation
of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner
stone, Ephesians. 2.18, 19. And who will not pray for the head City of the Nation
to which he does belong?

2. The privilege of holiness was also great; for, thither the Tribes went
up, unto the Testimony of Israel, to give thanks unto the Name of the Lord,
Psa. 122.4. And Gods house was there, as the Psalmist adds in the ninth Verse,
Because of the house of the Lord our God, I will seek thy good. So it is
called by Micah in the place alleged, and by Isayah, Isai. 2.3. And the
Evangelist calls it, The holy City; Mat. 4.5. The Church now is likewise holy,
as Joel prophesied of it; Ye shall know that I am the Lord, dwelling in Zion
my Holy Mountain, then shall Jerusalem be holy, Joel 3.17. Therefore, let it
be our resolution, because of the house of the Lord, to seek the Churches
welfare. But this motive will appear more in the next.

3. The privilege of Love which is manifested to the Church,

1. That God dwells there: He refused the Tabernacle of Joseph, and chose not
the Tribe of Ephraim; but chose the Tribe of Judah, the Mount Sion which he
loved, Psalm. 78.68. David further expresses it, that God dwells there with
delight; For, the Lord has chosen Sion, he has desired it for his
habitation; This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have desired it.
Psa. 132.13, 14.

2. God appears there, and in that, the Bush that burned but was not consumed
was a type of Gods appearance in the Church, Exodus 3.2. I will go now, says
Moses, and see this great sight, why the Bush is not burnt; And God called unto
him out of the midst of the Bush. The place where Jerusalem was, was called,
the Land of Moriah, because of Gods appearing, where he made himself known
unto his people: In Judah is God known, his name is great in Israel, in Salem
is his Tabernacle, Psa. 76.1, 2. If we would see God we must wait upon him
in his worship, we must visit him in his holy Temple: for to his Worshippers
he shows his face, and makes known his glory.

3. To it he makes gracious promise; and to others in it for her sake. I will
abundantly bless her provision, and will satisfy her poor with bread; I will
cloth her Priests with salvation, and her Saints shall shout alowd for joy,
Psalm. 132.15, 16. Is not this an evidence of love? But further; See David
describing Gods love in stirring up the peoples thankfulness, Psa. 147.12, 13,
14. Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem, praise thy God O Zion: for he has
strengthened the Bars of thy gates, he has blessed thy children within thee.
He makes peace in thy borders, and fills thee with the finest of the wheat,
Shall God witness his love, and we our neglect? If we be not conscionable
in the duty, let us at least be wise, to favor whom the Lord respects. As it
is therefore fit for the members let us pray for the Church, for with this only
motive I will leave both the exhortation, and this second part of the Text, for
whom David prayed.

III. The third part is, What he prays for; 1. For the Churches Restoration.
2. For her Continuance.


1. David prays for the Churches Restoration, That God would do good unto
Sion; for his former sin had brought an harm upon it, and God was offended.
I would briefly make this useful in two Observations.

I. The first Observation. That sin is of so public an harmfull nature, that
it reaches, beyond the person that sins, unto others.

David sinned, and his people suffered: and we observe in Scripture, both; That
the Sin of a Prince has reached to his people; as in the Case of this David;
because of his pride, a pestilentiall disease lessened his number; and he
confesses himself the cause of the slaughter; Lo, I have sinned and done
wickedly, but these sheep, what have they done? 2 Samuel 24.17. And the sacred
history resolves the Judgments that came on Judah unto the sins of Manasseh:
Because Manasseh the king of Judah has done these abominations; Therefore I am
bringing upon Judah such evil, that whosoever hears of it, both his ears
shall tingle, 2 King. 21.11, 12. And likewise that the sin of a people
reaches to their Prince; as Solomon a King has made a grave and serious
observation; Prove. 28.2. For the transgression of a Land, many are the Princes
thereof; that is, There are often changes, their Princes being cut off by
death. To make use of this.

Use. 1. It shows how heinous is the nature of sin, it is like a pestilence
that takes hold and consumes. Politic Writers have distinguished of men, that
they may be good common-wealths-men, though bad Christians; but surely,
according to the truth of the notion, such a one is malum publicum, though he
may be bonus cives; and whatever his relation be unto the Weale-publike, if
he be wicked, he is harmfull; and like a fire that consumes what is near him,
and would consume the world, if God were not more abundantly merciful.

Use. 2. Let us then be careful that we harm not society: if we will not
be religious, let us yet be merciful. Oh spare the Country, bring not the
plague upon it, you that live impenitently: bring not upon us a swift
judgment, which so long as your sins are violent, we cannot but expect.

II. Second Observation. David, that sinned, prays. There is much equity in
that, that they which make the wound should provide a plaster. I must not
weary you, and therefore will name two Uses.

Use. 1. It condemns a careless generation, that are forward to sin, but
backward to pray. The Drunkards, Swearers, Whorers, Sabbath-prophaners,
Worldlings, Oppressors, Pleasure-mongers, and the rest, such as they, are they
that hurt us; but of all others, these are most backward to come unto our
Fasts. Unjust cruel wretches, that without compassion can do injury, but have
no hearts to use the means for prevention of judgments.

Use. 2. Let us show our selves just to the places where we live; be ready to
seek God, and to use all means to pacify Gods wrath. Let us weep over the
sins that we have committed, and the hurt that we have done by our sins; and
let us use David's course and method; pray as he: Lord pardon our sins, and he
merciful to our County.

2. David prays for the continuance of the Churches restored happiness, in
these words; Build up the walls: noting the Churches need, and that her
condition here is not perfect; which will give us leave to draw out, and touch
upon two brief Observations.

I. Observation. That the Church stands in need of walls.

We need not doubt the truth of this, when we consider the multitude of her
enemies, and their great envy at her peace; so that Nehemiah had good reason
in his time for his care in building: and for that reason, the good providence
of Almighty God has taken a course for his peoples safety, to wall them about,
that his spouse might be a garden enclosed, Cant. 4.12. a Vineyard compassed
round with an hedge, and strengthened with a Tower built in the midst of it,
Esai. 5.2. I Will not enlarge so plain a matter; but for the use of it.

Use. 1. I must needs condemn, 1. Such as trust in the bare name of the
Church, as if therefore they should be safe, only because they can plead, The
Church of God is in the Land. But it is as insufficient a plea as that of the
Jews, The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord; for the Church it self
has need of walls of defense.

2. But far greater is the sin of such as pluck down the walls it has,
and lay it more open to invasion. There are some false and treacherous men that
have ill will at Sion, being of that cursed brood of Edom, they say, Down with
it to the ground; I mean (besides the pleaders for Baal) such as are profane
and impenitent in their lives. They shall smart for it, whosoever they are, and
shall at length receive the doom of Traitors.

Use. 2. Let us be friends to the Church, and do what we can for the
establishing of her peace, and the building of her walls. Endeavor the
assurance of Gods love, that the love of God may be the strongest wall.
Entreat for, and wait upon divine Providence, because the Providence of God is
our wall. Live answerable to the holy Gospel, that the Gospel, being continued
to us, may defend us: for if that be removed, our fence is broken down; and
for our part, by our un-answerablenesse to it, we make great breaches, so
great, that it is our wonder, that God goes not through and leaves us; that the
adversary rusheth not in, to ruin us. Oh that at length we were suitable in
our lives to that holy Gospel; that the Church might also have the wall of our
holiness, which though of it self it be but slight, yet, when it is of Gods
building, it will hold out and give strong resistance to any adverse power; nay
God himself never enters as an armed man, but when there is a breach in the
holiness of a people. Let us endeavor to be living walls; that as that
Grecian City which being unwalled, the Ambassadors of another City wondered,
and demanded the reason: some of the chief Citizens poynting to the Bands of
some able young men, These (say they) are the walls of our City. So let it be
our endeavor, that we may be walls unto the Church, and to the places where we
live.

II. Observat. That the Church is still unfinished, and wants some of her
beauty.

While there is building, the structure is not finished; no perfection till the
last stone be laid. It is so with graces, men still are to be built up farther,
and by the use of the Ordinances are edified to the most holy faith. It is so
with Arts, they have not attained their Apex, their (...), but men still invent
and add to the Palaces of philosophy and all other humane learning. Nor is it
convenient to the very condition of the Church, while it is, in Via; that it
should be perfect. It has a perfect rule, so that it needs no traditions to be
added either for strength or beauty; but it is not perfectly answerable to that
rule.

Use. Let us only make this Use, to pray unto God, 1. That the strength and
the beauty of the Church might be still increased; that the Kings Spouse might
have her clothing of wrought gold, and be brought unto the King in a raiment of
needle-worke, Psalm. 45.13, 14. That at length the Isles, and the ships of
Tarshish might bring their Sons from far, their silver and their gold with
them, unto the name of the Lord our God, and to the holy one of Israel; that at
length, according to the promise, The Sons of Strangers might build up her
walls, and their Kings minister unto her, Esai. 60.9, 10. Entreat of God that
he would put fresh beauty upon his Chosen, that she may multiply as the Bud
of the field, and increase and wax great, and come to excellent Ornaments;
that she may be clothed with broydred work, decked with bracelets, have a
jewel on her forehead, and a beautiful Crown upon her head, that she may be
perfect through his comeliness, which he puts upon her: according to the
beauty of Judah described by God himself, to the upbraiding of her
ingratitude. Ezekiel. 16.7, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.

2. That her full glory may be hastened, when the holy City the new Jerusalem,
shall be prepared as a Bride for her husband. That the building might be
raised to its full height; that the kingdom of Gods glory may come, which is
the expectation of the Saints. Even so, Come Lord Jesus. The Spirit and the
Bride say come. This is the fourth part, What he prayed for: of the rest in a
few words.

IIII. The fourth particular is; To whom he prays. Do THOU good; Build THOU.
He prays to God, whom he knew onelyable to hear what he said, and to grant
what he knew fit. I would have observed:

I. That God is the Churches safety. If he build it, it shall be strong: if he
cover it, it shall be safe: if he do good unto it, it shall be happy.

II. That to God we must have recourse for our safety. They are usual and
known notions, and therefore I am less sorry that I have not time to speak of
them: Only, let us take notice, and make a due use of our knowledge, to speed
unto God, and to refuge our selves under the Almighty, and pray; Lord help, for
it is time for thee to put to thy hand. I hasten to end with the fifth and last
part of the Text.

V. How, or in what manner he prays. Do good in thy good pleasure, or, in
thy good Will. That which I would observe is this;

I. Observe. That Gods motive is himself. There is nothing, ad extra, that sets
God on work in the bestowing of his love. There is much that may move God to
anger, according to our humane use of speaking; and therefore it is safe to
resolve our own perdition to our selves; that judgments temporal, but
especially eternal damnation is because man has sinned; yet in this we take
away nothing from Gods absoluteness and sovereignty; for, in his bestowing of
his love, we acknowledge all to be free; and though heaven and salvation be
not granted but to them that have done good in this life; yet we may resolve
our eternal choosing unto free pleasure, or good pleasure; as here: Do good
in thy good pleasure; because there could not be found in them, what might
move or draw God for to love them.

II. Observe. That we must use that motive when we deal with God.

I have formerly spoken of some other arguments in prayer, as the Covenant and
the promises, but in the use of them, in the ultimate resolution we bring all
to good pleasure. There must be an universal resignation of our Choyces and
desires to God; and then we pray,

1. Wisely: when we can content our selves with his provisions, and sue for
what he is delighted in, and pleased to give us.

2. Then we also pray humbly, when pleased to receive what he is pleased to
carve us; as we have seen a wise and awful mother disposing to the Trenchers
of her children, not what they, but what her self thinks needful for them;
and they receiving what is laid before them: without finding fault, without
curious appetite after another bit, or a better dish.

Let us learn thus to pray, and know at length that Art and Skill that
prevails with God; Be pleased with what he proportions us, and be humbly and
submissely content. Use the argument, and especially neglect it not, in the
behalf of the Church: Pray David's prayer often, Do good to Sion in thy good
pleasure: Pray the Churches Prayer often, Ne irascaris Domine: Pray often the
prayer of the Priests and Ministers of the Lord, Be favorable, O Lord, be
favorable: Spare thy people O Lord, and give not thy heritage to reproach,
that the heathen should rule over them; Wherefore should they say among the
people, Where is their God? They are of low and unworthy thoughts that Center
themselves in themselves, that have no respect to what is abroad, that have no
care of the holy Church of God; and I dare be bold in the censure, they are no
Citizens of the new and heavenly Jerusalem, that are no friends to Israel while
it is warring in the Camps. Let us show our selves friends in our mothers
Cause, fight by our prayers, our spiritual weapons, against the Turk, against
the Pope, against Judgments, the Pestilence, Scarcity, and the Sword. If we
would have comfort to our consciences, if audience to our suits in our own
behalf, let us remember Sion; for then the promise is, They shall prosper that
love thee. Pray for the Kings Majesty, pray for the state of these kingdoms,
pray for the King of Swedens Army, pray for our English Forces, pray for the
distressed in Bohemia, in the Rheine, in France; and in one word to comprehend
these and all; pray for the peace of Jerusalem: for our Brethren and Companions
sake let us now say; peace be within thy Walls, and Prosperity within thy
Palaces.

MATTHEW. 3.7, 8. But when he saw many of the Pharisees and the Sadducees come
to his Baptism, he said unto them; O generation of Vipers who has warned you
to flee from the wrath to come?

Bring forth therefore fruits meet for repentance.


OUr Assemblings for prayer continue, because the cause continues; We have
waited so many days at the posts of Gods house, and yet have not hearing. Let
us find what deaffens the ear of God, whether Reformation has been wanting
to our Humiliation, for to that David ascribes it, Psalm. 66.18. If I regard
iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear my prayer. There must be a Real
prayer, as well as a Vocal; otherwise, hypocrisy will hinder our Audience. I
have therefore chosen to continue my method: to the large discourse of prayer,
to add a seasonable discourse of Repentance, the second remedy that we are to
use for the removal or prevention of evil.

The Text is part of the Baptists sermon, and so far as I shall make use of it,
we may consider in it;

1. To whom it was preached: To the Pharisees, Sadducees and the multitude.

2. The sermon it self; which is,

1. Hortatory to repentance, from the seventh Verse to the eleventh; wherein
we have:

1. The proposition, or maine exhortation, Ver. 8.

2. The Arguments; Ver. 7. which are two: 1. Their sinful state. 2. Their
unsensiblenesse of danger.

2. Doctrinall: Ver. 11, 12. But I will not cut forth more than I shall use;
and therefore come to the first part.

I. To whom the Baptist preached: Saint Luke tells us there came a multitude;
The word there is (...), it signifies the mixed company or throng, which our
English word does very aptly express, a Rabble, which I think was borrowed of
the Hebrew (...) Rob, which comes of (...) Rabab, to multiply. It was a mixed
assembly of all sorts of people, and among the rest, there were many of the
Pharisees and Sadducees. There were many Sects among the Jews, these were the
most eminent, and the most hypocritical; yet they came together with the rest
to the Baptism of John, which was then Gods ordinance. I meant not to say much
of this circumstance, but briefly would observe.

I. That the Church visible is mixed, there may be Hypocrites, in our assemblies.

This was now the Ordinance, and therefore the meeting about This, the Church:
But all come; the Rabble, the multitude, and among them (whether out of
curiosity or malice, or both) the Pharisees and Sadducees come likewise.

II. That the Baptist condemns them for Hypocrites, that seemed other to the
people.

They magnified these men for their eminent sanctity, but these are here taxed
for gross, though secret hypocrisy. There is a secret hypocrisy which must
be discovered ahd condemned. And if we take a view of their appearing
holiness, we shall see what great cause we have to fear, both others and our
selves, when we find how far we come short of their righteousness which we
ought to have exceeded; which is all the use I mean to make of this
circumstance.

Our view shall be of these two particulars: 1. What they were. 2. What they
did.


1. We will take notice of them severally, what they were.

1. The Pharisees had holiness in their name; they were separated men, separated
from common condition, separated unto extraordinary Sanctification.

1. They were separated from common condition.

1. From Commerce and usual society with the vulgar people, whom they esteemed
unclean and cursed; as appears by their scornful mention of them in the
case of the Officers confession: Have any of the Pharisees believed on him? But
This People who knows not the Law, are cursed, John 7.48, 49.

2. From the vulgar habit, that the difference of their very garments might
witness their holiness.

3. From the usual and received delights, that it might appear their
affections were weaned from pleasures and recreations.

2. They were separated unto extraordinary sanctification and holiness: and
therefore the Pharisee brags in the Temple; God, I thank thee, that I am not
as other men are, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, or even as this Publican: I
fast twice in the week, I give Tithes of all that I possess, Luke 18.11, 12.

1. They were so precise, they would not eat before they washed, and condemn
the Disciples of Christ for profane despisers of the strict Law, that they
washed not their hands when they eat bread, Mat. 15.2. And Saint Mark gives
the reason why they found fault; for the Pharisees, except they wash their
hands often, eat not, Mark 7.3. They were so punctual in the observation of
that Tradition, that if a Pharisee came to a place where there was not enough
water both to wash and drink, he would rather choose to wash, though he dyed
for thirst.

2. They would wash when they returned from the market, Mark. 7.4. lest happily
they might be polluted by their society with the profane multitude.

3. They washed their Vessels also, Mark 7.4. that not their meats alone, but
their very dishes might carry holiness, lest that which entered in at the mouth,
might defile the man.

4. They would not admit familiar society so much as to eat wiih sinners, as
may appear from that cavilling Question which they made to our Saviors
Disciples, Mat. 9.11. Why eats your Master with Publicans and sinners?

5. But to have feasted might argue them familiar, they were therefore more
precise, not enduring to be touched by the sinful: which we observe from
their censure of Christ, Luke 7.39. This man, if he were a Prophet, would have
known, who, and what manner of woman this is that touches him: for she is a
sinner.

6. They made broad Phylacteries, for the ostentation of their holiness. The
Law was, that they should make Fringes in the borders of their garments, Number.
15.38. The word is (...) Tsitsith or Zizith, which signifies a lock of hair,
because their fringes hung like hair on their skirts; or like the branches of
trees, as another word which the Jewish Writers use, Gnapaph, signifies. They
were to wear these in the wings or skirts of their garments to be a Fringe,
that is, a Remembrance of the commandments, But the Pharisees abused this unto
hypocrisy and superstition, and enlarged those Fringes of their garments, Mat.
23.5. There are two words used by Matthew, in that place; (...), and (...) the
latter of which words is used by the Chaldee, which calls them, Cruspedim.
All their works they do for to be seen of men, they make broad their
Phylacteries, and enlarge the Borders. To the threads of three inches, they
fastened others, which might not be less than four; and he that had the
largest Border was deemed the devoutest man.

7. They were much also in Mortification, and from their several practices
they had several names and differences. One would go carelessly, and sometimes
knock his head against a post or wall, This was called Pharisaeus impingens;
Another would tread so softly and demurely, as if he had not feet but stumps,
This was called Pharisaeus truncatus; Another sort wore an habit on their heads
in the fashion of a Mortar, which both pressed them with the weight, and
hindered their sight, and were called Pharisaei mortarii. I might instance their
other differences, and other their expressions of holiness, as their just
Tythings, their liberal Alms, their two weekly Fastings; but I hasten. These
were the Pharisees.

2. The Sadducees were another Sect, whom they counted very holy.

1. They were so severe in their carriage and manner of life, that some think
(though it otherwise seem to me, that they were called so of Sadoc the father
of their sect:) they had their name from thence, and were called of their
righteousness, Tsaddichim, Righteous or Just men.

2. They kept so close to the Scriptures of Moses, without entertaining corrupt
Traditions, that they were called Karaim, Biblers or Scripturists; and in other
observations strict; some were their own proper, in some like the Pharisees.
We see what they were, let us secondly see,

2. What they did: They came from their several places, they came to the
ordinance, to be baptized; to be baptized of John the new-Rivall of their
holiness, and a man likely to monopolize the opinion of the people, and in
that respect their adversary; they came also with the multitude, and were
content to be seen in a Crowd.

Such they were, and this they did: yet the Baptist condemns these men for
Hypocrites, who in all other men's opinion were accounted very holy. How much
cause have we, both of fear and trial? Let us not believe that all are right
that seem so, nor our selves to be so, unless we have good warrant upon
impartial searches.

II. Having taken a view of the Auditors, let us now attend to the sermon
itself, which I told you, is partly Hortatory, partly Doctrinall: we are only
to deal with the Hortatory part; The exhortation to Repentance: and because
John's method is such, first with the Arguments, and then with the proposition.
His scope was to affright those arrogant Hypocrites, who boasted of their
Original, and were secure: and therefore in the seventh verse he uses two
arguments; One from the sinfulness of their estate, O generation of Vipers:
The other from their unsensiblenesse of danger, Who has forewarned you? etc.

1. The first Argument. O generation of Vipers: In this he discovers their
sinful condition, that they were the wicked offspring of wicked parents, and
enemies of the Truth and the Prophets. I will pass this more briefly with
three Observations.

I. Observation. That Hypocrites are a generation of Vipers.

The Pharisees had not only Ortum Viperinum, but they kept Naturam Viperarum.
Such they were, and naturally all are such; For, 1. the Viper is full of
venom: so malice and wickedness does abound in nature. 2. The Vipers eat
through the bellies of their Parents: there is that enmity against truth, but it
is chiefly true of the Pharisaicall, the persecuters of the Prophets and the
true Church. 3. Vipers are specious in show, and as it were painted in their
skins: Hypocrisy masketh it self, but with a Vizzard fairer than its native
proportion. 4. The teeth of Vipers are hid within their gummes, but when they
close them they press forth poison: such is the dissembled yet dangerous
malice of the wicked. 5. The Vipers when they have bitten a man, hasten to the
waters; the fittest emblem of the rest to hypocrisy, but chiefly appliable to
the Pharisees, who had their Baptismata, their frequent Washings.

The Use of this may be double to us:

1. For our deep humiliation, when we take notice what naturally we are.

2. For our serious trial, that we would examine our selves whether we still
be so.

II. Observe. That the consideration of this condition is a motive to Repentance.

Men are therefore more slack to repent, because they know not sin, and the
nature of sin: they see not how odious, how poisonous, how miserable they are,
and therefore being not sick, have no care to seek a Physician; but if we were
truly acquainted with our selves, how much we are diseased, it would be a
strong motive to repent, that we might be healed.

Use. Let us be much in this meditation, and often cast our selves upon those
thoughts and observations, that we may be truly, kindly, seasonably humbled.

3. The Baptist discovers this consideration, to that end, that he might move
them to repentance.

But it seems too bitter an application; it might rather exasperate than amend:
nay, there was much wisdom in Saint John's zeal; some must be so handled:
therefore our Savior also deals roughly with this kind of men; Serpents,
generations of Vipers, Matthew. 23.33. A thorn fetches blood when it is rudely
handled, but a nettle stings most, unless we press it hard: These were
nettles, and were self conceited of their holiness, and proudly domineered;
therefore he is not more conscionable than wise, in that application.

Use. It is sometimes sit to speak rough words, when the hearers conscience is
not tender. We must learn that wisdom, both to observe and apply, when we
meet with a Pharisee or Sadducee, to deal as John Baptist did, plainly and to
the Conscience.

2. The second Argument is from their unsensiblenes of danger, which I most
intended to spend this time upon; in the latter words of the seventh Verse: Who
has warned you to fly from the wrath to come?

There is not the same sense of these words among all Expositors;

1. Some think them an Admiration: What new thing is this! What strange sudden
change! that I see Pharisees coming to my Baptism! Who has warned you?

2. Some think it a doubtful expression, mixed of admiration and suspicion.
Are ye likewise come to my Bagtisme? whether are ye sincere? whether are ye
serious? Who has warned you?

3. Some think it a voice of Terror: Do ye think to escape, because ye come
now to my Baptism? Who has warned you? Who has directed you in this course?
Ye cannot be able to fly from the wrath to come.

4. But leaving these to the approbation of such as like them; I rather
conceive it to be a voice of denial: Who has warned you? That is, None has
warned you; or, you are not warned. You come to my Baptism formally,
hypocritically; but you continue Hypocrites, and apprehend not the danger ye
are in, nor how ye may escape it; ye are not sensible of flying from the wrath
to come. There is a little difficulty in the reading of the words: (...). There
is a double ellipsis, (...) for (...): and the other this: (...); for (...); as
the word is used by Saint Peter, 2 Pet. 1.4. (...). But the sense I have given;
he exhorts them to repent by consideration of that wrath which they were not
sensible to fly from. And according to this interpretation, the observations I
would take out for your use, are these four.

I. That there is wrath to come.

II. That the wrath to come may be fled from.

III. That wicked men are unsensible both of wrath, and flying from it.

IV. That to be sensible of both these, is an argument of Repentance.

I. Observe. That there is wrath to come.

By wrath in this place we understand the judgment of God offended and
wrathful, and the effects whereby divine wrath is manifested; so the word is
used to signify in many Scriptures. Romans 2.5. Thou treasurest up wrath against
the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of God. Ephesians. 5.6.
Col. 3.6. The Wrath of God comes on the children of disobedience. But how wrath
may be said to be in God, seeing in God is no passion, will be worthy of
explication. We may conclude this first rule, That God is more displeased with
sin than man is or can be. He cannot endure it, as the Prophet speaks, Thou
art of purer eyes than to behold evil, and can not look on iniquity, Hab.
1.13. Yet this second rule is as true, That there is no passion in God. We
must therefore find wrath to be in God in another manner than it is in man:
in him only in regard of the similitude of effect; so the School
distinguishes of Ira afficiens, and efficiens: In man is ira afficiens, we are
changed and perturbed with our indignation; but in God is ira efficiens, he
does the same as we, but without changes, without perturbation: So the Lunary
Rainbow is not affected with colors as the Solar is. There is a conclusion in
some Schoolmen, That no affection or operation that essentially includes
imperfection can properly be attributed to God; but if the imperfection be
accidental, and therefore separable, it may: so that when the imperfection is
severed from it, it may be said to be in God. Now a passion may two ways be
said to be evil: 1. From the very kind of it, when the object imports it
evil: so envy is; and therefore envy cannot be found in perfection it
self. 2. According to the quantity of it, when it is too much, or too little;
so anger may be evil, and so not in God: but because that evil is
accidental, and anger may be separated either from defect or excess; as it
is so severed, it may be said of God, and that either primarily or secondarily:
1. Primarily, The wrath of God is no more than voluntas puniendi, Gods will to
punish. 2. Secondarile, it is the punishment it self; so that now we find,
both, 1. Wrath in God, 2. Wrath from God. Both which are joined by the Prophet,
Jerem. 7.19. Do they provoke me to Anger, says the Lord? Do they not provoke
themselves, to the confusion of their own faces? Yet God still remains the
same, without alteration, as that acute and subtle Docter Jackson after his
large mathematical demonstration of his hologonie, the circular figure, has
very divinely expressed it: He is most loving, yet never moved with love,
because he is eternally wholly love: He is most jealous of his glory, and a
revenger of iniquity most severe, yet never moved with jealousy, yet never
passionate in revenge, because to such as provoke his punitive justice, he is
eternally severity, and Revenge it self. To apply the explication to the mind
of the place; Saint John means the declaration of Gods wrath, not present, but
future; and may note, both the destruction of their City, and more principally,
eternal damnation, which is elsewhere plainly called, Wrath to come, 1 These.
1.10. So that when we say, There is wrath to come, we understand, that God may
be offended, and may have a store both of temporal judgments and eternal,
which may fall upon us.

Having thus cleared it, let us see it proved. That there is wrath to come, it
appears,

1. From the very being of sin, for there is a suitableness in sin unto
judgment. You know there will be a Storm when the Vapors are exhaled, and
Clouds have been long gathering. Sin is the seed of wrath, and judgment is
then sown, when sin is committed, therefore, though the seed may for a while
lie covered in the ground, yet the Harvest will come at length, and when the
sinner is ripned, he is cut down.

2. It appears from Gods truth, for God has threatened wrath, and Gods
threatenings are not in vain. There was a severe doom against Jezabel, and the
threat had Truth in it, and therefore, though the painted Strumpet frolickt
away her time, as not expecting it, yet at the set time, the wrath came; as
Jehu the conqueror made the observation of it when his servants returned in
with the news, that the dogs had eaten her: This is the word of the Lord, which
he spoke by Elijah the Tishbite, In the portion of Jezreel, dogs shall eat
the flesh of Jezabel, 2 Kings 9.36. There are threatenings of wrath every where
in Scripture scattered against sin, and shall come to pass because God is true.

3. That there is wrath to come, appears from Gods equity, for men are not
ever punished here, or not for the present, therefore there must be a time of
account and retribution. We see often that wicked men, that monsters live
pleasurably, and dye unplagued, but the equal justice of God will not suffer
them to escape scot-free, therefore where there is not a present rod, there must
be future wrath.

4. And lastly, it is evident from Gods glory, for he is not only just, but
will have the glory of his justice, and will manifest his equity. We wonder
at Gods dealing for the present, therefore there must be a time of separating.
Happily our steps may wel-nigh slip, and we may be envious at the foolish, when
we see the prosperity of the wicked; and may be ready foolishly to question
and repine; How does God know? Is there knowledge in the most high? Behold,
these are the ungodly who prosper in the world, who increase in riches. But let
us go into the Sanctuary of God, and understand their end, then we shall find
them set in slippery places, brought into desolation as in a moment, and
utterly consumed with terrors: for God will at length be glorified in the
equity of his proceedings, and in men's notice of that equity.

This may be useful to us in a double notion.

Use. 1. It removes the ground of our unwarrantable admiration and exclaiming
of the ordering of time and government. Men are ready to dispute, as Pompey did
in the Gardens of Chrysippus after the loss at Pharsalia, Whether there be a
Providence. When we see men thrive by injustice, and prosper in their evil
courses; and others that fear God, and live holily make themselves a prey; we
wonder that God endures those, and forgets these: but cease to wonder, for,
there is wrath to come. Some busy servants that would be wiser than their
Master, may forwardly desire and urge it; Master, there are Tares, will thou
that we go and gather them up? But what is the answer? Nay: lest while ye
gather up the Tares, ye root up also the Wheat with them, let both grow
together until the Harvest, and in the time of the Harvest, I will say to the
Reapers, gather ye together first the Tares, and bind them in bundles to burn
them, Matthew. 13.28, 29, 30. Fret not, but wait upon Gods time. It was the
madness of the Anabaptists of Munster, that they would purge the world in a
frantic fit, and put to the sword, all the wicked upon earth; but Gods wisdom
and method is otherwise, he will not at all acquit, but he defers the
execution to a fitter day, and then wrath will come; the Tares shall be bound
in bundles for the fire.

Use. 2. Let us believe this truth, that there is wrath to come: the not
believing of this, is cause of much unevenness, of much profaneness, of much
carnal security in our lives. But if we did truly believe it, it would beget a
profitable fear; which I would also exhort unto, a fear of temporal
judgments, a fear also of eternal.

1. Let us fear the wrath of temporal judgments which are threatened and sent
of God, that men might fear before him. When storms are preparing there is
cause to fear, and I see not any reason but that they which have son-like
affections should yet tremble. Especially when we apprehend how terrible God
is in his wrath here, we shall see cause of fear. Look upon examples of his
wrath, how the Lord looked when he frowned. When the Inhabitans of the old
world had polluted their ways, God was displeased, and wrecks his displeasure
upon them with a fearful tempest, the depths were broken up, and the windows
of heaven opened, and all creatures living (besides Noah's company) were
swallowed of the waters. The cry of Sodoms sin reached up unto heaven, and
pierced the ears of God, and moved him to such indignation, that he consumes
them with an intermingled shower of fire and brimstone, and beats down the
Inhabitants together with their habitations, Sodom and the adjoining Cities. We
judge of the rage and fury of a tempest that is past, by the Shipwreck that is
made, when we see the floating carcasses of drowned men, the broken ribs of the
torn vessel, the forsaken goods here and there scattered upon the sands; so
has God been pleased to let us see the fury of his wrath, in the strokes that
have bin laid thick and heavy upon former offenders. When the people had
danced about their calfe, the Lord speaks, as impatient of the delay of his
revenge; Let me alone, that my wrath may wexe hot against them, and that I may
consume them: As if he boiled in the heat of his rage, and would not be quiet
till they had felt what it was to offend their God. At another time, when the
people complained, the Lord was displeased, and his anger was kindled, and the
fire of the Lord burnt among them, and consumed them, or, did eat among them,
as the Hebrew bears it, Number. 11.1. God did devour them in his anger, and as
we shall see after a great fire which has consumed a building, some rubbish,
and here and there some pieces of timber half consumed to ashes, and made
black with the flame, as remaining monuments of that cruel and merciless
Element; so the wrath of God brought such destruction, that a monument of it
was left in the name of the place, ver. 3. it was called (...) which comes of
(...) He burnt: to signify to us an example of severe revenge upon the
provocation of almighty God. Observe how Moses sets it forth in his case, Deuteronomy.
3.26. The Lord was wroth with me for your sakes, and would not hear me; but
said, let it suffice thee, speak no more unto me of this matter. It is not a
small matter to have God offended; Moses had that privilege to speak to the
Almighty face to face; we would have thought if Moses should prefer a suite,
he might be sure to speed; but we see, God speaks to Moses as if he did
not know him, but will not grant his request for entering Canaan; let it
suffice, speak no more. If we read in Deuteronomy. 4.21, 22, 23. how Moses works
upon it, how he aggravates the displeasure against himself, we cannot but
deeply conceive what a thing it is, to be sensible that God is displeased with
us. The sword, or scarcity, or pestilence, are terrible things in themselves;
but oh let us apprehend what it were to have one of these, or a far more
light and easy judgment sent among us in anger. O Lord (says David) rebuke
me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in in thy hot displeasure, Psalm.
6.1. He seems more to fear the wrath than the judgment: If I be rebuked, if
chastned, yet oh let it not be in displeasure; That I may be able to bear,
This I cannot. Jeremiah prays in that manner, and with reason: O Lord, correct
me not in thine anger, lest thou bring me to nothing, Jerem. 10.24. Let us
fear before God, for his wrath will crush us, it will crush us to nothing, it
is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.

2. Let us fear also the wrath of eternal judgment; That is, truly,
properly the wrath to come. In other judgments, Gods anger is kindled, in
this, his jealousy smokes. Other plagues lie heavy upon the backs of
Sinners, this, a far heavier burden will grind them unto dust. When God
drinks to men in punishments, he makes them pledge him in a bitter cup; but
this is the dregs of the cup of his fury and indignation. But we may sooner
spend a multitude of words, than be able to conceive it fully; and therefore
Saint Jude rather leaves it to conceit, than he will describe it, when he
calls it, The Blackness of Darkness for ever. Saint Hierom has a conceited
gloss upon those words which David uses to the men of Jabesh Gilead, for
their sincere kindness to their dead Master, 2 Samuel 2.6. The Lord show
kindness and truth unto you: Misericordiam in praesenti, Veritatem in futuro:
as if the mercy which is showed here, were but as nothing, but a lie in respect
of that real truth of mercy which shall be showed hereafter. So the wrath
that is here manifested in temporal inflictions, is but a shadow compared with
that truth of misery which wicked men shall feel in hell. Some books have
described that condition; I Will not fall upon their labor, but would only
desire to leave your separated and retired thoughts sometimes upon that
meditation, that you would believe there is a wrath to come; that so a
profitable kindly fear might be maintained.

II. The second observation. That the wrath to come may be fled from.

That wrath may be avoided, needs no other proof than that it has been; and
that proof, the history of Scripture frequently yields us. Ahab was a wicked
man, yet I cannot think but his humiliation was sincere, who was so sensible
of the threatened wrath, that he rent his clothes, put sackcloth on his flesh,
fasted, lay in sackcloth, went softly; however, God accepted it, and tells the
Prophet: See thou how Ahab humbles himself before me? Beoause he humbles
himself, I will not bring the evil in his days, 1 King. 21, 29. The King of
Ninive found escape by the same way; God saw their works, that they turned from
their evil way, and God repented of the evil that he said he would do unto
them, and did it not, Jonah 3.10. Whether these were sincere in what they did,
comes not to our present question; it is enough that wrath was fled from: but
in Josiah we have an instance without that exception, in the return of an
answer from Huldah the Prophetess; Thus says the Lord, Behold I will bring
evil upon this place; but because thine heart was tender, and thou did
humble thy self before God, behold I will gather thee to thy Fathers, and thou
shall be gathered to thy grave in peace, neither shall thy eyes see all the
evil which I will bring upon this place, 2 Chro. 34.24, 27.28. But besides
examples, it may appear upon this ground of reason. Condemnation may be
avoided, and therefore wrath, therefore judgment: such as know how to hide
themselves under Christ, are refuged: for there is no condemnation to them that
are in Christ Jesus, and therefore being justified by his blood we shall be
saved from wrath through him. Romans 5.9. for He is that Jesus which delivered
us from the wrath to come, 1 These. 1.10. 1 These. 5.9. But I need not prove
further what is not at all doubted, and therefore may proceed to make it useful
by application.

Use. 1. That wrath may be fled from, concludes unto us, That the escape of
wrath is by flight; our safety is not by standing out, but in running from the
storm; which I rather note to discover their folly who seek other means of
prevention or escape: as namely,

1. Such as stand unto their cause, and urge their innocence against the
righteous sentence of an unpartiall Judge; as if they were so guiltless, that
evil could not come nigh them; or if it did, they might complain of wrong,
rather than beg a redress.

2. Such as upon the same opinion, in stead of confessing themselves guilty,
traverse the Indictment (to use the phrase of our law), and do make
contradiction to it.

3. Such as think the execution of the sentence may be stayed and a reprivall
had, by corrupting the seat of Judicature, by bribing of the Judge.

4. Such as trust to their pleadings, that they have claim of privilege and
immunity to their persons.

5. Or Lastly, that deceive themselves in their expectation from others. But
all these are deceitful refuges; We are every one guilty, and cannot
overthrow the Bill, the righteous Judge will not be bribed, we have no plea
of exemption, and all humane strength will fail us; There is no avoidance but
by flying.

Use. 2. Let us therefore wisely use the right remedy, let us fly. But here is
still the difficulty, how we may fly from wrath. There is a double flight: 1.
Corporal. 2. Spiritual.


1. The Corporal flight is that which some hope they may safely trust unto. The
Kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, hid themselves in the
dens, and the Rocks of the mountains, and said to the Mountains and Rocks,
fall on us, and hide us from the wrath of the Lamb, for the great day of his
wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand? Rev. 6.16, 17, 18. That shall
be the sudden and miserable shift which poor wretched men shall make at that
great day. So others think to escape from judgments temporal and present: but
in vain; for every place is in Gods reach, as the Psalmist has fully and
excellently expressed it, Psalm. 139.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. God besets us behind
and before, and lays his hand upon us; and therefore whither shall we fly
from his presence? Every place is Gods Jail, and every creature is his Jailer,
he has his Attachments ready, and can serve them when he pleases; so the
Lord threatens, Amos 5.19. As if a man did flee from a Lion and a Bear met
him. If God mean to punish us, though we escape one judgment, another shall
overtake us; they are all Gods Officers, and are ready upon their service, so
that we shall be sure to fall into the hands of some of them. It was a grave
speech of Ely: If one man sin against another, the Judge shall judge him:
there shall be a legal proceeding, and the accused shall find an Advocate to
plead his cause in open Court; but if a man sin against the Lord, who shall
entreat for him? He must needs be cast, for who will be an Advocate to defend
a cause against God? 1 Samuel 2.25. The Lord cannot be prevented of his purpose
against a man, for, as it is very aptly expressed in the Psalm, Psa. 11.6.
Upon the wicked he shall rain snares. There are snares laid, and men that are
Gods enemies will be entrapt and taken; and here is the difference: The snares
which men lay may be avoided; if there be snares in one place, they may go
safe in another: but God in every place will take us, his snares are as
frequent as the drops of rain; you know the rain falls upon every part, so
that no piece is dry: so are Gods engines: he raines snares, and can meet with
us, in our selves, in our bodies, in our minds, in our children, in our
friends, in our estates, or in our names: he has a thousand ways to deal
with us, therefore we cannot escape by a corporal flight.

2. The spiritual flight, is a flying from Gods wrath, unto God, under his
own wings. We must do as Noah did to escape the violence of the Flood, enter
into the Arc, be hid in that place, and by that way that God has appointed,
be found in Christ, covered with his garment, signed as one of his. There was
a great destruction in Egypt, the first borne of every family slain, how
shall the Israelites escape? they must sprinkle the doore-posts of their houses
with the blood of the Paschall; and the destroying Angel seeing it, would pass
by. We must be sprinkled, sealed as Gods peculiars, and then we shall
escape. But more particularly, we must flee from Gods wrath, by shunning what
procures his wrath, which rule we shall best find by observing three
particulars which are signified by this word, Wrath.

1. Wrath signifies, Gods being offended, therefore we must carefully shun
what ever provokes him to anger. The ground of indignation is some injury done
to one which some way concerns him; it is not a simple injury; for no man will
be angry, that a Jew is chaind at Constantinople, or that a Moore is whipped at
Venice, because, though happily the correction may be injurious, yet it nothing
concerns us whether it be or no. That which moves indignation must be somewhat
that touches upon God, but most properly that which touches or trencheth upon
his reputation and honor; we must therefore find what dishonours God, and
labor to avoid it.

1. The neglect of a due in point of honor, moves a generous mind to
indignation: as Alexander did much stomach it, when Darius omitted the title of
King unto him. We may not neglect to give unto God what he challenges from us
as his own due and right, the honor of his name upon all occasions, and in
every business.

2. It easily incenseth us, when besides the neglect of honoring us, somewhat
is done to us, that diminishes our reputation. As when the Empress of
Constantinople had let slip some words of contempt against that valiant Narses,
that she would make him spin among her maidens: They so enraged the injured
Captain, that he protested in his anger, he would weave such a web as all
their power should not undo; and thereupon, in a deep revenge brought the
Lombards into Italy. The generous, of all other injuries, can least bear
disgraces. If we speak contemptibly of Gods power, if undervaluingly of his
wisdom, if complainingly, of his provisions, if murmuringly of his providence,
if impatiently of his corrections, we do what we can to disgrace him, and God
will be highly provoked.

3. Indignation is moved, when the injury is done by such persons, as are
either below us for their condition, or beholding to us for some benefit:
though we could brook an injury from a great One, and a Stranger, yet we
could never endure it from a servant, engaged as well by courtesies received, as
the debt of subjection. We stand in both those relations unto God, in regard of
our condition, infinitely below him, viler than the very dust; and in regard of
our engagements, bound by infinite mercies: for whatever we either are or
have, is wholly of him, therefore for us to provoke him, must needs make his
wrath wax hot against us.

4. Another ground of indignation or anger, is, when the injury is done before
such persons, as,

1. Such with whom we contend for glory: to give an affront unto a competitor
in the presence of his competitor, as to disgrace Caesar in the presence of
Pompey, must needs raise him unto wrath and indignation. God does as it were
contend with the world, with gain, with pleasure, for glory; so that to prefer
the world or our own lusts before God, is to dishonor him, and moves him to
wrath.

2. Such whom we love: (to clear a divine matter by an amorous) if an affront
be done unto a lover in the presence of his Mistress (as affection is wont to
call the party upon whom affection is bestowed) it is therefore more grievous,
because in her presence to whom he would endeare himself. God wooeth the
soul, and is jealous of our love, lest it be given to another. Gain and
pleasure are likewise Suitors, if we prefer either our profit or delight before
Gods will, he must needs be offended with us.

3. Such by whom we would be reverenced: so to disgrace a Master in the sight
of his servants, or a Father before his children, does aggravate the injury,
because it makes them contemned where they look for a special respect. We
stand in such relation to God, as servants to our great Master, as children to
our heavenly father; therefore to offend him as we so relate unto him, cannot
but occasion his heavy displeasure: for, if he be a Father, he must have his
honor, if he be a Master, he must have his fear, Mal. 1.6. That is the
first thing we are to do, to flee from wrath, We must shun what dishonours God.

2. Wrath signifies Gods being offended as it is declared in some judgment:
therefore in this sense, we are to find out the examples of sins and
punishments where wrath has been manifested, and avoyde them. The Scripture is
plentiful, I will only instance a few, and leave others to your own
observation.

1. Profaneness: when the inhabitants of the old world gave themselves over to
their own pleasures; buying and selling, eating and drinking, marrying, and
giving in marriage, but had no care of Gods service, then wrath came with a
flood. We must take heed of a profane worldly secure course of living, minding
only the earth, and plodding after it, for this deadens the life of grace; and
the neglect of due worship to God, incenseth him.

2. Envy: we have this instanced, Numb. 12.2. In Aaron and Miriam who envied
Moses; What, say they, has God spoken only by Moses? Has he not spoken also
by us? Whereupon it follows in the ninth verse, And the anger of the Lord was
kindled against them. They were troubled that Moses should be the only Man,
only dear in the esteem of the people; such are the secret thoughts of the
envious against the eminent, but the Lord endures not such burnings, such
strifes; he would have us quietly possess our selves, contented with the
condition in which we are placed.

3. Selfe-seeking: Balaam is the example of this; Balak sends for him, God
would not have him go; Balak profers largely, Balaam soliciteth for liberty;
it is granted, but, says the Text, Gods anger was kindled because he went,
Number. 22.22. Balaam was a selfe-seeker, and had a covetous itch after the Kings
favor and reward; this makes him earnest to go, though he knew the will of
God contrary. If we hunt after our own gain, we shall offend God, and must
therefore learn selfe-denyall.

4. Rebellion, aggravated with ingratitude: Here Solomon is the monument, 1
Kin. 11.9. The Lord was angry with Solomon, because his heart was turned from
the Lord God of Israel, who had appeared unto him twice. If God afford unto us
frequent visits, the tokens of his familiar acquaintance to us, if then we
forget him, and our hearts turn away from him, we may deservedly look for
wrath.

5. Siding with Gods enemies: This we find in the case of Jehosaphat, 2 Chronicles.
19.2. Should thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord?
Therefore is wrath upon thee from before the Lord. God will not endure to have
us take part with his enemies, for then we break the league; and the breach of
league shall surely be punished. I might follow this with more exemplary
punished sins, but I rather leave it to your own private readings.

3. Wrath signifies eternal damnation: therefore to avoid that, we must avoid
infidelity and stubbornness against the offer of grace. If an invitation be
made, and we refuse to come to the Supper of the King, he will wexe wroth
against us, and destroy us, Mat. 22.7. Let us lay hold upon Christ, upon the
offer of free mercy in the Gospel; Let us kiss the Son lest he be angry, and
so we perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled, yea but a little. Let us
refuge our selves under Jesus, who delivers from the wrath to come. This is
the spiritual flight that we must take, if ever we hope to escape from wrath,
for otherwise, Suits, or Bayles, or Protections, will not stead us. So much of
the second, that wrath may be fled from.

Upon the other two observations I must bestow but a small time and a few words.

III. The third Observation: That wicked men are unsensible both of the wrath
to come, and of flying from it.

Who has forewarned you? That is, you are not forewarned. The Devil is very
malicious, and hood-winks us for a double inconvenience, that he might make us
to be venturous upon sin, and secure without fear of danger.

Use. It discovers to us the reason why men live so securely as if they
expected not a sentence, and so careless of the ordinance; they apprehend not
the weight of sin, nor see what follows. But to conclude.

IV. The fourth and last observation is this; That to be sensible of both
these, of wrath and the remedy, is an argument of Repentance.

So the Baptist wisely uses and disposes it: That he might press them to the
duty of the next verse, he labors to convince them of their danger, and how
it might be escaped.

Use. Let us labor to be sensible of both these; of both or neither: for if
we see wrath without escape, we shall be swallowed of despair; if we see
escape without wrath, we shall be deceived with presumption. Let us see both,
apprehend both in their true natural force.

1. Let us be sensible of wrath, see sin alive. We are not startled with the
apprehension of sin, because we see it not as it is, alive, and ready to
devour us. You know or conceive in your minds, that a Lion, or a Bear, or a
Dragon, are terrible beasts; but if you should see a Lion or a Bear painted on
a wall, they would not affright you, though the Painter should bestow his best
Art in laying the colors to make them look never so terribly; they would not
fright you, because you know they are but painted. We look upon sin as a dead
thing, only painted out by the oratory of witty Preachers, and therefore are
not at all troubled. But if you should meet a living Bear in some open place,
gaping, and ready to devour, it would amaze you: let us labor to see the life
of sin, the danger of it, the gaping mouth of it, and then it will make us run
for safety by repentance; there is one work to see sin alive, but that is not
enough.

2. Let us be sensible of the remedy: see mercy alive also, that the wrath may
be escaped; for unless we apprehend this also, we shall sooner despair than
repent. A man must first see the gaping Beast before he runs and seeks a
place of succor. But if one should see such a Beast in a plain open field,
where there were neither house nor hedge to hide, he would have no mind to run,
but grow desperate or fall down with amazement and fear; but if there be an
house near, and the door open, it gives encouragement to run. Upon the
apprehension of sin and wrath, we must see mercy near, and the door open for
us to enter, else we shall be fo far from repentance, which is a turning to
God, that we shall rather turn from him with despair and horror. Let us see
sin alive, and mercy alive also; both wrath and the remedy of wrath, and then
we are fitted to Repentance.

MATTHEW. 3.8. Bring forth therefore fruits meet for Repentance.


THe Baptists method, is, after the framing of his Arguments, to propose the
exhortation. The Sermon is partly Hortatory, partly Doctrinall; The part
Hortatory, is, unto Repentance; where, 1. The Arguments: Verse 7. Of them
already. 2. The Proposition: Verse. 8. The verse that I have now read. (...).
Bring forth therefore fruits meet for Repentance.


The Interlineary reads it, Vt sic effugiatis. Common exposition annexeth it
thus; That therefore ye may be able to flee wrath, seriously repent. It is not
difficult; the mind of the place is this: See that ye neither mock God, nor
me, nor your selves with hypocrisy: but be sincere in your repentance,
declare the truth of it by good works, for Repentance is known so as the tree
by the fruits. There are two parts: 1. The Inference. 2. The Exhortation.


1. The Inference, therefore. He draws this grave and serious conclusion from
the former reproof. Let us learn that wisdom and love in our reprehending of
others, that it may not be to the shaming of their persons, but to the
bettering of their souls: else we shall rather sharpen men unto revenge, than
reclaim them or reform their errors. Let them see, we mean not to lash
them, but to bring them unto God.

2. The Exhortation; Bring forth fruits meet for repentance. Without straining
or fetching blood of the Text, there are naturally but these two Observations,
which I shall follow at this time, and make useful to you.

I. That there are fruits worthy of, or meet for Repentance.

II. That we must bring forth those worthy or meet fruits.

I. That there are fruits meet for Repentance. That I may more distinctly and
usefully handle this observation, I shall endeavor before I apply it, to
explicate and confirm it.

I. Concerning the explication of it, three things are to be cleared.

1. What repentance is. 2. What are fruits. 3. What are worthy fruits, or
fruits meet for repentance: all which terms are in the proposition.
1. What Repentance is, is the ordinary subject of sermons, and of many books
now extant; so that it is to be supposed that you cannot be ignorant of the
nature of it; nor will ye expect that in the compass of a sermon time I
should deliver the mystery so fully as others have written it; yet I shall
labor to bring things unto a view in a close and collected manner, for the
satisfaction of the text, and so far as shall be useful for the present. And
because words are the garments of things, and notionall words (because they
signify) do make us understand natures; therefore that we may conceive of
repentance rightly, we will consider, 1. The Name. 2. The Thing.


1. Concerning the name; it is a rule in Lactantius; Graeci melius and
significantius (...) dicunt, quam nos Latini possumus resipiscentiam dicere;
and the sum is, that they speak better who use the Greek words. These are two
of special use.

1. Metanoia, (...), which comes of (...), the first faculty of the reasonable
soul. The understanding is the first mover, which sometimes, either for want
of light, or neglect of care, mistakes, and rusheth upon an error; the review
of that mistake or error is called (...), a second, or an after-understanding.
So in the general.

(...), The sorrowing after a thing is done; as 2 Cor. 7.8. (...). Though I
made you sorry, I do not repent (id est) I am not sorry, though I did repent
(id est) though I was sorry. So Romans 11.29. The gifts and calling of God are
(...), without repentance: (i. e.) God is not sorry for bestowing them. So also
in the general: But because there may be a change, and sorrowing to the worse,
therefore the words in their own naked signification do not express enough;
but as they signify in common use. Thus (...), is of (...), Madness, and
(...) Afterward, and is the correcting of a man's self for his folly; and so
it is taken for (...), Soundness of mind; as Lactantius has well described
it; Is enim quem facti sui poenitet, errorem suum pristinum intelligit, ideoque
Graeci melius, etc. Resipiscit enim, ac mentem suam quasi ab insania recipit,
quem errati piget, castigatque seipsum dementiae. So also in the now use, (...)
is the same with (...) and as Nazianzen adds unto it, (...), A turning to the
better. The Latin word Poenitentia, which is of poena, punishment, as agreeing
rather with sorrow only than conversion; does not so properly express what
we have in hand, as Resipiscentia. The word is not used in ancient Latin
writers, only once found in Cicero, when he speaks of Alexander, how
passionate he was after he had killed Clitus, Tanta fuit vis poenitendi. Yet I
should not be very precise in rejecting that word, or taking the other; partly,
because I find it used by old Christian Latins, as Lactantius, and Tertullian,
and Cyprian; partly and specially, because I conceive more in repentance than a
bare acknowledgement of error, or turning unto God; That there is besides, an
afflicting or grieving of the soul, and a detestation of sin; which manifests
it self by outward signs, As Job 42.6. I abhor my self, and repent in dust
and ashes. And, Joel 2.12. Turn unto me in fasting, weeping and mourning.
There the Hebrew word (...) Sciub is used, which is ever translated (...), yet
is not without external signs of sorrow and detestation. So St. Austin in one
Epistle uses it, Est poenitentia bonorum and fidelium poena quotidiana, in qua
pectora tundimus dicentes, Dimitte nobis debita nostra. And in another place;
Certam poenitentiam non facit nisi odium peccati, and Amor Dei, quando sic
poenites, ut tibi amarum sapiat in animo quod ante dulce fuit in vita, and quod
te prius oblectabat in corpore, ipsum te cruciat in mente. The name then gives
all this unto us, that it is an after-wit, sorrowing for sin, turning from it
with detestation, unto God.

2. But it is not enough to look upon the garment, but we must know the thing
itself; which falls under diverse acceptations: and because Preachers according
to the ambiguous sense of it, use it sometimes one way, sometimes another, that
the unacquainted here is confounded by the ambiguity, and knows not how to
take it; That I may direct you to a profitable hearing of others in this point;
I will tell you the differences, and how repentance is taken, 1. Less
properly. 2. More properly. 3. Improperly.


1. Less properly, Repentance is two ways spoken of, and understood.

1. Synecdochically, and then it is no more than Contrition; (...), a
displeasing, or wounding of the soul; which is, either Legal, and that may
be found in Reprobates; or Evangelicall, which is only in converts, and is
called a sorrow unto God.

2. Generally, and that is more than Contrition, in a general notion; it is
the whole turning of a man to God. Which difference serves somewhat to the
clearing of that controverted question, Which is first, Faith or Repentance? If
we take Repentance Synecdochically, then Repentance is before Faith: If
Generally, then Faith is before Repentance.

2. More properly: and then repentance is upon the sight and detestation of
sin, the true conversion of the life unto God. This the Scripture calls, The
renewing of the soul; Ephesians. 4.23. Be renewed in the spirit of your mind.
Ezekiel speaks of it, and more than the Apostle: Repent, and turn your selves
from all your transgressions, make you a new heart and a new spirit. Ezekiel.
18.30, 31. Which agrees with those other places which make two parts,
Mortification and Vivification; a dying with Christ, and a rising to newness
of life: Romans 6.4. A departing from evil, and doing good; Psalm. 34.14. A
ceasing to do evil, and learning to do well, Esa. 1.16, 17.

3. Improperly; and so the outward profession is called repentance; and this is
best expressed by the word Poenitentia, penitence, or penance. This is
ordinary, or extraordinary; and both, either of one alone, or common to many;
the common to many is a public manifestation of sorrow, detestation, and
conversion, by some humiliation; and so these assemblies of ours, and such of
the like nature, have been called, and not improperly, by some of the
Ancients, Penances. But what repentance is, properly, I told you in the second
division. So we have cleared the first thing, what repentance is.

2. The second is, What are fruits. The word fructus, may either be derived, a
ferendo, because of bearing or bringing forth; or a fruendo, of enjoying,
because fruit is the pleasure or riches of any thing that bears: and being the
virtue of every thing in its kind, it has a kind of deliciousness in it, as
the Gr. (...) seems to be of the Chald. carpe, sweet ripe fruit. But that
derivation which I am most pleased in, is, that a fruitful man is called
(...), of (...) and (...), a Birth, of (...), to bear; so that fruit is that
which a living thing sends out of it. That which has life in it, sends forth
somewhat: you may see it in Animals, they procreate; you may see it in plants,
if a stock be dead, it so remains, but if there be life in it, it shoots out
branches, buds, leaves; somewhat it sends forth of it self. The fruit of an
Animal is the work of that life; so the fruit of the plant is the work of the
plant: and therefore the Apostle has cleared this phrase by another, Acts
26.20. Paul preached to the Gentiles, that they might do works meet for
repentance. The fruits are the works of that repentance which has life within
it: which may satisfy for the clearing of that.

3. The third is, What are meet fruits, or fruits meet for repentance. This may
admit of a double interpretation.

1. Our fruits or works must be meet for repentance, that is, there must be
somewhat in the degree of our repentance, suitable to the degree of our sins. I
know it is true, that there is nothing but Christ's death which is infinitely
meritorious, which is proportionable to the sin: yet the acts of our
repentance must suite with the acts of our sin. This we find in the example
of Peter, He sinned greatly, and he wept bitterly: he sinned, and he wept;
but there is a farther proportion, he sinned greatly, and he wept bitterly.
Paul was a Persecuter, but when he was converted, he became a Preacher; there
is a proportion; but Paul who was a bloody Persecuter, became a most painful
Preacher: there is a farther meetnesse. We must thus be answerable in our
penitence, to our sin; when we have slipped from God, we must catch a faster
hold upon him; and by so much faster as our slip was fouler.

2 But secondly, which is the sense I would rather give you; there must be
answerablenesse in our works to the truth of our repentance; our works must
correspond to the life which is within us; when we are converted, there must be
works meet.

1. To Synecdochicall repentance; true sorrow, and those notes which are given
fully by the Apostle, 2. Cor. 7.11.

2. To general repentance; hatred of sin, purpose to leave sin, reformation of
the life.

3. To proper repentance; Conversion, a new principle of life, and such actions
as flow from new life.

4. To improper repentance; profession by signs: they are these; contrition,
confession, and satisfaction. These are all fraits worthy of, or meet for
repentance; and it shall suffice for the first business which I promised, The
explication.

2. The confirmation of this truth, that there are such fruits, appears:

1. Because God has commanded them: if there were not such a thing in rerum
natura, there should be no precept; for though we are sometimes commanded to
do what we cannot do, yet we are never commanded to do what never was to
be done: if God bid us be perfect, therefore there is perfection, though we
cannot be perfect. But this is required both here, and Act. 26.20.

2. Because repentance has life, a true perfect life: now where is perfect
life, there is a work, it shoots out fruit. He that is a true penitent, a true
convert, has a spirit of life within; for faith has purified his heart from
dead works: and therefore he lives unto God, and brings forth fruit unto
holiness.

3. It appears there are such fruits, because we have found such in the
examples of holy men, who have repented and have been converted. To present
those examples, were to spend away the time needlessly; and therefore I leave it
to them that are well acquainted with the Bible-history, and fall unto
application.

Use 1. If there be fruits meet for repentance, it condemns those dead forms
of Popish penances, which have no life, nor no fruits worthy of an inward life.
It is true that in elder times there were ceremonious corrections of shame,
appointed in the Church; as Tertullian shows us the custom of his time: Sacco
and Cineri incubare, corpus sordibus obscurare, presbyteris advolvi, and aris
dei adgeniculari: Yet now the popish penances are as blasphemous as they are
ridiculous and idle, when presumptuous Confessors dare injoyne them, as
satisfactory and meritorious. We acknowledge, that nothing is more common in
true religion, or more necessary than true repentance; which we conceive to be
the hatred of sin, termining in the love of the Righteousness of Christ; whose
proper Seat is in the mind and will, both being changed, the one to know, the
other to love, that duty which we owe to God and man. We know, these inward
motions are not hid; That hatred shows it self by confession, by tears; This
love, by all works of piety and charity. But believe further, that it is
sometimes needful to require and receive absolution from the Church according
to the authority that Christ committed to her. It is an impudent slander of the
Jesuits therefore, who say, that we together with the Novatian Heretics, have
taken away, not only the name, but the power and rites of ecclesiastical
reconciliation of sinners unto God. For we both deny, that the Novatians or
Catharists did deny, the restitution of the fallen by public penance: for
their error was this, that there is no place for repentance for those who fall
after Baptism; which occasioned the Jesuits mistake. And none will say that
the Novatians denied penance to be a Sacrament; for that later fiction was not
then invented, and therefore could not be then questioned. Mere Sophistry: By
faining the Novatians to be their adversaries, they would gain credit to their
cause; desiring to make their Readers believe the Novatians did oppose it;
thereby hoping to prove it anciently defended, because anciently resisted.
(...). And for our selves, we deny, that we deny either penitence or
absolution; but we deny penance to be a sacrament, as having neither
sacramental matter, nor sacramental institution. We justly find fault with
the multitude of their idle penances and their nature.

Use 2. If there be fruits of Repentance, meet for it, and worthy of it, it
gives us a ground of Trial, to discover the truth of our Repentance by the
fruits. We will examine those Signs particularly, according to the formerly
named different acceptations; that being more distinct, we may make the
application closer to the Conscience.

1. Taking Repentance for Contrition; the fruit or sign of it is to be truly
and sincerely sorrowful for sin: but because all men do profess themselves
sorrowful, we judge of the truth of it.

1. True and unfeined sorrow grieves more for the offense, than for the
punishment. It grieves at sin, not only as a burden, and that which wearies us
with the heavy load of following wrath; but as it is a sin, a violation of
divine Law: and from hence, it looks upon it as an odious thing, though it saw
no punishment; vile and filthy, though not dangerous.

2. Unfeined sorrow is greatest for sin, greater for sin than for other
crosses, or what else may move displesure. The apprehension of sin, by a
sorrow-toucht man, makes his memory and thoughts bitter to him; that he is in
Bitterness because of his sin, as one is in Bitterness for his first borne:
according to the phrase used, Zach. 12.10. Yet this trial must be with
caution; for a Convert does not always find this difference of sorrow
sensitively, but ever Intellective quoad displicentiam voluntatis. He may be
sometimes overborn with a passionate sudden grief, for the loss of health, or
credit, or estate, or friend; and may be for the time miserably distempered:
but in his serious collected thoughts, he sees sin as the swallowing Evil,
that which drowns the thought of others. And because Tristitia is ex eo quod
patitur aliquis, as the school speaks: therefore he that sorrows for sin, is
wearied with it, and that makes him nolle peccatum, disaffect it, and desirous
to shake it off. This is the first sign, True sorrow.

2. Taking Repentance for a general turning, there are three signs:

1. Hatred of sin, which was the praise of Ephesus, This thou have, that thou
hate the deeds of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate, Rev. 2.6. The Penitent
casts not off his sin, as the Merchant in a tempest throws away his goods,
because he cannot keep them; but willingly, freely, because he cannot endure
to look upon them. Why are some men in the time of their Sickness violent in
throwing away their sins? Not for want of love unto them, but they see the Sea
grows high, the Tempest rages, they begin to apprehend what death is, and
what hell is; and know, unless they lighten their vessel, they cannot be safe:
then they are busy in the work, they throw over-boord their usury, their
drunkenness, their swearing, and such like stuff: but it is not out of hatred
to their sins, but of love to themselves; for if they could continue in their
sins, and be saved when they have don, they could be contented not to part.
Their practice and affection may be lively seen in Phaltiels history: David had
married Michol, Saul injuriously gave her to another: when David came to the
Crown and was able to command, he sends for his wife Michol; her husband dares
not disobey, but brings her on her journey, and then sends her from him: But
what? Is Phaltiel weary of his Michol, that he now forsakes her? nay, he was
enforced; and though she were gone, he looks after her to Bahurim, weeping.
Carnal men, though for fear, or some other reasons they shake hands with
their sins, yet they have many a longing heart after them, and bestow many
affectionate look; they part, and yet they are loath to part asunder. But
unfeined hatred sues for a Bill of Divorce, and with much willingness forsakes
sin, as a lewd and paltry strumpet, angry that so long he was wedded to it.
But the truth of this appears further.

1. When our hatred is against all sin, without any exception.

2. When it is constant, without Truce, or any Intermission.

3. When it is implacable, without articling for agreement, or hope of any
future reconciliation.

4. When it is vehement, without granting any present favor or toleration. All
which notions I might enlarge profitably, but that I remember you observe how
the time spends.

2. Besides hatred of sin, there will be a purpose to leave, which discovers
it self right and sincere.

1. When the purpose shows it self full for the future time, against future
sins, by its readiness in the present against present sins. It is the
formal protestation of deceitful men, That they will reform, they will leave
such courses: but, in the mean time, they earnestly pursue, what they say,
they do purpose to leave.

2. When there is a purpose to use the means, as well as to resolve the end;
they mean to forsake sin, that ply the ordinance, that attend upon
preaching, that are much in prayer, that are often in the combat: if men
neglect these means, I cannot believe that they are fallen out with their sins
in earnest.

3. When there is an endeavor to remove away those impediments which usually
hinder the execution of the purpose. If a man say he purposes to leave
drinking, and yet has no care to refrain ill company, it argues his purpose
is deceitful, because he studies not to remove the hindrances of his purpose.

3. Besides this hatred and purpose, there will be reformation; a reformation
of the whole man, an amendment of life. He that can see his sin, confess
his sin, weep for his sin, and yet return to his sin again: Believe not
such a man's repentance; for where is his reformation? I confess there may be
infirmity, and the penitent may sometime fall into the sin again. But what
means this cleaving? this continuance in sin? You all, if demanded, would
boast your repentance: so did Saul of his obedience, in the matter of Amalek:
But says Samuel unto him, What then means the lowing of Oxen and bleating of
Sheep in mine ears? God commanded him to slay all; Saul says he had done the
whole commandment: but whence then was that noise? Are ye Drunkards still,
common Swearers still, whore-masters still, Profaners of the Lords day still?
and come to these fasts as penitents? and witness your boast of repentance?
Are ye humbled as the Lord commanded? Have ye repented as the Lord comands?
What means this noise? Why does your drunkenness, your oaths, your
profanesse continue? you have not done as the Lord required, if there were true
repentance there would be reformation. This is the second.

3. Taking repentance for conversion, the sign of it is a new life, which is
many ways discerned. There are new thoughts, new desires, new delights. The
soul dwells upon heaven, and lives by faith; by faith which seasons the
affections, and takes away the souls frettings and impatiencies, and weanes us
from earthly pleasures, making us, as weaned children, to be content with the
dug or without it, teaching us so to look upon the comforts of the breast what
ever we count sweet, that if God be pleased to give them, if God be pleased to
deny them, still to be contented. Our new life will also have a new appetite, a
desire after spiritual food, a sign of grace, than which I know none more
common or better; for such as the life is, such is the nourishment and choice
of food. But I will rather enlarge my self upon one other instance, the
instance of spiritual motion* but because motion may be found in diverse
things, this rule must be distinctly examined. Prayer, reading, hearing,
meditation, are motions; and men no other than natural perform them: the
difference is from the principle. An engine moves, and a man moves, but there is
not the same principle of motion in the engine and the man. An engine is made of
wheels, and being wound up to a certain height, the wheels run, till the
spring be down, and then it stays, and unless wound up again, continues
idle, because it is but an engine. But man moves from a principle of life, and
has of his own a loco-motive faculty. If natural men be upon a good motion,
it is because something winds them up, for ye may pegge and strain the natural
to what ye will, by presenting such respects as please them, and then set them
on going: but the motion will not hold. But the Christians is from life, Christ
is formed in them, and they live by the faith of the Son of God. We may also
sometimes be deceived as well in the speed as in the motion: wicked men may be
forward upon things that are good: but here is still the difference: says the
Apostle Romans 1.7. (...): What is in me is ready. In the Christian there is a
(...), which is the word there used, a readiness, a free naturallnesse as it
were unto that which it does. Two horses run upon their full speed, but here is
the trial of the goodness; The one is forced forward by the spur, and if the
steel were from his side, the Jade would stand quiet; but the other, being
full of spirit and courage, that carries him forward, that (of himself) he can
hardly be kept in. Natural men, if they do any good, it is because they are
spurred on: but there is a (...), a freeness in the right man, it is his life
that carries him on to good duties with cheerfulness. Besides, (for I can
hardly leave this meditation) our spiritual life will show it self in the
uniformity of our motion: It is right, not circular. Man moves not as the
spears orbicularly, which is the reason that men are soon giddy when they
turn round. The Christian is not his own compass, but moves upon a line,
straight to Scripture-canon. And in regard of the subject the motion is
uniform, every part equally moves, and equally swift with the whole. If the
arm, or leg, or any part move not equally, but lamely, there is defect: but
chiefly, if the conserving parts be dull. The intellect, will, affections, move
with an harmony, where there is this principle. This is the third sign or
fruit.

4. Lastly, taking repentance for an outward profession of it, the fruits or
signs of it, are three.

1. Contrition: I mean an outward contrition, for of inward sorrow I spoke
before. The penitent Magdalen abounded in tears, they ran down like water,
that she washed the feet of our Savior with them. So Peter wept bitterly, he
drew plenty of that water. I cannot credit every wet eye, for some, like the
Crocodiles, have tears at will; and besides, the constitution of some bodies
(I think) is such, that they cannot wet their cheeks; but how-ever, the heart
must be so affected; and if our constitution will admit it, sometimes upon
some occasions our eyes. But herein we may discover the deceitful pretense of
dry constitution; when we can be apt enough to shed tears for other causes,
tears of anger, tears of grief, tears of fullennesse; and then, if we have
none for sin, it is an Argument of deceitful carnal hearts, for if we had
not hard hearts, we should not have such dry eyes.

2. Confession: David is often our pattern, so is Nehemiah, so is Daniel: So Job
professes, He did not cover his sin as Adam, nor hide iniquity in his
bosom, Job 31.33. We are not ashamed to sin before men, why then should we
be ashamed to confess our sins. But oh, when shall our congregations be
witnesses of our public repentance? When shall we see a Drunkard come and
say; lo, here am I, the scandal of your society and faith, that have abused
together my self and the good creatures of God, I now acknowledge in the face
and sight of heaven, how I have offended. When shall we see the unclean person
prevent a censure by a voluntary penance? oh when? when? There must be some
sutablenesse in our confession of sin unto our sin.

3. Satisfaction: That Discipline, Those penances, which were used in the purer
primitive times by the Church, were called Satisfactions. Chrysostom, and
Hierom seem to understand this Text so. Repentance must in some kind or other
be witnessed by this; So Zacheus witnessed the truth of his: and the
reprobated Judas will condemn our neglect, he sorrowed for his fault, made
confession to the Priests, made restitution of the moneys: Ah, how far more
fearful is our case, if we come short of the reprobated Judas? These may be
the grounds of our trial; and so much of the first Observation.

II. The second Observe. that is is our duty to bring forth fruits meet for
repentance.

It needs not explication, for all the difficulty was cleared in the former;
only let us see it briefly confirmed.

1. It is our duty, for there are many precepts; therefore Paul prays for the
Colossians, that they might walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being
fruitful in every good work, Col 1.10. Your own reading may find more.

2. We have not only precept, but decree; we are ordained to it: It is the end
of our creation, and of our redemption: We are Gods workmanship, created in
Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has before ordained that we should
walk in them, Ephesians. 2.10.

3. It is the end of Gods dealing with us; if he afford mercies, if threats, if
judgme^ts, al are to call us to repentance. His mercies are to that end: if he
sense his Vineyard, gather out the stones, dress it, and build a wine press,
then he looks for grapes, Esa. 5. His threatenings are to that purpose: he tells
us he purposes to strike, that the Axe is ready, laid to the root, that every
tree might bring forth fruit. His judgments are so intended, and therefore
complains that by them his people were not bettered; Why should ye be
stricken any more? ye revolt more and more, Esa. 1.5. And the towns are
condemned where our Savior went; for if the same things had bin done in Tire,
it had repented long agon. Let me apply it.

Use. 1. If it be our duty; it then very justly condemns,

1. The barren, who bring forth no fruits at all. I may say to many, as our
Savior to those in the Market place, Cur statis otiosi? why stand ye all the
day idle? men live only as if they were sent but to live without a farther
end; I may wonder as our Savior; Why stand ye all your youth idle? all your
strength idle? all your old age idle? what a shame is it, that men should spend
so many years, 20, 30, 40, 50, an 100 years some, and do nothing, make no
entrance, or if an entrance, no progress in grace. Has no man hired you? Have
ye not been hired by means, by mercies, by offers of grace? Why do we spend
our strength and labor to instruct you? wherefore have ye the Gospel? why
have ye enjoyed preaching? the benefit of so many sermons, and do nothing, but
continue barren?

2. It condemns such as are indeed fruitful, but bring not forth fruits worthy
of repentance. Men are but too fruitful in the works of darkness. The fruits
of ignorance, the fruits of profaneness, the fruits of Popery, the fruits of
Atheism, do every where abound. You bring forth fruits worthy of your selves,
being rank ground for weeds that are noysom and unprofitable. Ye bring not
fruits meet for this business and this day. A fasting day is but a bud or
flower, but the fruit must follow afterward. When ye assemble to a work of
this nature, there is a good show made, fair blossoms: but if there be a day
of humiliation and no reformation follow; it is but a blossomed tree, which at
length comes to nothing.

Use 2. If it be our duty, let us be careful of our duty: this application I
shall more profitably branch; into, 1. A direction. 2. An exhortation.


1. A direction, how we may be wrought unto the duty: 1. How to repent. 2. How
to bring forth worthy fruits.


1. A direction how to repent; I will method you in the way which you must
take, and carry your meditations through the several degrees by which ye must
ascend.

1. Learn to consider sin, to conceive of it rightly, to see it in its own
nature. Let us not deceive our selves in our condition, to think our selves
rich, and increased in goods, and to have need of nothing; when in deed we are
wretched and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked: Rev. 3.7. that ye may
the better discern and do this, consider;

1. The infinite majesty of God, which by your sins is offended.

2. The infinite bonds and relations that by your sins are violated.

3. The heavy wrath which upon such violations from such a Majesty, by your
sins you have justly incurred.

4. What good things, which otherwise ye might have possessed, by your sins
ye are deprived of, and have forfeited.

5 What evils, as the effects of divine wrath, by your sins are brought upon
you.

6. The infiniteness, and preciousnesse of Christ's sufferings, which for your
sins he freely under-went. Ye may spread your thoughts upon these, and by
them help your selves to the serious consideration of the heinous nature of
sin, which is the first work to be done.

2. Consider obedience unto God to be a duty absolutely necessary, that one
thing neeedfull, Luke 10.42. So necessary, that when some related Pilates fact,
that he mingled the blood of diverse Galileans with their Sacrifices, CHRIST
told them, Except ye repent ye shall all likewise perish, Luke 13.3. Consider
repentance to be so necessary, that without it there is no salvation, but ye
are sure to perish.

3. Upon the apprehension of sin, and the necessity of repentance, go and
cast your selves down before the presence of God, in the humblest manner, when
you are in private alone by your selves: lay your selves open unto him; pour
forth confessions: for if we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to
forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. 1 John 1.9.
See what encouragement David gives, I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine
iniquity have I not hid: J said, I will confess my Transgressions unto the
Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin, Psalm, 32.5. And go and say
unto God as David did, Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this
evil in thy sight. Psalm. 51.4.

4. When ye are at the lowest, then cast up an eye to Christ, by faith embrace
the promise of life; by faith in him expect not only the justification of your
persons, but the renovation of your natures; that the covenant of promise may
be performed: challenge of Gods truth, That he would give you a new heart, and
put a new spirit within you, that he would take away the stony heart of your
flesh, and give you an heart of flesh: that he would make you remember your
own evil ways, and your doings that were not good, that ye might loath your
selves in your sight for your iniquities and for your abomination. Ezekiel.
36.26.31.

5. When ye have challenged mercy and grace, then resolve in the strength of
God to return. There is nothing in your own power, and therefore a bare
simple resolution will not avail you.

We often observe such resolutions come to nothing: and no wonder; because
they are not taken in the power of God.

A gross sinner, in a good sudden mood, begins to bethink himself, and then
he resolves to leave his sin. I have heard a drunkard, when he has been
reproved, say, I will leave this drinking and company-keeping: or a swearer
say, I will refrain these oaths. And so of others.

Happily some may commend these resolves: I cannot, dare not: I think it no
commendable thing, but a remedy as dangerous as the sin, because the remedy
is a sign. You will think it strange divinity: but observe whether these men
do not as frequently fall into the sin as resolve against it: they resolve
not to do it, and then do it: they again resolve not to do it, and again
they do it: That is their course, the circle which they run round in, to
sin, and resolve, to resolve, and sin. And observe, whether you ever knew
one of these bare resolutions to have good success. But this must be your way;
Lord, I see what I must do, but together with it I see what I am not able to
do: thou have made me willing, make me also able: my desires are toward
grace, and so far as I am able to resolve, I do resolve, but it is in the
power of thy might: Oh add unto thine own work, perfect thine own
beginnings. This is to resolve to repent in Gods power, and it succeeds; for
we are not sufficient of our selves, to think any thing as of our selves, but
our sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3.5.

6. Lastly, let us strengthen our resolutions with this care to avoid all
impediments that might hinder our returning unto God. Many things do impedite
or entangle the soul, sometimes worldliness hangs like a clog, sometimes love
of company and pleasure is like a snare about the feet; but we must thrust
away such, as troublesome importunate suitors, whose impudence will not have
denial. We shall never go freely till we be unclogged. This is the method we
must take in the course of our repentance.

2. The other direction is, how ye may bring forth fruits. Be not wanting to
your selves, neglect not tillage and the right husbanding and manuring of your
ground; or because the metaphor is here of a tree, do what is in your power to
make a fair and flourishing growth. But, because Paul may plant, and Apollo
water, but God must give the increase: therefore because it is God work,
entreat him to do it; be often and much in prayer.

1. That God would afford a moisture from his ordinances, and to you grace and
power to suck up that moisture. The tree sends its roots up and down, some
this way, some that, every way; to suck from the humid earth, and of the deaw
and rain that falls from heaven, to draw what it can unto it self. Pray that
God would drop down virtue in the word, and labor diligently to attract it.

2. That God would put within you, the heat of charity, that out of love you
might keep the commandments. It is heat which conveyes the moisture up into
the sap of the tree, and carries along the nutrimentall humor: hence it is,
that in spring time the trees and plants do sprout. Where there is love in the
heart, there will be obedience in the life: Mary the penitent did much, for
she loved much.

3. Pray that God would sanctify to you all several conditions. The winter is
profitable to the plants, to solid and collect them: The summer, that they may
emit or send without what they have collected. Pray that God would sanctify
trial, and a more pleasing life, both, to that end that you might be more
fuitfull. This is the direction.

2. I will end with an exhottation.

1. Let us endeavor to be meetly or worthily fruitful, to be some way
answerable in the degree of our repentance, to the degree of sin. When shall we
find penitents come blubbered into our Churches? Oh that such as have been
eminent in their sin, would be eminent in their repentance. There are some
have an eminency of evil; sometimes in a Town or Parish we shall know some
who are noted, and poynted at for common Drunkards: some are known by their
common swearing: They are known by these sins, as others are by their Trades.
Oh that such men would not only repent, but give public testimony of their
repentance, that they might be noted for that also; such a one, such a one is a
convert. O, that Drunkards, Adulterers, Swearers, Oppressors, Sabbath Breakers
would be eminent in the contrary, in sobriety, in the use of drinks, in
temperance to correct their flesh, in a strict watch over their tongues, in
mercy to the poor, in a conscionable observation of the Lords days. We think
any thing enough for God, if ye leave your callings or pleasures for one of
these days, hear, and pray out the time that the congregation stays
together, ye think ye do enough; you think a sigh a great matter, the drop
of a tear to be almost meritorious. Ah, why should we be so ungrateful, so
unanswerable unto God. When you fall into sin, ye pursue it violently, why
should there not be such zeal in the return? As ye sinned with greediness,
with violence repent.

2. In our repentance let us be answerable to our spiritual life: let us live
as such as we are. In civil relations we can easily do it, we can live
suitably to our estates, we can very easily live above it. If a man basely and
meanly borne, be raised by the accession of a great wealth to be a Gentleman,
he can soon forget how he lived when he was poor, he can very easily learn
stately carriage, to look high, and speak big, and despise his neighbors.
There are excesses in our carriage this way, whence it is, that the commonalty
live like Gentry, the Gentry like Nobility, the Nobility like Princes, and
Princes scarce know how to live. Oh that there could be these excesses in our
spiritual manner of life. Christians live as heathens, as unbeleevers, as
wordlings, It is a shame for us to live so much under our selves. But let us
endeavor, that are Saints, yet so much as we can, to live as Angels, live as
much as we can in heaven; have heavenly thoughts, and heavenly desires, and
heavenly motions: to live, if not above, yet at least answerable to our
principle of life.

Let me conclude with an application of entreaty to your consciences, that ye
would be moved to return unto God. Will a threat prevail? Know then, that the
Lord knows how to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be
punished, 2 Pet. 2.9. The Baptist urges this argument in his sermon, Now the
Axe is laid unto the root of the trees; therefore every tree which brings not
forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire: in the tenth verse of
this Chapter. Beloved, judgments are come near us: The Pestilence is Gods
Axe, and a very sharp one, it can cut down men suddenly, it can cut down
Countries; it has felled Preston wood, and tall grown trees in other places:
It is laid near the root of this County, in Lancashire on the one side, in
Denbighshire, on the other, in Shropshire, on this: how easy is it for God to
fetch another blow, and lay us down? or why should we expect to stand
untoucht, when the wood round about us is either feld or cropped? Why do we
despise the riches of Gods goodness; and after our hardness and impenitent
hearts, treasure up unto our selves wrath against the day of wrath, and the
revelation of the righteous judgment of God? Romans 2.5. But I will not end with
a threat, but would rather desire that the goodness of God might lead us to
repentance. The word that the Apostle uses is (...), The goodness of God it
leads on, or invites, or provokes, Romans 2.4. Let this be motive enough; let his
(...) and his (...), his forbearance, that, though he be provoked, he is
patient and will not strike, and his long-suffering, that he waits and expects
when we will return; let these move us. Let the promise of mercy move us: let
the mercy that we already have received move us, for we may observe that we
have not lost the fruit of our labors, of our fasting, of our prayers; for
Sweden prospers, and the rage of our neighbor pestilence cease; that we
hope, shortly to be as loud in our praises, as we have been solemn in our
humiliations.

Deo Opt. Max. sit gloria.

