

SAINT PETER'S ROCK, Under which title is deciphered the faith of Peter, the
foundation of the Church, Christ's sacrificehood, and the comfort of the holy
Spirit.

Done by Alexander Top Gent.

Printed 1597.

To the reverend father in God Doctor Lions Bishop of Cork, Rosse and Cloin in
Ireland: A. T. wishes prosperity and grace everlasting.
COnsidering your Lordships zeal to the truth, due respect of the Gospel, and
unfeigned love to the professors; I presumed to publish this small work under
your Lordships protection: partly because it was begotten in that country;
partly because the country bears but little fruit of the scripture: but
principally and especially, to gratify your Lordship for many favors. The
subject is easy, yet not learned; often red, seldom marked; observed of many,
yet understood of few. But seeing the level of all controversy is to hit the
truth, whose champions ye all are; and by you all arguments must die or live: I
appeal unto your L. for my just defense, or your Lordships better advise. The
spirit of grace illuminate your L. understanding. London. March, Anno 1597.

Ever your Lordships to command, Alexander Top.

To the Reader.
GEntle Reader, I have for thy use and comfort, framed (as near as I could)
the deriuation of the Christian faith: and that thou may the better
understand my meaning heerin: know, that as the Creed was a thing most breef,
and learnedly composed in the prime time of the Church from many places of
scripture: so my purpose was to make a true dissipation of the articles,
disposing them to the places from whence they were first taken: to the end that
from henceforth thy faith should not he grounded upon bare words, but upon
knowledge of these scriptures so material for salvation. My pains is free,
freely use it, God give grace in all points. Farewell.

A. T.

SAINT PETER'S ROCK.
I BELIEVE) First I think it needful to expound this word BELIEVE; then to
show the use of it: and lastly to what end it is used of the believers. The
word seems of a compound and proper signification, deeper than mere English
can understand: for it means therein or thereby thoroughly to live, wherein we
do believe: yielding up the possession of all spiritual senses; disposed from
all earthly affection of the members, by the true mortification in spirit: for
this syllable (be) in apposition, is no less possessiue or effectiue with us
at this day, than with the Hebrews of ancient time ((...)) or BE: which
always imports in, by or through: but far more inwardly of us to be
understood, because it gives a most secret meaning to the word it makes: as
for example, think and bethink, adding a very deep cogitation to thinking:
get and beget; where it has some special conceit in meaning, seem and beseem;
here it makes that, which was in outward show, only like it self, simple; become
a very beautiful creature to the beholders. (Besides, this syllable (be) that
holds so small room in a Commonwealth, causes any adiunct to remain
substantially in his subject, as I BELIEVE) to wit, I am wholly living in God
the father, etc. so, as quicksiluer confounds all other metals, and
transformeth their bodies by his liuelyhood: so does this syllable bring a word
of common and open sense, to a most close and necessary signification in
spirit: so that to believe argues a trusty confidence in the essential
subject of spirit; and for the time of steadfast believing, the spirit has no
manner of sympathy with the flesh, but the flesh remains dead, and mortified
to all natural inclination, in pleasure or suffering: whether it be health or
sickness, riches or poverty, love or hatred, cheerfulnes or grief of heart, or
any other pleasure or calamity incident whatsoever: the communion of the
spirit being hereby redeemed out of the prison of flesh, and euapored into life
eternal. For the spirit is no more ruled by the flesh, but the flesh by the
spirit. What then is subject to this spiritual belief, Ezekiel. 20. 29.
metals, wood or stone, as the altar Bamah, or such like? No, you shall not
finish, that you have in your mind to do, if you serve wood or stone as the
heathen. Is it metal? not the preciousest of all metals, gold: for mighty
Emperors have been deceived by their golden Idols, and have perished: Dan. 3. 1.
as Nebuchadnezar by his Image of sixty cubits high, and six broad. The Idols
stand up as a palm tree, Ierem. 10. 5.
but speak not; they are born, for they cannot go; they can do neither evil
nor good: Ierem. 10. 9.
fear them not. Silver plates are brought from Tarshish, and gold from Vphaz,
the work of men's hands. There shall com out of Bells mouth that, Ier. 51. 44.
which he has swallowed up, and the nations shall no more flow unto it. But the
wall of Babell shall fall, and become an astonishment among nations. Can men
make gods that are no gods? Can their own hands make them a redeemer, or their
handy work save them? No: for the belief of all men being lively and
spiritual, cannot live for ever, or be faithfully reposed in such unprofitable
subjects; seeing, in them there is no blast of life: for, they neither breath,
nor smell, nor hear, nor walk, nor speak, wherein then can they live? How should
they defend a man, that trusts in them? but both the caruer and the work
perishes together. What then is subject to this spiritual belief? A horse;
because he runs fiercely in the battle; or many thousand chariots; because
they seem invincible: or man, because he can devise and determine long before:
nay, or princes; that so many millions of knees bow unto? these all have place
of life, for they, both breath, smell, hear, and speak, and eeke can go and not
be borne: yet seeing their bodies be altogether frail and dissoluble, wasting
to nothing, there is no place for everlasting life found in them, whereupon the
spirit of belief should work; much less any means, whereby the gross nature
of man might be justified. Psalm. 33. 17.
The horse is void of understanding. Exodus 14. 28.
All Pharaos chariots and confidence perished at once. 2. Sam. 24. 1.
David was plagued for numbering of his host of eight hundred thousand fighting
men, whose power and trust was soon abated by affliction. This teaches us then
the vanity of gold, the senslesnes of wood and stone, the weak defense of horse
and chariot; nay more, Psalm. 118. 9.
the utmost safety of an host, and the confidence in princes: for here, David
being a king, could not save his host from the pestilence, nor his incomparable
number work their Lords security; wherefore man (we see) is not the thing to
be believed in: albeit, he has both sense and power, in a firm understanding.
For in nothing, but in man is this work of faith required, so that whatsoever
is above man knows al things, and what so is below him hops for nothing.
One man may trust in another, or one may advance himself above his fellows;
but the one and the other do both fall, Genesis 14. 11.
as when the children of Israel murmured against Moses, being a man, supposing
the punishment to be his, that was inflicted on them, showing that in their
prosperity, they believed in him only: wherefore they perished infinitely
through their misbeleef: for as they were obedient to man; so died they in
their own corruption. Otherwise if man could be saved by believing in man, or
in man's works, there is not one that would be disinherited of eternal life,
and the promise of salvation would seem merely frivolous. Numb. 20. 10.
Moses and Aaron lifted up themselves at the rock, whose honor was abased by
extreme punishment. Genesis 10. 8.
Nimrod began to be mighty upon the earth, and erected a kingdom by his own
might: to wit, the cities Babel, Erech, Accad, and Calne, Genesis 11. 4.
all built in the land of Shinar. Who said, com let us build us a city and a
tower, whose top may reach unto heaven, that we may get us a name; lest we be
scattered upon the earth. He had spoken more prophetically if he had said, that
we may be scattered upon the earth: seeing it becam suddenly the cause of their
horrible confusion; so that they were made as aliens in their country and
city, one not understanding another language; even so are the arrogant
deprived of their glory, when their most provident security turns to
destruction. By this is showed, what it is to believe, what manner of creature
is bound to believe, and who are misbeleeuers. Now follows the necessary use
of it, and to what end we so constantly use the same. Understand therefore that
it is the joint of all the articles of our faith: nay, without it can be made
no effectual article at all; but all the whole speech becomes a confused
heap of faithless syllables. By believing we are discerned from Infidels and
barbarous people, that are as bruit beasts, without any hope or knowledge, our
religious constancy is manifested, our bond of amity and league of humane
society sealed. It is the fire, hammer and touch, to purify, mally and try
us; it is the wind that divides the wheat from the chaff: it is a most
comfortable meditation in all seasons; a salve against all offenses and
scandals whatsoever. A man may in his mind believe, and not utter it: but then
cannot his faith appear unto his brethren. So that he shall become a stumbling
block unto them: and thus much for the very protestation of the word. Now
concerning the end of believing, it is to be saved: and touching the cause, why
we must not believe in the vanity of the above recited powers, it is; that
there is no safety or salvation in them: for man has no power of his own
salvation, neither is any man to put trust in the strength of his own arm, to
deliver him from death. We believe therefore that the subject of this our
spiritual faith shall live for ever: and that the spirit that now is imprisoned
in this our flesh, shall mortify our corrupt members by an vnwauering faith,
which before it vanishes to fly unto that eternal dwelling place, may so
sanctify our fowl and sinful nature, that we be made fit vessels to
comprehend eternal life. For seeing there is no manner of salvation with
flesh, wood or stone, or any other thing that our earthly senses can perceive,
we must invent a thing subject to our understanding: which being a college or
digestion of all senses, and mere spirit and life, the subject must be wholly
spiritual and lively. Where then is this subject to be found? for we see it is
neither in the treasure of the earth, nor in the glory of the world. Let us
therefore lift up our eyes unto heaven, and behold the habitation of life: the
everlasting author of spirit in all creatures. The Greeks termed it (...),
which most like comes of (...) and (...), an high and prosperous wind among
the heathen: but in the creation it was called (...) where the light spirit and
vapor of waters remain, that seasoneth all living creatures in the air. This
is the most excellent dwelling place of that ghostly (...), or everlasting
AEVVM, AETAS ALTERNA, or AETERNITAS, SOLVM EXISTENS, God, All-good, SVMMVM
BONVM, PRIMVM MOBILE, the first thing that moved, and the author of al things,
whose highest seat is heaven, Aristot. de mundo.
(...), which is to wit, Gods highest house of the whole world is called
heaven. Kal. 2.
(...), the firmament of faith. Therefore this is that eternal spirit that we
are to believe in: for it is the very issue of all things, the breath of his
mouth created all, maintains all, yea and destroieth all at his will; him are
we to worship as Lord of all, who in the first tongue that men spoke, gave
himself a name, declaring his eternity: to wit, that he was always one and
the same, Isai 41. 4.
infinite, without beginning or end IEHOVA, who ever was, only is, and ever
shall be; whom no time changes: for a thousand years with the Lord is but as
one day: he himself is the root of time, and the point thereof: his beginning is
unsearchable; his presence unmeasurable, and his continuance everlasting: in
him then we must believe that will be saved, or delight to live for ever and
ever; not liply only in words, but with our whole heart and soul, duly
conceiving that his infinite majesty and power that gives our understanding
matter to work upon: before him stands the end of all flesh, the relaxation
of spirit, the volubility of all souls is in his power. 1. Sam. 2.
There is none holy as the Lord, nor any God besides him, or like him; therefore
speak no more presumptuously; let not arrogance com forth of your mouth: for
the Lord is a God of knowledge, and by him enterprises are established. The
bow and the mighty men are broken, and the weak have girded themselves with
strength; they that are full are hired forth for bread, and the hungry are no
more hired: so that the barren has borne seven, and she that has many
children is feeble. The Lord kills, and makes alive; brings down to the
grave, and raises up; the Lord makes poor, and makes rich; Psalm. 113. 7.
brings down, and exalts: he raises up the poor out of the dust, and
lifts up the beggar out of the dunghill, to set them among princes, and to
make them inherit the seat of glory. For the pillars of the earth are the
Lords, and he has set the world upon them: he will keep the feet of his
saints, and the wicked shall keep silence in darkness. For in his own might
shall no man be strong; the Lords adversaries shall be destroyed, and out of
heaven shall he thunder upon them: the Lord shall judge the ends of the world,
and shall give power unto his king, and exalt the horn of his anointed.
Therefore whosoever believes steadfastly in him, he is already translated into life
eternal. Through this belief was Enoch and Elias taken up quick into heaven,
to remain happy with him for evermore. Genesis 5 24.
For it is said, Henoch pleased God; for he walked with him, and was no more
seen; for God took him away: so was Eliah while he walked with Elisha taken
by a whirlwind into heaven, 2 King. 2. 11.
whose spirit was so settled on this heavenly Godhead, that he knew before that
he should be taken up, when as he said to Elisha; 2. King. 2. 9.
What shall I do for thee before I be taken from thee? Neither must we think
that there is any other mediation to be made for us by angels, saints, or
elementall creatures of what sort soever, than our own spiritual confession
and lively protestation: for after we duly conceive what a God he is, by him
our temporal life (that believe) shall be translated into everlasting life.
This is the fountain of nature, and nature it self; the author of antiquity,
Dan. 7. 22.
and the ancient of days; whose word is truth; whose being is inuariable, and
whose place is perfection. He made man the most excellent creature on the
earth, whom he created in honor, Genesis 2. 15.
and placed in pleasure. According to his own image made he him, Genesis 1. 27.
that he might be glorified in him, and gave him dominion over all his
creatures in earth. This then is to be believed of us, that as we remained in
him and his power before all worlds were made, and before our first father Adam
was created: so when he shall take this life from us that he has given us, and
bereave us of this earthly stewardship, that we shall return again to that
everlasting place, wherein we were first elected and prepared, before the world
was made, or any foundation laid thereof. Adam fell by misbeleef to death by
neglecting the first caveat that God gave him, who soon, by the inticement of
the woman, sinned extremely, by eating of the only forbidden tree of the
garden: Genesis 3. 6.
both being circumuented by the subtilitie of satan, the prince of darkness.
Neither are we our selves free from that corruption, which he wrought unto us
his posterity: yet God, to keep his own image from desperation, hastened to
promise him life again, Genesis 3. 15.
if he would harken unto it: which, no doubt, Adam laid hold on, being
contented for to leave the pleasure, that he had in this world, only hoping for
life in the world to com. Genesis 2. 23.
For, he named his wife Euah, life, foreseeing that she should be the mother of
life, and, that her seed should bruise the serpents head, which he counted a
sufficient revenge upon his deadly enemy. Isai. 27. 1.
In what day, the Lord with his mighty sword should visit the piercing serpent:
yea, that crooked serpent, and slay the dragon in the sea: and he most
assuredly believed, that it should happen, though in his days he might not see
it. Deuteronomy. 3. 28.
Even so traveled Moses for the rest he saw not, for the good of his
posterity, the Israelits: 2. Sam. 1.
and likewise David warred for the peace of Solomon. 1. King. 1.
Therefore let men be wise, and take heed of surfeiting in too much pleasure of
this world, least they be wholly disinherited of the world to com. We see how
glad Adam was to embrace this little branch of life, whereas before, he made no
reckoning of the whole body which he enjoyed. His beginning was happiness, but
by his disobedience, has left a cursed inheritance to all nations of the
earth. Wherefore it is not enough for us to continue in the state, wherein we
were first borne, albeit, it had been blessedness in him so to have done: for,
then we abide still, as children of wrath. Col. 3. 5. 6.
But, seeing so many, so little alter from their nature, let us all be
circumspect, and look about us, how to escape this prison of ignorance, the
bait of satan, as the part of a wise man is, to see, both before and behind,
(...), Hom. II.
not too much besotted with the security of the present time. Let us, therefore,
look back and consider by our fall, from whence our redemption is to com:
then, with a lively faith indeed, lay hold of it, as did Adam and the rest of
the holy fathers, which, before the law or any ordinances were made, received
the comfort of the holy Ghost: having an entire hope of the continual grace of
the same God. For, from thencefoorth Adams conscience dwelt in the Lord: so
that, he believed in God the father almighty, maker of heaven and earth. And
this was a true faith in him, because he had no other father but God, who was
almighty: for he made him of nothing, he made also heaven and earth: earth to
bring forth creatures, and heaven to nourish them unto man's use. Therefore we
rightly say (Our father) or, I believe in God, the father almighty, maker of
heaven and earth. For, every man's faith is known unto himself, and, another
man's faith is to him uncertain. This belief brought life unto him that was
dead; likewise Noah his belief was the same in the arc; such was Abraham's,
when he would have offered his only son Isaac: in whose seed, the blessing of
all nations was hoped for, Genesis 12 3.
according to the promise; and the like in many other, which, for breuity I
recite not: Exodus 4. 30.
as Moses by his wondrous miracles in the land of Egypt: in so much as he
excelled all the wit, 2. King. 6. 6.
and magic of that land; Elisha made iron to swim in the water, with many
other, which became true prophets of things to come: so immortal was their
belief in those days, that their daily bread was the heavenly cogitation of
this eternal subject, Matt. 6. 11.
the infinity of power, happiness, strength and honor; the recorder of his own
hand-work; the register of all that is done; the cause of all things that shall
happen. We have, in respect of him, no manner of being, no presence, no life, no
perfection; our being is inconstant; for man is unstable in all his ways. Our
presence is of no abiding: Psalm. 39. 5.
for he has made our days but as a span long. To conclude, our actions and
cogitations are so perverse and wicked, that it might repent the Lord of our
redemption, as it repented him that he made man. Genesis 6. 7.
And a very small number should enter the ark, and be saved. That poor life
which we have, is no more to be respected than death it self, seeing it
withers as the lilly in all his glory. Our greatest perfection is but extreme
imperfection, when as the works of God in beginning, middle and end, are
absolutely perfect for ever. His beginning ends, his mean time both begins
and ends: his beginning is a momentary end, and there is no other mean time
with him. Is it then enough to say, I BELIEVE IN GOD THE FATHER ALMIGHTY MAKER
OF HEAVEN AND EARTH? In no wise: for although we are bound to believe so much,
yet is it not all that is required of us; for the very Jews believed thus much:
whose belief was to be saved. They saw the salvation of the Lord a far off
through remorse in conscience: considering their fall, and the wickedness of
man's thoughts all day long. Adam their father had lost his state of knowledge,
they therefore remained in ignorance sinful; and their whole hope was to be
grounded upon the comfortable promises of that God, and otherwise it had been
hard for them to have conceived in their minds so great an eternity, and such
an immortal happiness. But God bereauing man his image of that honor which he
once affoorded him, which is to say, the inheritance of a paradise, would not
utterly destroy him, but rather make him by a lively faith to await for a
blessed estate to abide for ever, yea for ever and ever. As Adam being first in
the adoption of blessedness and life, and consequently we all by him: became
accursed and died, made us accursed and to die daily: and as he by the almighty
Gods means hoped to regain his salvation; so we particularly ought to scan the
means of his salvation, to keep our frail flesh from desperation; to comfort
our guiltines of death, and to keep us from everlasting damnation. His means
was the comfort of a victory, wherein he reioiced as a giant to run his course:
Psalm. 19. 5.
and he did most constantly believe, that as God promised, so he should
vanquish his most subtle and deadly enemy. What could more win the heart of
man, tha^ such a promise? Sundry such promises from age to age were revealed to
his posterity: Genesis 9 26.
As to Noah; Blessed be the God of Sem. To Abraham; Genesis 17. 6.
I will multiply thee as the stars of heaven, when as yet he had no child, and
his wife was old. To David by the prophet Nathan; I will be his father, 2. Sam.
7. 14.
he shall be my son: if he sin, I will chasten him with the rod of men, but
my mercy shall not part away from him, as I took it from Saul, whom I have put
away before thee; and thine house shall be established, and thy kingdom for ever
before thee; thy throne shall be established for ever. Ier. 33. 14.
In that day I will cause the branch of righteousness to grow up unto David, and
he shall execute right judgment in the land: then shall Judah be saved, and
Jerusalem dwell safely: and he that shall call her, is the Lord our
righteousness. For thus says the Lord; David shall never want a man to sit upon
the throne of the house of Israel. This is the good then which the Lord will
perform unto the house of Israel, and unto the house of Judah. These were all
most delightful promises still to stay the heart of man in his own salvation:
Isay. 7. 14.
yet received Isay a greater light, when he understood the name of this
conqueror: Dan. 9. 24.
but Daniell the greatest comfort, to whom the precise time of victory and
blessing to all the world was foretold, which was in the coming of Messiah,
which we call CHRIST the anointed, Jesus that was promised the savior of the
world. These men were revived by mere promises; but we being adopted heirs of
their hope do exceed their faith in believing in this Jesus: for we conclude
with Peter, Matt. 16. 16.
that he is the son of the living God. Wherefore we say; AND IN JESUS CHRIST,
to be understood every man's Jesus or Savior that believes: whom Jesus or
Iehoshua the son of Nun, savior and captain of the Israelites, prefigured
long before; that as he led Moses people into the promised land, and sustained
them in all their iourneyes: so shall this Jesus defend and keep us, that call
and trust upon him, from all subtle and malicious inventions of satan, and the
world whatsoever, and most courageously carry us through this vale of misery,
to a promised land of rest, a paradise, wherein he himself is Lord; and they
that will not endure patiently the calamities, vexations, and variety of this
journey to rest, shall surely have their reward with the murmurers of Israel,
and the ten wearied and uncomfortable spies of the land of Canaan, which might
not see the land again, that they had once without cause blamed, Numb. 13. 29.
to hinder Gods decree. And (no doubt) with their false reports grieved many
thousand souls; and had not the Lord put into the hearts of Joshua and Caleb his
valiant servants to speak the truth, many surely might have perished in
infidelity: but the Lord found Caleb as a heart hearty, and courageous, not
fearing death; who was therefore rewarded with a second youth, Ioshu. 14. 11.
both in strength and wisdom; his youth came again unto him, and his age
returned forty years, answering well the question of regeneration, or second
birth, made by Nicodemus to our true Joshua, John. 3. 4.
or savior in the Gospel, to still and pacify the grudging mutiny of the
people, which the false spies had raised through the host. Joshua was to them a
shepherd, signifying our shepherd Jesus that guides us to heaven. The blind
Jews makes salvation in this word (...) save us; where they have both in word
and sense Jesus; yet will it not agree with their consciences to say Jesus save
us: but the cause of their wilful error in this point is, that they may cover
many sins with one excuse. For to say he came not, utterly denies his
condemnation to be by them; it denies that he was crucified by them; it
denies that they so wickedly pierced him; it denies that they gave him gall
and vinegar to drink; it excuses their buffering, mocking and scourging of
him; their spitting at him; their crowning of him with thorns, and generally
whatsoever else they did despitefully unto him. But when these things were
alleged to them, and the certainty of his coming to be just in the fulness of
time, proved: they began (whereas before they skilfully contended) with
bashfulnes to plead their own ignorance in the prophets, standing amazed (...),
Hom. II.
as stags at a gaze, they say, they be the sons of Abraham, Christ's own
kindred which John Baptist answers; Say not with your selves, Matthew. 3. 9.
that we have Abraham to our father; for God even of these stones can raise
children unto Abraham. Matt. 8. 11.
And again; Many shall come from east and west, and rest with Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob in heaven, but the children of the kingdom (the Jews) shall be cast
into utter darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. What then
can their proud lineage and alliance help them, when for not believing aright
in the Messiah, they fall daily into condemnation? Now again to return to our
own farther instruction; from whence comes our help and our salvation? even
from the Lord that has made both heaven and earth: or from the father Lord of
heaven and earth. Matt. 11. 25.
This Jesus came from heaven, was made flesh of the virgin Mary, begotten of
his father before all worlds; he is very God as touching his father, and very
man as touching his mother: whereby he might undertake manhood, and ioin it unto
his Godhead, and become a fit messenger about his fathers business, as he
answered the propitiations for them; I must go about my fathers business: Luke
2. 49.
to prove that he was the true root of Ishai, Isay. 11. 1.
and the seed of Abraham. Luke. 3.
Saint Luke lays down the line of his manhood to God, reckoning all his
fathers till Adam. Saint Matthew shows his divinity, and the succession of his
right unto the kingdom: Matthew. 1.
as it was said, Isai. 8. 14.
A virgin shall conceive a son, and thou shall call his name EMANVEL, God
with us. This is that seed of the woman that was to bruise the serpents head,
and to take the prey out of the devils jaws: which means of redemption by the
ey of faith the holy fathers foresaw. He therefore is not to be thought Jesus
the son of Nun; Josh. 1. 1.
nor Jesus that was called Iustus, Col. 4. 11.
Paul's work-fellow; nor Jesus the son of Sirach: Ecclus. 50. 27.
but Jesus (...), which was called Christ the anointed, Matthew. 1. 16.
to show the title of his earthly honor: the other name declares his authority
in heaven by his fathers spiritual and everlasting inheritance: but of the
name, Christ, is hereafter to be spoken. This name was given by his father, to
the end that men might believe in him being sent, and not be deceived by any
other professed Joshua; therefore was it told, Dan. 9. 24.
Messiah shall be slain, even the Lords Christ or anointed. And to make the
blind Jews more inexcusable, the very day and hour of his death was
fore-shewed by the prophet. He was called Jesus of his infinite salvation,
(...), Matthew. 1. 21.
for he shall save his people from their sins. Like as if he should make
those which the Lord has called (...) none of his people (...) his especial
people: or turn the Lords fearful and terrible words (...) I will not have
pity, 1. Pet. 2. 10.
into ruhhamah, I will have pity on. For such is the virtue and force of his
reconciliation with his father. This was the very lamb of God, that wrought
Isreal's salvation; he shall make crooked paths straight; a bruised reed shall
he not break: even so patiently went he as a sheep unto the slaughter, not
opening his mouth. Oh how unspeakable seems this patience to us his
followers, when, the least occasions (the greatest in this respect being
nothing) can withdraw our most heavenly and devout cogitations of spirit, to
the most earthly and sensual will of the flesh? Which plainly discovers our
unwilling service of God; our urged obedience toward him; our most undutiful
expectation of him; our idle hands in his vineyard; our dull ears in hearing
him, and whatsoever else we neglect, which generally is the time pleasing of us
all. Wherefore (good brethren) serve him as ye ought, willingly: obey him
liberally: humbly attend on him: be not found idle in the vintage, nor as deaf
adders stopping your ears at the voice of the charmer, charm he never so
wisely: neither harden your hearts as in the day of provocation, or in the day
of temptation in the wilderness, and let us learn to serve the world even as it
serves us, which is even then to loath it, when it seems most amiable, then
to refuse it when it most desires us; and then to fear it most when it most
fawneth upon us. But what crosses can the frailty of man's flesh abide? or from
what will or earthly pleasure can it abstain? truly not the least: although it
were to win the everlasting joy of heaven. Notwithstanding, Jesus warns us to
suffer reproaches for his sake, Math. 5. 11.
adding blessedness to our patience: and also he wills us to com unto him all
that are weary and heavy laden, Math. 11. 28.
and he will refresh us. Likewise he says unto us; Take on my yoke, and learn
of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest for your
souls. Recording the prophets exhortations to the people of Jerusalem in these
words; Ier. 6. 16.
Take heed to the ancient ways of your fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
which is the good way; walk therein, and you shall find rest for your souls.
This is the salvation that the prophet David so much delighted in: Psalm. 69.
For, says he, God will save Sion, and build again the walls of the city of
Judah, and they shall dwell there, and inherit it, and the seed of his servants
shall inherit it; and they that love his name shall dwell therein. Jesus was
sent, not only a savior to the Jews that faithfully received him, because
they were his own kindred: but also unto them that were without, yea even the
Gentiles: As it is said; Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has raised
up a mighty salvation for us in the house of his servant David: to be a light
to lighten the Gentiles, and a glory to the people of Israel: and to perform
the oath which he swear to our forefather Abraham, that he would give us. There
may we well understand and mark, that he was sent a deliverance to all nations,
that they whosoever should call upon him, might be delivered from the fear of
their enemies ghostly or bodily, to wit, the outrageous threatenings of Satan,
or any opprobrious comminations of this world. This was the salvation that
Simeon prophesied of, and received comfort by, Luke 2.
when he said; Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace; for mine eyes
have seen thy salvation: and likewise Mary's thanksgiving, Luke 1.
when she said; My soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit reioiceth in God
my savior. It seems the prophets had no greater comfort than still to be
foreshewing of this savior, the redemption of the world; as their prophecies
mention. Isai. 1. 2. 3.
In that day the highest mountain shall be prepared and exalted above all hills,
and all nations shall flow unto it; and many people, to wit, the Gentiles,
shall go and say; Com let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house
of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his
paths: for the law shall go forth of Sion, and the word of the Lord from
Jerusalem. The Lord himself will give you a sign, Isai. 7. 14.
A virgin shall conceive a son, etc. butter and honey shall he eat, till he
have knowledge to refuse the evil, and to choose the good. In another place;
Isai. 9. 6. 7.
Unto us a child is born, and unto us a son is given, and the government is
upon his shoulders; and he shall call his name wonderful, counselor, the
mighty God, the everlasting father, the prince of peace; the increase of his
government shall have none end; he shall sit upon the throne of David, and upon
his kingdom to order it, and to establish it with judgment and justice from
henceforth for ever. The zeal of the Lord of hosts will perform this. But
there shall come a rod forth of the stock of Iesse, Isai. 11. 1. 10.
and a graffe shall grow forth of his root: and in that day the root of Iesse
which shall stand up, for a sign unto the people: the nations shall seek unto
it, and his rest shall be glorious. This then is the most true, and comfortable
rest for the souls of all them that trust in him. Isai. 22. 17.
And the work of justice shall be peace, even the work of justice and quietness,
and assurance for ever; and my people shall dwell in tabernacles of peace, and
in sure dwellings, and in safe resting places. A voice cries in the wilderness,
Isai. 40. 4.
prepare ye the way of the Lord; make straight in the desert a path for our
God: every valley shall be exalted, and every mountain and hill shall be
brought low, and the crooked shall be straight, and the rough places plain:
the glory of God shall be revealed. Isai. 42. 2.
Behold, says the Lord, I will give to Jerusalem one that shall bring good
tidings; behold my servant, says the Lord, I will stay upon him; mine elect,
in whom my soul delights: I have put my spirit upon him; he shall bring
forth judgment to the Gentiles; he shall not cry nor lift up, nor cause his
voice to be heard in the street: a bruised reed shall he not break; the smoking
flax shall he not quench; he shall bring forth judgment in truth, and the
Isles shall wait for his law. These places assured the Lords redemption unto
all the world, as in the same chapter. Let them give glory unto the Lord, and
declare his praise in the Islands: which whole chapter, because it so strongly
concerns this work, let the reader apply it to this place. I have held my
peace a long time, says the Lord, and refrained my self even a thousand
years; Apoc. 20. 7.
by the which space satan was bound. And now I will cry, says the Lord, and
make mountains and hills waste, and dry up their herbs. Isai. 53.
Who will believe our reports, or to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? His
anointing is prophesied here like wise; The spirit of the Lord is upon me,
Isai. 61.
therefore the Lord has anointed me; he has sent me to preach good tidings to
the poor; to bind up the broken hearted; to preach liberty to the captives; and
to them that are bound the opening of the prison, etc. What a wonderful
delight had this prophet from time to time to set before the eyes of the people
the coming of their savior, Jesus? yea the whole world was too little to
withdraw him from the confidence that he had already conceived of his
redemption to come. This therefore I thought not amiss to lay down, concerning
the prophets confidence, the rather to strengthen the weak hearted, and to stay
such as should be falling. For if the prophet by the ey of faith could assure
salvation imminent to the believers of the people: how much rather then is it
to be required, that we by the help of our sensible understanding should not
fail of that faith. For have not our ears heard Christ's own words? Have not
our eyes seen the manifestation of him in the flesh? Who has not heard of his
works that he did on the earth? Math. 1.
Who has not heard of his birth? Math. 2.
And that he was carried into Egypt? Have we not heard that he was baptized in
Jordan? Math. 3.
Have we not heard of his fasting, Math. 4.
preaching and the devils tempting of him? Have we not heard of his woondrous
cures? Math. 8.
Have we not heard how he made Apostles to preach? Have we not heard of the
feeding of five thousand men with three loaves and two fishes? Math. 10.
and many other miracles which he did? Yea surely: we have heard of his
passion, his descension, and ascension also; and yet is all this too little to
enable our weak spirits to faith, except with Didymus we feel, or with
Nicodemus enter into the womb again: our wickedness is so great, that through
faith we can imagine no assured salvation for us in our God: whereupon suddenly
we say with the fool; Psalm. 14.
Tush there is no God. But woe to them that say to their maker, Thou made me
not. Shall the vessel say to the potter, Thou did not fashion me, or make me
excellent, or why did thou not make me honorable, as some other of thy
workmanship? Surely the vessel that inquireth thus, shall be dashed and broken
in a thousand pieces. Is the work better than the workman? or whence was the
creation of man? Psalm. 24.
Open ye everlasting doors, and the king of glory shall com in. Now seeing we
have all heard of this Jesus, the son of God our redeemer, our everlasting
quietness and rest: let us all study to be rich in the true knowledge of him,
and thereby, only to receive the most glorious comfort of this world. First to
know assuredly, that he, the same that was promised, came according to the
fulness of time, for the salvation of mankind. Because he being God, begotten
of his father before all worlds, became man by his father borne in the world,
whom the world was not worthy of. He became flesh to free and save us from our
sins, Math. 1. 16.
and cleanse us from our wickedness: to translate our corrupt nature into
incorruption: our mortal seed into immortality: and to conclude, our vile and
unstable flesh, into most pure and steady spirit, to last with him for ever and
ever, Amen. This Jesus is not the savior of the spirit and soul after this
life only: but the preserver and defender of all that verily trust in him, from
dangerous mischances, or evil fortunes in this world also whatsoever: as is to
be noted in the example of the Iailor, first the miraculous means of Paul and
Silas, Acts. 16. 37.
their deliverance out of bands, when the doors flew open, and their fetters
were loosed; then Paul's aduising of the Iailor, saying, Do thy self no
harmme, we are all here; and lastly, by the admonition of Paul and Silas to
salvation, wishing him to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and both he and his
house should be saved: whereupon both he and his house were baptized out of
hand, and were saved. For our own sakes I thought it not amiss, to lay down
the strong faith of this so soon-conuerted Iailor; before, as it were, a mere
stranger to christianity, to incite us to a more stedy conversation in our own
profession: likewise the faith of the Centurion is to be noted, Math. 8.
by our saviors approbation, saying; Not in Israel have I found the like
faith. So the faith of the two blind men that cried incessantly, Math. 9.
Son of David have mercy upon us: who even as Christ bad them, believed his
power, and received their sight. With many other like places in scripture to
fortify our weak faith, to extinguish infidelity, and root out Atheism
throughout the whole body of all Christian churches. Wherefore let us say, It is
Jesus that we follow; he is our master, we fear not: and not mistrust at every
little tempest of this world when the wicked rise up against us, Psalm. 2. 1.
imagining vain things. Peter failed of faith at the beginning of the wind,
whereby he began to sink; but then that the Lords salvation might seem more
manifest, he cried, Lord save me: and he passed safely. Here the Lord made the
very floods a sufficient rock to build his church upon: for through his faith
he passed them as on the firm ground. Now, that Jesus was called Christ the
true Messiah, or anointed, whom the Lord anointed with the oil of gladness
above his fellows; Heb. 1. 9.
foreshewed in all ages from the beginning of the world, until he came to be
anointed the most holy. Dan. 9. 24.
Neither among men is there any other name given under the cope of heaven, by
which we can be saved: he being the end of Iubiles, or joyful years; the
sealing up of all prophesies, visions, miracles, and of all ceremonies: whom
the Lord anointed with glory and honor, Heb. 2. 7.
and set him over the work of his own hands. The Paschall lamb being now
offered up once for all. Ioh. 1. 29.
He was called the anointed, Ioh. 3. 6.
because it was the manner of the Jews coronation and election both of kings
and priests; it pertained unto him; for he was their lawful king apparent,
whom, the wise men from the East visited to worship at Jerusalem, Math. 2. 1.
saying, Where is he that is borne king of the Jews? Mich. 5. 2.
Thou Bethleem art little to be among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee
shall com the ruler in Israel, whose goings forth were from the beginning
everlasting, that is to say, out of the house of bread shall proceed the bread
of life, food for our souls unto everlasting life. Our fathers did eat Manna,
and died, but whosoever eats of this Manna shall live for ever. Psalm. 110. 4.
As he was also high sacrificer after the order of Melchizedek, it pertained
unto him: but the Jews received him not as king, because he was Joseph's son,
and a Carpenter, and came not like a king in white raiment, neither as a
sacrificer, because he was to imitate Melchizedek in his priesthood, and not
Aaron. Neither did their blind hearts conceive that the law should be changed;
and dreamed of none other priesthood but Aarons, when as in deed Melchizedek
was a figure of the true Messiah, as in a large prophecy is expounded, Isai. 9.
6.
by the prince of peace: for Melchizedek was king of Salem. Genesis 14. 18.
Sem and Melchizedek are both one, who for his vprightnes might be called the
king of righteousness, Malchi-zedek: Hebr. 7. 1.
and for his antiquity without father and without mother, without beginning or
end of days. His birth was unsearchable, because he was born before the flood;
and his end of days not seen, because he out-liued all his own posterity of
the next age. Therefore says Noah, Blessed be the God of Sem, Genesis 9. 26.
and God will persuade Iapheth to dwell in the house of Sem. So the priesthood
of Melchizedek remained in Sem that had this blessing of God: Genesis 14. 19.
and he blessed Abraham, Genesis 14. 20.
who paid him tithe of all. Thus much of Jesus, which was called Christ, in
whom we also believe: of whom his disciples first received the cognizance of
Christianity in Antiochia, where they were presently persecuted by Herod. Such
Herod's have been ever until this day, but they are such, whose darkness
vanquisheth their light. Let us therefore be ever glad to say, We have found the
Messiah, Ioh. 1. 41.
which is the Christ. To this end therefore God sent his only begotten son,
that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.
He it is that declares God; Ioh. 1. 18.
for he is in the bosom of his father: for this Christ is sent a savior to the
believers, of salvation; but to the unbelievers a speedy judge of condemnation,
which shall be thus; they saw the light, and being ashamed of their ill works,
Genesis 3. 8.
hid themselves in darkness, the mother of all errors and untruths: for truth
loves the light, and the light does glorify it. HIS ONLY SON. Math. 3. 17.
This is my well-beloved son in whom I am well pleased; Psalm. 118. 22.
this is the head corner stone that ioineth together the building of Iapheth
and Sem. John 3. 35.
The father loves the son, and has given all things into his hands. He that
believes in the son has everlasting life: John. 7. 38.
and out of his belly shall gush floods of living waters: Deuteronomy. 18. 15.
but he that obeieth not the son, shall not see life, and the wrath of God
abides in him: John. 4. 14.
this is the well of waters springing up unto eternal life, that whosoever
drinks thereof, should not thirst again. Now, to wit what the thing is that
we worship, and believe in: It is the only son of God, begotten of his father
before all worlds spiritually: for God is spirit, and to be worshipped in
spirit and truth. And as the Jews believed that this Messiah the son of God
should com, so we must know and believe, that he is com: they refused him in
the flesh, and we may not plead IGNORAMVS in spirit: let our spirits then be
guided with knowledge, otherwise our belief is no belief; for no credit can be
given to an uncertain hope. Wherefore, John. 5. 39.
let us search the scriptures; for in them we think to have eternal life, and
it is they that testify of him: otherwise, but a few by ignorance can be
excused, Romans 15. 4.
because these things are written for our learning and aedification. As the
father raises up from death and quickens; so the son also quickens whom he
will. And the father judges not, but refers all judgment to his son;
because all should honor the son as the father: and they that honor not the
son as the father, honoreth not the father that sent him. So whosoever
hears his word, and believes in him that sent him, shall not com unto
condemnation, but has passed from death to life: for as the father has life
in himself, so has the son. To believe cannot be to seek honor one of
another, but of God alone, and his son Jesus Christ: for when Moses stroke the
rock, Exodus 17. 6.
seeking honor of the children of Israel, saying, Hear now ye rebels, shall we
bring you water out of the rock? Here for not sanctifieng the Lord in the
presence of the Israelites, and for honoring themselves in the Lords miracle,
both Moses and Aaron were cut off from the hope they had to see the land of
promise. If Moses being a faithful leader of the Lords own host, and an
approved servant of the mighty God Iehoua, fell by disobedience into
arrogance, Exodus 17.
seeking his own honor more than Gods, and was so severely punished: oh that
men would but think, how fearful a sentence that was, by which he was deprived
of forty years hope, and the favor of so long travel, which was so sore in
the wilderness. How much more terrible shall our judgment be, if any way we
decline, or fall away from a sincere and perfect belief, which we have had in
God the father, and his son Jesus Christ: or if we believe not the word that
testifies of him, and through which we see him daily? Moses had but a mere
hope of things to come, which things we have seen through faith: and we are
strongly to abide therein, giving all honor to the son as to the father, in
whom we believe, and by whom we live and have our being. John. 6. 37.
This only son of God Jesus Christ is the bread of life, the true sabbath or
rest, the very top and end of Iubiles: let us study to enter into this rest.
His meat is to do his fathers will; and let our sustenance be, to follow him
and do his will: and let us not labor only for the meat that perishes, but
for the meat that dureth everlastingly, which the son of man shall give unto
us: for him has God the father sealed: and the work of God is to believe in
him whom he sent (his son.) This is the rock that followed the host, and the
rock whereupon the Lord has founded his church: this is Gods rock, and the rock
of the All-sufficient: John. 10. 20.
he and the father is one. And whosoever lives and believes in him shall
never die: John. 11* 26.
he shall gather together into one the children of God, from all corners of the
earth, by his death and passion. He is the son of God that takes away the
sins of the world: Nomb. 21. 9.
this is he that was to be lifted up, John. 3. 14.
and exalted above all heavens. Lord who believes our report, and unto whom is
thine arm revealed? And Lord who shall dwell in thy tabernacle, Psalm. 15.
and rest upon thy holy hill? Even he that leads an vncorrupt life, and does
the thing that is right. For this is the vine, and his father is the
husbandman; and the branch that bears not fruit in him, he cutteth off: and
every one that bears fruit, he purges, that it may bring forth more. So
must we abide in him, and he in us: for as the branch cannot bear fruit,
except it be in the vine; no more can we except we abide and dwell in him. Let
us therefore, pray for the peace which is in him; for the peace of Jesus Christ
the son of God, is greater than the afflictions of the whole world. Let us be
of good comfort, John. 16. 13.
he has already conquered the world: Psalm. 2.
and let us kiss the son least he be angry, and so we perish everlastingly;
for if his wrath be kindled yea but a little, blessed are all they that put
their whole trust and confidence in him: for the father has put all things in
subjection under his feet; Psalm. 2.
and given him the utmost parts of the earth for his possession. OUR LORD. He
is the sovereign Lord of the whole earth, and inspireth the hearts of kings and
princes, according to his wisdom: he aduaunceth the humble, and puts down
the mighty from their seat: he fills the hungry with good things, and the
rich he sends empty away. He is the faithful steward, that gives his fathers
people meat in due season: he blesses all them that call upon him in his
fathers name. Psalm. 7.
This is the well-beloved Solomon, the prince of wisdom, whose daughters goings
are beutifull; the ioints of her thighs like jewels; the work of a cunning
man: her navel as a round cup full of liquor; her belly as an heap of wheat,
compassed about with lillies; her breasts as two young roses that are twins; her
neck as a tower of Iuory; her eyes as the fish-pooles in Heshbon, by the gate
of Bath-Rhabbim; her nose as the tower of Lebanon, that looks toward
Damascus; her head as scarlet, and her hair as purple. He is the spiritual
Solomon; his fair daughter, Psalm. 8.
the Church: which also is compared to a vineyard, that brings forth fruit,
even a thousand fold. He is the Lord that the prophet David spoke of, and
whose victory he foresaw, Psalm. 110.
saying, The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou on my right hand, till I make
thine enemies thy footstool. This is the horn of our salvation, in whom our
fathers trusted, and were counted just, Hebr. 11.
as it is manifest in the epistle to the Hebrews, where, a whole chapter is
spent in reciting their faith: the learning whereof I refer to the diligence of
the reader, seeing it is a full record of all the ancient fathers belief. This
is the Lord of al mankind; for he has purchased us all by the offering up of
his body, and sheading of his blood, to free us from these links of sin,
wherein we are entangled through Adam: And therefore he has now full power to
say, Math. 25.
Com ye blessed of my father, and inherit everlasting life: or go ye cursed
into utter darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. And as we
were then bound with the chains of sin growing in our carnal bodies,
stirring us up to do the will of the flesh: so are we at this day (being rid
out of those bands by the death and passion of our Lord) bound likewise to him
in spirit, to serve and obey him as obedient servants, looking for no reward by
desert; but by his mere favor and mercy inheritance with him of life eternal.
Therefore is he Lord over kingdoms and nations, and there is no higher power
than that which the father has given him: He is the holy one that dwells in
the praises of Israel, Psalm. 22. 3.
in whom our fathers trusted, and were delivered: his therefore is the kingdom,
power, Math. 6. 13.
and glory for ever and ever, Amen. He is the Lord of hosts, that now fights
for the house of Israel; whose fight let us manfully undertake, commending our
weak forces to his mighty protection: Psalm. 18.
for he is a sure rock of defense in all his ways. WHICH WAS CONCEIVED BY THE
HOLY GHOST, BORN OF THE VIRGIN MARY. This especially does confirm our belief
in Christ Jesus his only son; in that, he was conceived by the holy Ghost.
All spiritual conception is from God the father of spirit and life, whose
works are all miracles in our cleerest sight; but this comprehension of our
savior was merely spiritual: therefore he truly descended from God the father
of spirit: for before they came together, she was found with child, and that
which was conceived in her was of the holy Ghost. Math. 1.
Before the morning sprang, Messiah had the dew of his birth, and before the
womb of his mother was made, he was known: who has been, is, and shall be all
one with the father; the same, whose years endure for ever, although the
heavens pass and wax old, as does a garment. He is Michael the Archangel of
the covenant, high sacrificer of the heavenly Jerusalem, and he that buried
Moses, using the words of Iehoua, S. Jude.
The Lord rebuke thee satan. Here the Papists are seen extremely doting, when
they make the virgin Mary the queen of heaven, and the special means by whose
prayers and aduocation, they attain to salvation; as if of necessity there
must be both king and queen: which absurd conclusions might, by Homers
divinity, be sufficiently reproved and corrected, when he says; (...), Hom. II.
which is to say, A government of many is not good; let there be one king.
Which words, although he spoke them not divinely, yet our experience tells
us, that it was skilfully advised concerning a Commonwealth. In saying thus,
they abrogate the power of Christ, and his authority in heaven, and make the
Trinity imperfect in unity of Godhead, the persons not having equal relation
each to other: they give unto Mary that which pertains unto Christ; all one
with God, conceived by the holy Ghost of his father. Wherefore it is he that
remains still our King, our Judge, and Sacrificer, whose kingdom is infinite,
whose judgment is irreuocable, and his priesthood has none end. Saint John
says; If any man sin, we have an advocate with the father, 1. John. 2. 1.
Jesus Christ the just, and he is the propitiation for our sins. But in that
he was born of the virgin Mary, he was a fleshly body, to stand for the
redemption of all flesh; yea of his own mother, whom he reproved of ignorance,
when she said: Why have thou dealt thus with thy father and me? we have sought
thee with heavy hearts. He answered; How is it that ye have sought me, know you
not that I must go about my fathers business? but they understood not. Which
shows, that she was of the earth earthly; and now sleeps (no doubt) with
her fathers, waiting for a glorious resurrection of an immortal body, by the
intercession of her own Jesus, to whom all power is given both in heaven and
earth, as it is said: Blessed is the fruit of thy womb, for thou have brought
forth the savior of our souls; the true Emanuel, God-with-vs. For he came in
flesh to take away the sin of the flesh; and is also in spirit to continue
with all them that believe in him, for evermore. Neither may we imagine any
other wight in heaven or earth worthy to be believed in, besides the three
persons in unity; for as the son is advocate with the father, and the father
and son all one: so the holy Ghost being of them both, conueieth us unto them
by an assured faith, that we may be with Emanuel, which is God with us for
ever. He was called Emanuel long before by the prophet Isai; A virgin shall
conceive a son, and she shall call his name Emanuel. SVFFERED UNDER PONTIVS
PILATE, WAS CRVCIFIED, DEAD AND BVRIED. The prophet David spoke of this his
passion, Psalm. 22. 16.
saying, Dogs have compassed me, and the assembly of the wicked have enclosed
me: they pierced my hands and my feet. He submitted himself to the hands of
Pontius Pilate; for he knew his hour was even then com, and that his kingdom
was not of this world; John. 16.
otherwise, as he says, his soldiers would have fought, and not had suffered
him to be delivered into the hands of men. Seeing then his time was com, in
which all things should be fulfilled, according to his fathers will, he
besought of his father, the cup, to wit, of bitter anguish, might pass from
him: and lifting up his eyes to heaven, John. 17.
said; Father, the hour is com, glorify thy son, that thy son may glorify
thee. When he was to be betrayed by the child of perdition Judas, Psalm. 110.
and knew it; how great was his patience, when as he reproved him not, but
told him; What thou do, John. 13 27.
do quickly. Pontius Pilate was a Roman, under whose hands Christ suffered:
showing, that as the Romans had always persecuted the low Jerusalem, the
true Church on earth; so, that the Lord should justly continue his wrath in
them; and that they might remain in a perpetual curse: they also persecuted
him whom the world was not worthy of, the high Jerusalem, the spiritual
Church. Which example of cruel tyranny has ever since been found in them,
and shall be doubtless even to their own destruction. But they will say,
Pilate was commanded to crucify him again and again, and he excused him, not
guilty; true: wherefore Pilate was so much the more guilty of his death, because
he could find no fault in him. For when the power to loose one was in him, and
not in the Jews, John. 19. 10.
as he said to him, Know thou not that I have power to crucify thee, and
power to loose thee: and to them, he had tried Christ to be guiltles; yet
willing to deserve the applause of the Jews, and the favor of Caesar, clean
against his own conscience, to his utter condemnation to death, he loosed
Barrabas a notable murderer, Acts. 3. 14.
and executed that most just king of peace and righteousness to everlasting
life. It is like this manner of cruelty will not be left among the Romans,
until a final desolation (the end of affliction) come upon them, according to
the prophecy of Balaam. Nomb. 24. 24.
Ships shall come from the coasts, Kittim Lord of Italy or Romania, and subdue
Ashur, and vanquish Heber; and he (to say) that Kittim shall come to
destruction: a most plain prophecy not yet sufficiently noted for our defense
against them. By Ashur are meant all the Babylonians, Medes, Persians, and
Assyrians his posterity. So under Heber is signified all his posterity the
Hebrews, and consequently the Jews, of whom Christ rose a natural branch. So
from time to time their policy has been to erect an earthly monarch, by daily
persecutions of the Church, against their own spiritual consciences: and by a
catholic persecution of the church, to exalt their catholic tyranny in steed
of the Church. Neither can I see them justly called Catholics, except for the
uniform massaker of true Christians. Now therefore least we should mistake this
Christ by ignorance of his death: our belief is a consonant speech most
divinely composed for our understanding, that we may as well perceive the
certainty of his passion, as of his incarnation: wherefore it is necessarily
mentioned in our belief: his conception, his incarnation, his passion, the
manner of his passion, and the end thereof. Touching his conception and
incarnation, I have before spoken: touching the certainty of his passion, his
very enemies confess, that such a Christ came according to the prophets, and
suffered: for their chronicles and ancient monuments of time say no less.
Notwithstanding they wilfully mistook him, and abandoned him for a false
Christ. That Pilate was a Roman, the Romans themselves confess, and that he
had such an office, they do not deny; and that such a Christ at the same very
time suffered under his hands: for their own sakes they must conclude, if they
at all hope for salvation in him. Hitherto I find not one idle word to be
spared as frivolous or improper concerning our Christian faith: and it is most
evident, that if any of these words had been omitted, or for breuity sake, not
penned: of necessity they must had been delivered and taught for the better
understanding of our belief. HE WAS CRVCIFIED. This was the manner of death
that he was put unto by Pilate, the curse of the law: for by the Jews own
law; Cursed is he that hangs on the true. Deuteronomy. 21. 23.
But Christ bought us from the curse, Gal. 3. 13.
being made a curse for us, that now in the true seed of Abraham all nations of
the earth, the sons of Iaphet might be blessed by the God of Sem, and that
Iaphet and Sem might now dwell together. Nay the Jews made this curse more
reproachful in Christ, than by the law otherwise could be devised. For the word
(...), to be fastened to the cross; far and very hainously exceeds the word
(...), to be hanged, Gal. 3. 13.
as Saint Paul uses it to the Galathians. (...), hanged upon a tree; and
according to Saint Mathewes exposition, Math. 22. 40.
(...): by these two commandments hang the law and the prophets. But to show
their most outrageous malice, they cried, crucify him, crucify him, which is to
say, Nail him, nail him to the tree. Neither can the washing of Pilats hands
before the people, Math. 27. 24.
make his guiltines unguilty; they thought that they could not use him too
hardly: For they made account heerby to see him do many great miracles, as he
had done before, insomuch that they assaied him with all temptations, not
considering that his time was finished, and that he was to enter the Ark of
salvation, as a new Noah, savior of the world. Neither did they regard the
limits of his manhood, but scourged him, buffeted him, spit on him, and pierced
his sides. They mocked him, Math. 27. 40.
saying; He that destroyed the temple, and built it again in three days, let
him save himself: their blindness did not comprehend the temple of a second
Solomon, the body of Christ a second Adam, which should within three days be
destroyed, and built again to stand for ever and ever: just the distance of
old Adams natural years from the foundation of the first temple: so proceeded
they still to tempt him, even with extremity of anguish to his soul, and
mortal torments to his body, when most patiently he cries; Math. 27. 46.
ELI, ELI, LAMMA SABACTA NI? My God, Psalm. 22. 2.
my God, why have thou forsaken me? but they understood him not; and soon after
he gave up the ghost, * and died. And his soul left the veil of his fleshly
body: at the consummation of all, Math. 27. 51.
the veil of the temple rent from the top to the bottom, 2. Chron. 3. 14.
showing that the high sacrificer was not from thencefoorth yearly to enter in,
to make oblation and atonement for the sins of the people: but that Christ
being once offered up for all, was made high sacrificer for all, to abrogate all
ceremonial priesthood of the law; and therefore was he called a high sacrificer
for ever, Psalm. 110. 4.
after the order of Melchizedek: Hebr. 7.
his office was so far above the Levites, as Melchizedek excelled Aaron; the
one being only high sacrificer under the law, the other an old pattern of
priesthood before the law, whom Christ was to imitate: that in the appointed
time, he might take away and abolish the ceremonies of the law, and make
reconciliation for the sins of the people by his death: Hebr. 2. 17.
seeing he was sent as another Moses a brief expositor of the law, that they
that believed not in him, their condemnation might be just. DEAD. This word
shows the end of his passion, that it was even unto death; neither might this
word be spared: for he might suffer under Pontius Pilate, and be crucified, yet
not unto death: and might had been by the interruption of passion void of death
at all. Wherefore this is necessarily added, WAS CRVCIFIED, DEAD. That we cannot
think he suffered fantastically, or that he suffered in vain: for at his
expiration he was said to be dead. He died that day wherein Adam fell, being
with us a friday, which was the Jews saboth even, that he might perform and
finish to us the long promised and lively saboth, which through the fall of
Adam we had need of. A most fine note, that we became bound and free in one
day: the interruption of time being 3960 years or therabouts. Here we may well
perceive the eternity, yea the everlasting memory of the Lords counsel and
providence. What end is there of his wisdom? Who can imagine a greater wisdom
than this? which is to search the tokens and figures of this Christ his most
certain coming. It is a true pathway to Gods knowledge, and teaches us to
imitate him in spirit and truth, and to ground our belief according to that
knowledge of him now com. Verily it is much to be lamented, that these things
are so smoothly ouerpassed of many, and so little regarded of any: by the
which, the Lord had such pleasure to foreshew his son unto the Jews, now for
our aedification: insomuch that by most diligent observation of the same, they
have continually penned large volumes in the admiration of it. But we think
and contend, that it is enough to acknowledge Christ our redeemer, and to
believe in him whom the father has sent: we are much deceived to call that
enough, which is in due respect nothing. For the devil acknowledged Christ to
be the son of God (which the Papists are always ready to object, when we
argue justification by faith) but the text says, that he confessed him with
trembling. So then, before we can acknowledge him our redeemer: we must of
necessity learn, how we became bound; and before we can rightly believe in him
whom the father has sent, we must needs understand some warning of his
message: which most often and breefly is repeated throughout the body of the
old Testament. Then must we try, whether he came according to the fulness of
time, wherein the father promised to send him: and afterward when he is come,
whether his message be of God or not, he himself exhorts us to make trial.
These seem good ground-works to build our faith upon: for as it is required in
us to believe, so is it most expedient for us to know him in whom we do
believe: because it separateth us from death to life, as before I alleged. For
example, Christ says to the thief; Luke 23. 43.
This day shall thou be with me in paradise: and again of himself; Father,
into thine hands I commend my spirit. But concerning his body, it died in the
flesh: for it was wrapped in linen, and laid in a tomb by Joseph a just man
of Arimathaea and Nicodemus, according to the manner of the Jews, Luke 23. 52.
and buried: and to manifest that his body was dead, after the manner of men,
the women prepared sweet odours and ointments, and rested the Saboth day.
Nicodemus might here see a cleerer sight of the second birth than he had
before: neither was his burial an illusion to deceive men's sight: for the
Jews would not be mocked, but commanded a watch and sure fastening to the
door, least his disciples should steal him away; keeping in mind the words
that he spoke upon the earth: Math. 27* 64.
Within three days I will rise. Thus have I concluded his passion, the manner
of his passion, and also his burial, which was according to the law. HE
DESCENDED INTO HELL. Here comes the article that drew me to this whole
discourse: for that I saw the learned something at ods about it; yet so, as all,
both the one and the other did firmly hold it necessarily inserted in our
Christian faith. Neither will I take upon me here so much to reconcile the
learned, which diversely allow of it, as to debell the unlearned opinions, which
admits it not at all: holding it a superfluous and needless article to be
taught among Christian families. It is something strange when clownes exceed in
sophistry. This kind of men had rather be followed as Christ's of a new church,
than follow Christ as disciples of the true Church. It behooves them therefore,
in whom remedy consists, speedily to redress such erroneous errors: least
some other soon after should deny that he ascended into heaven; Acts. 23.
whereby a sect of Saduces might arise amongst us, Math. 27.
denying any resurrection at all; and so the latter error become greater than
the former. Now therefore concerning the misconstruing of these words; then
touching the abiection of them; and lastly, how to understand them both in
their utmost force; and also how they were first meant in the primitive Church:
as appears by the indifferency of the penners of them. But as concerning his
descending or going down, no man (I know) will deny this word that has any
feeling of the ascension and going up: which is most manifest by Saint Paul's
Epistle to the Ephesians, which recites the prophet David's words mentioned in
the Psalms. Ephesians. 4. 8.
Thou art gone up on high, Psalm. 68.
and have led captivity captive; thou have received gifts for men, yea even the
rebellious have thou led, that the Lord God may dwell there: praised be the
Lord which ladeth us daily, Selah. But Saint Paul's allusion is this: that he
ascended, and captiued captivity, and gave dwelling places to men. Now insomuch
that he ascended, says he, what is it but that he descended first into the
lower parts of the earth? and he that went down is he that went up above al
heavens, to fulfill all things* If therefore he had been to go down to the
place of the damned, as some will; he must had descended into the lowest part
of the earth, as he went up to the highest heaven: for his depth ought to had
been answerable to his height; nay (...), under all the earth, as he ascended
(...), above all heavens. Reason will, that as the Lords glory wherewith he
glorified his son, is above all heavens, for they were made by him, and they
are the work of his own hands, and wax old as does a garment, and shall pass
and melt away like wax: even so the damned are to have their portion below all
the earth by opposition. Seeing, as happiness and unhappiness are extremities; so
are their habitations most extreme, and remote one from the other, which cannot
be in places to be discerned by flesh, except we will devise to make
purgatories in the concauities of the earth, as Papists have done, or our eyes
more sharp than Moses eyes were. For arguments sake then I conclude this, that
seeing the state of the damned is permanent for ever, it is not to be changed
by a new creation. 2. Pet. 3. 9.
For there shall be a new heaven and a new earth: so that this heaven which we
see is as a veil before our eyes, to keep us from the sight of God; whose face
would be so glorious, that we should not be able to look up: for he appeered in
a flame of fire, Exodus 3. 6.
which God our savior makes himself, using his fathers own words, showing,
Exodus ^2* ^2.
that it is he that sits on the fiery throne, this earth but a bar to defend
us from the outrage of the damned spirits, which would consume us with horror,
and there were no help for us. But for the places of Gods existence, and of
the everlasting prison; the divine scripture in no language has affoorded
names, except circumstantiall or metaphorical: nay, God himself has forborne
to name the place of the happy or unhappy; and much less was man able to
perform it: for he never went and came again. Neither in our sight can any
proper resemblance be made of it. Therefore let us think of Christ's descension,
that he went first into the lower parts of the earth, which Saint Paul alluding
Ezechiels words, Ezec. 32.
(...) writes in these words, (...), which is all one as to say, What is it
but that he also descended first into the lower parts of the earth? Here he
said neither (...) far under; for (...), far above: nor (...), all the earth:
for (...), all the heavens. But if S. Paul had meant that he descended to the
place of the damned; he would had said, that he descended far under all the
earth: or as the Epistle of Jude mentions, under darkness, Jude.
where the condemned angels are reserved in everlasting chains, making a
certain analogy of his ascension and descension. But Saint Paul was to speak
of Christ's going down into the lower parts of the earth, to say, the bowels of
the earth, to vanquish death, wherewith his humanity was imprisoned, as the
sons of Adam: and of his going up above all the heavens, to win life and
possess inheritance for all his chosen. Therefore by his descension was not
meant the place of everlasting torment, but as a man should say, he went down
into the parler of the earth, to put off his humanity, and put on divinity; to
put off corruption, and put on incorruption; to put off mortality, and put on
immortality: and lastly, to put off death, and cloth himself with life, to
wit, that he might be a body in all respects as before, but freed from the
bands of the flesh, showing plainly the manner of our resurrection toward, as it
is said; 1. Cor. 15. 2^.
Christ is risen from the dead, and became the first fruits of them that
sleep: for as by man came death, so also by man shall all be made alive: and
as in Adam all men die; so by Christ shall all men revive. But of his
resurrection and ascension shall be said more in due place: only this a little
to show, to what end he descended: which was to destroy death in his own body,
that was the last enemy to be destroyed. 2. Cor. 15. 26.
Wherefore, he being no more in subjection unto death, has the only power under
his father to destroy death in us quick and dead, that believe, at his next
coming: for as the resurrection to come of flesh is of two kinds, one from
life to life, and the other from death to life: Behold, we shall not all sleep,
1. Cor. 15.
but we shall all be changed; so Christ was to signify in his death, the nature
of both. It is manifest that he rose as they that shall not sleep; for his
bones and flesh perished not, neither had the worms hold on him: it also
appears that he was changed as they that sleep: for he rose out of the belly
of the earth within three days; even so long was Jonah in the whales belly.
Seeing then death was his last enemy, and all things were put in subjection
under him save death: it is plain, that by his death (which was the conquering
of death) he finished all that might be expected of him, for the salvation of
mankind. Then as the article follows, HE ROSE FROM THE DEAD. We must
understand, and be sure heerby, that he came first down to the dead, which is
to say, into the earth that brings forth all things to death: as if a man
should say the mother, or the very state of death, which in Hebrew is called
(...) sheolah, or (...) sheol, PETITIO, or POSTVLATIO, the grave alwais
craving, never satisfied; according to the parable of Agur: Prou. 30. 1^.
Three things, yea also the fourth will not be satisfied: the grave, the barren
womb, the earth with rain, and the fire that says not, it is enough. Here is
declared the plain and natural force of that same word with the Hebrews, which
we call hell, the grave. This sheol both all and some confess to be the lowest
place of his descension: and as concerning the understanding of the Hebrew, in
Greek it is translated (...), TANQVAM AB OBSCVRITATE; from whence the Romans
had AEDES, used for a house, a church, or a grave; a place of darkness, the
habitation whereof is deprived of the light of heaven. So that, the word Hades
is a word agreeing with the other, and are translated each for other, both
signifying the state of death, or sepulcher of the dead. The Syrians invented
gehenna, it seems from Jeremy: And they built the high places of Baal, Ierem*
32. 35.
which are in the valley of Ben-hinnom, to cause their sons and daughters to
pass through the fire unto Molech, an abomination to the Lord, and a sin to
Judah. Ierem ^. 31.
And again; They have built the high place of Topheth, which is in the valley
of Benhinnom, to wit, Ghe-hinnom, the valley of Hinnom, near Jerusalem, the
portion of his inheritance: that they might burn their sons and daughters in
the fire. Therefore behold the day comes, says the Lord, that it shall no
more be called Topheth, nor Ghe-hinnom, the valley of Hinnom, but Ghe-haregah,
the valley of slaughter: for they shall bury in Topheth till there be no place.
I suppose that our western bonfires do taste of this idolatry, or at the least
have remained as a relic of that ceremony unto this day, which the Pope has
conveyed heertofore throughout all his dominions. Now concerning the situation
of Ghe-hinnom: Hinnom his inheritance, Ios. 15. 8.
it was on the south side of the Iebusites, and the same is Jerusalem. This
suffices for Topheth in the valley of Hinnom, Gehenna. The heathen Latins have
as far as they could reach, borrowed names for the like place, Virgil.
as EREBVS, of the Greek word (...), TENEBRAE, CALIGO, NOX, or (...), the dark
night, the night that all must sleep. Horat.
HAEC ENIM NOX EST OMNIBVS DORMIENDA. So likewise TARTARVS or TARTARA, the
profundity of the earth, as it is said, Hesiod.
(...), the rivers of the swift Ocean, Hom. ^.
and bottom of the earth. So STYX INFERNORVM PALVS, a river for his deadly and
horrible coldness so called. ORCVS, of the Greek (...), IVSIVRANDVM, an oath: for
in this place they used their exorcismes and coniurations. AVERNVS or AVERNA, a
lake in Campania, dedicated to Pluto. Phlegithon a place where the earth is set
on fire by lightning. So Pluto, Denat. book 2. deorum.
whom Cicero calls Dis, to whom all natural and earthly force was dedicated,
whom the Greeks call (...), and the Syrians (...) Mammona, rich; presuming that
he had the keeping of all the riches that sprang out of the earth, and returned
to the earth again: whereby they thought him treasurer of hell, and Lord of
Hades. Acheron is a place by nature so environed with hills, that it cannot be
touched with lightning. Seeing therefore all their fained circumstances so aptly
agree with Hades, let us learn with Homer to understand the word Hades aright,
Iliad. A.
where he says; (...), speaking of Achilles, that his fury sent many valiant
souls to Hades, as we say to their last home: it is most like he thought of
none other torment. Now concerning the Christian Latins, and such languages as
agree in the very words: they say, DESCENDIT AD INFEROS, which is all one with
Saint Paul's words, he descended to them beneath in the lower parts of the
earth, to wit the dead, from whence he was to rise with victory: though the
Papists by this word would have that signified, which no authority will, but
their own naked opinions, (...) AD INFEROS, into purgatory: wherein me thinks
they grossly err, seeing the scripture makes mention of no other punishment
after this life for sin, than the second death, the harvest of all flesh, when
Christ shall sit in judgment upon his fiery throne to divide the goats from the
sheep, saying; Come ye blessed of my father, and inherit everlasting life: and
to the sinners; Go ye cursed into everlasting darkness, where shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth. (...) is a construction something strange to Grecians
that understand not the word (...) with it, as if we should say, into the house
of the grave, confirming my former words. But the Papists will object, whither
else should he descend being once buried, but to the damned? which I admit a
question, and for answer refer them to S. Paul's words, which are already
recited. What is it, but that he descended first into the lower parts of the
earth? That he descended (therefore) they confess, and to what place he went,
this place (I know) will very effectually prove unto them; how that he was
buried also it is most true, as before is showed: therefore he was buried, and
also descended: for Saint Paul means, that his descension is all one with his
burial: taking the occasion of speech from his ascension. Whereby it seems,
that some penners of this Creed have stuck upon this article, fearing least
this word, Hell, should bring them into an error; beyond al authority of
scripture: and (while they grant it to be the place of the damned) they durst
not admit this article at all, but that he was buried, and rose again the third
day. Neither did they see how well the one or the other might suffice, both
being rightly understood. But the form that we most use is, he was buried and
descended into hell; where it is penned as two articles, being indeed but one:
which is to say, simple truth, in that he was buried; and Saint Paul's argument
of the manner, when he says, He descended, etc. Now indeed this word Hell is
used throughout the whole nation of the Goths, to wit, in the countries
Sueuia, Germania, and Saxonia, that is, Insula Britannica. For as far as the
Goths enlarged their territories, their language remained still in force:
therefore in Swedland they say he went down to Heluet; in Germany to Hell; in
our English, which is to say, old Saxonish Hell. Now concerning the original
deriuation of the word according to the letter: it is plainly showed in
derision of the king of Babylon after his death, by these words; (...) How art
thou fallen from heaven, Isai. 14. 12.
O hellel, the son of the morning, which is to say Lucifer. For, as the
Painims worshipped the sun as a God, while he shined in his most glorious
height: so likewise in his absence they abhorred him; supposing that in his
declination he visited them in the earth. And the heathen people at this day
that have not yet known God, still observe the same kind of worship. From hence
it comes, that the word is so disputable with us. Though the Painims were
ignorant of the suns course, yet they were not ignorant of their own
language: for they reserved this word from Isai, till their own christianity;
so that when they had found another God, they made this their Hell, to wit,
Lucifer as before. But seeing we better know the course of the sun, we must
of necessity hold it to be the grave; without any further arguments of places
that were never heard of. Therefore mark the resolution of the speech, HE WAS
DEAD AND BVRIED, AND DESCENDED INTO HELL. Now insomuch as he was buried, he
rose again; in that he was dead, he rose from the dead: insomuch as he went
down into Hell, to wit, the secret place of the dead, to put off death and to
put on life: he went up to heaven the everlasting seat of life; and dwelling
place of aeternity. And as with the Astronomers, there is reckoned among other
spheres, that which they call CoeLVM EMPYREVM, or IGNEVM, a fiery throne above
all spheres, 1. Tim. 6. 24.
the light that none can attain unto: so would necessity grant the place of
the damned souls to be in opposition far under all spheres: for no aeternity
can continue in changeable bodies, whether they be heavenly or earthly: but to
prove that this word cannot signify everlasting punishment, and that our
savior descended into no corruption, thus I argue. All perfect means of
salvation was foretold by the spirit of God to the Jews, that they who
believed or mistrusted, might justly be saved or condemned: But all that was
prophesied, was but of his passion, burial, and resurrection; therefore was his
passion, burial, and resurrection the perfect means of salvation: seeing he
himself was perfect long before; for he had his perfection from his father
ever before all worlds. And the prophet David says; Psalm 16.
Thou will not leave my soul in hell, nor suffer thy holy one to see
corruption: that his body should neither corrupt nor perish in the grave, so
pure was he, that he escaped the snares of death. Now we are not only to define
the word, but also to search the authority thereof, which must be in the
scripture, and not elsewhere. In the Bible is found no one word that can signify
the state of the happy or unhappy: therefore this word, Hell, is not meant the
state of the damned, nor any other corruption than the grave, or the state of
death. Neither is it dangerously penned or used, as some late vpstart unlearned
have thought: contending, that it ought not to be said as part of our Christian
faith; which objection above is sufficiently answered. Indeed Christ never
showed any farther article of faith, than that he should suffer many things of
the elders, Math. 16. 21.
and of the high priests and scribes at Jerusalem, and be slain, and rise
again the third day: this was all that he added to the perfection of the
church, which he promised even then to build upon Peter's faith; which mystery
Peter understood not; wherefore he became an offense: so that he began in
spirit, and ended in the flesh. If any other article had needed, Christ would
in this place have added it for the perfection of his church, which he had
promised to build: but all that he added, was in the words before recited;
therefore in these words consists the perfection of the church, the members of
Christ, which is the rock and foundation thereof. For had not the Jews had a
perfect warning of redemption to come, through the Messiah savior of the
world, and the full means thereof, and of all that he was to perform for the
salvation of mankind: how could they take notice of their redemption, or be
justly condemned for misbeleef? for they that lived in the time of Christ's
humanity, were to see that which their fathers hoped for. If then we will
further know what ought the substance of our faith to be? I answer in a word;
Our faith ought to be the harvest of our fathers hope: so that we believe that
we have received that which they hoped for: so through one faith in one Jesus,
they and we are both saved. Isai. 53. 8.
Who shall declare his age? for he was cut out off the land of the living. Here
my purpose was to show, that this article might safely be used, without
advantage to the Papists, or offense to such as I before meant. Therefore as we
now see with our eyes, and believe that Jesus the true Christ came and finished
his pilgrimage here on earth, being the only begotten son of God, conceived
by the holy Ghost, born of the virgin Mary, crucified according to the
prophets: so, what he was to do, he himself declared to the fathers in spirit,
insomuch that they also saw their salvation by the eye of faith, which they had
in the same Messiah, Colos. 1. 18.
the first born of the dead, and of al things to have the pre-eminence. He is
the reconciliation of all the world: and even as his father spread the heavens,
and adorned them, and created the earth and sea, with all the implements; so is
the son commander of all, and the beginning and end of all things are in his
hand: he is made judge of all flesh, coming as it were in the mean time to
reconcile the limits, and to constrain all nations to worship him: He was made
all one with the father, the beginning of the world, and the last end must ply
unto him, from whom al sentence of joy eternal, or perpetual misery shall
proceed; and to this end he preached in spirit long before he was incarnated.
Genesis 6. 3.
The Lord said; And my spirit shall not always strive with flesh: and his days
shall be an hundred and twenty years. (...) which is to say; 1. Pet. 3. 19.
By which also he went and preached to the spirits in prison, which were
sometime disobedient, when the long suffering of God waited in the days of
Noah, while the ark was in making. Your father Abraham reioiced to see my day,
Ioh. 8. 56.
and he saw it and was glad. Suppose, says Peter, 2. Pet. 3. 15.
that the long suffering of the Lord is salvation; even so our brother Paul,
according to the wisdom given to him, wrote unto you; Do thou the same, Romans
2. 3.
and think to escape judgment, and despisest thou the riches of his
bountifulnes and patience, and long sufferance, not knowing that the
bountifulnes of God leads to repentance? Wherefore as by one man sin entered
into the world, Romans 5. 12.
and death by sin, so death went over all men: for unto the time of the law
was sin in the world, but sin is not imputed while there is no law. Gal. 3.
17.
The law four hundred and thirty years after the promise, cannot disanull the
covenant. God gave the promise to Abraham, but death reigned from Adam to
Moses, even on them also that sinned, not after the manner of Adams
transgression, which was as a figure of the second Adam. Seeing then before the
law all men were dead in sin without any hope of justification to eternal
life: it was most needful that the Gospel should be preached unto them. 1.
Pet. 4. 6.
Whereupon it seems Saint Peter continues his speech of preaching: to this
end was the Gospel preached also to the dead, that they might be condemned
according to men in the flesh, but might live according to God in the spirit.
Now this is plain, that whosoever were under the law, were condemned by the law
according to the flesh. By this all men under the law were judged by the law.
But seeing the dead were before the law (howbeit many righteous men, to whom
the promise was given, were justified by faith) they were not to be judged or
condemned by the law, but by the spirit of Christ that preached unto them,
while they were in the prison of death, that they might bear fruit in the
resurrection also: otherwise should they be born without adoption in Christ at
all, like as the clouds are congealed and melt again to nothing: or as the
wind passes through the air, and no man marketh it: so without law or grace
should they perish without conscience, which the Atheists now adays would soon
grant. But their judgment long ago is not far off, 2. Pet. 2. 3.
and their condemnation sleeps not. They are wels without water, and clouds
carried about with a tempest, to whom the black darkness is reserved for ever.
Now if we doubt, that Christ did preach in the spirit before he came in the
flesh: let us consider the Epistle of Saint Jude, Jude. verse. 9.
where is said touching blaspheming of authority; Yet Michael the Archangel
(Christ) when he strove against the devil about the body of Moses, durst not
blame him with cursed speaking, but said; The Lord rebuke thee. Mark then, this
Michael was a cheef Angel, yea more than an Angel, Apoc. 12. 5.
as the Revelation shows also; There was a battle in heaven, Michael and his
Angels fought against the Dragon; and the Dragon and his angels fought, but
they prevailed not, neither was their place found any more in heaven. And the
great Dragon that old serpent called the Devil and satan, which deceives all
the world: he was even cast into the earth, and his angels were cast out with
him. Here Christ the seed of the woman bruised the serpents head. This Michael
is the man-child that was borne to rule all nations with a rod of iron, Psalm.
2. 9.
and break them in pieces like a potters vessel. Diverse times is this Michael
spiritually mentioned through the old and new Testament; Dan. 10. 12.
Lo, Michael a cheef prince help me: and there is none that holds with me,
Dan. 10. 22.
but Michael your prince. Dan. 12.
In that day shall Michael stand up, the great prince, which stands for the
children of thy people. And in the same place; Lo Michael one of the cheef
princes came to help me. Wherefore it is to too absurd for us to think, that a
king having banished an offender for punishment, into a most desolate place of
the world, to remain there for ever; would himself go after to obtain
greater power over him. For what greater subjection can there be, than for
ever, yea for ever and ever to abide a slavish vassal in all servitude,
horror, and trembling? Therefore suppose not that the Holy one saw other
corruption, than in flesh; for he drove the prince of darkness into a corner,
where the sink of all corruption is. Now what perfection he could draw out of
this sink, that he himself had cursed; let the consciences of all men try and
judge, and be warned with Peter, that they defile not the things that the Lord
has purified, and that they cleave not so fast to corruption, as to pervert
the Lords ways, and besot their own understanding. Concerning the word, Apoc.
6. 8.
Hell, it is written; Behold a pale horse, and his name that sat on him was
Death, and Hell followed after him; and power was given to them over the fourth
part of the earth, to kill with sword and with hunger, with death, and with the
beasts of the earth. Here we see that our expositors plainly take Hell for the
grave, that is always wont to follow after death. Pet. 2. 13.
So when the day of the Lord shall come, by which the heavens being on fire
shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt away with heat: and a new
heaven and a new earth established, wherein dwells righteousness: Apoc. 21. 1.
and the first heaven and the first earth passed away: and when the Lord shall
creat new heavens and a new earth, and the former not remembered. For, Isai. 65.
19.
says the Lord, as the new heavens and the new earth, which I will make, shall
remain before me; Isai. 66. 22.
so shall your seed and your name continue, and from month to month, and from
sabbath to sabbath shall all flesh come to worship before me, says the Lord,
and they shall go forth and look upon the carkases of men that have
transgressed; for their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be
quenched, and they shall be an abhorring unto all flesh. This is the miserable
condition of the wicked ones, the second death, the lake that burns with fire
and brimstone: Apoc. 2. 8.
at the opening of the books, and the resurrection of all flesh, which is to
say, when the sea, death and Hell shall give up their dead, Apoc. 20. 1.
which are in them: and they shall be judged according to their works: then
both death and Hell, which have all this while had power over flesh, to cut it
off from inheritance of this life, through the curse; shall at the last
resurrection be vanquished to all flesh, and cast into the burning lake by our
Lord and savior Jesus Christ our forerunner. In this world shall the cursed
endure his damnation, and the happy shall feel his blessedness. He that lives
in this world an hundred years, shall die a young man; neither shall any be
called a child of years: but he that builds in this world shall inhabit, and
they that plant vineyards shall eat of the fruit; neither shall they plant, and
another eat: but they shall enjoy the works of their own hands, and shall not be
made to labor in vain, and bring forth in fear: for they are the seed of the
blessed of the Lord, and their buds with them. Yet concerning his descension
remains this one thing, he made his grave with the wicked, and with the ^ich
in his death, though he had done no wickedness, neither was any deceit in his
mouth. Now in that it is said, he made him a grave; he chose him a place in the
earth, whereinto he vouchsafed to descend and be buried for our salvation:
though many wicked and rich men lay as glorious as he, whom the cell of the
earth was far unworthy to contain. Dan. 12. 2.
Where the many that sleep shall awake to everlasting life, and some to shame
and perpetual contempt. Again, that he was buried, and descended also into
hell, read the ancient Christian meaning of the word (Hell) in the example of
the rich man written by Luke the Evangelist, translated into Saxonish many
years ago, which says thus; ha peand re peleza dead and paer on Hell
bebynzed. which is now as much as to say, And the rich man died and was buried
in hell. I should think it very absurd therefore farther to urge any comment or
exposition for the word, Hell: seeing (no doubt) these expositors of the
Gospels, sufficiently understood what they said in their own language. Nay,
whosoever will not yield unto so plain a testimony of truth, the mark of
controversy: he may be thought little zealous, yea obstinate in his own
profession. Now of such as would have Hell to be in the earth, and to mean the
place of the damned, and would prove it by the word, Luke 16. 26.
Gulf, that was between Abraham and the rich man: the word in the Greek
original is (...) HIATVS, FISSVRA, a gap or cliffe, as Virgil cites the word
properly forth of Homer, (...), TELLVS IMA DEHISCAT, Let the earth cleave. But
we understand the word, Gulf, a concaue and a devouring place, which is hardly
argued by the circumstance following; seeing (...) and (...) signify neither up
nor down, but passing over as it were from shore to shore, as TRANSCENDERE and
TRANSRIMARE, agreeing with the prophets words before recited, they shall go
forth and look upon the carcases of men, etc. And beside, Saint John proves a
further punishment to ensue after death and hell, which is to say, the burning
lake. Let us abstain therefore, farther to inquire of the places, which the
Lord has shut up from us and our understanding. For says the Lord; Gen 3. 22.
Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil. And now least
he put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and eat and live for
ever; therefore the Lord God sent him forth from the garden of Eden, to till
the earth, whence he was taken. And the Lord has set Cherubims, and the blade
of a sword shaking, to keep the way of the tree of life. Here we see that the
jealous God excluded Adam out of the garden, least he should attain to see the
state of the eternal. Wherefore the plain and open things are for us and our
children to observe and do: but the secret and hidden things pertain unto God
only. The prophet Jonah was a most excellent figure of our savior, if a man do
diligently mark his prophecy. 2. King. 14. 25.
First, his name signifies a dove in the Hebrew voice, in the likeness whereof
Jesus received the spirit of his father from heaven, where he himself
confesses, Math. 3. 16.
that he saw the heavens open, and the spirit of God descending like a dove,
Psalm. 74. 16.
and lighting upon him, the true turtle dove, whose soul the beast had never
power of. Jonah his message was to preach; so Christ: Jonah willingly suffered
shipwreck, Iona. 1. 12.
for the safety of the ship and mariners; Christ willingly endured the curse
for the salvation of the earth, and the inhabitants thereof: Jonah was in the
belly of the fish three days and three nights; so long was the son of man to
be in the belly of the earth: Jonah descended into the belly of hell; for says
he, I cried in mine affliction unto the Lord, and he heard me; out of the belly
of hell cried I, and thou heardest my voice. Which hell is here nothing else but
the vale of death, and extreme mist of darkness, wherinto our savior also
descended for the same space. Jonah arose and went to Nineveh to finish his
message of preaching; Christ arose likewise, and ascended into heaven, to
consummate all his fathers will, after he had once yielded up his spirit into
his hands, Math. 17. 50.
and had destroyed the temple of his body, and built it again in three days.
Jonah had pity on the gourd, for which he had not labored, neither made it
grow, which came up in a night, and perished in a night: so deals Christ with
his adopted members, taking pity even of the mere fruits of darkness, whose
beginning and end is not to be discerned of men: for they abide not the light
that truth loves. THE THIRD DAY HE ROSE AGAIN. He walked the path of life,
even to the presence of his father, Psalm. 16. 10.
the fulness of joy; at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore: which path
he has also showed to us his followers, whose flesh yet does rest in hope. Let
us therefore (perceiving the mortality of our veil) even for his sake strive to
enter into that path, how narrow or straight soever it seems; the crooked and
hard ways are passed with care and fear to eternal joy: but the wide and
easy ways in this life lead to destruction, and pull us hastily to
condemnation and everlasting woe in the world to come. Our savior Christ by
his power which he received of his father in heaven, could destroy the temple
and build it again in three days, John. 2. 1^
as he said; Destroy this temple (pointing at his body) and I will build it in
three days. Which is a very fine and perfect exposition of the rock, where he
says; Thou art Peter, and upon this rock (pointing to himself) I will build my
Church: but the blind Jews understood not of what temple he spoke, albeit he
had called it so: neither will the Papists understand of what rock he spoke,
albeit it was his name long before. His power was so infinite, not only in
framing to himself a new body, Math. 27.
but to many other that slept in the dust of the earth, Dan. 12.
such was his will to manifest his attractiue power to all flesh, that hops
for the resurrection in the world to com: when the time of recreation of all
flesh shall appeer. Psalm. 17.
Wherefore stay our steps continually, O Lord, in these thy paths, that our feet
slide not, and deliver us from the hands of such as have their portion in this
life. Concerning his resurrection Saint Paul testifies at large, how that he
died for our sins according to the scriptures, and that he was buried, and
rose again the third day, 1. Cor. 15.
and that he was seen of Cephas, then of the twelve; after that he was seen of
more than five hundred brethren at once; of whom many at that time remained as
a confirmation of his testimony, the rest being asleep. After that he was seen
of James, and then of all the Apostles, and last of all, of him. Which chapter
I entreat the diligent reader to turn to, because it wholly concerns this
article: For it proves the resurrection of the dead, and that Christ is
already risen; then that we all shall rise, and the manner how. Whereas for me
to make a new frame of the same texts, adding nothing but form to my purpose,
were mere arrogance, or rather, as Saint Paul says, (...), and might seem unto
the reader as the honey of one be, in comparison of a whole field of sweet
flowers. In many other places, where the whole Psalm, chapter or book concerns
the matter in handling, I refer the reader to the ancientest testimonies
thereof, whether it be of prophets, Evangelists, or Apostles, which were the
nearest recorders of that time. FROM THE DEAD. Which is to say, them that
sleep, for whom Saint Paul wills us not to lament, as others that are clean
without hope: for says he, as we believe that (our) Jesus died and rose
again; so (our) God through Jesus will bring again those that sleep with him;
for the Lord shall come down from heaven with a showt and the voice of the
Archangle, 1. These. 4. 13.
and with the trumpet of God, and those that be dead shall rise first, and then
those which remain alive shall be carried up with them in clouds to meet the
Lord in the air; and so shall we all be with the Lord. Also he taught his
disciples, Mark* 9. 3.
that he should rise again the third day: and after I am risen I will go into
Galile before you. Mark. 14. 28.
His ascension in this place is little to be spoken of, because by his
descension it has sufficiently appeered by the contrary argument: yet thus
much he testifies, John. 7. 34.
saying; Whither I go you cannot (in the flesh) come. In my fathers house are
many mansions: if there were not I would declare unto you. I go to prepare a
place for you. Let not your hearts be troubled, ye believe in God, believe also
in me. Though I go to prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive
you unto my self, that where I am there may you also be: and whither I go you
know, and the way you know. For it is I that am the way, the truth, and the
life. No man comes to my father but by me: John. 14.
if ye had known me, you should had known my father also, and from
henceforth ye know him, and have seen him. Moreover he says to Mary; John.
20. 17.
Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my father, but go to my brethren,
and say to them; I ascend to my father and to your father; and to my God and
your God. Here he most comfortably becomes brother unto us, acknowledging his
father and ours to be all one, through his precise and faultlesse observation
of his fathers will. After that he had breathed upon his disciples the holy
Ghost, John. 20. 22.
and at the sea of Tyberias comforted them again with his presence: he was
taken up in a cloud out of their sight; and while they looked steadfastly
toward heaven as he went, two men stood by them in white apparel, Acts. 1. 9.
which said; Ye men of Galile, why stand ye gazing into heaven? This Jesus
which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come as you have seen him go
into heaven. Abraham received three Angels with the presence of God: Genesis 18. 2.
Lot received two Angels as messengers from God of his salvation in the absence
of the Lord: Genesis 19. 3.
for the Lord sent them to destroy the city. In such places is the office of
the Trinity to be marked, and most diligently considered. Likewise, that he
ascended it appears by S. Lukes words; Luke 24. 51.
And it came to pass, that as he blessed them he departed from them, and was
carried into heaven: into that ancient and everlasting house of his father;
where the riches and treasure of Christ's kingdom lay, where neither rust, nor
moth could corrupt, nor thieves break through and steal; which is the farthest
height of heaven, and above all heavens that we can imagine, as is abouesaid.
Let us not therefore be gazers, woonderers, or strangers to the things that
ought to be most familiar unto us. For nothing appears plain to them that
know not God, and him whom he sent our savior Jesus Christ. HE SITS AT THE
RIGHT HAND OF GOD THE FATHER ALMIGHTY. Who being the brightness of glory, and
the engraven form of Gods person: and bearing up all things by his mighty
word, Heb. 1.
has by himself purged our sins, and sits at the right hand of his
fathers majesty in the highest place. Ephesians. 1.
Here comes to pass the spiritual prophecy of David, saying; The Lord said
unto my Lord, sit thou on my right hand till I make thine enimes thy
footstool, which is to say, at the right hand that rules all the wolrd: this
is the right hand that shall find out them that hate him: Psalm. ^1. 8.
strong is his hand, Psalm. ^9.
and high is his right hand. The right hand of the Lord has the pre-eminence;
Psalm. 118.
the right hand of the Lord brings mighty things to pass. David being a
prophet, and speaking unto men, was to use the phrase of men, and also to
allude unto the manners and power of men: for all the preferment that has been
among men, has been to place authority on the right hand, seeing all
actiuitie, worthiness, prosperity, readiness and facility consists in the right
hand of a man. This was the reason of David his figurative speech to make men
understand the pre-eminence of the most High: whereas indeed God is all spirit,
and has no communion with flesh, as it is already proved. His right hand is a
threatening hand to them that hate him: but it entertains them kindly that love
and worship him in spirit and true holiness, as doers of his will, and obseruers
of his commandments. Which thing the prophet slacked not, when he said; Lo I
com: for in the book of life it is written of me, showing his election by the
holy spirit. Yet why does he so steadfastly affirm, that it is written of him,
etc? surely his own soul told him. For says he, Psalm* 40.
I desired to do thy good will, O my God, yea thy law is within my heart; and I
say thy right hand, Psalm. 44.
thine arm, and thy cheerful countenance saves and defends all such as
thou fauorest. Again, Psalm. 18.
thy right hand has stayed me, and thy loving kindness made me grow. I beheld
the Lord always before me (says he) and he is at my right hand, Acts. 2.
there shall I not be shaken. By this we may well perceive the worthiness of
Christ, received by his father into that holy place, into which he entered, a
sacrificer for sin once for all; so there is one God, one mediator betwixt
God and man Jesus Christ. Wherefore lift up your hearts unto the Lord; let your
souls be lifted up on high, yea and fly unto heaven as a bird with a most
cheerful note, and a new song, praising God, and saying; Hosanna in the
highest, which is to say, Save us, O thou that dwell in the most high. FROM
THENCE HE SHALL COME: Even as the men of Galile saw him go: Acts. ^. 11.
and he shall come riding upon Cherub, Psalm. 18. 10.
and flying upon the wings of the wind. Behold, he will come with his fan in
his hand, Math* 3. 12.
and he will make clean his floor, and gather his wheat into his garner: but
he will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire. Wherefore shall he come
thence? TO IVDGE THE QVICK AND THE DEAD. Now Gods throne is a fiery throne,
whose coming to judgment no man knows: who, at his coming shall baptize
with the holy Ghost and with fire, coming suddenly as a thief in the night; or
as a master, whose return the servant knows not: least the wicked should be
forewarned to flee from the anger to come, and advance themselves, concerning
the advantage of this life: therefore they shall give account to him that is
ready to judge both the quick and the dead. 1. Pet. 4. 5.
Judge nothing, O people of the earth before the time; until the Lord comes,
who will lighten things that are hid in darkness, and make the counsels of the
heart manifest: and then shall every man that does so, have praise of God.
Christ commanded his Apostles to preach, that he was ordained of God a judge of
quick and dead. Saint Paul says; I witness before God, and the Lord Jesus
Christ that shall come again to judge the quick and the dead at his
appeerance and his kingdom: 2. Tim. 4.
which is to say, when his kingdom shall come that we daily pray for in the
Lords prayer: in which kingdom the Lord make us partakers of his sons
inheritance, even as we grow in him unto the house of the living, Amen. I
BELIEVE IN THE HOLY GHOST. Here again is the first tenor of our confession
repeated, to wit, I believe in, which ought to have relation wholly and
severally to the three persons only, least we make a confusion of all; as some
do, which take it literally, without discerning the sense at all; but saying in
haste, I believe in the holy Ghost, the holy catholic church, the communion of
saints, etc. Here the simple (except he be taught) cannot understand, but that
he believes in the catholic church, and in the communion of saints, etc. so
far forth as in the holy Ghost, or in the other two persons: but of this point
anon more at large. I believe in the holy Ghost. Why? I believe in the father
and the son, as is abouesaid, and the holy Ghost is all one with the father
and the son; for he proceeds both of the father and the son, and with the
father and the son together is glorified: therefore I equally believe in the
holy Ghost, as in the father or the son, or as in both, father and son.
For, because the holy Ghost is exempted from neither, it pertains to each
one, and to both alike. The holy Ghost was the father and the son before the
world; the son was the holy Ghost and the fain the world; the father is the
holy Ghost and the son in the world to come. The concentricall Trinity being
thus; Father, Son, Holy Ghost,
whose might, authority, and power shall be at that time all one over them that
shall be baptized with the holy Ghost and with fire: for now, even to day is the
holy Ghost laboring in the hearts of men, to win them unto the father and the
son. Wherefore harden not your hearts as in the provocation, in the day of
temptation in the wilderness. Happy shall the wise virgins be, which are found
with oil in their lamps, not trusting to borrow in the busy day of all flesh
when none can lend. Wherefore, good brethren, be not as the foolish virgins, the
sleeping disciples, the sluggish servants, or as the busy Martha: but have
care to choose the better things during the time of the flesh, that the holy
Ghost may find a resting place in your souls, to bring you to everlasting
life. Math. 11. 5.
Then shall it be said; The blind receive their sight, the hault go, the lepers
are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor receive the
gospel. Mark* 14. 38.
Take heed, watch and pray, least ye enter into temptation: Mark. 13. 33.
Take heed, watch and pray, for ye know not when the time is. For Christ says;
John. 14. 16.
I will pray the father, and he shall give you another comforter, that he may
abide with you for ever, the spirit of truth whom the world cannot receive,
because it sees him not, nor knows him; but ye know him: for he dwells
with you, and shall be in you. I will not leave you comfortless, I will come
to you: yet a little while and the world shall see me no more; but ye shall see
me: because I live, ye shall live also. And in the same place following, Christ
says; These things have I spoken unto you being present with you, but the
comforter which is the holy Ghost, whom the father will send in my name, he
shall teach you all things, and bring all things unto your remembrance which I
have told you; and so forth to the end of the chapter. And in the next
chapter; But when the comforter shall com, whom I will send unto you from the
father, even the spirit which proceeds of the father: he shall testify of
me, and ye shall be witnesses also; because ye have been with me from the
beginning. And again Christ says; I tell you truth, it is expedient for you
that I go away: for if I go not away, the comforter will not com unto you; but
if I depart, John. 15. 26.
I will send him unto you: and when he is come, he will reprove the world of
sin, of righteousness, and of judgment; of sin, because they believe not in
me; of righteousness, because I go to the father, and ye shall see me no more;
of judgment, because the prince of the world is judged. John. 16. 7.
I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot hear them now, howbeit
when he is come which is the spirit of truth, which will lead you into all
truth: for he shall not speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear, that
shall he speak; and he shall show you the things to come: he shall glorify me;
for he shall receive of mine, and shall give it unto you. To this place may be
applied the Lords words spoken by the prophet Joel; Joel. 2. 28.
I will power out my spirit upon all flesh, your sons and your daughters
shall prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams, and your young men shall see
visions: and also upon the servants, and upon the maidens in those days will I
power my spirit. Whosoever therefore shall call upon the Lord with a contrite
heart, doing the works of the spirit, and not of the flesh; he shall be saved.
For in mount Sion and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as the Lord has said,
and in the remnant whom the Lord shall call. The holy Ghost is a diverse gift
unto the chosen; to some the gift of prophecy; to some the interpretation of
toongs: as Saint Paul says touching spiritual gifts; 1 Cor. 12.
Brethren, I would not have you ignorant, wherefore I declare unto you, that no
man speaking by the spirit of God calls Jesus execrable: also, no man can say
that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost. Now there are diversity of
gifts, but the same spirit: and there are diversity of administrations, but the
same Lord: and there are diversity of operations, but God is the same, and
works all in all. Now the manifestation of the spirit is given every man to
profit withal: for to one is given by the spirit, the word of wisdom; to
another the word of knowledge, by the same spirit; and to another the
operations of great works, and to another prophecy, and to another the
discerning of spirits, and to another the diversity of toongs, and to another
the interpretation of toongs. Now all these are the body of Christ, and members
serving to several uses in the church of God, as some for apostles, some for
prophets, some for teachers, some to do miracles, some for healers, some for
helpers, some for governors, some for linguists, and some for interpreters.
This gift lights on the chosen in many shapes: it came upon the son of man
in the likeness of a dove; Acts* 2. 3.
it came upon the Apostles in the form of cloven toongs like fire; it came upon
disciples at Ephesus, Acts* 19. 6.
that never before heard of the holy Ghost, by Paul's laying hands on them. How
the faithful may be assured of this gift, let them read the eight chapter of
the Epistle to the Romans, concerning the hope, patience, and prosperity of
this gift, which will something ease the tediousnes of this treatise. Therefore,
kind reader, take it in worth that I so often send thee to the spring it
self, for the water that is most sweet and fresh; the carriage not far, and
the burden easy: albeit, I will not omit to lay down in this place the fruits
of the flesh, and the fruits of the spirit: for they rebel each one against the
other, and the operations of both are contrary. For the works of the flesh are
adultery, Gal. 5. 19.
fornication, uncleanness, wantonness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, debate,
emulations, wrath, co^tentions, seditions, heresies, envy, murder,
drunkenness, gluttony, and such like; which things whosoever does exercise, he
shall not inherit the kingdom of God. But the fruit of the spirit is love, joy,
peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meeknes, and temperancy,
against which there is no law. Thus much I thought good here to mention, that
ye may have in this Enchiridion as it were a mariners compass to pass by; for
as by it, we recover a direct course again after many storms, and at last
come to a safe port: so if by the weakness of the spirit you wend with the
tempest of the world, doing the will of the flesh; then have you also before
your eyes, the points of hope, patience, and prosperity, the direct course unto
the holy land, where ye shall arrive and anchor more safe than sowls in their
nests, Luke. 9. 58.
or foxes in their holes; yea or any treasure in the depth of the earth: for
all such things in the day of judgment shall show forth their own property,
and be revealed unto the eyes of the living: at which day shall be the harvest,
whereunto the tares also are reserved as well as the wheat. This is the land
that is more worth than all kingdoms; here is the plentiful field that
multiplieth so manifold; this is the field of hid tresure; Math. 13.
the pearl of great price; the draw-net that gathers of all kinds; the
fruitful senuy, and the sauory leven. The heirs of this kingdom shall shine
as the sun: thus much concerning the comforter, that guides the chosen to
salvation. Now touching the catholic church. If we believe in the catholic
church, we bring a curse upon us: for the church are the members of Christ
their head; not clear from sin, because the old man remains yet in them:
and says the prophet; Cursed is the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh
his arm. One man may have a sympathy with another, until perfection shall
come by grace. Also if we believe in the catholic church, we lessen the power
of God our father, of Christ our savior, and of the holy spirit our comforter,
to whose power no perfection is wanting: for it made us perfectly, it saves us
assuredly, and most entirely releeueth and comfort us daily. Which creation,
salvation, and consolation, the holy catholic church so far relieth on; as is
needful for any one member of the same: should we presume then to be made
holy, because they are holy? or saints by believing in the holy members of the
church? or will we all be catholics one by one, because we all make one
catholic church? No, there is no saint but he whom the spirit sanctifies; nor
any catholic but the church: which is the composition of many members into one
catholic and perfect body of Christ the head; through the holy Ghost the
spouse of the Anointed. Psalm. 45.
The holy city of God Jerusalem came down from heaven prepared as a bride
trimmed for her husband: Apoc. 21. 2.
I will show the bride the lambs wife: read the whole chapter. Concerning the
new city Jerusalem, the church, holy, catholic, or universal on earth. This
is the vineyard of red wine, Isai. 27. 2.
that the Lord has kept so daintily, and watered every moment least any assail
it. This has the Lord set as a sign on the mountains for all the inhabitants
of the earth, Isai. 18. 3.
that when he blows the trumpet they might hear, yea upon mount Sion blows
he, and the most base and vile nations repair unto his name. Isai. 26. 1.
This is the strong city, whose bulworks are salvation, and in whose walls
consists the whole strength of Judah. This church has none other foundation
but Christ, and the faith which we have in him; 1. Cor. 3. 11.
the true rock that followed the host. Math. 16.
Wherefore we are Gods laborers, 1. Pet. 2. 4.
his husbandry, 1. Cor. 10. 4.
and his building. If any man lay other foundation than this, Exodus 17. 6.
the fire shall try of what sort it is: Number. 20. 10.
and if any man's work abides, he shall receive wages; but if his work burn,
he shall lose (his labor.) Again, know ye not that ye are the temple of God,
and the spirit of God dwells in you? This much has showed that we are the
very temple of God, founded upon Jesus Christ, of which the holy Ghost is
minister, and dwells in us. Which temple if any man destroy, God the builder
will destroy him; for the temple of God is holy. More concerning this point,
read the whole third chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthes; this temple
of the Lords was sanctified in old time: yea even when he dwelt in no house; 2.
Sam. 6. 6.
but walked in a tent or tabernacle, leading his servant Moses though the
wilderness with the children of Israel, even as a shepherd leads his sheep.
Such was his tender mercy toward his possession at that time, that in four
hundred and fowerscore years he dwelt in tents and tabernacles, and his arc
remained within the curtains. Then Solomon built a temple for his name,
against the coming of Shiloh then to be sent, Jesus Christ, the very
foundation, walls, and borders of the catholic church, gathering together a
communion of saints by the holy Ghost, a most comfortable minister in the same.
Therefore there is no catholic, but the Lords building, which is the common
passion of the members of Christ. And we are not to believe in the catholic
church, of which our selves are members: but we believe that we be of the
catholic church, and that we are part of the Lords husbandry and building upon
his son Jesus Christ the rock, even the foundation that was revealed by God
the father unto Peter. For when doubt arose who he should be, Peter confidently
answered; Thou art that Christ the son of the living God: and Jesus answered
and said unto him; Blessed art thou Simon the son of Jonah, for flesh and
blood has not revealed this unto thee, but my father which is in heaven: and
also I say; Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my church, and the
gates of hell shall not overcome it. Here met I something concerning the
catholic errors of the Popish church: that make PETROS, PETRA, PETRA ROMA, and
ROMA CATHEDRA PETRI, which in a word may be easily confuted: for Peter, at the
pronuntiation of the words, Thou art Peter, etc. was in the coasts of Caesarea
Philippi Tetrarchae far from Rome: neither was it ever spoken of by any
testimony now of six hundred years old, that Peter was at Rome, only a new
opinion of that church has of late inueterated. Concerning the word, Rock; all
rocks of salvation are spiritually taken: Psalm. 18. 3.
as David says; The Lord is my rock and my redeemer. And in another place it
is said; Tzuri shaddai, My rock is the all-sufficient: but this is meant of our
savior a rock of salvation; seeing upon it he will build his church, a temple
not made with hands: therefore of necessity must this rock be taken spiritually,
as a revelation of God from heaven to Peter of his son Jesus Christ, which
was the faith of Peter, when he said; Thou art the anointed, the son of the
living God. And upon this faith will Christ build his church, so sure as upon a
rock never to be moved: Psalm. 123.
for they that trust in the Lord, as mount Sion cannot be moved: the gates of
hell shall not prevail against the building on this rock; for the true faith
in Christ shall continue for ever, yea even as an everlasting building, that
the fire neither wastes nor consumes. There was no cause why Peter should
have received a special blessing, but in regard of his revelation from God:
for it is said; Happy art thou, because my father has showed thee this. Upon
this rock will I build my church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail over
it, and I will give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever
thou bindest on earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou loosest on
earth shall be loosed in heaven. Indeed Christ showed that he himself had the
keys, when he says very comfortably to John; Fear not, Apoc. 1. 18.
I am the first and the last: him that Isai prophesied of, which am alive and
was dead, and behold I live for ever and ever: verily I have the keys both of
death and hell. And in another place; Let him that has ears, hear what the
spirit says unto the churches, and write to the angel of the church in
Philadelphia; Apoc. 3. 7.
these things says the true and holy one, that has the key of David, who
opens and no man shuts; who shuts and no man opens. And in the next
verse; I know thy works; behold I have giueu before thee an open gate, and no
man can shut it, because thou have little power, and thou have kept my
commandments, and not denied my name. The key of David is manifested unto us,
when he says; Open ye everlasting doors, and the king of glory shall com in.
Here was his faith as a key, and therefore called the key of David. He foresaw
the lion of the tribe of Judah that came of the root of David; the lamb of God,
who was the only in heaven and earth that could open the book and loose the
seals. Heerby we see that Christ only opens, Apoc. 5. 5.
and no man shuts; and shuts and no man opens. It is plain by
testimony of scripture, that there is but one key to open heaven to mankind,
and that is Christ the king of glory, who is entered in, and there is no other
doorkeeper but he. Therefore whereas our savior says; I will give thee the
keys of the kingdom of heaven: that is to say, the spiritual knowledge, to
preach my word, which thou did but now testify, in these words; Thou art the
anointed, the son of the living God. The knowledge heerof is to the
believers a key of entrance to life eternal: but to the wicked and reprobate
unbelievers, a key of exclusion to condemnation for ever; and such is the
binding up of the faithful as sheaues into the barn, and the loosing or
undoing of the wicked as the stubble to be burnt in unquenchable fire.
Otherwise, if Christ had given him his own whole authority on earth, or had
made him porter of the kingdom of heaven, no doubt he himself in a verse or
two after as it seems, might had lost his inheritance in heaven: for if Peter
had been able to have dissuaded him, Christ had not gone to Jerusalem, nor
suffered much of the high priests and elders, nor been slain, nor the third day
risen again. Whereby it seems that he was as great an enemy to salvation as
might be, when he said; Go not master, have pity on thy self; it shall not so
com unto thee. Here fell he so extremely in faith, that he received a greater
rebuke for ignorance, Math. 16. 23.
than ever Judas did; Get thee behind me satan (for before it seems he made
him a companion) thou art mine offense, thou sauorest not of the wisdom of
God, but of the wit of man: wherefore now I am to thee as Isai prophesied, Isai.
8. 14.
a rock of offense, 1. Pet. 2. 8.
a stone to stumble at. But admit he had been the iustest man that ever was,
and so lived until he should go the way of the fathers: yet was not his
righteousness inheritance; for it came from God, and he could leave nothing to
his posterity that claims more than his authority by succession: thus much
concerning the catholic church. THE COMMUNION OF SAINTS. I believe that there
is communion of saints, and that I my self am one of the communion, elected by
the spirit through faith in Christ. THE FORGIVENES OF SINS. I believe also
that there shall be a forgiveness of sins through the passion of Christ, as is
already showed by his passion. THE RESVRRECTION OF THE DEAD. I believe there
shall be a resurrection of the dead, and that I shall rise again with glory
unto life everlasting. These last articles I handle not in this place, because
each of them is already severally proved in my treatise. All that remains is
to conclude my purpose, which was to show the nature of believing: that by the
faith of his own heart every man is saved, what he is to believe in, the cause
why; and lastly, the unspeakable comfort, that every true believer has by his
faith in God the father, God the son, and God the holy Ghost* to whom be all
power ascribed, both now and evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

