DIRECTIONS FOR A GODLY LIFE: Especially for Communicating at the Lord's Table.
Intended first for private use; now published for the good of those who desire
the safty of their own souls, and shall be pleased to make use thereof.

BY H. TOZER Mr of Arts, and Fellow of Exceter College in Oxford.

Psalm. 69.33. Seek ye after God and your soul (...) live.

OXFORD. Printed by WILLIAM TVRNER Printer to the famous University. 1628.

TO THE HONORABLE Gentleman Mr LORENZO CARRY Son to the R. Honorable Vicount
Faulkland Lord Deputy of Ireland.
WORTHY SIR
SINCE the time that it first pleased your honorable Father to commend you
unto the religious government of this College, wherein you now live, your
carriage has been so sweet and lovely, that it has won, I dare say, the
heart of each member thereof to a readiness of respecting this your goodness,
as in word so in deed, according to their several places and dignities.
Neither could I suffer my self, standing in a more near relation than any of
the rest unto you, to come short in the performance of this office; Wherefore I
here offer unto your religious meditation this ensuing treatise, collected and
composed first for private use, but now published; not to gain the applause of
any (from which my own unworthiness sufficiently checkes me) but chiefly
for these two respects; first to testify that love, which I both owe unto you
and am ready to make good; Secondly and more principally to invite you to a due
consideration of those holy duties therein contained, that by a seasonable
knowledge of the same your actions may be the more carefully ordered, and
God's name in the faithful practice thereof more fully glorified. The subject
is a matter not of humane learning, but of God's service; and thereof a part,
without exception, the greatest; the due receiving of the holy Communion. A
duty, I confess, better known, then well considered; and more often thought
on, then sincerely practiced: if it were not so, bad actions would not be so
commonly priviledg'd by the greatness of the Agents, as now they are; but they
to whom God has given most honor here, would ever think it their greatest
glory to honor him most again by their faithful service unto him. And good
reason why they should, if they remember that to whom God has given most, of
them he requires most again; yea such, who have the precedence of others in
place and dignity, may do well to consider, that, in making a conscience of
matters of Religion and leading their lives according to the rules thereof,
they do not only provide well for the salvation of their own souls, but
give a good occasion to others also, while they happily provoke them to the
practice of the same duties by their good examples: which are ever held as
lively precepts, and serve for a secret reproof to an ingenuous inferior,
when he shall see himself defective in that, wherein his betters have gone
before him. Let the Honorable and Mighty thus remember how far they shall
honor God by a religious life, and then they cannot but acknowledge that it is
their glorious fredome to be his humble Servants. Others, if they please, may
take notice of this persuasion; and perhaps they would, if I were not unworthy
to advise them: but now I speak to you alone, whom I well know willing, as
freely to make use of others help, so truly to accept of this from me. Your
own happiness you must confess, with thanks to God, that by his providence
you live in that Society, whose Religion is as firm as undefiled; where you
cannot say you want the rule either of loving precepts or exanple; according
unto which you have already joined with the rest in a religious communicating
at the Lords Table. My desire is to persuade you to a constant perseverance in
what you have so well begun; that so devoting your tender years, with those
which follow unto the service of the Almighty, you may again from him receive
and fully enjoy his daily blessing, which does ever attend on those that truly
seek him. Some meditations which perhaps may serve for your direction, I here
present unto your view; in which I freely acknowledge almost nothing mine (to
prevent the censure of a curious Reader) but only the labor of composing;
this I now commend to you, and you unto the blessed providence of the most
Highest resting ever

Yours truly in the Lord HENRY TOZER.

DIRECTIONS FOR THE DVE RECEIVING OF THE HOly Communion.
CHAP. I. What a Sacrament is and how many there be.
A Sacrament is an outward visible sign of an inward and invisible grace;
ordained by God, whereby he does seal unto us his covenant of grace made in
the blood of Christ, and we again testify our faith and piety toward him:
so that it is both a sign in respect of the thing signified, and a seal in
respect of the covenant thereby sealed unto us. The word sacrament does
properly signify an oath, whereby Soldiers bound themselves unto their
General; whence it is taken to signify that obligation, whereby we tie our
selves to the blessed and sweet service of Jesus Christ: for hereby we, as
Christ's Soldiers, first bind our selves by promise of obedience to fight
under the Lords banner against the world, the flesh and the devil; Secondly we
put on the cognisaunce and Arms, the Colors and mark of Christ by professing
our faith in him, that so it may appear unto the world to whom we do belong.

Now Sacraments are of two forts. First of the Old Testament, which were 2.
first Circumcision, secondly the Passover. The first was ordained for a sign
of entrance into the Covenant; the second for an assurance of confirmation of,
and continuance in the same: both which are now abolished, and in stead of them
we now have the Sacraments of the New Testament, which are likewise 2. first
Baptism answerable to Circumcision; secondly the Lord's Supper to the
Passover: both signified by that water and blood, which issued out of the side
of Christ, when it was peirced by the soldiers on the Cross. Of these the
first is called the Sacrament of our Nativity or entrance, because by it we
are assured that we are received into the Covenant of Grace, and so are
regenerate and belong to the flock of Christ: the second is called the
Sacrament of our growth and perseverance, whereby we grow up in Christ, and
are assured that we shall be still kept in this estate. So that both are
necessary; the one to assure us of our entrance into, and the other of our
continuance in the estate of Grace; for although that Grace once conferred
cannot be lost, yet our assurance does often want strengthening by reason of
our manifold temptations, against which we are comforted by the remembrance of
Christ's death and passion: which does also teach us why the Sacrament of
Baptism is received but once, and the Lord's Supper often; because our birth
is signified by our Baptism, and we can be borne but once; but we daily stand
in need of food and strengthening, and therefore we often receive the Supper of
the Lord, that our souls may be nourished unto life everlasting.

Chap. II. What the Lord's Supper is.
That we may rightly understand the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper we must
know 2. things. 1, what it is; 2, what belongs to the due receiving of it.

For the first; the Lord's Supper is a Sacrament, consisting of Bread and Wine
lawfully consecrated and distributed; instituted by Christ himself for a
continual remembrance of the Death and Passion of Christ, and the benefits
which we receive thereby.

This institution was at Christ's last Supper after he had eaten the Passover
with his Disciples; so that it is called a Supper in respect of the time of the
institution; and the Lord's Supper in respect of the Author, the Lord Christ;
as also in respect of the end thereof, which is partly to set forth the Lord's
Death, and the spiritual food therein received, namely the body and blood of
Christ himself.

In this Sacrament we must consider 2 things. 1. the parts: 2. the end.

The parts are 2. first the outword Signs. Secondly the thing signified. The
signs are either representing, namely the elements themselves: or applying
signs, which are the actions about those elements.

The elements are 2. Bread and Wine; not Bread only, but both, according to
Christ's institution: and that asunder, not the Bread dipped in the Wine, as some
will have it; because Christ's blood was shed out of his body for our sins,
and we are to receive these signs as representing Christ, not whole but
wounded and peirced.

Now Christ chose those elements before any other, because they best serve to
set forth Christ's Body and Blood; for as Bread by diverse breakings and
pressings comes to be perfect, yea the chiefest, food of our bodies, still
giving a good relish, when other things do not, and is also more common to all
tha^ any other. So the body of Christ by many torments was made the chief
nourishment of our souls, remaining always most sweet and pleasant, and
common to all that can receive him by faith; and as Wine does cherish and
comfort us, satisfy our thirst, purge away many corrupt humors, and makes us
bold and adventrous: so the blood of Christ reviues and gladd's our drooping
souls, satisfies our spiritual thirst, purges us from all our sins, and
makes us courageous against all fear of our enemy the Devil; again as
bread is made of many grains into one loaf, and wine of many grapes into one
cup: so we, partaking thereof, and of Christ, by faith, are made one with
him as our head, and also one among our selves as members of his body; thus of
the elements.

The Actions in this sacrament are of 2. sorts. 1. of the Minister. 2 of the
Communicants. The actions of the Minister are these.

1 Setting apart, and 2 blessing of the Elements, whereby is signified that
Christ Jesus was set apart and sanctified for us, as it is Ioh. 17.19.3.
breaking and pouring out, and 4. distributing to the Communicants; whereby is
signified that Christ's Body was crucified and his blood shed, and that the
benefits thereof are offered unto us, if we have faith to receive the^, as it
is Ioh. 3.15. He was lifted up, that whosoever believes in him should have
life everlasting.

The actions of the Co^munica^ts are 2. 1. Taking. 2. Eating and drinking.
By which is signified that they, which receive benefit by Christ, must receive
him by faith applying his merits to their own souls, as Ioh. 1.12. As many as
received him to them he gave power to become the Sons of God, even to them
which believe on his name.

Thus of the signs; the thing signified is the Body and Blood of Christ, with
the benefits, which we receive thereby; namely the strengthening and
refreshing of our souls in the remission of our sins: and this we receive,
not of the Minister (for he gives only the signs) but of God himself,
apprehending the same by our faith; for Christ is not signified in these signs
as in a picture, but exhibited unto us; being himself present in the
Sacrament, though not corporally to the Bread and Wine, yet spiritually to our
faith; for though his Body be in Heaven and must there remain until the last
day, as it is Act. 3.2; yet we may feed on him spiritually by faith by applying
his death and passion unto our sinful souls: so that there is one union
between Christ and the Elements, which is Symbolicall; and an other between
Christ and us, which is spiritual and real.

The ends of this Sacrament are twofold: 1 in respect of others: 2 in respect
of our selves.

In respect of others, to testify unto them that faith which we profess; that
so they seeing our readiness herein may have their hearts also stirred up to such
good duties. In respect of our selves it concerns, either what we have
received from, or what we are to return to God. In the first respect it
serves.

First for remembrance; namely, of the death of Christ; for, as often as we
receive this, we show the Lords death till he come. 1. Cor. 11.26.

Secondly, for confirmation unto us; and that, both of our union among our
selves; as 1. Cor. 10.17. for we being many, are one Bread and one Body, for we
all partake of one Bread: as also of our Communion with Christ; for as the
Bread and Wine are turned into the substance of our bodies; so we by faith are
united unto Christ, and made flesh of his flesh; for his flesh is meat indeed,
and his blood is drink indeed; Ioh. 6.55: and for this cause it is called the
Communion.

In the second respect concerning that which we are to return unto God, it
serves to testify our thankfulness to God for his mercy in giving us his Son,
and in him all things, and assuring us thereof by this Seal: which we cannot
but do, when we consider the torments that he endured for our sins, which
were indeed the very nails and spears that pierced him: and for this cause it
is called the Eucharist; because in it we offer up our thanks unto God; and
so also it may be called a Sacrifice: not that we do therein offer up Christ
unto God, (for Christ himself at once finished this offering of his Body on
the Cross) but because we offer up our thankful hearts unto God for his mercy
in Christ, so that it is a sacrifice, not of Christ, but of our thankfulness.

CHAP. III. The Necessity of receiving the Lords Supper.
THat we may receive this Sacrament, as we ought, we must consider 2 things. 1
the Necessity; 2 the right manner of receiving the same.

As for the first, we must know that it is not a thing indifferent for us to
receive or not to receive at our pleasure, but that we ought to do it though
not every Sabbath after the custom observed in the Primitive Church, yet
without fail, as often as occasion is offered; according to the example of
those in the Acts, who continued steadfast in breaking of bread, Act. 2.42.

The Necessity of which duty will further appear, if we consider these 2
things. 1 the principal cause, which often keeps us from it; 2 the motives,
which may draw us unto it.

First, that, which makes us backward in the performance of it, is
questionless the policy of our Arch-enemy, the Devil; who strives by all
means to draw us away, either by a careless neglect of our chiefest good to
feed rather on our own foolish imaginations (as he did them in the Gospel,
who had rather see their ground, or prove their oxen, than taste of that Supper
to which they were invited. Luke 14.18.19.) or else by a timorous fearfulness
of our own unworthiness to approach unto so holy a banquet, as this is. And
truly, if we could but see that this is his doing, we would by all means
strive against his temptations; for, who amongst us would not endeavor to the
utmost, so far to resist his temporal enemy, as that he should not be able
to hurt him either in body or in goods? and shall we be more careful for the
preservation of our earthly bodies, then of our heavenly Souls, which Christ
Jesus has redeemed by his precious blood? God forbid; we must know that God
expects more at our hands; and that our souls are never so safe, as when they
are in greatest opposition --, and do that which is most displeasing unto our
chiefest enemy, the Devil; for the more we please him, the less we please
God; and the nearer we are to him, the farther we are from God.

The Motives which may draw us to the performance of this duty, are taken from
a due consideration of these 2 things. 1 who it is, which inviteth us unto it.
2 what be the consequents of receiving or not receiving.

He which inviteth us, is God himself, whose ordinance it is; and who requires
it at our hands as a principal part of his service; and therefore as often as
we omit it, we may be sure that we offend him; which he himself testified
in threatening to cut off that soul from his people, which should forbear to
keep the Passover. Numb. 9.13: and if so, then doubtless the neglect of this
Sacrament, wherein Christ is so fully exhibited unto us, is very displeasing
unto him; which is also expressed in the parable of the great Supper, Luke 14.24.
None of those men, which were bidden, shall taste of my Supper: Why? because
they came not when they were invited; and if we refuse to come when the Lord
calls, who knows whether he will give us life until the next invitation? Let
us therefore take the Lord's offer, while it is to day, lest we be cut off
before the morrow.

The next motive is taken from the consequents, and that 1 of not receiving. If
we receive not, we offer a twofold injury; the one to Christ, the other, to
our selves.

To Christ 2 ways. 1 in contemning his ordinance, who commanded his Disciples
to receive it, 1 Cor. 11.24. and in them us. 2 in neglecting his love toward
us; who (as a Father on his death-bedd) in the night that he was betrayed,
bequeathed this seal and pledge of his love unto us, which therefore ought to
be right dear unto us, and at noe time neglected when it is offered.

Again, if we receive not, we injure our selves; and that also 2 ways. 1 in
respect of our name and profession; for, if we come not when others do, we
expose our selves to the censure of them, showing that we are at least
neglecters, if not contemners of GOD'S ordinance, who will have all to come to
it Matt. 26.27: yea that we have not the life of a Christian in us; for
whosoever eats not the flesh of the Son of man, and drinks his blood,
has no life in him. Ioh. 6.53.2 we injure our selves from the benefits
thereof, for the remembrance of Christ's death and passion (if duly considered)
cannot but be a great comfort unto us; which we put from us, as often as we
omit the Lords Supper: and thus much we may assure our selves, that the Devil
will be ready to take the least occasion to suggest other meditations unto us:
and what a miserable thing is it for us to be exercised in our own pleasures
or such like, when others, with whom we are bound to be present, are
reverently gathered together, to the comfort of their own souls, to feed at
the Lords Table? If we say that we are then exercised in other good duties, as
reading the Word of God or such like; we must know that such duties (good in
themselves) are not acceptable to God at such times; and who knows, seeing
that herein we neglect the Lords ordinance, how far he will give the Devil
leave to tempt us, and draw us away even from those duties also to wicked
imaginations?

2. The Consequents of receiving cannot but invite us to a constant performance
of this duty. Now these consequents respect either God, or our selves. That
which respects God, is our duty of thankfulness and praise, which herein we
offer unto him for his mercy; which is very pleasant unto him, and necessary to
be performed of us; because he is gracious, and his mercy endures for ever
toward them that fear him; and how then can we but with David, have our
hearts ready to sing and praise him with the best member that we have? Ps. 108.1

That, which respects our selves, is the benefitt which we receive thereby;
which is twofold. 1 General. 2 more special. The General benefitts, which
we receive by the Lords Supper, are chiefly two.

1 Asupply of all our wants; which we shall be sure to have if we receive
aright; for he, which eats the flesh of Christ, shall never hunger; and he,
which drinks his blood, shall never thirst, as Christ himself has promised:
neither need we doubt of the truth hereof; for, he is full of grace and
truth; Ioh. 1.14. and in him dwells all fulness. Col. 1.19; and how then can
we want any thing, if we possess him that has al things?

2. An excellent rule to our whole life; for when we hereby consider God's
great love unto us, we cannot (if there be any love and fear of God in us) but
be careful to avoid any thing, which may be displeasing unto him: so that
hereby our bodies are made more obedient unto our Souls, and our Souls unto God.

The special benefit, which we receive by the Lord's Supper, is in regard of
our faith; and this again respects either our selves and others, or else our
selves alone.

The first is, a testifying of our faith unto others; for hereby we both show
unto others the faith, which we profess; and also by our example stir them
up to the performance of the same duty; in this respect therefore it is
necessary that we should often receive.

In the second respect it is a confirmation and increase of that faith, which
we have in us: wherein we are to endeavor by all means to continue, as S.
Paul taught the disciples, Act. 14.22. and beware that we fall not from our
steadfastness, but grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ: as it is 2. Pet. 3.18. whereof we cannot but be careful, if
we consider our weakness; for we are ever subject to Apostasy, and our faith
is exceeding weak; as we may plainly see by our coldness in prayer and other
good duties, by our fear of death, and by our love of this world: for the
strengthening of which Christ has left unto us this Sacrament, as a special
means conducing thereunto; for the Covenant which our faith takes hold of, as
it is contained in the Word of GOD, so it is sealed unto us by this Sacrament;
and therefore Christ calls the cupp, the cupp of the New Testament, because it
seals unto us the Covenant of God in the New Testament, accomplished in the
shedding of Christ's blood. Now if a King should in pity and compassion send a
pardon under his Seal unto a poor distressed prisoner; would we not judge
that prisoner unworthy of the benefitt thereof, if he should either wilfully
refuse it, or carelessly neglect it? questionless we would: yet such is our
case before God, who, as King of Kings, has sealed unto us by this Sacrament a
full remission of all our sins; if we therefore shall either wilfully
contemn, or at our pleasure receive this pledge of his love, what can we
expect at GOD's hands, but a just remoueall of this his favor from us? Surely
if we join the consideration of our own weakness, which so much needs
help, with the meditation of God's mercy, who so freely gives it, we cannot
but acknowledge our own misery, if we neglect it: wherefore as we fear him,
and tender the good of our own Souls, let us be careful in the due
performaunce of this so weighty a business. But some are wont to frame these
excuses for their absence.

1. The often receiving of this Sacrament may breed a disesteeme thereof; and
therefore it is safer sometimes to abstain. To which I answer, that in
matters temporal (as pleasures, and such like) the often use may breed
contempt, or at least neglect, as it often does: but in spiritual things it
rather breeds a greater desire, because the more we feel and know the
goodness of them, the more we seek after them; yet if it so come to pass,
that by often receiving, we begin to undervalue the worth of it; we must
consider that this neglect arises not from the often use of the thing, but
from our corrupt nature; for this Exercise is God's own ordinance; always
attended with his blessing, if rightly received; appointed as a means to
stir up and increase our zeal and devotion; and therefore it is not likely
that it should hinder it. Let not this therefore keep us from the LORDS Table,
but let us rather come, that it may be a means to increase our piety.

2. Some will say; I am not prepared, and therefore dare not come: but this
indeed is no excuse; for we must know that we ought to be always
prepared, our whole life should be a continual preparation, as to all other
good duties, so especially to this; being ever ready when the Lord shall call,
as our Savior admonishes us, Matt. 24.44.

3. Others will urge; I am to take a journey, or to be employed in such or
such a business; and therefore I cannot come: Well: if this journey or the
like, must of necessity be performed, thy excuse is the safer; but if it may
be any way avoided (as oftentimes it may) assure thy self, this is to
prefer thy own pleasure before that which God commands: a day will
certaynely come, wherein we must give an account for the neglect of the least
of God's ordinances; and then it will be said of such Pretenses, Who required
these things at thy hands?

4. Some are wont to urge; I am not in charity, by reason of some wrong which
has been offered to me, and therefore I ought not to come. This indeed is
an excuse too common: but we must know, that if we be not in charity, it is
our own fault; for we ought to be in charity, and still to preserve it: and
certaynely a miserable thing it is, that we should prefer to feed on our
own malice rather than to eat of the Lord's Supper; this is to hurt our
selves more than we need, even to wrong our selves because others have
wronged us; we should rather seek all means of reconciliation, that so we
may remove those impediments of Piety and Religion, and come the more freely to
the LORD's Table.

5. Some thus plead for their absence; I am afraid to approach unto the LORDS
Table by reason of my manifold infirmities, which are in me, and therefore I
had rather sometimes to refrain, lest I come unworthily, which is a very
fearful thing. It is so indeed, but we must consider, that our staying away
is no comfort unto us in this case, but rather a means to make us worse, and
to pull down Gods judgments upon us: we should rather remember the goodness
of God, that inviteth us, promising to refresh those that are heavy laden with
their sins. Matt. 11.28: not putting us off for our infirmities; for, if
thero be a willing mind, he accepts us according to that which we have,
and not according to that which we have not. 2. Cor. 8.12. though we want that
perfection, which others have; yet, if we have a true desire to be refreshed
by the merits of Christ, and have a sincere heart before God, he will accept
us according to this. Whenever therefore the Devil shall tempt thee to draw
thee away by the consideration of thy own infirmity, cheer up thy self with
the comfort of the blind man in the Gospel, Mar. 10.49 be of good comfort,
behold he calls thee: say unto thy self; Christ Jesus has invited me; and
has promised to accept me, if my heart be sincere, humble, and willing; why
then should the consideration of my infirmities keep me from it.

6. Others thus reply; I desire to receive, but I am conscious unto my self of
some crying sins which I have committed before God, for which I have not yet
sufficiently repented; and how then can I partake of this holy banquet in the
presence of God? Is it so? art thou poor, and yet will thou refuse gold when
it is offered unto thee? who will the^ pity thee for thy poverty? art thou
desperately sick, and will thou not seek unto the Physician for means of
recovery? who will the^ bemoane thee for thy disease? Behold, Christ Jesus is
the Physician of thy soul; as well able to heal it of all it is diseases, as
he did the bodies of those, which came unto him, of their infirmities: forsake
not then this heavenly Physician; but labor by a serious repentance to
discharge thy conscience of those thy sins, and then come speedily unto him: it
is the counsel of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 11. who bids us to examine: and then
eat, not go away; first examine, then eat of this Bread and drink of this
cup: If thou say, I had rather stay till the next opportunity, that I may have
the more time to repent; consider that the longer thou stayest, the more sins
thou will run into, and then it will be so much the harder to repent as thou
ought: and besides that, how do thou know, whether God will give thee
grace and time to repent then or not? he has promised indeed to have mercy
upon a sinner, at what time soever he shall repent; but he has not promised
to give him grace to repent when he will: Seek the Lord therefore while he
offers himself unto thee, that thou may find mercy when thou seek it.

Lastly, some in a proud manner thus excuse, (or rather justify) their
absence. I do already sufficiently believe whatsoever is proposed in the word
of God; and therefore what need have I to receive this Sacrament so often, as
a seal to confirm my faith? it does no way confer grace unto me; and my
faith is so firm, that I persuade my self I need not a seal to strengthen
it, so much as others do, whose faith is weaker; wherefore I think that I may
sometimes forbear. But know, o vain man which thus disputest with thy God,
that this is Gods ordinance, a principal part of his service, which therefore
ought diligently to to be performed, though it did no way profit us, even
because God had commanded it: yea, when we have done all those things which
are commanded us, we must say that we are unprofitable servants, we have done
but that which was our duty to do. Luc. 17.10. Besides, is thy faith so strong
that it needs no further strengthening? do thou not daily perceive in thee a
weakness of understanding in matters of Piety and Religion; a frailty in thy
memory, and a continual disorder in thy affections? if not, know thus much;
that it is a misery to want, but a greater misery not to be sensible of our
wants: and this also know for a certain truth, that when thou find in thy
self either none, or at leastwise a small desire of hearing Gods word and
receiving the Sacraments; know, I say, that there is surely some sin or other
in thee not well repented of, which cloyeth thy soul, that it cannot delight
in those spiritual exercises. Let us therefore endeavor to come to the Lords
Table as often as we are invited; and when we do come; let us take heed
that we come not for fashions sake, or to please men, or in any opinion of our
own merit in this action; for this is not a celebration, but a profanation of
the Lords ordinance, because herein we serve not God but our selves; which is
a fearful thing; for God is not as man, that he should be deceived; neither
sees he as man sees; for man judges only according to the outward
appearance, but God searches the very heart and reins; and will one day as
certainly punish the prophaners of his ordinance, as the contemners thereof.
Wherefore, as we ought in the first place to be fully persuaded of the
necessity; so should we in the second by all means labor to come to the
knowledge of the right manner of receiving; which is the next thing to be
considered.

CHAP. IIII. The Necessity of preparation.
HE which desires to receive at the Lords Table in a right manner, must make
conscience of three duties, which are necessarily to be performed.

1 A diligent Preparation before.

2 A seasonable Meditation in the time of receiving.

3 A religious practice after the same in our lives and conversations.

In the first (as before in the matter of receiving) we must take notice of a
things. First, The Necessity. 2. The right manner of Preparation.

The Necessity will plainly appear, if we consider these 2. things. 1. In
whose presence it is, that we are to receive. 2. The danger which we bring on
our selves by not being prepared.

As for the first, we are to sit, and feed in the presence of the Lord
himself. Now if any, even the best of us, should be invited by a King to his
Princely table, he would be careful to present himself (if he reverence his
presence) in the best manner that he could, putting on then especially (if he
have any better than other) his best apparel, and disposing all things in the
most decent order, that so he might be the better accepted: if so; with what
fear and reverence should we then approach unto the Table of this King of
Kings, when he inviteth us? who stands there ready attended with his Angels
to behold those, which present themselves; and will soon epsy out that man,
who shall dare to approach before him, not having on his wedding garment; and
what can such expect, but, with the man in the Gospel, a casting out into
utter darkness? Matthew. 22.12. Neither must we think to deceive the Lord
with an hypocritical outside; for he looks not to the outward gesture
only, but to the inward parts of the soul: it is not so much a clean hand
or curious attire which makes us accepted of God, as a pure heart and a
cleansed soul, adorned with faith and repentance; we may for a time deceive
mortal men, such as our selves: but when the secrets of our hearts shall be
made manifest, then shall our hypocrisy, as well as our negligence, be laid
open to our destruction. Let us therefore humble our selves before God, and
prepare our selves aright, that we may escape the danger which will otherwise
fall upon us; which is the second thing to be considered in the Necessity of
preparation. The danger of not being prepared is particularly set forth unto us
by considering the offense, which we herein commit, and the reward thereof.

If we come unprepared, and so receive unworthily, our offense is no less than
to be guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ. as Saint Paul says. 1. Cor.
11.27. that is, we offer special disgrace and indignity unto Christ, in not
receiving him with that revere^ce which we ought: which offense, as it is in it
self very heinous so it draws on us a fearful punishment; for the Prophet
Jeremiah has pronounced him accursed which does the work of the Lord
deceitfully: Ierem. 48.10. and if it be so in other things, which are of less
moment, what can we expect for the abusing of this so weighty a matter? The
Apostle sets down at full the fearefulnes hereof; when he says. 1. Cor.
11.29. that he, which eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his
own damnation: than which what can be more terrible? neither is the
Scripture silent in shevving us the judgments of God upon such offenders; as
we may plainly see, both in the Old Testament, in the sudden death of Vzza
for rash touching of the Arc; and also in the New, in the binding hand and
foot for want of the wedding garment. Wherefore let the danger hereof move us
to a careful preparation, before we presume to come unto the Lords Table.
But some may say; I persuade my self, that I can by no means be worthy to
receive this Sacrament, and how then can I receive vvorthily? it is true, if
we truly consider our own vnvvorthines and the excellency of this
Sacrament, we cannot by any means become worthy thereof: but this must be
our comfort, that he is truly worthy whom God in mercy acccepteth as
worthy; and so he will us, if we come unto him in humility and reverence.
Let us therefore, according to the Apostles rule, first try and examine our
selves, and then eat of this Supper: which that we may the better do, we
ought in the next place to take notice of the right manner of preparation.

CHAP. V. Concerning Examination in general.
FOr our better performance of the duty of preparation, we must be careful to
set aside a convenient time before the Communion; wherein, laying aside all
other impediments, we ought seriously to be exercised in three duties. 1. A
diligent examination of our fitnes and worthiness to receive. 2. A comfortable
premeditation of the benefits, which we are to receive. 3. earnest prayer unto
God for a blessing upon our endeavors; that so we may be accepted to receive
those benefits.

In our Examination we are to consider; 1 To whom this duty belongs: 2 how it
is to be performed.

The first we learn from Saint Paul. 1. Cor. 11. who bids every man to
try and examine himself; so that we our selves are to examine our selves.
Indeed the Ministers of the word of God, and all such, to whom God has
committed the charge and care of others, ought carefully to try and examine
those, which belong unto them; that so they may be the more fit: and inferiors
ought also willingly to submit themselves unto their trial; yea, if it be not
offered, to seek their help when they doubt of any thing; that so by their
directions they may the more cheerfully go on. These are duties, which God
requires at the hands of all; the neglect whereof will one day fall heavy
upon those, which shall fail in the due performance thereof. Yet this is not
sufficient; for we are, for the most part, full of hypocrisy, ready to hide
our sins from others; yea we are so vvitty in iniquity, that we can behave
our selves so smoothly, in respect of the outvvard show, that others shall
find no fault in us at all; though notvvithstanding our consciences do all
the while accuse us of some sins lurking within us: wherefore we are
commanded also to try and examine every man himself in particular.

This Examination must be twofold. 1. General. 2 Particular. In the first we
must examine our selves in these two things. 1 Whether we be in the number
of the faithful or not; which is very needful to be considered, otherwise
we partake in vain; for as our bodies can receive no nourishing and
strengthening from the food, which we daily receive, unless they have some
life in them before: so neither can our souls, if they be void of the life
of grace, receive any comfort by this spiritual food in the Lords Supper;
which does continue and increase life, where it finds it; but works none,
where there is none before. Let us therefore in the first place diligently try
whether Christ be in us or not; of which we shall the more fully assure our
selves, if we can find this persuasion in us, that we (as our forefathers
were) are strangers and pilgrims here, Heb. 11.13. looking for a city (as
Abraham did) which has foundations, whose builder and maker is God; and that
we are made free from the bondage of sin by the Son of God, Christ Jesus.
Ioh. 8.36. and so with David, put our whole trust and rely only on his mercy.
Psalm. 52.9. 2. We are to make trial of our readiness, whether we be willing
and have a desire to partake of the Lords Supper or no. A willing mind God
required of those, which offered any thing for the building of the Tabernacle;
as it is Exodus 25.2. and of those, which offered him any burnt offerings,
Levit. 19.5. If so in these, which were but shadows of things to come; much
more does he expect it at our hands in the performance of this duty, which is
the substance it self. Neither yet let us here deceive our selves, thinking
that a bare consent or willing mind is sufficient; it is an hungry desire and
appetite, as well as a willingness, to receive meat offered; yea that
especially, which testifies a good disposition in the stomach: and God
requires in all his service (therefore in this also) that we serve him with
all our heart, and with all our soul. Deuteronomy. 10.12. and blessed are they, which
hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled: Mat. 5.6.
For want of this desire it is, that many, when they come to the Lords Table,
are never the better; because God, as he inviteth, so he feeds none but
those that hunger and thirst: Isai: 55.1. Let us therefore try and examine our
selves whether we can say with David. Psalm. 42.1. Like as the heart desires
the water brooks; so longs my soul after thee, o God: my soul is a thirst
for God, yea even for the living God: when shall I come to appear before the
presence of God? if we can find this desire in us, then happy are we: if not;
let us humble our selves before God, and beseech him to work and stir up in
us the good motions of his spirit, that so we may attain to some measure of
this thirst; and from that go on farther to a particular examination of our
fitnes to receive.

CHAP. VI. The Examination of our Knowledge.
IN our particular Examination (because we are dull and ignorant in matters,
that concern our Salvation, and also have, and do often offend both God and
our neighbors; all which are hindrances to the due performance of this duty,
we must examine our selves in those particulars, which concern both our
information in matters which we should understand; and our reconciliation with
those, whom we have offended.

That, which concerns our information, is a good and wholesome knowledge of
those things, which God has revealed unto us; which is so necessary, that it
is the very ground of all our service of God: for how can we do the will of
God aright, if we know it not? Surely that the soul be without knowledge, it
is not good says Solomon: Prove. 19.2. and therefore God will have all men to
come to the knowledge of the truth. 1. Tim. 2.6. without which we can reape^
no comfort unto our selves in any thing that we do; but are as dead men: for
this (and this only) is life eternal, that we know God and Jesus Christ whom
he has sent: Ioh. 17.3. So that without it there is no life: and hence it is
that the Lord himself complains Hos. 4.6. My people are perished for lack of
knowledge; and hence it comes to pass, that many receive this Sacrament
without any benefit unto themselves, because they are not able to discern of
it aright. We should therefore all our life long carefully exercise our selves
in the word of God, that so, when we shall come to examine our selves
concerning our Knowledge, we may the more easily, and with the greater
comfort, try our fitnes in this respect; whether we have attained to a
competent measure of knowledge in the grounds of religion or not. Which that
we may the better do, we are to make trial of a twofold Knowledge, which
we ought to have: the one concerning God, the other concerning man.

Concerning God we are to know, that there is but one, only wise, and true God,
subsisting in three Persons; the Father begetting the Son; the Son begotten
of the Father; and the Holy Ghost proceeding from both: which is a mystery
far exceeding our understanding; yet so sarre are we to know and believe it,
as GOD has revealed it in his word: and therefore first are we to Examine our
selves concerning this knowledge.

Concerning man we are to know, that he was first created in vprightnes
according to the Image of God. Genesis 1.27. but afterward fell through
disobedience, and was again recovered by the meritorious death of Christ
Jesus. This we are to examine according to the 2 parts of the Word of God, the
Law and the Gospel.

In the first we shall plainly see what we are in our selves, even wretched
and miserable sinners, corrupt children of disobedient parents; and that we
have justly deserved death as a due reward for our manifold sins both
original and actual; being carnal, sold under sin, by nature the children
of wrath Ephesians. 2.3.

In the second we shall understand what we are in Christ; and what that
covenant is, which God has made unto man in him for the pardoning of their
sins which return unto him by repentance, and apply the same unto themselves
by faith. So that here we are to know 2 things: 1 the means of our redemption
and reconciliation, the Death of Christ: whom God in love sent into the world,
to redeem them that were under the law, that we might receive the adoption
of Sons: Gal. 4.5. and so has delivered us from the power of darkness Col.
1.13.

2. The means, whereby we may apply this unto our selves; namely faith; which
is a gift of GOD, begotten and increased by hearing the word, and receiving the
Sacrament. Let us therefore seriously examine our selves, whether we have
learned out of the Word of GOD our first innocence, which we had by creation:
our misery, which we fell into by transgression; and the happiness, which we
have obtained again by our sweet and blessed redemption: for in those things
ought every one to be instructed, which approaches unto the Lords Table.

Besides this Knowledge of GOD and Man, we are further to have a particular
Knowledge of the Sacrament it self; where we are to try, whether we do
rightly discern the Elements from the Lords Body, and the true use of them:
wherein we must consider, that the Bread and Wine, (in themselves ordinary)
being ordained of Christ, are now become holy; and whereas CHRIST blessed this
Sacrament at the first institution, we are to know that it is a blessed
Sacrament; because, whatsoever he blesses, is blessed; and that it will be a
means of great blessing unto us, if rightly received and whereas Christ gave
the same after Supper, we must further know, that it was not ordained to
satisfy our bodily hunger; for, if any man thus hunger, Saint Paul tells him
that he must eat at home. 1 Corinthians. 11.34. but it was given for the
refreshing of our wearied Souls by the commemoration of Christ's Death for us,
and of our communion with him: but of this particular Knowledge of the
Sacrament, more in the beginning of the first chapter. In this, as in the
former, we must diligently try and examine our selves; for, except we know
all these things, we are not to partake at the Lord's Table; because without
it, whatsoever we do, is but blind devotion.

Chap: VII. The Examination of our repentance.
THus of our information in matters, which we ought to know. As for our
reconciliation, we are to examine our selves in those things, which concern
either God or our Neighbors; because we have and do often offend both.

Those, which concern God, are principally 2. 1 Repentance whereby we
testify our hearty sorrow for offending him, with a desire of amendment. 2
Faith; whereby we take hold on his mercy, for the pardon and forgiveness of
them.

First, we are to try whether we have attained to a competent measure of
Repentance. And indeed, if we truly look into our selves, and consider that
we must one day give an account for every idle word, we shall find matter
enough for Repentance, if our hearts be not hardened in sin. Now, that it is
necessary to examine our selves herein, appears from this, because without it
we have noe ground at all for any comfort in CHRIST JESUS; for he, which is
stuffed with his sins, is noe more fit to receive Christ, than a glutted
stomach it is meat: and again, unto them that are defiled, there is nothing
pure. Tit. 1.15. that is, if through unbelief, they remain in their
pollutions; but unto the pure all things are pure; and if we cleanse our hands
and purify our hearts and so draw nigh unto God, he will draw nigh unto us.
Iam. 4.8. as many as walk according to this rule, peace be upon them. Gal. 6.
16. Let us then search and try our ways and turn unto the Lord. Lament.
3.40. and put on David's resolution before we come to the Lord's Table; I will
wash my hands in innocence, O Lord, and so will I go to thy Altar. Psalm
26.6. In this examination of our Repentance we must have respect both unto the
time past and to come.

In respect of the time past, we are to perform 3. duties.

1 Carefully search our hearts to find out our own corruptions; that knowing
them we may the better avoid them which is most necessary to be done and that
in the first place; because it is impossible that he should seek to go into
the right way, which does not first see his error: and thus much we must
know, that he that will not set his sins before him here to his conversion,
shall have them set before him hereafter to his confusion, if we will needs
cover and hide sins, let us in love and charity cover the sins of others;
for, Love covers a multitude of sin. 1. Pet. 4.8. that is, lays them not
open before men to their disgrace, who have committed them; as many do, who
delight to hear other men's faults ripped up to the quick, but cannot endure to
hear of their own: we should not so much exclayme against other men's sins,
but rather be humbled for our own, and lay them fully open before our selves,
that so we may come to a more serious repentance for them. Which I think,
we cannot but do (except we have more than stony hearts) when we consider
the torments which CHRIST suffered for our sins; and see our own misery, what
we are in our selves: for this must needs drive us unto God, as a desperate
disease unto the Physician; and make us utterly to accuse our selves and say
Psalm 51.3. I acknowledge my fault, and my sin is ever before me.

Now the chiefest means, which we can use to come to the knowledge of our
sins, are these 2. 1 A conntinuall meditation in the Word of GOD, wherein (as
in a glass) we shall plainly see all our deformities. 2 A seasonable
conference and conversation with such as are themselves touched with their
sins, both which are excellent means: and therefore we ought sincere- to
love the Word of God, because it does discover our sins unto us; and diligently
read, and exercise our selves in it, that so we may come to a full knowledge
of it; and also heartily effect and love those whom we se to be thus affected.
when we have thus considered, that we ought, and how we may discover our
sins; let us examine our selves whether we have thus done in our life past
or no, giving thanks to GOD that he has at any time discovered such or such
sins unto us: if we find that we have not thus done (as GOD knows, we
are all too slack herein) let us seasonably repent us of this neglect; and be
sorry that we have no sooner repented; desiring GOD that he will be pleased
ever more and more to discover our sins unto us, that so we may the better
forsake them and serve him, as we ought. Having thus unfolded our sins
before our eyes, let us in the second place examine; how in sorrow we have
humbled our selves to GOD for them; for this is that, even our sorrow, which
must move God to compassion; and we know that God is nigh unto them that are
of a contrite heart, and will save such as be of an humble spirit: Psalm.
34.18. and therefore David, being pressed down with the burden of his sins,
comforted himself in this saying: The Sacrifice of God is a troubled spirit; a
broken and a contrite heart, O God shall thou not despise Psalm. 51.17. Whereas
on the contrary, if we have no true sorrow, if our souls be not wounded
within us for our sins, we cannot expect that either we or our prayers
should be accepted of God; or, that we shall with the Sacrament receive any
comfort to our souls if we come not to it with sorrow for our former
transgressions.

Now there is a twofold sorrow: 1 Servile; when we are sorry for our sins
(as some servants are, when they have offended their Masters) not because we
have sinned against such a Master, but because we have thereby made our selves
subject to the punishment due unto our offense: this is not that sorrow, which
God expects of us; for it rather drives us to despair, than to any pious
meditations. 2 Filial; when (like natural children) we grieve for our
sins; not so much in respect of the punishment due unto us, as that we have
sinned against so merciful and loving a Father. This is that true sorrow, with
which we ought to be affected: which we may obtain two ways. First by our
selves. Secondly, by the help of others also.

By our selves; and so by the consideration especially of two things: First
who it is that we have offended; even GOD himself, who in tender mercy
toward us, gave his only begotten Son to die for our sins: the
consideration of which cannot but work in us a true sorrow, that we should
offend so merciful a God; for what son is there (if he have in him the
affection of a son) but would grieve that he should offend a Father, which
has been ever loving and kind unto him?

2. The grievousnesse of our sins, which we have committed; which will
plainly appear, if we consider them either in respect of our selves, how
deadly they wound the conscience; or with reference to others, how infectious
they have been to them; whom we have often drawn into the same faults, which
we our selves have committed; and so have made them guilty of our sins, and
our selves of theirs.

The next means, to attain this sorrow, is the help of other men, who are
themselves touched with a feeling in this kind; with whom we ought to
accompany our selves, and patiently to accept of their admonitions, still
accounting them our truest friends, which most faithfully and roundly put us in
mind of our faults. The hypocrite may esteem such as desire thus to express
their love, busybodies or the like; but David's wish was that the righteous
might smite him friendly and reprove him. Psalm. 141.5. and whosoever is a
sound-hearted Christian will ever strive to make the best use of such, as he
can. Let us therefore examine our selves, whether we have made good use of
those means or not: if we have not, we ought to humble our selves before GOD
for this neglect also; earnestly beseeching him that he will work in us true
sorrow for our sins past, with desire of amendment. Whereunto that we may
the better move him, we are in the next place to lay open and confess our
sins unto GOD; which is the third thing required in our Repentance.
Confession is so necessary, that without it we can expect not pardon at
God's hands, but rather some judgment or other; and therefore Solomon says.
He, that covers his sins, shall not prosper, but who so confesses and
forsakes them shall have mercy: and Saint John persuades us hereunto by the
mercies of GOD, saying; If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to
forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. 1. Ioh. 1.9.

Now in our confession we are to observe especially three things. First what
we are to confess. Secondly to whom. Thirdly how.

As for the first, there is a twofold confession. 1 Landis, or of
Thankfulness; of which David speaks Psalm. 89.1. With my mouth will I ever be
showing thy truth; yea every day will I give thanks to thee and praise thy
name. Ps. 145.2. Which we are also daily to practice according to his example:
but this is not that confession, which is so properly meant here in the matter
of Repentance. There is therefore another, called Confessio fraudis, a
confession of sin; and this we are to make, if we will truly repent: which
ought to be, not of some sins only, but of all as far as we can call
them to mind; and especially of those beloved and bosome-sinnes to which we
are most addicted: which that we may the better do, we ought daily to renew
the memory of them in our selves; that so we may be the better able
faithfully to confess the same, as often as occasion requires.

2. We are to confess our sins, not unto men or Angels, but unto GOD, who
is the supreme Judge of all. There is indeed a time wherein we may make
confession before men; either in public, before a whole congregation by way of
penance, being by the Church thereunto commanded; or else in private; and
that, either, for satisfaction, to our Neighbor, whom we have wronged; or for
consolation, to the Minister, when our consciences are troubled. But that
confession, which is a part of our Repentance for our sins past against God,
and wherein we desire full pardon for the same, we are to make to God alone:
for he it is, who is offended, and he alone, that can forgive our sins.

3. Our Confession must not be of the heart only, but of the mouth also; for
God, who made both, expects to be honored by both; and as both have bin
unclean before him; so they ought both also to acknowledge the same, that he
may cleanse and purify both them, and with them the whole man.

Again our confession must proceed from a twofold ground. 1 Hatred of sin
because by it we dishonor GOD 2. Hope of mercy, which is that we aim at in
our confession; and it must further be qualified with sincerity, with shame
and sorrow that we have offended so gracious a GOD, least GOD reject us as
hypocritical. Let us therefore henceforth leave off censuring the faults of
other men, and begin to aggravate our own; and especially before we presume
to come to the Supper of the LORD: Let us take some time unto our selves,
wherein we may be most private; and shut our selves up in our closets, and
there humbly on our knees lay open before God those sins, which we have
committed in our life past: and that fully and faithfully; neither diminishing
the number of them, nor mincing the haynousnesse of them for God will not be
mocked. These are things, which we are to perform in respect of the time
past: as for the time to come, we must know, that he which will truly repent,
must not only turn from Evil, but also turn unto Good; and therefore, having
confessed our sins past with sorrow for them, we must (if we expect pardon)
constantly purpose for ever after, by Gods grace, to amend and reform our
lives; resolving (as much as in us lies) to avoid all occasions, which may
draw us into the like sins again, and to make better use of those means
which God has affoorded us, than we have done heretofore; and that by so much
the more, by how much we have offended so gracious a Father. But of this
resolution of amendment, more in the 12 Chapter.

CHAP. VIII. The Examination of our Faith.
THe Examination of our Faith, is that whereunto S. Paul exhorts the
Corinthians, saying, examine your selves, whether you be in the Faith or not.
2. Cor. 13.5. The necessity whereof appears even from this, that without
Faith we cannot please God in any thing we do. Heb. 11.26. much less in
this weighty business: yea Faith is so necessary, that without it we do
receive nothing at all, when we do receive; for although with our bodily
hands we receive the Bread and Wine; yet if we have not Faith, we want a hand
to receive the Body and Blood of CHRIST, and the comfort which thence arises
unto our Souls: for how can we be persuaded in our consciences, that our
receiving is acceptable unto God, and that the merits of Christ Jesus belong
unto us without Faith? it is impossible that we shou^ld receive any more
comfort than what we believe; and therefore our Savior CHRIST says; he that
believes on me, shall never thirst. Ioh. 6.35: therein implying, that he
which does not believe in him, shall ever thirst: yea, which is fearful; he
which believes not, shall be damned. Mar. 16.16.

Now that Faith which is here required of us, must not be only a general
faith, whereby we believe that the Word of God is true, and that God is a just
Judge; (for this the Devils themselves believe and tremble at it; and well
they may, considering what is due to them; eternal condemnation) but we must
go on further to a more special kind of Faith; and (which they cannot do)
apply the merits of CHRIST, and the promises of GOD made therein, unto our
Souls and Consciences; saying with Job, chap. 19. v. 25. I know that my
Redeemer lives: I know, by the knowledge of Faith; or I believe; and not only
the Redeemer of Man, but My Redeemer lives.

Of which that we may the more fully persuade our selves, we must believe;
first concerning our selves, that we are not able, of our selves, to do any
thing that is acceptable and pleasing in the sight or God; for we have nothing
but what we have received of God, as S. Paul testifies, whether good gift, or
ability of doing good.

2. Concerning the means of our Salvation, we must believe, that the merits
of CHRIST'S Death and Passion are alone sufficient for our Redemption, without
any merits at all, or satisfaction of ours.

3. Concerning GOD, we ought to believe, that, if we truly repent us of our
life past, constantly purposing to lead a new life hereafter, and sincerely use
those good means, which he shall afford us, he will then be merciful unto
us in accepting our endeavors through the merits of Christ Jesus.

4. Concerning the Sacrament, we ought to believe; that it is a means,
ordained of God, to exhibit unto us Christ Jesus with his merits, and a seal
to confirm our Faith. If, upon consideration of these particulars, we can be
thus persuaded of our own insufficiency and unworthiness, and that yet
notwithstanding upon our sincere humiliation and obedience, God will be
merciful unto us; if we can not only say in general that God is a merciful
Father, and that Christ died for the redemption of Man; but every one of us in
particular thus apply unto himself; I believe that God is my merciful Father,
and that Christ Jesus died to redeem me as well as any other; all which I
shall have plainly confirmed unto me in the receiving of this Sacrament;
wherein (I trust) God will in mercy accept me for Christ's merits, though of
my self I be unworthy: if (I say) we can find that we are not
hypocritically, but sincerely; not verbally, but heartily, thus persuaded; then
may we, having thus made peace with GOD by our Faith and Repentance, boldly
approach unto the Lord's Table.

CHAP. IX. The Examination of our Charity.
Having examined our selves in those former duties toward God, we are to go
on to another duty, which concerns our neighbor; namely, Charity; which is a
free forgiving of those that have offended us; with a testification of the
same, when occasion is offered; and a reconciliation of our selves to those,
whom we also our selves have wronged.

That we may be the better persuaded unto a due performance of this duty, we
are to observe 2 things.

1. The motives thereunto.

2. The manner how it ought to be done.

The motives, which invite us to the necessity of it, are drawn from the
consideration of these 4. things.

1. What we our selves have done unto others.

2. What harm we do unto our selves by not being in charity.

3. What they are, with whom we are offended.

4. Whence such wrongs, as we receive, do primarily come.

As for the first, we are conscious unto our selves of a twofold offense, which
we have committed.

1. Against other men; whom perhaps we have at some time or other more wronged,
then they us; or at least our consciences can tell us, that we have been
prone and ready thereunto, had we not been prevented: and how can he, which
has been forward to wrong others, make the most of every wrong offered by
others unto himself? we must here take notice of the advice of Solomon in
another case. Seek not, says he, to have thy servant curse thee; for
oftentimes thy heart knows, that thou thy self have also cursed others:
Eccles. 7.22. So also, be not hasty to aggravate the wrongs which others have
done unto thee; for thy heart can tell thee, that thou thy self have also
wronged others.

2. If this consideration prevail not with us; let us consider in the next
place, that we have daily offended GOD far more than any man can offend us:
and can any of us expect any mercy from GOD in the forgiveness of our debts,
if we show none to others in passing by small matters of offense? Small, I
say; because the greatest are but small in respect of the offenses, which we
have committed against GOD. Our Savior CHRIST told his Disciples plainly
(and in them us) Mar. 11.25. if ye do not forgive others their trespasses,
neither will your Heavenly Father forgive you your trespasses: which was
verified in the Parable of the cruel servant; who (because he had no
compassion on his fellow servants, as his Lord had pity on him) was delivered
to the tormentors, till he should pay all that was due; with this application
annexed, so likewise shall my Heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from
your hearts, forgive not every one his brother their trespasses. Matt.
18.34.35. The consideration whereof, I think, is able to move any good hearted
Christian to love his brethren, though they have offended him.

The second Motive unto this duty is taken from the consideration of the
harm, that otherwise we bring upon our own Souls; which indeed is
greater, than either we can do unto others, or they unto us.

This harm is twofolde; 1 General; namely, a stayne to all the good, which
we have: for though we speak with the tongue of Men and Angels: though we
have all other good gifts, as of Prophesying, understanding of mysteries, etc:
yet, if we have not Charity, we are nothing: 1 Cor. 13.1.2. Let us not
therefore boast of our learning and other good parts, as long as we are
without Charity; for all is nothing; no more than a sounding brass or a
tinkling cymball.

2. Particular: and so it is an hinderance, 1 to our Prayers; 2 to the right
receiving of the Sacrament. The want of Charity is an hinderance to our Prayers
in a twofolde respect.

1. Because, without Charity, we cannot expect to receive that which we pray
for; for if we pray to GOD to forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them
that trespass against us, how shall we hope that God will forgive us, if we
forgive not others, which is the condition of our Prayers? to pray for the one,
and not to perform the other, is to mock GOD in our Prayers; or rather,
miserably to deceive our selves: for, as many have not because they ask not:
so many ask and receive not, because they ask amiss: I am. 4.3: and such are
they which ask without charity; and who knows how soon they may stand in
need of GOD'S mercy?

2. It hinders our Prayers in this respect; because without Charity, we cannot
join those, with whom we are at variance, with our selves in our Prayers:
which is against the rule of our Savior CHRIST, who bids us to pray; Our
Father; and give us Our Bread; and so to join others with our selves in every
Petition: now how can we heartily pray thus for them, whom we love not? our
own consciences can sufficiently tell us, that we cannot; yea, and that we
often have been faulty herein. Wherefore, if we desire that our Prayers
should henceforth be effectual, let us follow the counsel, which Saint
Peter gives to the Husband and Wife, 1 Pet. 3.7. which is, to live together
according to knowledge, bearing one with another, that our Prayers be not
hindered: which, if we do, our Prayers shall be much furthered, as CHRIST
himself says: if two of you shall agree on earth, as touching the thing that
they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is in Heaven:
Matt. 18.19.

The want of Charity is an hinderance to our due receiving of the Sacrament:
because the Sacrament is a Seal of our union and communion, as with CHRIST, so
amongst our selves: as Saint Paul says: 1 Cor. 10.16.17. The cup of blessing
which we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? the bread
which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? for we, being
many, are one Bread and one Body, because we partake of one Bread: So that,
unless we be joined together in love, we cannot be capable of those
benefits, which otherwise would arise unto our Souls.

Again, love is the very badge, whereby we are known to be CHRIST'S
Disciples. Ioh. 13.35: by this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if
ye love one another. It is a part of that wedding garment, wherewith every one
ought to be clothed, that comes to the Lord's Table. Wherefore, if we desire
to be accepted when we do come, and there to receive the benefits of
Christ's Death and Passion, let us put on the bowels of mercy and compassion.

A third Motive unto this duty is taken from the consideration of the parties,
with whom we are offended: they are Men, yea Christians as well as our selves;
such for whom CHRIST died as well as for us. Shall we then think it hard to
suffer some small wrong at their hands, for whom CHRIST thought it not too much
to die? can we persuade our selves, that there is the love of God in us, if
we hate them whom he so loved? every one, which loves him that begat,
loves him also that is begotten of him: 1 John 5.1. and whosoever loves him
that did redeem, loves him also that is redeemed by him.

The fourth Motive unto this duty of Charity is taken from a serious
consideration of the first original, whence these wrongs proceed, which we
receive.

And here we may take notice both of the Author, and also of the Disposer
thereof. The first Author is not so much the party from whom we receive the
wrong; as the grand-Enemy of both us and them; the Devil: who well knows,
that a house divided against it self cannot stand; and therefore strives by
all means to set us at variance among our selves, though sometimes upon small
occasions; that so thereby, hindering us from the performaunce of good duties
(as the receiving or the Sacrament, and such like) which are the means of our
Salvation, he may the more easily tempt us to worse employments, while others
are better exercised; and so make his side the stronger against us: and who
knows what power it may please God to give him against us at such times?
Wherefore, as we love our own safety, let us seek to cross him, who thus
opposes us by his temptations: and if we will needs be at strife, let it be
with him, who will never be at quiet with us, until he have gotten the upper
hand of us: which we may the more easily persuade our selves unto; if we have
respect not so much to other men's wrongful actions, as to his wicked
suggestions, the cause of all; and assure our selves, that, in putting up a
wrong, we right our selves, and cross him; which should be our chiefest aim.

Again, as the Devil is the Author of our wrongs: so GOD, who is the
Disposer of all things has a hand in it: who permits the Devil thus far
to provoke us: perhaps for the trial of our constancy and patience, or for
other some ends best known unto himself: and, if we could but see, that the
finger of GOD is in our Crosses, we would patiently answer with David, Psalm.
39.10. I will become dumb, and open not my mouth, because it is thy doing; and
so commit our cause to him, that he might make our righteousness clear.
Psalm. 37.6.

These are the chiefest Motives to persuade us to this duty of Love and
Charity; to all which we may add another, taken from the exceeding love of
God to us; who so loved us, without any love received first from us, that he
sent his Son to be a propitiation for our sins. 1 John. 4.10. whence the
Apostle gathers this powerful consequence; if GOD so loved us, we ought
also to love one another: verse: 11. Which that we may the better do, let us
in the next place see the manner how it ought to be performed.

Here we are to have respect both to the time past, and also to come.

As for the time past, either we have vvronged others, or they us. If we
have vvronged others, we ought to perform two things. 1. undo that which
we have done, by making restitution as far as in us lies: according to the
example of Zacheus Luke 19.8. who was willing to restore fourefold whatsoever
he had taken from any man by false accusation: such ought we to be, ready to
make good, whatsoever we have taken from any man, and to give satisfaction for
any vvrong that we have done. Neither is it sufficient to be vvilling thus
to make satisfaction, when we are moved thereunto: but we must also in the
second place seek peace with those, whom we have wronged, though we be not
ask't: which is the Counsel of Christ himself: Matt. 5.23.24. If thou bring
thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy brother has ought against
thee, leave thy gift before the Altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled to
thy brother: he says not; stay till he come to thee, or, be reconciled when
he comes; but go thou to him. And so David also advises us Psalm. 34.14.
Seek peace and ensue it: stay not till it be offered to, or required of thee;
but seek it. But perhaps those (whom we have offended) are far off, and we
cannot come near them; or near, and will not be reconciled to us; what shall
we do in this case? Here we ought to use all means that we can, for the
procuring of peace and quietness; but if either occasion or acceptance be
denied us, we need not doubt but that God will be pleased to accept of our
desire.

Now, if others have wronged us, we must (though perhaps it may seem somewhat
hard) freely forgive them; loving even them that hate us; whereunto our Savior
Christ often admonishes us in every Gospel; saying; If thy brother trespass
against thee seven times a day, thou shall forgive him: Luke 17.4. And again,
I say unto you, love your enemies; bless them that curse you Matt. 5.44. But
some one may say, such an one has vvronged me so much, that flesh and blood
cannot take it. It is true, if thou consult with flesh and blood, it will seem
hard to bear the least wrong: but flesh is not a friend, whom we may safely
consult; but rather a bosom enemy, whom we ought to resist: if we ask
counsel of Christ (whose counsel we ought and may most safely follow) he
will bid us go and be reconciled: and Saint Paul bids us to feed our
enemies, and to overcome evil with good: Rom: 11.21. and Solomon can tell us,
that it is the glory of a man to pass over a transgression. Pro. 19.11. As for
revenge, it is not for us to meddle with it; because the Lord himself says,
Deuteronomy. 32.35. To me belongs vengeance and recompense: and Saint James will
assure us, that to have bitter envyings and strife in the heart, is wisdom
which descends not from above; but is earthly, sensual, divelish: but that
wisdom, which is from above, is easy to be entreated, and full of mercy: I
am: 3.17. wherefore let us greiue at such wrathful motions, assuring our
selves that it is a point of heavenly wisdom to forbear; and certainly, if
we can but once find that God has wrought in us a readiness to forgive those,
which have wronged us, and to pray for their conversion, we may esteem it an
evident sign of Sanctification.

As for the time to come, that we may the better preserve the bond of Charity,
we must resolve carefully to observe these 2 sorts of rules. 1. How we may
keep peace with others. 2 How others may do the like with us.

As for the first, because others may outwardly wrong us either in word or
deed, that we may in both avoid discontent and strife thereupon, we must
propose unto our selves a twofold rule.

1 Concerning their words; which is the rule in Solomon, Prove. 7.21. namely:
That we take no heed unto all words, that are spoken: for this is that, which
often stirs up strife amongst us, which otherwise might easily, and without
any prejudice be avoided, if men were not too inquisitiue and ready to take
notice of every thing that is spoken: and therefore we should here not
entertain but fleight, yea reject such men, who, under pretense of love unto
us, will whisper in our ears, and maliciously inform us against such or such
an one; whom Solomon calls pickthanks, whisperers, tale-bearers, such as will
separate chief friends: Prove. 16.28. for occasion of separation may be given
(if so taken) even between friends; as we often see that he, which is
singularly affected to another, may hastily speak some reproachful words of
him; which perhaps he will presently be sorry for, and not speak the like
again; yet this shall be enough for the breach of charity, if it be in the
audience or a whisperer: who (to speak the truth) is a mere incendiary,
that will ever be adding fuel to the fire of contention. Whence Saint James
calls the tongue a fire, a world of iniquity, that sets on fire the whole
course of Nature. I am. 3.6. And Solomon says, that without wood, the fire is
quenched; and without a talebearer, strife cease. Prove. 26.20.

The second rule, whereby we may keep peace with others, is concerning other
men's actions: which is, that we so take them (though sometimes wrongful) that
we be not easily provoked thereby; for a hasty and furious discontent upon some
small occasion, does often break out to the breach of charity; whereas a
seasonable deliberation would mitigate the matter, and so cover all in
silence. And therefore Saint Paul tells us, that Charity suffers long, and is
not easily provoked. 1. Cor. 13.4.5. If we can but make true use of these 2
rules, we may easily, for our parts, live at peace with others. Secondly we
must endeavor that others also by our carriage may do the like with us: to
which purpose we must take away, first a common fault amongst us, which is a
maine cause of strife and enmity: 2 the occasion thereof.

The fault it self is railing, scandalous and reproachful speaking: which is
so frequent, that few or none (if we look narrowly into our words) but are
conscious unto themselves hereof; but so heinous in it self, that Saint Paul
ranketh it with robbery and extortion, 1. Cor. 6.10. saying, that neither
thieves, nor revilers, nor extortioners shall inherit the kingdom of God; and
so pernicious also unto the sweet society of men; that it is that breath, which
often blows the coals of contention so far, that they cannot be quenched
again without blood: and daily experience teaches us, that there is no such
common cause of strife and debate, as scandalous terms which are so often
heard amongst us: so that, if we can but avoid these, we shall take away the
very ground upon which our wrongful actions are builded; and therefore Saint
James, beseeching us by the name of brethren, exhorts us not to speak evil
one of another: I am: 4.11. and Saint Peter's advise is, that we lay aside all
evil speakings, and, as newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the word.
1. Pet. 2.1.

Now, that our speech of others may be such as it ought to be, let us follow
the advice of Solomon; whose counsel is, that it be friendly: Prove. 18.24: A
man that has friends, ought to show himself friendly: not uttering any thing;
that may tend to their disgrace; least, by such discourtesies, he loose their
good liking; but rather endeavor by fair, and courteous speeches, to knit
their hearts faster unto him.

Neither yet can we easily avoid this fault, unless in the second place we
take away the occasion of it; which is a tickling desire, that most men are
affected with, to hear the faults of other men (though perhaps less than
their own) laid open and spoken against: which quickly begets a suspicion
of their vvorth, and hereupon we too too readily build some calumnious report
or other. If it shall therefore happen at any time, that we hear the slips
and errors of another; let us not be delighted therein, but rather seek to
cover them; for he, that covers a fault, seeks love: Prove. 17.9. and not
he, which desires to have them laid open. This is that which we ought to
do, both for the restoring and preserving of charity; wherein we must
necessarily examine our selves before we come to partake with others at the
Lords Table. If upon examination we find any thing wanting; either that we
are not in charity with others, or others with us; let us according to these
rules seek by all means to make good what is wanting, and so come.

CHAP. X. Of Premeditation and Prayer.
THus of the first thing to be performed in our preparation, namely Examination
of our own fitnes to receive. The second is the Premeditation of the benefits,
which we are to receive: which we must not omit, that we may the better be
stirred up to seek God, and to communicate at his Table with joy and
gladness; for there is nothing which makes us more cold and backward in such
duties, than this, that we have not sufficiently tasted how good the Lord is
to those which seek him; the consideration whereof is alone able to move any
man to a longing desire after him. Wherefore, having searched into our own
estate by a serious examination, least we should yet fall back to a lukewarm
carelessness of what we are to do, (to which the Devil will be ever ready to
tempt us) and so become the more unfit to communicate at the Lords Table,
either to Gods glory or our own comfort, let us ever quicken our devotion
with a seasonable premeditation, before we come, of the benefits which we
are to receive by coming. All which are comprehended in this one word life;
which we receive in the Lords Supper, by receiving Christ, who is Life it
self. John. 14.6.

Now the life of a Christian is either the life of Grace here, or Glory
hereafter.

The life of Grace (which we obtain in this Supper) consists of 2 things.

1. A happy freedom from a twofold evil: first of sin; from which we are
freed by the Death of Christ: whose blood (if we rely on him) will make our
sins (though as red as scarlet) to become as white as wool.

2l of Punishment; from which Christ has redeemed us by the shedding of his
blood; so that there is no comdemnation to the^ which are in Christ Jesus. Romans
8.1. whence we may boldly say, who is he that condemns? it is Christ that
died; yea rather that is rise^ again, who is even at the right hand of God,
making intercession for us: verse. 34.

The second thing is a comfortable enjoyment of a threefold good.

1 An inseparable union both with Christ our head, from whom nothing shall be
able to separate us: Rom: 8.38. as also with our brethren and fellow members in
love and charity; which David accounted a good and joyful thing: Psalm. 133.1.2
A blessed strengthening of our faith, whereof this Sacrament is a sure seal,
(as before) whence it shall come to pass, that we shall be able to resist
the temptations of the Devil, (who striveth by all means to make shipwreck
of our faith and us) and reply with David, Psalm. 16.9. I have set God always
before me, for he is on my right hand, therefore shall I not fall: this is
that which will make our hearts glad, and our flesh to rest in hope, as it is
ver. 10. which brings in a third good, and that not the least, that God
vouchsafes to his people in this world, namely, Peace of Conscience.

This is that which we are most carefully to seek after, and which in the
latter end, will be more worth unto us, than ten thousand worlds of pleasure
which we can enjoy: and therefore David's counsel is, Keep innocence, and take
heed unto the thing that is right, for that shall bring a man peace at the
last. Psalm. 37.38. Now wherein can we better keep innocence, than by being
carefully and faithfully exercised in Gods service? and what greater comfort of
heart, and what greater peace of conscience can redound to a poor sinful
soul, than the full assurance of the forgiveness of his sins, and his
inseparable union with Christ Jesus which we receive, if we receive aright,
by receiving the Sacrament. This is that, besides which there is nothing in us
that shall be able to strengthen and comfort us against our enemy the Devil,
in the day of our departure hence; who will then be sure to affright us with
the vglines of our sins (though now in policy he cover them) that so he may,
if it be possible, drive us to despair of Gods mercy toward us: then (I
say) by the help of a good conscience, as Samuel resolutely spoke unto the
Israelites, 1. Sam. 12.3. saying, Behold, here I am; witness against me before
the Lord and before his anointed; whose ox have I taken? whom have I
defrauded? and I will restore it you: so shall we be able to nonplus our
calumniating enemy, and say; Behold, Satan, here I am, witness against me
before the Lord, wherein have I done those evil things which I should not have
done? wherein have I omitted those good duties which I should have done? when
did I at any time despair of Gods mercy, or neglect the same? when did I
profane, or abuse his holy sabboths? when did I conte^ne or neglect his word
and Sacraments? here I am; witness against me: but my conscience tells me to
my comfort, that I have diligently, according to my power, performed what I
ought, and therefore thou have no part in me. If we can thus clear our
selves, then shall we be able to say with Saint Paul, 2. Tim. 4.7.8. The time
of my departure is at hand, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my
course, I have kept the faith: and that which follows hereupon, is,
Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness. This Crown is that
benefit, which we shall receive, after this life of grace is ended, in the
life of glory. In the mean time, while we live here, we shall receive,
though not this Crown actually, yet the full assurance thereof, believing
with Saint Paul, that it is laid up for us, which the Lord the righteous Judge
shall give us at the last day.

These are the benefits, which every true communicant receives at the Lords
Table: wherefore (as we desire to receive these benefits, which pass all
understanding) let us carefully meditate thereon, that we may be inflamed
with the desire of them.

But (because all that we can do, is nothing without Gods blessing) we
are in the next place to pray to God, that he will be pleased to bless our
endeavors, and to accept us in his Son; which is the third duty required of
us in our Preparation: without the due performance of which, though
otherwise we have diligently prepared our selves, we cannot expect to
receive any comfort of soul with the Bread and Wine; because God only gives
that unto us, and he is debtor unto no man: let us therefore seek unto him by
prayer for a blessing, who is the giver of all blessings. This we ought to
do first in private, setting aside some convenient times, wherein we may
freely betake our selves to this duty: but especially in the morning, when we
are to receive, we should rise early and consider what we are to do that
day, namely, sit at the Lords Table, and therefore be sure that we consecrate
our selves to God by Prayer and good meditations. Secondly in public with the
Congregation; where we ought to present our selves at the very beginning, that
so we may join together in all things which we are to perform, and there at
our first entrance power forth unto God (as at all other times) this or the
like prayer.

O Lord stregthen me against the temptations of Satan who striveth to draw
away my heart from thee; and accept the prayers, which I shall now make unto
thee through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Which done, join with the Congregation in such prayers as are then used.

In both we are carefully to consider 2. things.

1. For who^ we ought to pray; and that is, not for our selves only, but for
others also, according to the Counsel of Saint James. Chap. 4. v. 16. Pray one
for another; which we learn from the pattern of prayer, the Lord's Prayer,
left unto us by Christ himself.

2 How we ought to pray; and that is, first in humility, with a feeling of our
own wants, for which the poor Publican was rather justified than the proud
Pharisee for his vain boasting. Luke 18.14. Secondly in a settled and fervent
devotion: when we pray, our minds ought not to be fixed on any thing else
(as many, God knows, are) for God will have the whole heart or none. 3. In
faith; with confidence that we shall receive what we ask; for he, which
wavereth, that is, not beleiveth, Let not that man think that he shall
receive any thing of the Lord. I am. 1.7. If we be deficient in any one of
these conditions, we ask amiss, and so shall receive accordingly. Wherefore,
as we desire to receive benefit and comfort by the Lord's Supper, let us seek
unto God for it: and as we hope to have our prayers heard; let us pray both for
our selves and others in true humility, fervencie and devotio^, and assured
hope of obtaining.

Chap. XI. Of Meditation at the Lord's Table.
Having thus fitted ourselves by examination of our estate, state premeditation
of the benefits, and prayer for a blessing, we may assure our selves that we
have prepared our selves for the receiving of the holy Communion (though by
reason of our weakness, not in that measure, yet) in that right manner as we
ought: and so have performed the first duty required of us, namely diligent
preparation; whereupon we may boldly and chearefully (otherwise not) present
our selves unto the Lord's Table: where we are to be excercised in a second
duty, namely, a seasonable Meditation.

This Meditation must be threefold. 1 Before. 2 In the time of the
Consecration. 3 After the same, or, in the time of Receiving.

Before the Consecration, when the Minister is going toward the Table,
Meditate on these 2. things. 1 Seeing the table spread, and the Elements set
thereon, we are to consider, what place we are come unto; namely the Table of
the great King of Heaven and Earth; and that therefore we ought most carefully
and reverently, to behave our selves, both in body by a reverent and seemly
gesture: and also in mind, laying aside all earthly cogitations whatsoever: and
that in a twofold respect. 1 Because the place it self is holy and therefore
ought not to be profaned by any unseemly behavior; for these must be laid
aside, as GOD commanded Moses. Exodus 3.5. Put off thy shoes from off thy feet,
for the place whereon thou stand, is holy ground. 2 Because as the place is
holy, so also God himself is there amongst us, as he says Matthew. 18.20. Where
two or three are gathered together in my name there am I in the midst of them:
He is in the midst of us, beholding not only our outward gesture but our very
hearts and affections; and ready both to reward those that honor him by
reverencing; and to punish all such as dishonor him by profaning and abusing
his holy ordinance: which we shall do if our carriage be not with fear and
reverence.

2. When we hear the Minister say, Draw near and take this Sacrament; we
must consider that God by his Minister freely inviteth us to his Table; then
let every one lift up his heart by this or the like ejaculation.

Lord, I am not worthy by reason of my sins to approach before thee; but
seeing it has pleased thee in mercy to call me, behold, in humility and
obedience I come.

Then join in prayer with the Minister. In the time of the Consecration we
ought seriously to settle our minds on the Elements, and the Actions about
the^, for the better stirring up of our devotion: and so meditate thus. 1. When
we hear the Minister read the words of Christ's Institution, and see him take
the Bread and Wine; we ought joyfully and thankfully to meditate on the great
love of God in setting apart his Son for the Redemption of us his enemies;
which is represented in the taking of these Elements, and setting the^ apart to
be distributed unto us, as seals and pledges of the same: joyfully (I say) in
respect of the benefit, which does thereby come unto us, and thankfully in
respect of God's love, which is greater tha^ all the hearts of men joined in one
are able to express.

2. When we see the Bread broken and the Wine powered out, we ought to be
exercised in a twofold meditation. 1 Of comfort; considering that the Bread is
broken and the Wine powered out, not only to be the more divisible to the
Communicants, but chiefly to represent unto us the crucifying of Christ's Body,
and the shedding of his Blood for our sins: for he was broken for our
iniquities. Isai: 53.5. By which is not meant that any bone of him was broken,
but that he was crucified: whence we should every one of us gather this
comfort, saying to our souls: Christ Jesus was broken on the Cross, and
suffered an accursed death for me; by whose merits, I trust, I shall escape the
curse of that death, which is due for my sins unto me. And here by the way
we may take notice how the Papists do err in delivering whole cakes unto the
Communicants, which represe^t Christ whole not crucified, and so afford the
less comfort.

2. Of sorrow, and that for our sins; the grievousnesse of which was such that
they could not be satisfied for, without the precious Blood of Christ Jesus:
these were the spears that pierced him to the Soul; that was that, which drew
his precious Blood from his side: and the consideration of this should breed in
us a hearty sorrow, that we so vile wretches, as we are, should thus wound so
loving a Redeemer: and certainly if we do not grieve for those sins, for
which he has so much smarted, we may justly fear that the stupid Earth, the
hard rocks, and the dark graves, which trembled, rent, and opened at his
death, shall one day rise up in judgment against us and condemn us. When
therefore we see the Bread broken etc: let every one thus meditate; O vile
wretch that I am, that I by my sins should thus wound my merciful and loving
Redeemer.

After the Consecration, when the Minister is receiving himself (considering
that we are in the presence of God, who sees our very hearts) we should
power out our souls unto him in this or the like soliloquie.

O Sweet Jesus, I do humbly acknowledge with the Centurion that I am not
worthy, that thou should enter under my roof, much less to come and suppe
and dwell with me: but seeing it is thy good pleasure to vouchsafe me this
favor, cleanse me, I beseech thee, from my sins, that I may entertain thee
in a pure and sanctified heart, strenthen my faith that I may fully rely on thy
mercy; comfort me with thy blessed spirit and so dwell with me for ever.
grant this, O blessed Redeemer, for thy mercies sake, Amen.

Again, before we receive, when the Minister is coming to distribute, and
offers the Elements unto us (considering that Christ with all his benefits is
offered unto us by GOD, as well as the Elements by the Minister) let every one
meditate thus with himself: Christ with the benefits of his Death does now
come to sanctify and comfort my sinful Soul, in full assurance whereof I am
to receive these signs and Seals at the hand of his Minister; And so as he
stretches out his hand to receive these, let him lift up his soul in faith
with this or the like ejaculation. Come, Lord Jesus unto thy humble servant, as
my trust is thou will. This we are to do after the Consecration, before we
receive.

After this in the act of receiving we are to perform these two things.

1 While we eat the bread, meditate every one thus.

Blessed Jesus, I do heartily believe that thou wast crucified on the Cross,
and that for me as well as for any other, and, as I have now received this
Bread broken, whereby my Body shall be nourished: So I believe that I have
also received spiritually thy Body crucified with all the benefits thereof; the
full pardon of all my sins; and the strengthening and refreshing of my
sinful soul; this I believe, Lord, help my unbelief for thy mercies sake.
Amen.

2. When we drink the wine, and while we feel it in our stomach, we should
thus meditate.

Most blessed Redeemer, I do truly believe that thy Blood was shed out of thy
Body, as verily as I have received this wine apart from the bread; and that for
the remission of my sins, as well as any others: and I do also believe that
with this wine I have received thy precious Blood, whereby my sins are fully
washed away and my soul purified: and that according to thy promise, I shall
never hunger nor thirst any more; because with this Bread and Wine I have
received thy flesh, which is meat indeed, and thy Blood which is drink indeed;
with which I humbly pray thee to cherish and nourish my poor soul, and to
increase in me hearty love to these my fellow members, who have now
participated with me, that so we may serve thee as we ought, and that nothing
may be able to separate us from thy love; which I humbly beseech thee to grant
for thy mercies sake. Amen.

Chap. XII. Of Practice.
THis is that, whereon we ought to meditate in the time of receiving; which
being duly performed, we ought in the next place to take notice of a religions
Practice of those things, which are to be observed afterward in our life and
conversation.

These things may be reduced to 2 heads: namely, such as we are to do, 1 in the
Church. 2 at home.

In the Church we must perform 2 duties.

1 Having ended the former meditations, we ought each man in particular to
give thanks unto God for his mercy, in this or the like form.

O Lord, I humbly bless thy holy name, for that thou have in mercy vouchsafed
to accept me at this thy Table amongst the rest of thy elect and chosen
people; and that thou have so graciously fed my languishing soul with the
precious body and blood of Christ Jesus. I confess, O Lord, that I am not
worthy of the least of thy favors; but seeing it has pleased thee thus to
have mercy upon me; give me grace, I humbly beseech thee, to walk worthy of
this thy mercy in newness of life to the glory of thy holy name, and the
salvation of my sinful soul; even for thy mercies. sake Amen.

2. After this every one ought to join with the Congregation in prayer and
thanksgiving, praising God for his goodness, and so depart lovingly together
with joyful hearts that God has so graciously entertained us his unworthy
servants.

After we are come home, we are further to take notice of 2. duties.

1. Meditation; meditating seriously what comfort we have received by being at
the Lord's Table. Upon which consideration, if we find any good motions in our
selves, any assurance of the forgiveness of our sins, we ought by all means
to cherish the same by the comfortable remembrance of Christ's Death and
Passion for us; and so much the more lift up our thankful hearts unto God for
his mercy; as Saint Paul Sweetly exhorts the Colossians, saying, as ye have
received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him; rooted and built up in
him, and established in the faith, abou^ding therein with thanksgiving: Col.
2.6.7. And this is that, which Solomon makes a true note of a righteous man;
that he will ever be increasing those good gifts, which he has in him; when
he says Prove. 4.18. The path of the just is as the shining light, that shines
more and more unto perfect day. When therefore we shall find a little faith, a
little love in us (as, GOD knows, the best of us has little enough) let us
desire to increase it, and to have our corruptions diminished; for these
desires are a beginning of Grace, and a sign of a heart well affected: and of
this desire we cannot make a better trial, than by considering whether we
long to receive again the next time; that so these good beginnings may be
the more perfected.

But if we find not this comfort in us; let us search into our selves,
whether there be not some sin in us as yet unrepented of, and whether we
came not so well prepared to the Communion as we should: if so, then ought we
to humble our selves before God, with sorrow for this our negligence: if we
cannot see this in us, but that we came well prepared; then must we patiently
wait the Lord's leisure, and pray earnestly that he will give us the comfort
of his Spirit; with full assurance that he will grant our request, when it
shall be best for us.

The second duty, wherein we must be excercised at home, is a resolution or
constant purpose of leading a new life, whereunto Saint Paul earnestly inviteth
us Romans 6.19. saying, As you have yielded your members servants to uncleanness,
and to iniquity, unto iniquity even so now yield your members servants to
righteousness unto holiness; and why? because being made free from sin, and
become servants unto God, we have our fruit (not unto sin, but) unto
holiness. ver. 22. Shall we then be made free from sin, and become the
servants of God, and yet return unto sin again? God forbid: if we do so, we
receive the grace of God in vain; which S. Paul beseeches the Corinthians to
take heed of. 2 Cor. 6.1: now what is it but to receive the Grace of GOD in
vain, when, after we have escaped the pollutions of this world through the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, we are again entangled
therewith; and, as the sow to the mire, return to our former course of life
again? Saint Peter will assure us, that it had been better never to have
known the way of righteousness, than, after we have known it, to turn from
the holy Commandment delivered unto us. 2 Pet. 2.21. And well were it, if
this were duly considered of some, who think it sufficient to live precisely
that day, in which they receive, (though perhaps they can scarce do that) and
presently afterward live as profanely and loosely as ever they did; but we
must know that GOD expects a daily reformation of those, which present
themselves at his Table; and, if we do not duly consider of it, we shall one
day with fear and trembling acknowledge it; as Saint Paul plainly tells the
Hebrews; saying If we sin wilfully after we have received the knowledge of
the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a certain
fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation. Heb. 10.26.27.

Now that we may the better lead a new life before GOD, we must consider that
to the direction of a Christian life 3 things are to be known of us.

1 What we are to pray for: 2. What we ought to believe. 3. What we are to do.

The first being rightly known, afford's us a perfect direction for our Hope:
the second for our faith; the third for our Piety.

The 1st we have fully set down in the Lords Prayer, composed by CHRIST
himself as a most exact rule for all our Prayers.

The second in the Creed, which contains the Articles of our Faith, contained
in the doctrine of the Apostles; called therefore the Apostle's Creed.

The third in the 10. Commandments, written by the finger of God himself, and
revealed unto us in his holy Word to be our direction both for our holiness
toward God and our charity toward our neighbors.

These 3 rules of our life (the Lords Prayer, the Creed, and the 10.
Co^maundeme^ts) are daily repeated of those of the meaner and more simple sort;
but yet (God knows) not so well understood, as they should be, by diverse to
who^ God has give^ a greater measure of knowledge: never did our Land, yea
almost every house, more freely abound with fruitful and comfortable
expositions upon these rules, than now they do; yet who looks so far into
them, as to know thereby the full extent of any of them? Some few indeed there
are (whereof GOD increase the number) who make a conscionable use of those good
means of Salvation: whereas others are well content, yea with delight desire
to read (and that upon the best days) vain and idle discourses, which are so
far from furthering us in the way of salvation, as that (like tares) they
choke the Word of God, and hinder the growth thereof, as we too often see by
our daily experience. There is indeed a time for all things; for pleasure, as
well as profit: but shall we spend the best of our time, yea (as some do most
miserably) the greatest part of our time in such vanities, and altogether
neglect those good helps for our direction; esteeming them too plain and
homely, or not pleasant enough for our witty inventions, and acute judgments?
Let such know; that they, which thus neglect their own good, are guilty to
themselves of a twofold crime,

1. Of unnatural wrong unto their own souls, in stopping their eyes from
beholding the light of salvation, which otherwise would shine unto them;
dealing herein as injuriously with themselves, as Papists do with their
deceived Laity; trayning them up in ignorance and blind devotion.

2. Of a twofold ingratitude: first toward those painful Authors, which
(like fruitful lights) have spent themselves for the directing of others;
whose labors do well deserve to be accepted amongst us; and we shall prove
our selves but unthankful members of the Church, wherein we live, if we make
not that good use of those lights, for which they were intended.

Secondly (which is the greatest) we show our selves unthankful toward GOD
himself, who has in mercy raised up such means for the helping of our
infirmities; whereof others, better deserving than our selves, have been
destitute. Having therefore such helps so freely offered unto us, let us (if
we desire to live more righteously before God) use them more carefully than
we have done: endeavoring in the first place to know what is contained in
each Petition of the LORD'S Prayer; that so, when we pray, we may know what
that is, for which we pray; and secondly, for our Faith, to know the full
extent of every Article thereof; that so we may truly understand what that
is, which we confess we believe: and because both of these are little
availeable, except our piety be such as it ought to be, let us especially be
exercised in the Commandments of GOD; that thereby we may understand what
we are commanded, and what forbidden. These are the direct courses which
every true-hearted Christian ought to take, and which will one day prove truly
comfortable, when others, vain and frivolous, deceive us.

But because our Piety and religious behaiuour is the chiefest thing required
on our part unto the leading of a new life, let us further see what rules we
may yet observe for the directing thereof.

This Piety of ours is seen in these 2 things. 1 Our Words. 2 Our Works and
Actions.

As for our words, we should follow the counsel of S. Paul to the Ephesians,
which is, that we avoid in our talk, all filthiness, all foolish talking, and
iestings which are not convenient. Ephesians. 5.4: and he gives a very good reason
for it. 1 Cor. 15.33. because evil communications corrupt good manners; and
that oftentimes both in the speaker and hearer. But some will say, what? must we
never use any pleasant discourses? no jesting at all? yes, there is a time for
that also; so it be, according to the rule of S. Peter, such as God may thereby
be glorified. 1. Pet. 4.11: otherwise we may not: stir up our minds we may
to an honest cheerfulness by civil and modest jesting; but obscene and
profane, which S. S. Paul calls filthiness; vain and idle, which he terms
foolish talking, and jesting, which is not convenient; such, I say, ought not
to be once named amongst us as becomes Saints: for hereby both speaker and
hearer are often stirred up to loose and vain gestures, or at leastwise to
conceive and think of them, and so God's Name is much dishonored. Miserable it
is to observe how frequently such speeches do pass for current under the
assumed titles of merry discourses: but let us remember what our Savior Christ
has said: Mat: 12.36.37. that by our words we shall be justified, and by our
words we shall be condemned, and that every idle word, which we shall speak, we
shall give an account thereof in the day of judgment: Must we give an account
of our Words, and shall we not then be careful of the^? Must we answer for
every idle word, and shall we fill up our discourses with blasphemies, with
obscene and scurrilous jestings? if we must give an account of the^, certainly
these will ly heavy upon us: Wherefore let us rather with David set a watch
before our mouth, and bridle up our lips, that we offend not in our tongue:
let us be careful that our words be such, as Solomon commends, Prove.
25.11. fitly spoken, which are like apples of gold in pictures of silver; that
is; such words, as contain wholesome matter, and are spoken in a comely and
decent manner, are as acceptable and pleasant to the ear of a judicious
hearer, as silver pictures, adorned with golden apples, are unto the eye of the
beholder.

For our Works, we must, as Saint Paul counsels, walk as children of the
light, ever proving what is acceptable unto the Lord. Ephesians. 5.8.10: having our
conversation honest among men, that they seeing our good works, may glorify
God thereby.

How to direct both our Words and Actions aright, we must chiefly observe
these 2 things, 1 how to avoyde that which is evil in both; 2 how to seek and
obtain, that which is good.

To avoyde that which is in evil, 4 rules are especially to be observed.

The first concerns the beginnings of evil; namely, that we watch and pray,
according to our Sauiour's counsel and practice: Matt: 26.41: least we enter
into temptation, and so be drawn away to sin against God; for of our selves
we are prone thereunto, and unable to avoyde it: and if it go so far that
we be once tempted to sin, and feel in us any motion thereunto, we should
endeavor to resist this temptation in the beginning, and reason thus with our
selves; Did not I lately receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, where I had
a full pardon of all my sins (past) sealed unto me, and where I vowed and
promised to lead a new life before God, how then can I do this thing, and
break my promise with God? I have put off my coat of sin, and therefore I
may not (I will not) put it on again: thus ought we to resist temptations at
the first, lest they get the dominion over us.

The Second rule concerns the occasions of evil, which we must necessarily
avoid, if we desire to avoid the evil it self.

The Occasions are diverse, but especially these 2.

1 Idleness, from which proceed many (and these sometimes heinous and crying)
sins which the Son of Syrach calls therefore the teacher of much evil:
Ecclus. 33.27. To avoyde this, we must be careful to employ our selves
diligently in that vocation, wherein God has placed us; for otherwise the
Devil will be sure to take an occasion to tempt even the best of us: as we see
in David, who was a man after God's own heart; and yet, when he was walking on
the roof of his house (while Ioab and the rest were in the battle) he was
tempted to commit adultery with Bathsheba the wife of Vriah: 2. Sam. 11.2. and
how many do we daily see drawn away to lasciuiousnes, drunkenness, and such
like vices by this occasion? Let us therefore carefully exercise our selves in
our Vocation, that the Devil may not have an opportunity to set upon us.

2. Bad Company, than which, nothing almost is more forceable to draw us away
to that which is evil: Let Joseph but live in Pharaoh's Court, and he shall
soon learn to swear by the life of Pharaoh. Genesis 42.15: and if Israel abide
in Shittim, the people will soon commit whoredom with the daughters of Moah.
Numb. 25.1: wherefore GOD commands his people to go out of Babylon, lest
they be partakers of her sins: Rev: 18.4. and often are we partakers of
other men's sins by frequenting their society; yea, (which is miserable to
observe) diverse of ingenuous disposition and civil behavior, have by degrees
been drawn away to looseness and riot, by associating themselves
unfortunately with vain and dissolute persons. And we may herein observe the
policy of our enemy the Devil; who, when he finds any man well disposed of
himself, and not ready to yield to others temptations will beset him (if he
can possibly) with this snare, that so he may either by the wicked persuasions
or bad examples of others, steal away his heart, and allure him to that which
is evil: which should be a forceable Caveat unto us, to make us heedful what
company we fall into, and with whom we acquaint our selves, if we have any
care of our souls: seasonable is the counsel of Solomon herein, who advises
us 1 concerning the examples of others, not to comforme our selves unto them by
walking in their ways, but to avoyde and pass away: Prove. 4.15. 2 Concerning
their allurements, by no means to harken unto the^; if sinners entice thee,
consent thou not. Prove. 1.10. If they say; come let us take our pleasure in
this or that sort, let us go to such a place, where we may freely do what we
will, if they thus draw thee, walk not in the way with them, refrain thy
foot from their paths. 3 As for familiarity with others, he advises us to
make no friendship with an angry man, and with a furious man not to go. why?
least thou learn his way, and get a snare unto thy soul: Prove. 22.24.25. Will thou avoid gaming, swearing, etc. then shun that company wherein those vices
are practiced, or else thou will rather increase them in thee. But some will
say; such an one is my familiar friend, and shall I leave him? that will be
taken unkindly; shall I get my self discredit, where I may avoid it? yes, be
he never so near unto thee, yet if he in his courses forsake GOD, forsake
thou him, lest GOD forsake thee: yea thou may therein show thy self a very
friend to him in winning him from his evil ways by thy forsaking of him; for
so says Saint Paul 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. If any man obey not our word, note that man,
and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed: it may be when he sees
thee leave him, he will begin to think of his bad life, and so be ashamed
of it, and by degrees leave it: therefore leave bad company for their sakes
also, as well as thine own.

The third rule is, how we may restrain our selves when we are about to
undertake any sinful action: and that is, by setting before our eyes this
Caveat, Godsees: for his eyes are over all. Prove. 15.3. and therefore
whatsoever we do, we should consider that we do it in his presence: which,
being conscionably considered, cannot but breed in us both reverence and
watchfulness; reverence in respect of his Majesty; watchfulness in respect
of his all-seeing Eye, that we offend him not, who will espy in us the least
fault, be it never so secretly kept from the World.

Again, consider how merciful God has ever been unto thee in delivering
thee from this or that danger, from this or that sin, whereinto thou must
necessarily have fallen, if he had not vpheld thee; and then answer the
Devil when he tempts thee, as Joseph did his wicked mistress; how can I
do this wickedness, and sin against my God? God has been thus and thus
mercifulll unto me, and shall I yet offend him and provoke him to anger? God
forbid.

The fourth rule is for our direction, when we are fallen into any sin;
which is this. When we are overtaken with any sin (as who is not every day)
we should presently lament it, and not suffer it to go on any further, least
it come to a custom, and so stick fast in us: this is a difference which
Solomon puts between the righteous and the wicked. Prove. 24.16. A just man
(says he) falls seven times and rises up again, but the wicked shall fall
into mischief: the just man, though he fall into any sin, rises again by
repentance; but the wicked sinketh deeper down, even to the pit of destruction.

These are the chiefest rules to be observed for the avoiding of that which is
evil.

The next thing, which we must look into, is, how we may obtain that, which
is Good. Here we must principally observe these 2 things: 1 make use of al
occasions thereunto: 2 make conscience of every good duty. As for the first, we
must first, according to the example of S. Paul, Phil. 3.14. use all diligence
that we may press on toward the mark, still endeavoring to be better and
better: and when we find our selves deficient in the performance of any good
duty (as GOD knows we are in all) we should do the same again and endeavor
to perform it more servently and seriously; that so we may come to a greater
measure of goodness. Again, we should gladly embrace the company of good
men, that by their example and advise we may be brought to a sense and feeling
of those sins, which we commit; counting it a great blessing of God, if thereby
we at any time be crossed in those sins, to which we are most addicted; as
gaming etc: and ever esteem best of that company, not where our ears maybe
filled with profane jestings, or tickled with superfluous conceits; but where
our corruptions may be most roundly reproved; esteeming them our best friends,
that will most plainly and faithfully put us in mind of our errors; which is
the counsel of Saint Paul to the Thessalonians; I beseech you (says he, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12.13.) to know them which labor among you, and are over you in the
Lord and admonish you; and to esteem them very highly in love for their works
sake: which may be our direction for esteeming both of our familiar friends and
of our teachers; both which (if faithful) labor for our good in the Lord by
admonishing us; and both thereby deserve from us a true regard as a recompense
of this their love: therefore if any man desire to be furthered in good
duties, let him testify it by loving such men.

2 If we desire to obtain that which is good, we must be careful that we
make conscience (as of avoiding every evil, so) of doing every good duty, be
it never so little; endeavoring with Saint Paul to have always a conscience
void of offense toward God and men: Act. 24.16. and laboring to keep, not
only some but all Gods commandments, according to David's wish, Psalm. 119.5.6.
O that my ways were made so direct, that I might keep thy statutes, so shall
I not be confounded, while I have respect to all thy commandments: Let us not
deceive our selves in thinking it sufficient, that we observe the sabbath, and
that we offend not God by swearing, stealing, or such like heinous offenses;
and yet in the mean time make no conscience of a lie for our commodity, or of
vain and idle discourses for delight; for, if we thus do, it is certainly an
argument of a bad heart.

But some perhaps will say; If I thus endeavor to carry my self in all
things, if I now and then do not give a little way, I shall be accounted too
precise, and curious in matters which I need not. Be it so; yet be willing to
undergo that censure; and esteem it safer to offend ungodly men by thy good
life, than a righteous God by thy bad life: and though others account it too
much precisenes, yet do not thou so; but rather consider that God commands
us to keep his precepts diligently: Psalm. 119.4: if diligently, then
certainly there is nothing in his precepts superfluous; nothing, which we may
do or not do, but every one, though of never so small a matter, is to be
performed of us: whosoever therefore shall endeavor to his power to keep the
Commandments of God in every thing, is so far from being too precise, that
he does but what he is commanded.

To these rules, for avoiding of evil and seeking of good, we may add one
more, as the rule of all the rest, and of our whole life; and that is the Word
of God: which alone is able to direct us in the way to salvation, as David
testifies: Psalm. 119.9. Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his way? even by
ruling himself after thy word: Wherefore let us carefully read, meditate and
confer, about this Word, and that often; accounting (as well we may) every
day lost, wherein we learn not something out of it; ever desiring more and
more to be instructed therein, and account it a great blessing of God, that we
have the use of it so freely to direct us in the way of salvation. Neither let
any man think himself so learned, that he needs no farther instruction;
for the best of us comes short of David, and yet he prayed still to be
instructed in the word of the Lord; as we may see throughout the 119 Psalm.
Again, if we did know more than we do, yet we are dull in the performance
of what we know; and therefore we have need to read the same again and
again, to stir us up to a daily practice hereof. But that we may so use the
word of God, as that it may be unto us the savor of life unto life; let us at
all times, when we are about to read it, lift up our hearts to God by prayer,
that he may give a blessing to our endeavors; without which whatsoever we do
in this or any other thing, it will be so far from being profitable unto us,
as that it will rather prove our ruin in the end.

He, which shall thus set his heart to serve the Lord by denying ungodliness
and worldly lusts, by living honestly, righteously and soberly in this present
world; he, which shall thus carefully receive the Sacrament in a right manner,
and hear the word with diligence, devoting himself to God by prayer in all
things, which he does; he which shall thus make conscience of his ways in
every thing; the blessing of God rest upon him, as it needs must; and that
peace of conscience, which no man knows but he that enjoyes, ever attend him
here, and everlasting peace and happiness crown him hereafter. Amen.

FINIS.
The Contents of each Chapter.
CHAP. I. What a Sacrament is, and how many there be. page 1 CHAP. II. What
the Lord's Supper is. 17. CHAP. III. The Necessity of receiving the Lord's
Supper. 27. CHAP. IV. The Necessity of Preparation. 54. CHAP. V. Of Examination
in general. page 62. CHAP. VI. The Examination of our Knowledge. 69. CHAP.
VII. The Examination of our Repentance. 78. CHAP. VIII. The Examination of our
Faith. 98 CHAP. IX, The Examination of our Charity. 104. CHAP. X. Of
Premeditation and Prayer. page 134. CHAP. XI. Of Meditation at the Lord's
Table. 147 CHAP..XII. Of Practice. 160

