A SERMON Preached the 26. day of May. 1584. in S. Mary's Church in
Shrewesbury: Before the right honorable the Earl of Leicester, accompanied
with the Earl of Essex, the Lord North, diverse Knights; Gentlemen of
worshypfull calling, the worshipful Bayliues, Aldermen and Burgesses of the
town of Salop.

By John Tomkys public preacher of Gods word there: Now first published by the
author.

Iam. 3.2. In many things we offend all.

Seen, perused, and allowed according to her Majesty's Injunctions.

AT LONDON, Printed by Robert Waldegraue, for William Ponsonby. Anno. 1586.

To the right honorable, the Lord ROBERT DVDLEY Earl of Leycester, etc. one
of her highness most honorable privy Counsel, and Chancellor of the
University of Oxford, grace mercy and peace, in Christ Jesus be multiplied.
I Have been requested (right honorable) by one, whose motion, in honest
causes, is unto me as a commandment, to bestow upon him that simple Sermon,
which by Gods assistaunce, I made before your Lords^ip in S. Maryes Church
(...) ^^ewesbury, the 26. of May ^584. Although my manner have been hitherto,
for the most part rather to deliver unto the Church, through my laborious
translations, the learning of other, then, in this learned age, to offer to
public view, mine own poor travels: yet because the aucthority of the
requester, then one of my hearers, was so great, and his wisdom so grave that
it stood with dutiful modesty, rather to yield than to deny, I forthwith
called my self to remembrance, what I had uttered (as God vouchsafed to
inhable me) and committed the same to writing, as leisure did serve me. My
travail again by me perused, seemed in mine eyes so seely, that casting it
aside as an untimely bearthe, hitherto I have detracted the performaunce of my
promise* But now considering that a promise advisedly made, may not rashly be
broken, I find myself in duty forced, to do that, which in Christianity, I
was then required. And, acknowledging it my duty, to use my tongue and my
pen, rather to the benefit of my country, then the winning of credit, I have
boldly resolved, so to keep promise, that the good of my sermon, by the
benefit of the print, may become common to all the godly. Although the matter
therein contained be warra^ted by Gods word, and the doctrine therein taught be
necessary for the time, yet, because the manner of the delivery thereof is
homely and base, it is altogether unworthy in your L. name to be published, who
worthily are become a patron of the works of the best learned. Nevertheless,
since your Lordship in this my labor has the best interest, because except
you had vouchsafed that time to have heard me, I had not that day spoken
(being no ordinary day of my weekly exercise) and, that it pleased you of your
singular humanity, to prove my dutiful endeavor, I make bold in
humbleness, to offer that now to your eyes, which in dutifulness I sounded
then in your ears. If I were able to deliver unto you a more worthy monument
of my duetifull thankfulness, for the manifold benefits by me undeserved,
which upon me you have largely bestowed, verily I would be inferior to none of
your debtors in will, which have them all my superiors in ability. And
therefore I hope your H. will accept that which I can, seeing I cannot that
which I would. Our memory cannot commit to oblivion, how courteously you
accepted that mean, and yet well meant intertainmenr, which the town of
Shrewsburie in duty gave unto you L. And the posterity, no doubt, shall hear
of your thankful accepting of many wel-comes, your cheerful hearing of many
orations, your circumspect view of the situation and buildings of the town,
your grave conference with the Magistrates in the government there of: your
comfortable going into the free Grammar school, to experience the
towardliness of the youth there, your Christian presence in the Church at the
Sermon, your painful travel in arbitrating controversies, your large gifts
unto master Bayliffes officers, your liberal rewards unto the
scholemaisters, your charitable alms unto the poor, all the which virtues
did then shine in you, as in a most clear mirror of true nobility. Neither
did you forget in that your progress, that you, with the rest of Gods children
in earth, are strangers and passengers in this world, Gen 47.9.
as our fathers were, Heb. 13.14.
which have not here a continuing city, but seek one to come. Therefore as a
provident peregrine, you carefully took your spiritual repast, in every of
your mansions, in feeding upon the word of God preached before you, for the
better refreshing of the soul. In this your christian pertaking of the
heavenly food, it pleased GOD of his gracious providence, above mine
expectation, to vouchsafe, that I did twice serve at his spiritual table, once
in the county of Stafford, where I was borne, and once in Shrewsburie, where I
have my charge, The dishes, which I offered to the gestes, were not dainty (I
do confess) yet because they were wholesome and sauorie, being well seasoned
with the salt of Gods word, I make bold under your honorable protection, to
offer the one of them to the taste of the godly, that by this means the feast
may be still continued. I doubt not, but they will take it in good part, which
have learned, that God, 1. King. 19.6.
which fed ELIAS with bread and water, Ioh. 6.11.
and refreshed his people with barley loves and small fishes, will, that we
crave at his hands not dayntie, Mat. 6.13 Luc. 11.3.
but daily bread, contenting our selves with homely, yet wholesome food. From
others, (if there be any, as I doubt there be many) whose taste is so curious,
that they will not, or stomach so lothing, that they cannot find any
sweetness in the word of God, Deuteronomy. 8.3. Mat. 4.4. Luc. 4.4.
which is the food of the soul, I expect no such thing, but referring them
to the Lord, I humbly desire him of his mercy, (if it be his will) so to
purify their hearts, by the operation of his spirit, Psalm. 34.9
that they may taste and see, how good the Lordis. Luc. 14.15.
So shall we be blessed, eating our bread in the kingdom of God. God long
preserve your honor, and so guide you with his holy spirit, that you may more
and more set forth his glory, benefit his Church: and profit your Country.
Salop the 24. of October. 1585.

Your honors most duetifull bound in the Lord. JOHN TOMKYS.

A Sermon preached in Shrewesburie, before the Earl of Leicester, by John
Tomkys, the 26. of May, 1584.
Ephesians. 5.1.2. Ephesians. 5.1.2
Be ye therefore followers of GOD, as dear children, And walk in love, even as
Christ has loved us, to be an offering and a sacrifice of a sweet smelling
savor to God.


The care of God for his people,
Our heavenly father is so careful for our spiritual sustenaunce (right
honorable, worshypfull, and dearly beloved in the Lord) that he gives us,
not only his blessed word, to become Deu. 8.3. Mat. 4.4. Luc. 4.4.
the food of the soul, but also Mat. 22.
faithful Ministers to break unto us the same. He sent unto his ancient
people, descended from Abraham the Patriarche according to the flesh, his holy
Prophets, Esa. 1.1. Ier. 1.1. Ezech. 1.1. Ose. 1.1. Amos. 1.1. Abdi. 1.1. Hab.
1.1. Ag. 1.1. Zach. 1.1. Mal. 1.1.
The su^me of the Prophets doctrine. Ier. 7.21.22.
to expound the law to them, Esa. 5.11.
to denounce his curses to the obstinate, Psalm. 1.1.
to publishe his blessings to the penitent, and Ier. 31.31
to foreshewe the new covenant between God and Man in Christ the Messiah
then to come Esa. 8.1. Hab. 2.2.
And the same Prophets, by the instinct of Gods holy spirit, committed to
writing, for the instruction of the posterity, the sum of the divine
Sermons, which they preached to the people. He has sent unto his new people,
Io. 11.16. Romans 3.29.
gathered to geather of the believing Jews and believing Gentiles, through
faith in Christ his Son, his blessed Apostles The su^me of the Apostles
doctrine.
Mat. 28.19.20. Mar. 16.15. Act. 2.38.
to preach repentance for the remission of sins, Romans 6.1 etc.
to teach newnes of life to the glory of God, Heb. 4.12
and to testify the performance of the new covenant between God and Man, in
Christ the Messiah in their time exhibited. And least the Church of God Number.
12.17. 1. Cor. 4.1.
which is his houshoulde, should want the least crumbe of his heavenly food,
the same holy spirit has moved the Apostles and Disciples of Christ, Io.
20.31 Revel. 1.19.
to record in writing the history, doctrine, and prophesies of the new
covenant. So bountiful a Father is our God, which gives us plenty of
heavenly, food, so provident a Lord is he which sends us from age to age
faithful disposers thereof.

The su^me of Gods word.
The sum of the whole word of God, so graciously given, so faithfully taught,
and so necessarily written, is contained in two points: true faith, and godly
life.

The method of the Epistle to the Ephesians.
The Apostle Paul has exactlie observed this method in this his heavenly
Epistle written to the Christians of Ephesus. For in the first three chapters
he proves that we are Romans 3.20:28.
justified not by our works, Lu. 17.5.
but by faith, which is the Ephe. 2.8
Gift of God. And in the three last chapters he shows, that works be
necessary, because they are the Gal. 5.22
fruits of faith, Iam. 2.18
whereby our profession is adorned, Mat. 5.16
and God glorified: O that this lesson were as well practiced, as it may easily
be learned, then should we be, Ia. 1.22.
not only hearers of the word, but doers of the same. The Apostle having
taught this doctrine to the Ephesians, and that most plentifully, for the space
of Act. 20.31.
three years, and being therefore become Ephesians. 3.1.
a prisoner in Rome, commits to writing the sum of his doctrine, for ye
confirmation of ye faith of the Ephesians, and the instruction of the ages to
come. Herein he imitateth the ancient Prophets whose manner was briefly Esa.
8.1. Abac. 2.2.
to put in writing, that which largely they taught. Such love bare Paul to the
flock of Christ, so perfect a pattern is he of a godly pastor. Now, for
so much as it is so necessary to learn to believe aright, Act. 13.39. Rom 3.28.
that thereby we may be justified, and to live a right, Mat. 5.16.
that thereby God may be glorified, I esteemed this text very fit for this
auditorie, because therein the Apostle briefly co^prehendeth both those
points, although in an altered order The distribution of the text.
first speaking of life, and then of faith. If the profession of Christians
were nothing else but an idle speculation, then were it somewhat to be able to
talk (...) Religion, although we lived not religiously. But Christ, the
author of truth, and the wisdom of his heavenly father, has taught us, that
Mat. 7.21.22.23.
^^ayn we call him our Lord, except (...) will of his father revealed unto (...)
his word: and James, as a faithful do^^r in ye schole of Christ, exhorts us
to Iam. 1.22
be doers of the word, and not hearers only deceiuyng our selves: what greater
care the^ ought Christians to have, than by their godly lives to make their
holy conversation to shine in the world to the glory of God, the edifying of
his Church, and to the testimony in their own consciences, that they be his
children?

The use of Gods law,
And lest we should wander out of the way of righteousness, by framing unto our
selves a faith according to our foolish fantasies, or a life agreeable to our
curious imaginatio^s, God has given us his law Psalm. 1.2.
to meditate therein both day and night. Yea, and that we may be effectually
stirred up to serve our heavenly Father without fear, Luc. 1.74.75.
in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life, he
deals with us in his word diversely. For sometimes he Deu. 11.27.
promises his blessings to us, if we obey his statutes: Sometimes he 28.
threatens his curses, if we transgress his ordinances: sometimes he Esa.
1.2.
provoke us with the remembrance of his benefits bestowed upon us:
Sometimes he Pro. 3.11. Heb. 12.5. etc. Imitation.
chasteneth us with his fatherly correction for our ame^dement. Unto these and
many other means of our instruction, set forth unto us in Gods word, S. Paul
in this place adds the very example of God himself, to be imitated by us:
exhorting us to be Ephesians. 5.1.
followers of God, as dear children. Herein appears the godly discretion of
the Apostle, who well considering yt we are as children, not able to practice ye
precepts of obedience, except we have a pattern to imitate laid before us,
nurtereth us by this means in the way of righteousness.

* Now, that we err not in this imitatio^, taught by the Apostle, Four things
are to be observed in this imitation.
we must carefully observe four things. The first, Who is to be imitated: The
second, Why he (that is to be followed) is to be imitated: The third, Wherein
he is to be imitated: The fourth: Of what manner that thing is, wherein he is
to be imitated.

1. God is to be imitated.
Paul meaning to teach us by imitation to lead a Christian life, proposes
God himself to be imitated by us, Saying, Ephesians 5.1.
Be ye imitators of God. Herein we have a mirror of Gods mercy toward us,
which, as a loving Father, vouchsafes to instruct us his children, not only
by his word, but also by his own example. If Poets have spared no labor to
imitate their Homer, Orators, their Demosthenes: Philosophers, their
Aristotle, that they might thereby attain to some perfection in their own
professions, we Christians may be abashed, yea rather by them condemned, if
with all diligence we do not imitate the most excellent and perfect pattern
of God himself.

God is to be immitated three ways.
But since it is neither conueni, ent nor possible, that we the creatures should
imitate every way God the creator, who is Eze. 10.5 Revel. 11 17
infinite, and Romans 16.27. 1. Tim. 1.17
incomprehensible, it is to be observed, that in his word he proposes
himself three ways to be imitated:

1. in him self.
First, in himself. So did God set forth his holiness, as a pattern of
holiness, to be practiced by his ancient people the Israelites, when he said:
Leuit. 20.26.
be ye holy unto me, for I Jehovah am holy, and have severed you from other
people, that ye should be mine. And Christ our Savior, in his earnest
persuasion, which he uses with his disciples, to draw them to the perfect
practice of brotherly love, (which then we show, when Mat. 5.44.
we love our enemies, bless them that curse us, do good to them that hate us,
and pray for them which hurt us, and persecute us.) 48.
sets forth to their imitation the perfectnes of the love of his heavenly
Father to mankind, which 45.
makes his sun to arise on the evil and the good: and sends rain on the
just and unjust. 48.
Ye shall therefore be perfect (says Christ) as your Father, which is in
heaven, is perfect. The like may be observed, concerning the To. 34.
truth of God, which he practices in his promises: Psa. 86.5
his mercy, which he shows to his servants: His justice: 145.17.
which appears in all his ways, 86.15. Romans 2.4.
his long sufferance, whereby he provoke us to repentance: All the which are
paterns of truth, of mercy, of justice, and of patience by us to be used.
And thus does God propose himself in him self to be imitated of us, as you
have heard.

.2. in his son.
Secondly God sets forth himself to be imitated by us in his son Christ
Jesus. Our heavenly Father does know the rudeness of us his children, who
hardly can esteem him imitable, which by nature is a Ioh. 4.24.
Spirit invisible. Behold therefore his fatherly care to lead us on in this
holy imitation of himself: He has given us his son, Heb. 1.3.
who is the brightenesse of his glory, and the ingraued form of his person,
which being by nature Ioh. 17.5
God with the Father, Mat. 1.18.
is become man with us, Heb. 1.3.
in whose inward and substantial brightenesse, Ioh. 14.7.
(which we discern by the effects thereof in his visible manhead) as it were
in a glass, we may behold, and as it were handle, the infinite and almighty
majesty, the infinite and incomprehensible love of God the Father, unto us his
children through grace, that we might admire the one with all reverence, and
imitate the other with all obedience. Ioh. 14.9.
If we see Christ with the eyes of our faith, then see we the Father, Heb. 1.3.
whose lively image he is. Now, Number. 21.9 Ioh. 3.14.8.56. heb. 11.13.
as Christ is beholden by a true faith, Iam. 2.24.
so this faith is made manifest by works, 1. Cor. 11,.1
and those works must be squared by the pattern of the works of Christ, in
who^ God sets forth himself to be imitated.

The works of Christ of two sorts.
But because the works of Christ are of two sorts: some miraculous, wrought in
power Ioh. 5.36.14.11.
to declare his Godhead, and to confirm his doctrine: and some moral, wrought
in obedience, Mat. 5.17.
to show his Man-head, and to fulfill the law: we must know that he is to
be imitated in the last, and not in the first.

Miracles.
For seeing his Miracles were wrought to seal up the truth of his Doctrine,
that he might be believed, Ioh. 14.11
for his works sake: and since he has sufficienlie confirmed his doctrine,
by the miracles wrought in his own person by his absolute power, and in the
persons of his Apostles and Disciples in the Act. 3.16.
power of his name, it sauoureth of infidelity, (The gift of woorking of
miracles being long a go ceased) to require of the Ministers of the Gospel,
by miracles to prove their Doctrine: and of presumption, (without special
warrante from Gods spirit) to attempt the working of any miracle. The
faithful servants therefore of the Lord may not say to the ragyng sea: Mat.
4:39.
Peace, be thou still: Nor to the sick of the palsy, 9, 6.
Arise: Nor to the blind Luc, 18, 42
Receive thy sight: Nor to the leper 8.3.
Be thou clean* Not to the buried in grave 10.11.43.
Come forth. And if there be any other such speeches of Christ in the New
Testament, (as therebee many) they can not assume them to themselves without
presumption* why so? Forsooth, as they were words, which Christ used when he
wrought his miracles, so are they mirrours of his Majesty, not to be spoken
by us in imitation, but to be reverenced of us in meditation. And how perilous
a thing it is, to draw the miracles of Christ into imitation: the great abuse
of Lent in time of Popery does sufficiently declare. For to fast forty days
and forty nights, and not to hungre, ( Mat. 4.2 Luke. 4.2.
as Christ did) so far exceeds the ability of man, that without miracle
it was never practiced of any. And yet such was the presumption of the Romish
Church, that it proposed this miraculous and strange work of Christ,
undertaken by him for a preparitiue before he begane to publish the Gospel,
as an example of imitation.

2. Conversation.
The New Testament is the written record of the Doctrine and works of
Christ, wherein with all diligence we must meditate, if we will become
followers of Christ in his Doctrine and life* whatso ever we find there
written of his Io. 3.17.
zeal to promote Gods glory, of his 6.43.
constancy in mayntaynyng the truth, of his 11.35. and 38.
pity toward the afflicted, of his 1. Pet. ^.23.
patience in afflictions, of his Mat. 11.29.
meekenes in his behavior, of his Ioh. 6.9.
sobriety in his diete, and of ^. Pet. 2.22.
his modesty in all his life, that same is therefore written, to sterre us up
by his example, to express the like virtues in our conversation. Surely,
since Act. 11.26
Christians take their name of Christ, it is very reasonable, that we should
be most diligente in learning his Doctrine, that we may know what to
profess, and most circumspect in observing his imitable works, that we may
express our Religion by our life. So shall we be Iam. 1.22.
doers of the word and not hearers only, so shall we not deceive our
owneselues. And that ye may know ye as Christ's Doctrine is to be learned, so
his life is to be imitated, I beseach you call to mind yt he persuaded his
Disciples to be Mat 11.2^
meek, because he was meek, and to Ioh. 13.34, and 15.12.
love one an other, because he had loved them saying: Mat. 11.29
learn of me, that I Am meek and lowly in heart: and Ioh. 13.14 and 15.12.
love ye one an other, as I have loved you. If we compare age with age and
fault with fault, we find, that ignorance and superstition were the blottes
of the age past, and that the blemishes of our age are carelessness, as well in
learning Gods will in his word, as in expressing the same in our life, in
some: and dissimulation counterfeityng love with men and zeal to God, in
others. How far these men are from the right imitation of Christ Ioh. 2.17.
which was eaten up with the zeal of Gods house, and 1. Pet. 2.22.
in whose mouth was found no guile, God Act. 1.24.
which knows the secrets of the heart, does know, and their consciences,
wherein they are giftie, do bear them witness. Has God light up the Psalm.
119.105
candle of his word in our age, and do we contemn the benifite of the
light; Has God delivered us in these days many Mat 25.15
talentes, and do we deliver him none back with increase? what then must we
look for? Suerly, Mat 21.43.
to have his word taken from us, and to be given to a nation, that will bring
forth the fruits thereof: and 26.25.
to be deprived of the talentes, which shall be delivered to good and
faithful servants, which will use them with increase. O then my brethren, let
us strive to attain that happiness which Christ pronounces to stand Luc.
11.28.
in hearing the word of God and keeping it. And hitherto how God may be
imitated by us in his Son Christ Jesus our Lord.

3. in his Saints.
Thirdelie God sets forth himself to be imitated of us 1. Cor. 4, 16 1.
These. 1.6
in his Saints. And hereby our heavenly Father sets forth unto our vewe,
as in a glass, the power of the operation of his holy spirit in 2. Cor. 4.7
earthen vessels. For when we consider, that the faithful servants of the
Lord, whose praise is in the word of God, were Iam. 5.17.
subject to the same infirmities, that we are, and yet nevertheless, shone in
sundry virtues, thereby we my learn, that we, Io. 15.5.
which of our selves can do nothing, yet abidyng in Christ by faith, and Christ
abidyng in us by his Spirit, may bring forth much fruit. So the mistrust,
which might rise through our own weakness in ourselves, is removed by the
consideration of the mighty operation of Gods Spirit in others. For we must
not think Deuteronomy 10.17, 2. Chro. 19.17. Job. 34.19. Act. 10.34. Romans 2.11. Gal.
2.6. Ephe. 6.9. Col. 3.21. 1. Pet. 1.17.
that God is an accepter of persons, Act. 10.35. The saints virtues to be
imitated.
but that in every nation, he that fears him, and woorketh righteousness, is
accepted with him. we must therefore diligently search forth the virtues of the
servant of God, that we imitating their good works, may imitate God, which
sets him self forth in them by us to be imitated. So then we must learn
righteousness, of Genesis 6.9. and 7.2.
righteous Noe: faith, of 15.6. romans 4.3. Gal. 3.6. Ia. 2.23.
faithful Abraham: chastity, of Genesis 39.8.
chaste Joseph: meekness of Number. 12, 13.
meek, Moses: we must learn zeal of 25.7. and 8.
zealous Phines: courrage, of 14.6.7.8.9.
courrageous Joshua: vncorruptenesse, of 1. Sam. 12.5.
incorrupt Samuel. We must learn valiantenesse of 17.45.46.47.
valiante David: wisdom, of 1. King. 3 12.
wise Solomon: patience of, Job. 1.21. Iam. 5.11.
patience Job. I pass over many rare virtues, which appeared in diverse of Gods
servants, mentioned both in the new Testament and in the old, all which are
examples unto us, that we followyng them may be found Ephesians. 5.1
followers of God, as becomes dear children. Let us therefore, brethren,
diligently read the word of God, that there finding the godly life of the
Saints described, we may use it as a pattern of Christian imitation. Neither
let us mistrust the merciful assistance of Gods holy spirit, Psalm. 145.18.
which is near unto all, that call upon him truly in faith

The Saints must be followed with a caution in two points.
But because Ia. 3.2.
the Saints of God, have always had their imperfections and blemishes, (Such
is the fraylenesse of man's nature.) they are not so perfect paternes, that we
may without exception imitate them. Therefore Paul adds this Caution: 1.
Cor. 11.1.
Even as I am of Christ teaching us thereby, that the Saints are so far
forth to be followed, as they follow Christ and no further, neither in life,
nor in doctrine.

1 in life.
So then Noes Genesis 9.21.
drunkenness: the Patriarchs Genesis 4.19.16.3.29.23.
polygamie: Joseph's 44, 5.
dissimulation, is no warrante, that we may be drunk, or at one time have
many wives, or dissemble. This caution observed, we may not imitate Moses
Number. 20.11.
mistrust of God: nor David's 2 Samuel 11.4.12.9.
adultery and murder: nor Manasses 2. Chro. 33.2.
idolatrye. So far must we be from imitatyng the faults of the Servants of
God that we may not with Mat. 26.70 Mar. 14.68. Lu. 22.57. Io. 18, 17, and 27,
Peter deny Christ: nor with 20, 25,
Thomas doubt of his resurrection: nor with Act, 15, 39,
Paul and Barnabas fall out among our-selues. And yet these, with many like,
be examples of the Fathers, not of the reprobate, but of the elect, not to be
imitated, Gal, 5, 22,
as the fruits of the Spirit, but to be avoided, 19,
as the works of the flesh.

2. in Doctrine.
And as this limitation: So as the godly follow Christ, is to be observed in
manners, so is it in doctrine. But the Doctrine, which Christ taught, was such,
as he confirmed by the written word of God, whereby Mat, 4, 4, 7.10. Lu, 4,
4, 8, 8, 2 1,
he confounded Satan, 18, 21,
confirmed his calling, Io, 10, 34,
confuted his adversaries, Luc, 24, 27
instructed his Disciples. And if we diligently read his Sermones, and
Epistles of the Apostles, recorded in the book of the New Testament, we shall
find, that what they taught, Rom, 4, 6
they confirmed by the holy Scriptures. For they knew, Io, 5, 39,
that in the Scriptures is eternal life, and that they are they which testify
of Christ. They knew 2, Tim, 3, 15,
that the holy Scriptures are able to make men wise unto salvation through the
faith which is in Christ Jesus. They knew that 16,
the whole Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable to
teach, to convince, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness: 17,
That the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect unto all good works.
They knew, 2, Pet, 1, 20
that no prophecy of the Scripture is of any private interpretation: 21.
and that the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but that
holy men of god spoke, as they were moved by the holy ghost. And if this
rule: No further to follow Men, then they follow Christ, had bine precisely
followed, from the time of the Apostles until our age, Popery had never been
so universally received in Christendom, as, to the loss of many souls, it
has. For what is Popery, Popery discribed.
but an hypocritical Religion, brought in by the doctrine of Men, without the
warrant of the word of god? And this much concerning the imitation of god in
his Saints.

2. God is to be imitated of us, because we are his dear children.
Now it follows to show the cause, (which is the second principal point) why
God will, that we immitate him. Paul yields the cause hereof adding Ephesians. 5.1.
As dear children. And in these words the Apostle uses a most vehement
persuasion, whether we way them by natural reason, or in them call to mind
the great benefit which god has bestowed upon us. For it stands with
natural reason, that ye natural child imitate ye natural father, in
expressing, not his vices, but his virtues, that he may be as well ye mirror of
his good manners, as ye glass of his co^tenau^ce. Ought we not then, which are
Ioh. 1.12.
the spiritual children of god Heb. 12.9.
the Father of spirits, to follow him in all things, wherein he has set forth
himself, as a pattern to be followed, that in our manners we may resemble him,
by bringing forth the fruits of the spirit, whereof anon we will speak? And
least we should think, that he requires impossible things at our hands,
(Behold his fatherly dealing with us) he requires no works of us, but such as
himself, his son, and his saints have done before us for our example. Now, if
the remembrance of benefits received may stir us up to duetifulnesse, Paul
would have us to know, that since god has vouchsafed to make Ioh. 1.12,
us by grace his beloved children, which Ephe. 2.3
by nature were the children of wrath, our duty is with all readynesse to
imitate him our loving Father, 5.1.
as becomes dear children.

Two things insinuated in the Greek words.
But for so much as the Apostle by using chosen words in the greek tongue,
wherein he wrote this Epistle, Ephe. 5.1
Os tecna agapeta, has insinuated, both the mean, whereby we become the
children of god, and the fruit thereof, I will briefly speak of those two
points, and so conclud this part.

1. The mean whereby we are made Gods children, is a spiritual birth.
The mean whereby we become gods children is Ioh. 1.13.
a birth, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man,
but of god. This birth Christ calls 3.3. and 5.
a new birth, which is wrought by gods holy spirit, Heb. 9.14.
which cleanses our consciences from dead works. Mat. 3.11.
and inflameth our hearts with the love of the truth. And that we may know that
this birth is altogether spiritual, James tells us, that Iam. 1.18
god of his own will begat us with the word of truth: And Peter teaches us,
that 1. Pet. 1.23
we are borne a new, not of mortal seed, but of immortal, by the word of
god, who lives and indureth for ever. So the^, since every thing in this birth
is most excellent, Iam. 1.18.
the father, God: 1. Pet. 1.23
the seed, his word: Ioh. 3.5. and 8.
the worker, his spirit: 1.12.
the fruit, his children, the due remembrance of this gracious means, whereby
we receive this privilege to be 1.12,
the sons of god, ought to move us effectually to be Ephe. 5.1,
folowers of god our Father, as beseems dear children.

2 The fruit of this spiritual birth, is our favor with God.
The fruit and commodity, which insueth unto us, by the means of this
spiritual birth, is exceeding great. For thereby we become Ephe. 5.1
Agapetoi, that is, amiable, diligible, acceptable, and pleasant in the sight
of our god, in whom he takes full delight, as a father in his children. And
this is more then Agapoumenoi, beloved. For among men, some time children are
beloved of their parents affectionately, when their co^dicio^s deserve no love
at all, Genesis 27.6*
as was Esau of Isaac. But by means of this new birth, there is cause why god
loves them, whom he has so regenerate. For thereby we become the members of
that holy body, whereof Ephe. 4.15.
Jesus Christ is the head. And the^ ca^ it not otherwise be, but as Luke 1.35.
Christ the head is holy of it self, so must tru^ Christians the members of
that head Romans 6.5. 1. Cor. 6.11.
participate by grace the holiness o^ their head, whereby they become
acce^ptable and amiable unto God. This moved Paul ye Apostle to teach us, that
1. Cor. 1.30
we are of god, in Christ Jesus, Who of god is made unto us wisdom, and
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption* And as ye whole body of Aaron
became fragra^t by the means of ye precious Exo. 30.30
ointement, Psalm. 133.2.
which distilled from his head to the hemme of his garments, and as his whole
body was glorious through his Exodus 28.2
beautiful attire, so is ye whole body of Christ, ( 1. Cor. 6, 15
whereof we be members) sweet in the presence of god, through the
sanctification of his spirit, and glorious before him, through the
righteousness of his son. For through Christ we, as 1. Pet. 2.5
lively stones be made a spiritual house, an holy Priesthode to offer up
spiritual sacrifices acceptable to god by Jesus Christ 9
yea, we are a chosen generation, a royal Priesthode, an holy nation, a people
set at liberty, that we should show forth the virtues of him that has called
us forth of darkness into this merueilous light. And thus you hear how both
Peter and Paul by the ^ue remembrance of these gracious gifts, which
necessarily follow our Ephe. 1.5,
(...) adoption into the children of god, through our regeneration Ioh. 3.5.
and 8
wrought by his spirit, do earnestly exhort us to Ephe. 5.1
be folowers of god, as becomes dear children. And this much touching the
causes, why god will that we be folowers of him.

3. God is to by imitated by walking in love.
Now follows the third point in this doctrine of imitation to be observed:
wherein god is to be imitated. This does the Apostle teach us, when as he
adds: Ephe, 5.2
And walk in love: whereby he shows, that then we follow god, as dear
children, Ioh. 13.14 15.12.
when we love one an other, as Christ has loved us. And surely the Mat. 11.30
yocke, which our heavenly Father lays upon the necks of us his children,
is light* and the service, which he requires of us is sweet, when as all the
practice of al our obedience stands in love, most sweet affection of a godly
min^ The Apostle meaning to stir us v^ effectually in this amiable imitatio^
of god, uses a metaphore drawn fr^ walking in the way, whereby he de^cribeth
unto us that love, wherein consists ye true imitation of god. Therefore that
the depth of this doctrine may be sounded, it shall behoue us t^ examine every
circumstance of the way* which being known unto us by experience, may give
light unto the meaning of this speech: Ephe. 5.2.
Walk in love.

Four things are to be observed in this kind of walking.
Now the circumstances in numbe^ are four: The first, whose the way is* wherein
we must walk: The second, what the mark of this way is: The third, of what
manner the exercise of thi^ way is: The fourth, what the end o^ this way is.

1. The way wherein we must walk, are the commandments of God.
The way, wherein we must walk^ is the kings path, the common hig^ way of all
Christians, without excep^tion, even the ordinances of the Lord which he has
given to all his people by them to be observed, with all dutiful reverence.
And therefore the law of God, the second time published by Moses, is thus
entitled: Deuteronomy. 1.1
these be the words, which Moses spoke unto all Israel etc. Neither did Moses
the servant of the Lord forget, when he proposed the Abbridgement of all Gods
laws, contained in Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5.1.
ten pre^eptes, 7.
to call together all Israel, and ^o exhort all Israel, to harken to the
ordinances and laws of the Lord, that they might learn them, observe them,
and keep them. Therefore as God is the Lord of al Christians, so is he to be
obeyed of al Christians. Now, as he has laid open his high way, (even his
holy laws) for all his subjects to walk in, so let us all learn, by his
holy word, to walk therein before him, with all integrity. Act. 10.34. Romans
2.11.
God is no accepter of persons. Therefore let every man consider his callings,
and learn, by Gods word, to walk before the Lord according to his vocation.
Esaias. 49.23
Princes, in fostering, cherishing, and governing Gods church: Mat. 23.17 Mat.
12.17. Luke 20.25. Romans 13.1. etc. tit. 3.1. 1. Pet. 3.13.
Subjects in obeying their Princes: Pro. 8.15
Noblemen, in making good laws: Romans 13.3 and 4.
M^^gistrates, in executing justice: 2. Tim, 2.15,
Min^^sters, in cutting aright unto gods fam^^lie, the bread of life, Iam. 1.19.
which is the wor^ of truth, as becomes 1. Cor. 4.1. and 2
faithful stewar^ in the Lords house: Ephe. 5.25 Col. 3.19, 1. Pet. 3, 7.
Husbands ^ loving their VViues, Ephe. 5.22. Col. 3 18, Tit. 2, 5. 1. Pet. 3.1
Wives, in su^^mitting themselves unto their husband Ephe. 6, 4, Col. 3.21
Parents, in nurturing their children Ephe. 6.1,
Children, in obeying their parents (...) the Lord: Ephesians. 6.1,
Masters, in cherishin^ christianly their servants: Col. 3.22. Tit. 2.9,
Servants in serving faithfully their masters: An^ to conclude Ephe. 4* 1,
every one of us: to walk^ worthy of the vocation, whereunto w^ are called,
that we may be 5.1,
followers o^ God, as dear children. For Mat. 25.14
what tal^le^t soever god in mercy has bestow^ed upon us, he has therefore
given it us, (yea though it be but a handicraft,) to use to ye glory of his
name, and to the benefit of his Church Esa, 30.21
This is the way, let us walk in it. And now to the second circumstance of
this way of the Lord wherein we must walk.

2. The mark of the way of true Christians is Love,
The mark of the way is Love. For so speaks the Apostle Ephe, 5, 2
Walk in love. Consider, dearly beloved, the great care, which our heavenly
Father takes for us his children, who: least we should wander out of the way,
wherein we ought to walk, gives us a mark to know our way by, even ^oue.
This love is that Romans 13.8
only debt, which god allows us to owe one unto an other. And the payment of
this debt is so acceptable, yt Paul pronounces: Rom, 13, 8
Whosoever loves an other, as he ought, has fulfilled the law of god.

Love double, 1. of God 2, of our neighbor,
Now, this love, which is the mark of our way, is double: First the love of god,
then the love of our neighbor. Of this abridgement of al our obedience
required by gods laws, christ himself is the collector, who calls Mat. 22,
38 Mar, 12, 30,
the love of God, the first and great commandment: and Mat, 22, 39 Mar, 12,
31,
the love of our Neighbor, the second, and like unto the first. And that we
might learn, to walk in the way of the Lord, within these bounds, our
Savior christ teaches us, that our love must be unfeigned in either respect.
For god requires, that Deuteronomy. 6.5. Luke 10.27
we love him, with all our heart, and with all our soul, and with all our
strength, and with all our thought: Leu. 19.18 Luke 10.27.
and that we love our Neighbor, as we love our self. And thus ye see, what
manner of love it is, which is the mark of our spiritual highway, altogether
sincere, and no whit hipocriticall.

Two things in love to be observed.
But will you yet learn more exactly how to discern the mark, that thereby
you may know the way? Observe then two things: what love does not, and what it
does.

1. What love does not
What love does not, Paul lays down plainly, when as he says: 1. Cor. 13.4
Love enuieth not, love boasts not it self, love is not puffed up. Love does
none uncomely things: 5
love seeks not her own things: love is not provoked to anger: 6
love thinks none evil: love rejoices not in iniquity: 8
love never falls away. And do we such things, and yet we are in the way?
Surely then Paul was far out of the way, which thus described the mark of
the way by the negatiues. Well my brethren, let us not deceive our selves, for
god neither mocketh, Gal. 6.7.
nor is mocked.

2. What love does.
But what does love, that we may know the work of our way by the affirmatiues
also? Hear Paul speak: 1. Cor. 13.
4.
Love suffers long: love is bountiful: love rejoices in the truth: 6
Love believes all things: 7
love indureth all things. And can we be in the way, except we do these
things? No undoubtedly: For this is the undoubted mark of the way. O then,
dear, brethren, let us bring forth the fruits of Love, that it may appear,
we walk in love. So shall we be blessed, being Iam. 1.22.
not only hearers of the word, but doers thereof: So shall we not deceive our
own selves. We delight greatly to talk of Love, God grant we may learn to
walk in Love. And this much of the mark of the way, wherein all true
Christians ought to walk.

3. The manner of walking in this way, must be a continual exercise of
godliness.
Now we come to the third circumstance of this way of righteousness, which is
the path for the childr^ of God upon earth to walk in. For it is not enough to
walk in this way (whereof I first spoke) and by the mark to know the way;
(which point was lastly handled) but we must also learn the manner of walking,
whereby our iournieng is brought to an happy end. And this is the manner of our
spiritual walking, that we walk continually in the Love of God, and our
Neighbor Gen, 17, 7,
The league, which God made with Abraham and his seed, Gal, 3, 9,
(which are we if we be endued with the faith of Abraham) was not momentary,
but perpetual. Gen, 17, 1, 7,
And this is the league, that the almighty will be our God, in perfourming his
good promises, and delivering us from evils, not for an hour, or a day, or a
year, but for ever: and that we walk before him, and be perfect, not for an
hour, or a day, or a year, but Luc, 1.74, and 74,
all our lives long. For as the protection of God, to us his people, is
continual so is it meet, that our obedience, unto him our God should be
continual also. and this continual exercise of godly^esse, did god inioyne
Abraham, and ^s in Abraham, when as at the coue^a^t making he said unto him:
Gen, 17, 1,
Hith^aller lephanai, which by the propriety of the Hebrew verb in the
coniuga^ion Hithpael, wherein it is used, does signify a continual walkyng
before the Lord in perfect obedience unto his laws. And least we should want a
comfortable example to lead us on in this continual exercise of dutiful
obedience to our God, Gen, 5, 22 and 24, In Hebrew Ijthallec, in English, He
walked continually.
Enoch is reported to have walked continually with the Lord all his life long,
Gen, 5, 23
even 365 years, in that he followed not the naughtiness of his age, neither
was steined with the corrupt worshipping of god with other, but worshipped him
continually, according to his commandments, in faith, integrity of heart,
and innocence of life, whom the Lord, of his free favor, Gen, 5, 24 Heb, 11,
5,
did translate that he should not see death. Oh happy man so long in service
with so good a Lord: Oh blessed god, acceptyng so mercyfully in the Messiah the
obedience of his servant! And shall we leave so^ sweet an example vnimitated?
O^ shall we neglect so great graces o^ perpetually bliss purposed unto us in
so certain an example? god forbid* For there can be nothing in this life more
sweet, then continually to serve the Lord, neither can there be any thing
after this life more excellent, then continually to live with the Lord. And
both these things are proposed unto us in this excellent example. Oh let us
then, my brethren, not think it tedious to walk continually in love. Now let
us consider on the contrary part, how perilous a thing it is, not to walk
continually in due obedience, before the Lord, which the Apostle intends
here, when as he exhorts us Ephe. 5.12.
to walk in love. Herein the example of the Israelites behavior in their
coming forth of Egypt may stand us in good steed. For god Number. 14.22.23.29.30
denied entrance into the land of promise, Exodus, 3.8.17.13.5.32.3 Deuteronomy.
6.3.11.9
which flowed with milk and honey, unto all those Israelites, which in their
hearts turned back in the wilderness to Egypt, Number. 14.24.30.
and granted the same ^nely unto Iosuah and Caleb his ser^auntes, which
walked continually i^ the way, with cheerful minds, in full assurance of
the performance of gods promises. But besides the truth of the history, Psalm.
95.11. Heb. 4.8.9.
the temporal rest in the land, of promise, is a figure of the everlasting
rest in ye kingdom of heaven. If therefore God thus punished the neglecting of
his temporal gifts, how much more will he be revenged upon the contemners of the
spiritual graces? We may not then look, my brethren, to enter into the
kingdom of God, except we walk on continually in love, which is the way, that
leads into everlasting life. We know little in the spiritual rynnyng, if we
know not, 2. Tim. 2 9
that they only receive the garland, which run to the end of the race. We
are ignorant in the spiritual husbandry, if we be ignorant, Luc. 9.26.
that he, which puts his hand to the plow, and looks back, is not
worthy of the kingdom of God. We wotte not to whom blessedness belongs,
if we wot not, that it belongs to them only, Mat, 10, 22 24, 13, Mar, 12, 13,
which persevere unto the end, So then it follows, that nothing is more
required in the children of God, than a conti^all exercise in all godliness.
How ca^ we be stars in the Lords firmamen^ Dan, 12, 3. Mat, r 3, 43,
except we shine continually in holiness* Or soldiers in his camp, Mat. 24, 42
25, 13, 26, 41, Mar. 13, 33,
except we stand continually upon our watch against the spiritual adversary?
Or trees of his garden of Eden, Psalm, 1, 3,
except we grow continually by the virtue of the sap of his spirit; And can
we be his passengers unto the heavenly Jerusalem, Mic, 2.10, Heb, 13, 14,
except we walk on continually in the love of god, and of our neighbor?
wherefore (as the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews exhorts us) 12, 1,
Let us run with patience the race that is set before us. Let us lift up our
hands, 12,
which hang down, and our weak knees, and make straight steps to our feet,
13,
least that which is halting, be turned out of the way, but let it rather be
healed. Yea, Exo. 12.11
let us make have to the promised land, with our loins girte, our shoes on our
feet, and staves in our hands, that we stay not in the way, which leads
from this worldly Egypt, unto the heavenly promised land. And this much
concerning the manner of walking in the way, which leads into everlasting
life.

4. The end of the way is everlasting life.
Now remains, that we show you the end of the way, which in order is the
fourth circumstance. The end of the way, wherein the Apostle exhorts us to
walk, is everlasting life. Neither is it without cause, that I propose unto
you the end of our walking. For the end of all actions, being first in
intention, and last in execution, is by experience found to be of that force,
that it draws us on, (although it stand with our peril) to accomplish yt we
intend, in hope to atchiue ye end, in our minds first proposed. And therefore
Christ our Savior, to encourage us Mat. 7.14
to enter in at the strait gate, and to walk in the narrow way, of due
obedience unto God, proposes the end, which is life, And on the contrary
part, to deter us Mat. 7.13.
from entryng through the wide gate, and walking in the broa^ way of
licentiousness, he proposes also the end, which is Destruction. And what can
be more comfortable the^ life, and the same to be inioyed eternally in the
kingdom of heaven? O^ what can be more fearful, then destruction, and the
same to be continued for ever in hell? Let us then chearefully walk on in the
way of obedience so shall we receive the promised reward. But that we may with
more courage run our race, in hope to obtain the crown, let us take a vewe
of everlasting life, with ye eyes of our mynds, as in gods word it is diversely
described. 1. Everlasting life compared to the land of Canaan.
god in old time gave unto the ancient Israelites the land of Canaan, a land
for the fruitefulnes thereof, said Exodus 3.8, Number. 13.27
to flow with milk and honey that they might, not only possess it, according
to his Genesis 15.14 etc.
promise, but also by the temporal benefits thereof, to be put in mind of
the spiritual blessings in the land of the living: and by their earthly rest
there inioyed after ye bondage in Egypt, to be stirred up with the desire of ye
heavenly rest to be possessed by ye people of god, after their deliverance from
the thraldom of Satan. Read the fourth to the Hebrews, and there shall you
find this doctrine waranted. So is the land of Canaan a figure of everlasting
life. Christ the wisdom of our heavenly Father, 2. Everlasting life called
salvation.
well knows, that this transitory life of ours is subject unto many
calamities, and therefore for our encouragement, he calls everlasting life,
Mat. 10.22 Mat. 13.13.
Salvation whereby undoubtedly he would have us to know, that everlasting life
is that blessed state, wherein we shall be delivered from all calamities of the
body, all griefs of the mind, all corruption of our nature, from sin, from
death, from Satan. So shall our bodies, 1. Cor. 15
which now are corruptible, 42
become incorruptible: which now ar ignominious, 43
become glorious: which now are weak, 44
become strong: which now are natural, 54
become spiritual: which now is mortal, 73
become immortal. And this Salvation, is that life everlasting, which christ
has promised to give to the^ Mat. 10.2, Mar. 13.13
which persevere in patience unto the end. I therefore conclude with the Apostle:
1. Co. 15.57
Thanks be unto god, which has given us victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ: 58.
Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, immovable, aboundaunt always
in the work of the Lord, for as much as ye know, that your labor is not in
vain in the Lord. Christ our Savior, regarding the grossenes of our capacity
in heavenly mysteries, compares everlasting life else where, to Luc. 22, 29 30.
a kingdom, wherein we shall eat and drink at his table, and sit on seats,
and judge the twelve tribes of Israel. By these earthly and corporal
benefits, Christ signifies heavenly and spiritual blessings, assuring us,
that, in the world to come, we shall have the fruition of the Lord, and with
him the fullness of felicity. And this is everlasting life. But know this,
that this only belongs to them, Luc. 22, 28.
which continue with Christ in his tentations. 3. Euerlastting life compared
to a kingdom.
To set forth unto us the exceedyng glory of eternal life, 1, Co. 9.25 2.
Tim. 4.8.
Paul, Iam. 1.12.
James, Reave. 2.10
and the Spirit in the Revelation liken it to a Crown, or Gar^and, which was
wont to be set, in ho^ourable manner, upon their heads, Everlasting life
compared to a Crown or Garland.
which in making masteries got the ^est. But withal hereby they forewarne us,
that except 2. Tim. 2.5.
we strive for the maisterie, and that lawfully, we may ^ot look to be
crowned. 1. Cor. 15.54
O noble ^ictorie achieved for us by Christ, where Satan, hell, sin, the
flesh, the world, and all the enemies of our salvation at once were thoroughly
subdued, so that now he triumphs over them in eternal bliss. Let us therefore
fight manfully under his standard, that we may be crowned gloriously in his
kingdom. But since the end is always fresh in the eye of the mind, 1. Cor.
2.9,
(as is before said) Paul undoubtedly much meditated upon the end of our
spiritual walking, Everlasting life compared to joys not seen, not heard, not
conceived.
which is (as I have showed) eternal life. And yet, his excellent revelation
notwithstanding as one not able in words to describe everlasting life, he
leaves it to the meditations of our minds, showing us, that 1. Cor. 2.9,
the things which God has prepared for them which love him, are such and so
excellent, as the eye has not seen, neither ear has heard, nor has come
into the heart of man. And to conclude, we have a most excellent portrature of
this eternal life in the 21. 6. Everlasting life compared to a goodly city.
chapter of the Revelation of John, where it is compared to a city curiously
built, garnished with gold and precious stones beautified within and without.
In which description, as all things are most excellent, so this is most
comfortable unto the elect, that, whereas he saw no temple, he yealdeth the
reason: Reave. 21 22 23
For, the Lord God almighty* and the lamb, are the temple of it. Adding: And
this city has no need of the sun, neither of the moon to shine in it: for the
glory of God did light it: and the lamb is the light of it. 24
And the people, which are saved shall walk in the light of it: And the kings
of the earth shall bring their glory and their honor unto it. And the gates of
it shall not be shut by day: 25
for there shall be no night there. 26
And the glory and honor of the Gentiles shall be brought unto it. 27
And there shall enter into it none unclean thing, neither whatsoever works
abomination or lies: but they, which are written in the lambs book of life. O
gracious God, which in mercy have prepared so glorious a place for thy
servants. Thy name be praised: Thy name be praised. But calling to mind our
filthiness through sin, let us Revel. 7.14
wash our robes through faithful repentance in the blood of the lamb, that
they may become white: and let us glorify Gods name by a godly life, that it
may appear, that we are his children: Otherwise we may not promise to our
selves the fruition of that rest. And this much concerning the end of the way,
which is everlasting life.

4. The love wherein God must be imitated must be unfeigned, sincere and free
Now follows the fourth end and last point of the text: How God is to be
imitated in love. And this does Paul lay down in these words: Ephe. 5.2
Even as Christ has loved us, and has given himself for us (to be) an
offering, and a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to God. Here the Apostle
shows what manner of love it is, by the practicing whereof God is imitated:
Namely, that we love God and one an other unfeignedly, sincerely, and freely
without regard of merit. For, not every show of love, is allowed before God,
but that love only, The object of our love double.
which is agreeable to the nature of that, which is loved. Then since the
object of our love, is double Mat 22.37 39 mar. 2.30 31. luc. 10.27,
god and our Neighbor, let us view their natures apart. 1. God.
God is Ier. 10.10, Ioh. 17.3. 1. these. 1.9.
true, Leu. 11.44.19.2.1. Pet. 1 16.
holy, and the Iam. 1.17,
fountain of all goodness. Therefore it is meet, that we should love him for
himself, with an unfeigned, sincere, and free love. Our Neighbor, (be it, he
be an heathen, yet is he) an excellent creature of God, Genesis 1.26 and 27.5.1.
made after his image and similitude. 2. Our neighbor.
Therefore to be beloved for the Creators sake, unfeignedly, sincerely, and
freely. How much more ought our love to be such toward our Christian neighbor,
considering, Ephe. 4.24 Col. 3.10.
that in him the image of God, Romans 5.17
which was decayed by Adam, is renewed through christ, Ioh. 1.12
whereby he is become thorough grace the child of God, Romans 8.17
and the heir of everlasting life. So then it follows, that as we ought to
love god, with an unfeigned, sincere and free love, because he is our father, so
should we love one an other, unfeignedly, sincerely, and freely, because we are
his children. And this is that manner of love, which if we practice Ephe. 5.1
we become folowers of God, as dear children.

The love, whereby we imitate God two ways described.
But that I digress not from my text, mark, I beseech you, my brethren, how
Paul describes this manner of love, two ways in the text: First by a double
example, the^ by proof of the second example.

1. By example
Examples in imitatio^ be the playnest documentes, so that they be perfect. Now
consider the godly discretion of Paul. For he here confirms his doctrine by
two examples, against the which none exception can be taken.

1. Of the father.
The first example of this unfeigned, sincere, and free love, is God the Father,
Ioh. 3.16.
who so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. If we
consider this gracious dealing of god with us, we shall find it to be a most
perfect mirror of his free love toward us, what soever herein we way. For if
we examine the causes of the love of God to us ward: When in us, which are
most unjust, and most unholy, there was no cause, why the most just, and most
holy God should love us, this love flowed from his own bounty, as from Iam.
1.17 1. Ioh. 4.10
the fountain of all goodness. If we search into the manner of the love,
wherewith God loved us so, and so exceedingly, that he gave to ransom us from
our spiritual bondage, 1. Pet. 1.18.
not silver, gold, or precious stones, not only a creature to save us
creatures, Heb. 2.16
not an angel to deliver us men, Ioh. 3.16
but his own son, yea his only Son, Mat 1.23,
God to remain God, and man, Heb. 10.5
to be a sacrifice, Phil. 2.8.
by an ignominious death to be offered for us, 1. Cor. 6.20.7.23. 1. Pet. 1.19.
even the price of our redemption. If we take a vewe of the end, for the which
God loved us, we shall perceive, that it was not to the benefit of himself,
or of his Son, Romans ^.^5,
(For God in himself, and of himself, without his creatures, is absolutely
blessed) but to our benefit, Romans 4.3.4
that we through him being saved, Mat. 25.^4
with him might live blessedly for ever. If we ponder, what God which so
dearly has loved us, requires again at our hands: verily nothing, Ephe 2.8
but that he gives us, Romans 5.1.
a lively faith to receive Christ, ^ Cor. 1, ^0
that in him we may receive all things necessary for our salvation, Ephe. 1.4.
and that we be holy, and without blame before him in love. So then ought we
to love, as the Father has loved us, unfeignedly, sincerely, and freely, that
we may be found Ephe. 5.^
followers of God as dear children. But if any object, that the love of the
Father is not mentioned in the text, and thereupon infer, that I digress
from the same, I answer: It is included in the little word Cai, so that the
sentence may be thus translated: 1. Ephe. 5.^
Even as Christ also has loved us, whereby, by a secret speech, the love of
the Father is insinuated, as in plain terms, the love of the Son is
proposed.

2. Of the sone
The second example of this unfeigned, sincere, and free love, is God the Son,
Ioh. 10.11,
who as a good shepherd gave his life for us his sheep: Romans 5.6.
who being just, 8.
died for us unjust: who, when as yet we were sinners, 10.
died for us: who, when we were Gods enemies, reconciled us unto him by his
own death, that by his life, we being reconciled, might be saved. If therefore
we thus love, as Christ has loved us, unfeignedly, sincerely, and freely,
without all regard of merit, Ephe. 5.2,
then walk we in love, then are we followers of Gods as beloved children Act.
11.26.
we are called Christians of christ, let us resemble him in manners, else are we,
our name notwithstanding, monsters, we take our selves to be the Disciples of
Christ, let us then learn to practice the precepte of Christ, which he
teaches us saying: Io. 13.34.
A new commandment give I unto you, that ye love one an other: as I have
loved you, that ye also love one an other. We would be all reputed the
children of our father, that is in heaven. But Mat. 5.45.
he makes his sun to arise on the evil, and the good: and sends rain ^n
the just, and unjust. Let us then: that we may be his children, Mat. 5.44.
love our ennimies: bless them that curse us: do good to them that hate us:
and pray for them that hurt and persecute us. Let us consider (as Christ
teaches us) Mat. 5.46.
that if we love them, which love us, we shall have no revvard: for the
publicans do even the same. 47
And if we be friendly to our brethren only, we do no singular thing: for
even the Publicans do likewise. 48
But we must be perfect, as our Father, which is in heaven, is perfect.
Neither can there be any precept fuller of equity, then this: Ephe. 5.2
Walk in love, even as Christ has loved us: Wherein it is required, that we,
which are beloved of God in Christ, should love our brethren, whom, the Father
loves in the Son, as tenderly as he loves us. And thus have I taught you,
my brethren, following Paul's steps in this place, by the example both of the
Father, and of the Son, what manne^ of love God requires at our hands that
we may prove Ephe. 5.1,
followers of him as dear children.

2. By proof of this example.
Now follows in the text the second way, whereby Paul describet^ the manner
of love, by the practis^ whereof we become followers o^ God, when as he
says: Ephe. 5.2
And hat^ given himself for us (to be) an offering, and a sacrifice of a sweet
smelling, savor to God. Ephe. 5.2
Paul having lastly proposed Christ himself unto us, as a perfect pattern,
after ye which we must fashion that our love, wherein we must walk, that we
may be found Ephe. 5.2
followers of God, as dear children, forgets not, to prove unto us the
perfection of the pattern of our imitatio^, (I mean of the love of christ) by
the excellent effect, which came thereof, namely our full, and perfect
redemption, Heb. 9.25,
wrought by the oblation of Christ here mentioned. The rule of Christ is Mat.
7.17.12.33. Luc. 6.43.44
that the tree is known by the fruit, so that the bad fruit shows the tree
to be bad, and ^he good fruit shows the tree to ^ee good. Then follows it,
that ^he love of Christ to vs-wardes is most perfect, Ioh. 3.16,
the fruit whereof is ^ur salvation and everlasting life. yet ^till note,
beloved, that the love of Christ is here proposed unto us, not ^o much to be
contemplated (al^hough it deserve a most reverend co^templation) as to be
imitated. But forsomuche as under this effect of Christ's love, Ioh. 13.1
wherewith he loved us unto the end, the work of our whole ^edemption offers
it self to be considered, it shall behoue me, following my text, to deliver
the same unto you (as God shall inhable me) more particularly. In our
redemption, wrought by a sacrifice, 6. circumstances to bee-noted.
The effect of Christ's love toward us, (as I have said) Ioh. 3.15.
is our redemption, and our redemption is wrought by a sacrifice, and in this
sacrifice, (as Paul here describes it,) Six circumstances are to be
considered: The first, who was the sacrificer: The second, How he sacrificed:
The third, 14
what, and of what kind the sacrifice was: The fourth, For whom it was
sacrificed: The fifth, To whom it was sacrificed The sixth, what effect the
sacrific^ wrought. When I shall briefly hau^ entreated severally of these six
point^ I will conclude, and commit you ^ the grace of God.

1. Christ is the sacrifice,
Man was created by GOD in the beginning Genesis 1, 26,
after his image an^ similitude, Ephe. 4, 24.
in righteousness and tr^^ holiness. But alas through the fall ^ Adam in Man
the image and simil^tude of God is defaced, and his rig^teousnesse, and true
holiness is clea^ blotted out, Ephe. 2.1.3,
so that now we are de^ in our trespasses and sins, being by natu^ the
children of wrath, Rom, 3, 23,
and deprived the glory of God. Now let us cons^der the mercy of God. When w^
were not able, by our own pow^ to deliver our selves from this v^speakable
misery, phe. 1, 4,
into the which th^rough sin we were fallen, e Go^ had devised, before the
foundation of t^^ world, to restore us to liberty, by a^ holy conciliation to
be made b^twene him and us. But let us consider how the case stood, God ke^
his covenant, which he made with Man: Man brake the covenant, which he made
with God. God the Creator was offended: Man the Creature had offended. God
needed not to seek a reconciliation with Man, Romans 1.25
who of him self without Man is blessed: Man durst not seek a reconciliation,
with God, who of himself without God, Leu. 27, 26 Gal. 3.10.
is curssed.

Two things in the Sacrificer to be noted, 1, his Substance, 2 his Office.
Who then might become a fit mediator of peace, as well in respect of his
substance or person, as of his function or office? Behold the To. 16.25.
revelation of the mystery, which was kept secret since the world began, 1.
Cor. 2.7.8.
even the hid wisdom, which God had determined before the world, unto our
glory, which none of the Princes of this world has known.

1, The Sacrificer by his substance or person is god and man,
Gal. 4, 4.5.
When the fullness of time was com, God sent forth his son, made of a
woman, made under the law, that he might redeem us, which were under the
law, that we might receive the addoption of Sons. This was a fit
mediator, an apt reconcyler, a convenient daies-man between god and Man.
Christ, being God, hable to save us.
For being Mat. 1.23,
god even the psalm. 2.7. Joan. 3.16.
Son of god, he durst present him self before god his Father, to entreat
for Man, Phil. 2.6.
as one which thought it no robbery to be equal with god: Christ being Man
willing to save us.
And being Matt. 1.18. Luc. 2.7.
Man* even the Son of Marie the virgin, was willing to reconcile Man unto god,
Heb. 4.15.
as one which was touched with the feeling of our infirmities. And so in the
person of the atonement-maker, was fulfilled the divine prophecy of Esaias,
saying: Esa. 7.14. Mat. 1.23.
Behold, a virgin shall be with child and shall Bear a Son, and they shall
call his name Emanuell, which is by interpretation, god with us. And this is
he which is the Sacrificer, Psalm, 2, 7, Heb. 5.5.
god with god and Phil, 2.7.
Man with Man Ion. 6.51.
one Christ, Psalm, 2, 7,
the Son of god, Mat. 3, 17. Mar. 1, 11.
the second person in the blessed Trinity. Now this much being spoken of the
person and substance of the Sacrificer, let us now more nearly way, who, and
how great he is by the consideration of his Function and office,

The Sacrificer, by his function or Office, is Christ, so called for that he
is: 1, our Prophet: 2, our Christ: 3. our King,
None was found fit, (as ye have heard) to be the Sacrificer to God for Man,
but the only Sone of God, who in respect of his function or office, is called
the Meshiah, Christ the Anointed. This name the word of God attributes 1.
Kin. 19.16
to Prophets, Leu, 16, 32 Number, 3, 3,
Priests, and Iud. 9.8, 1, Sam. 9, 16, 01, 1,
Kings, as well because they were anointed with material oil, (in token of
spiritual graces, wherewith god had endued them for the executing of their
offices) as also for that they were figures of Christ then to come. But this
name agrees properly to our redeemer, whom god anointed, not with material
oil, but Psalm, 45, 8, 89, 21,
with the oil of gladness above his fellows that is, with the full measure of
his spiritual graces, yt he being our great Prophet, our high Priest, and our
mighty King, might be a fit Sacrificer to reconcile us unto god.

1 Christ our Prophet,
Necessary it was, that the Sacrificer, should be the Prophet of gods people,
that Esa, 1, 16, 1, Luc, 4.18,
the Spirit of the Lord being upon him, he might therefore annoint him,
that he should preach the Gospel to the poor: he might send him, that he
should heal the broken hearted that he should Preach deliverance to the Captives
and recovering of sight to the blind that he should set at liberty them, that
are bruised: 19.
And that he should preach the acceptable year of the Lord: that he knowing
the will of his Father in our reco^ciliation, Heb, 10, 9,
should do the same.

2, Christ our Priest,
Necessary it was that the Sacrificer should be the Priest of gods people, that
since Psalm, 40.7, Heb, 10, 6,
god had no pleasure in burnt offerings, 10:
and sin offerings he might offer his body in sacrifice to god the father and so
do his will, 9
by the which we are sa^tified: 10,
4.
And for that it was impossible, that the blood of bulls and goats should
take away sins, 1, Pet. 1, 18,
he might redeem us, with his precious blood, 19,
being a lamb undefiled, and without spotte: And finally, Heb, 10, 12
that after he had offered one sacrifice for sins: he might sit for ever at
the right hand of God, 13,
and from thence-foorth tarry till his enemies should be made his footstool.

3 Christ, our King,
Necessary it was, that the sacrificer should be the king of gods people Io,
16, 33,
to overcome ye world, Luc, 22, 42
to subdue the flesh, Mat, 4, 1, etc. Mar, 1, 12, etc Luc: 4, 1, etc,
to conquer Satan, Io, 8, 46,
to vanquish sin, Rom, 5, 2,
to pacify gods wrath, Ose, 13, 14 1, Co. 15, 54,
to pluck out the sting of deeth, 55,
to spoil hell of her victory Psa, 68, 19, Ephesians, 4, 8,
to lead captivity captive, to give gifts unto men, Psa, 110, 1, mat, 22, 44,
and to triumph over all his enemies: Io, 10, 4.
yea to direct us his people with his word, 10, 22,
to guide us by his spirit, Psalm, 2, 9,
to defend us by his power, Luc, 1, 32,
unto whom god gave the throne of his Father David, 33,
that he might reign over the house of Jacob for ever, that of his kingdom
should be none end. And thus ye have heard my beloved, the ordinance of God,
that whom the sacrificer should reconcile unto God, them should he instruct, as
their Prophet, sanctify as their Priest, and guide, as their King. Judge ye
then, whether the Papists be not of the number of those false teachers, whom
Peter prophesied should come, 2, Pet. 2.1,
which should deny the Lord that bought them, which undoubtedly they do,
when by bringing in the traditions of men, they deny the fullness of Christ's
prophecy: by setting up their sacrifice of the Mass, they deny ye fullness of
Christ's Priesthood: by mayntayning, that the Bishop of Rome is Christ's vicar
general upon earth, they deny the fullness of Christ's kingdom. But let them
take heed and repent in time, otherwise (according to Peter's commination) 2.
Pet, 2, 1.
they will hring upon themselves swift damnation. And this much concerning
the sacrificer.

2, Christ sacrificed voluntarily wilyngly, and of his own ac
Now comes to be considered, the second circumstance of our redemption,
how, and with what mind this sacrificer sacrificed. And that is, he
sacrificed voluntarily, willingly, and, of his own accord. That this
persuasion might be settled in our hearts, Paul says not: (as truly he
might) Christ redeemed us, or reconciled us to God, but, when he had said:
Ephesians, 5, 2,
Christ loved us, to show the wonderful excellency, and incomprehensible
measure of his love toward us, he adds: Ephesians, 5.2,
And gave himself for us. So was the prophecy of David, concerning Christ's
voluntary death, fulfilled, reported by the author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews in this manner: Ps, 4, 7.8.9 Heb, 10, 15,
Wherefore, when Christ comes into the world, he says: Sacrifice, and
offering thou would not: but a body have thou ordained me: In burnt
offringes, 6,
and sin offerings thou have had no pleasure. 7
Then I said, Lo, I come, (in the beginning of the book it is written of me,)
that I should do thy will, O God. And thy will is, that he should
voluntarily die for us. In th 10 of John, where Christ teaches us, that Io,
10, 11
he is the good shepherd, and that we are his sheep, to testify his prompt
mind to die for us, he pronounces, that whereas Io. 10, 18,
no man could take his life from him, he laid it down of himself, for his
sheep. If any object and say: Yea but when Christ saw, that his bitter death
approached, comparing it to Mat, 26, 39 mar, 14, 36, Luc, 22, 42,
a cup, he prayed his Father, that, if it were possible it might pass from
him: How then was his death voluntary, since gladly he would eschew it? I
answer: this speech of Christ shows not any unwillingness to dye for us,
but the truth of both his natures, humane and divine, and his willingness to
offer himself in sacrifice for our redemption. For in that, Christ was subject
to humane affections and passions Mat. 26 38
as heaviness, Mar. 14, 33.
trouble of mind, Luc. 22.44
and agony, (into the which he fell, not so much through the terror of death
approaching, as the sensible feeling of Gods wrath then begone to be laid upon
him for our sins) it shows, that he was a true and a natural man () But in
that he subdueth the infirmity of the flesh, Mar. 26, 39 42. mar. 14.36. Lu,
22, 42
and submits his will to the will of his Father, he shows himself to be
god, who being conceived, as touching his manhood, without sin, moderateth
his humayne affections, in such a temperature, by the power of his godhead
that, although he were subject unto them, yet they brake not out to rebellion
against god, but were preserved without blemishe of sin. And lastly he
willingly yields to gods determination, and voluntarily submits himself
to the death of the cross, concluding his prayer: Mat 16.39
Nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will: Mar. 14, 3
Not that I will, but that thou will: Luc. 22.42
Not my will, but thine be done. Ye see then, that the manner of his
sacrificing, was by a vvilling and a voluntary death. Oh the exceeding love of
Christ to usward, Romans 5, 8,
who when we were yet sinners died for us. Io. 15.13.
Greater love than this has no man, when any man bestows his life for his
friends. But we are the friends of Christ, 14
if we do whatsoever he commands us. And this is his commandment, that
Io. 15, 12,
we love one an other as he has loved us. But he loved us with an unfeigned
love, which of his own accord gave himself for us. Let us therefore love
one an other unfeignedly, as beseems the disciples of Jesus Christ. And this
may suffice to be spoken of the manner of the sacrificing of Christ.

3. The sacrifice was the innocent soul, the undefiled body and the precious
blood of Christ.
Now in the third place the sacrifice it self comes to be considered.

3. The sacrifice was the innocent soul, the undefiled body and the precious
blood of Christ.
Herein must be noted two things: Two things noted.
First, the substance, then the qualities of this sacrifice, that thereby we
may learn: both what it is, and of what kind it is.

1, The substance of the Sacrifice is the man-head of Christ.
Of the Substance of this sacrifice Paul speaks in this text, when as he
tells us, that Ephesians. 5.2,
Christ gave himself for us. So then: look what christ is, as touching his
Man-head, and that is the sacrifice offered for us. But Christ, according to
his humanity, stands of a reasonable soul, and an humane body. Therefore it
follows, that he gave his soul, Christ's soul given to redeem our souls,
his body, for our bodies.
to redeem our souls, and his body, to redeem our bodies. Body for body, and
soul for soul* yea, he gave for us Mat. 27.35
his body, to be crucified: Ion. 19, 34
his blood, to be shed Ion. 19 03
his soul to be separated: Ion. 19, 33
his life, to be yealded. So then so tenderly did Christ love us, that Pet^^
18.19
he redeemed us, not with corruptible things, silver and gold: 20,
but with his own precious blood, as of a lamb undefiled, and without spot.
Which was ordained before the foundation of the world, but was declared in the
last times for our sakes. Neither was there any thing fit to become the
sacrifice for sin: but the Son of God, being free from sin. For although
the sacrifices of the law were ordained by God, yet Heb. 10, 4,
was it impossible, that by the blood of bulls and goats, our sins should
be taken away. And although Angels be most excellent creatures of God, yet was
the nature of none of them fit for this sacrifice. And therefore ye Son of god
took not upon him Heb. 2, 16,
the nature of an Angel, but of Luc. 1, 35,
Man, that in his Manhead, he might reconcile Man unto god, Genesis 2.6.
as in Man-head Man fell from god. This was the only way to satisfy gods
justice, and to pacify his wrath, that Romans 5.19.
as by the disobedience of one Man Adam; many were made sinners: So by the
obedience of one Man, christ, 12,
many might also be made righteous: * And that, as, by one Man Adam, sin
entered into the world, and death by sin: * So, by one man Christ* we might
receive the atonement, thorough the remission of sins, to everlasting life.
Of this point entreats Paul more at large in the fifth to the Romans, a
scripture for this purpose diligently to be wayed. And thus ye fee, that only
christ Revel. 5.5.
the Lion, which is of the tribe of Judah, and the root of David, is worthy to
open the book of life, and to lose the seven seals of the Mysteries of the
kingdom of heaven* Io. 1, 29.
even the lamb of god, which takes away but sins* Revel. 5.6.
the lamb of god, which was killed for us: 1. Pet. 1.20.
the lamb of God, which is a^ ordained for us, before the foundation of the
world. And for conclusion of this point mark, I beseech you this mystery in
our reconciliation, that he only is the sacrifice, who only is the
sacrificer, Christ the one, Christ the other, Romans 5.1, Heb. 10 14.
who by himself has reconciled us to god his father. Therefore blame us not,
although we dare not teach (as do the Papists most blasphemously) that Christ
is offered in the Lords supper, by the minister to god, for our sins, Heb.
9.26.
(who in the end of the world, was made manifest once, to put away sin:
by the sacrifice of himself,) but believe us, when we teach, that Luc. 22, 19
1. Cor. 11.24 25
thereby the memory of his death is continued until his coming, according to
the institution of Christ himself. Now since Christ has loved us, more than
he has loved his body, his blood, his soul, his life, all the which he gave
for 1, Co. 6.20,
the price of our redemption, 7, 23.
let us love one an other Ephesians. 5.2.
as he has loved us, and so become the followers of God as dear children.
And this much concerning the Substance of the Sacrifice, which is Christ
himself.

2, The qualities of the sacrifice were an holy oblation and an obedient
suff^yng-
Heb. 10.1.
The ceremonial law had the shadovv of good things to come, and not the
very image of the things. Therefore Paul knowing, that Romans 10.4.
Christ is the end of the law, Mat. 5.17.
(which has fulfilled the law of commandementes through his obedience, Ephesians.
2.14.
and performed, what soever was figured in the law of ceremonies, for our
redemption) calls him in this text Ephe. 5.2.
an offering, and a Sacrifice. The kinds of Sacrificers in the law of Moses
were many and sundry, not devised by Men, Leu. 1.1. Number. 7.89.
but ordained by god, to signify partly the filthiness of sin in us, Esa,
59, 2,
whereby we be divided from god, and partly the expiation of sin through
Christ, Heb, 9, 14,
whereby we be reconciled unto god. All these kinds Paul reduces unto two:
Ephesians. 5.2.
An oblation, and an host, both the which he terms Christ to be. And not
without cause. For such was Christ the sacrifice in true performance, as were
these in shadowed figure. So by the nature of them, we may learn the qualities
of the sacrifice, which is Christ. For first Paul calls Christ Ephesians. 5.2.
Prosphoran, an oblation, an holy offering: Secondly he calls him Thusian an
host, a slain sacrifice. By the first, we learn Christ's Luc, 1, 35,
holiness, by the second we learn Christ's Psalm, 22, 1, Mar. 27, 46, Mar.
15.34,
suffering. It was meet, that this sacrifice should be holy, that it might
sanctify the unholy: It was meet, that this sacrifice should suffer, that it
might bear gods wrath due for sin. The offering in the old law, is
therefore reputed holy, because it was such, as god, which is holy, appointed to
be offered. The slain sacrifice in the same law, is justly termed to suffer,
because it was a sensible beast, or a sensible bird, appointed by God to be
slain. Much might be said of the figures, whcich are these, but, for want of
time, I will only speak of the truth, which is Christ.

Two qualities of the Sacrifice to be considered.
And in him, two things here are to be considered: First his Holiness,
Secondly, his suffering.

1. Christ's holiness.
It was most necessary, that this sacrifice should be holy, for otherwise Mat.
5.13, Mar. 9.50. Luc. 14, 34,
it had not been fit, to have been offered to the most holy God: It had not
benefit, to put away our unholiness. It had not been fit, to have sanctified
us. If the salt in it self had not saltness, Mat. 5.13, Mar. 9.50. Luc. 14,
34,
it could not season the things that it seasoneth. If the fire in it self had
not heat, it could not heat those things which are before it. If ye sun in it
self had not light, it could not lighten the superioure and inferior bodies.
No more could this sacrifice Christ, make us holy in the sight of god, were
it not that it is holy of it self. For if reason require, that the thing,
which is to imparte a quality with another, be first fully endued with the
same it self, then must it necessarily be required, that Christ, which was to
make us holy, be first, in himself, most holy. Now let us consider the
gracious providence of God, to usward. That Christ might become an holy
sacrifice, to make us holy unto our God, Mar. 1.18, 20. Lu. 1.35.
he was conceived without sin by the holy Ghost, Mat. 1.25. Luc. 2.7.
he was borne without sin of the virgin Mary, Mat. 5.17. 1. Pet. 2, 22.
he lived without sin in true obedience, Mat. 27.24 Luc. 23, 47,
he dyed without sin an innocent death. For these causes Christ is called
Luc, 1, 35.
the holy thing, 1. Pet. 2, 9.
by whom we are become a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, and holy
nation, a people set at liber-tie: But to what end? verily that 1. Pet. 2, 9.
we should show forth the virtues of him, that has called us out of
darkness into merueilous light. And what? could we not be saved, were it
not, that our sacrifice Christ were in this absolute manner most holy? No
verily. For God will not that mankind be saved, except by Man his law given to
mankind, be fulfilled, That is, God will so be found merciful, toward
mankind, in remitting of sin, that he will still remain just, in requiring of
mankind obedience to his laws. Therefore, when all mankind was gone astray,
so that To. 3.10
there was none righteous, no not one: 11.
None that understood, None that sought after god, ye son of god himself
became innocent man yt in ye nature of man he might obey the laws of God, yt
Romans 5, 19
as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by one man's obedience
many might be made righteous, as also before I proved.

Two lessons to be learned.
And here we may learn two lessons.

1, the greatness of our sins,
The one: The greatness of sin, which could not be put away, but by the death
of the Son of God:

2, The assurance of our salvation, Leu. 11, 44,
The other, the assurance of our salvation, which stands with the justice of
God. Let us therefore so hope for life everlasting, that 1. Pet. 1.16.
we he holy, as our redeemer is holy. And this much of the first quality of
the sacrifice, which is absolute holiness.

2. Christ's fferyng.
The second quality of this sacrifice, which is Christ our Savior, is his
suffering. This his condition Paul puts us in remembrance of, when in the
text, he calls him Thusian, an host, a Sacrifice. The things whereof this
sacrifice stood, was either Psa. 50.13.
a bull: or Leu. 1.2.
an Ox, or 3, 1,
an heffer: or Number. 19.2
a calfe, or Leu. 4 3.
a Ram or Genesis 22.13
an ewe, or Leu. 3.7.
a lamb, or 9.3.
a goat, or 1.2.
a turtle dove, or 12.8.
a young pigion, which was appointed by ye law, first to be 12.8.
slain, the^ 3 2.
to be, offered by ye priest unto god, for ye sines of ye people. Mat. 27.35
Hereby was signified Ioh. 19.34:
ye suffering of Christ, 33,
ye sheddyng of his blood, 30.
his death upon the Cross, whereby he might become 30.
a propitiatory sacrifice for the taking away of the sins of the world. The
Patriarchs, the Prophets, and all the children of God, from Adam to Christ,
as they set the eyes of their bodies in the exercise of religion upon these
sacrifices and oblations, so did they set the eyes of their minds upon Christ
then to come. Thus did Esaias interpret these ceremonies, when he foreshewed,
that Esa. 53, 3,
Christ should be such a man, as should have a good experience of sorrows
and infirmities, 4*
that Christ only should take on him our infirmity, and bear our payns: 5
that Christ should be wounded for our offenses, and smitten for our
wickedness: that the pain of our punishment might be laid upon him, and that
with his stripes we might be healed. That the Lord would throw upon Christ
all our sins: 6
7
That Christ should suffer violence, and be evil entreated, and should not
open his mouth: That christ should be led as a sheep to be slain, and yet
should be as still as a lamb before the shearer, and not open his mouth: That
christ should be taken from the prison and judgment, 8
that he should be cut off from the ground ^f the living, which punishment
should ^oe upon him, for the transgressio^ of gods people. That christ should
have his grave ^iuen him with the condemned, 9
and with ^he rich man at his death: whereas he should never do violence,
nor unright, neither should there be any deceiptfulnes (...) his mouth:
Nevertheless, 10,
that it should please the Lord to smite Christ with in^^^mitie, that when he
had made his soul an offering for sin, he might see long lasting seed: 11
That Christ should see the fruit and labor of his soul, and be satisfied:
who, being the righteous servant of the Lord, with his knowledge should
justify the multitude, for he should bear their sins. 12
And that therefore the Lord would give him his part among the great ones, and
that he should divide the spoil with the mighty, because he had given over
his soul to death, and was reckoned among the transgressors: which
nevertheless should take away the sins of the multitude, and make
intercession for the misdoers. And that I hold you not longer, dearly beloved,
either in the figures, or prophecies of the old Testament, which concern
christ's suffering, whereby he became Ephesians, 5, 2,
a slain sacrifice for sine, let us call to mind, what thereof is reported in
the New. Ioh, 4.6.
Then shall we find that christ's whole life was a perpetual suffering:
where in he was a wearied, mat. 21.18,
hungered, and Io, 19.28.
thirsted: wherein he was 2.13.
bannished, Mat, 11, 18.
slandered and 22 46, Luc. 3, 29
persecuted: wherein he was 4, 1,
tempted Mat. 5 2
fasted, and 26, 40.
watched: wherein he labored, Luc. 4.31.
preached, and 22.44.
prayed: wherein he Mat. 26, 38
sorowed, Mar. 14, 33
grieved and Luc. 22, 44
swette water and blood: wherein he was Mat. 29.49
betrayed by Judas Mar. 14.50
sorsaken by his Apostles and Mat, 26.57
apprehended by the soldiers: wherein he was without cause 27, 40.
exclamed against wrongfully Mat. 26.60
accused, and unjustly 27, 24,
condemned: wherein he was 27.28.
stripped, Mat. 27.30
buffeted, and 27.30.
spitte upon: wherein he was Luc. 23.64
blinde-folded, Luc. 23, 29
mocked, and disdainefully 23, 29,
crowned with thorns wherein he was Mat. 27.35.
crucified, Mat 27.29,
tormented, and Io, 18, 25,
wounded, wherein he became Gal. 3, 13,
accurssed of God, Mat. 27.46.
sustained his, wrath, and Phil. 2.8.
died a most shamfull death. But what was the cause, that Christ the 1. Pet. 1,
19
innocent lamb of god, should thus suffer for our redemption; verily to
pacify Gods wrath, and to satisfy his justice, who would not suffer the sin
of mankind unpunished in mankind Therefore it was expedient, that 1. Pet, 3, 18.
the just should suffer for the Ioh. 10.11,
unjust, that the shepherd should give his life for his sheep, that the Lord,
should redeem his people

In the sacrifice christ shines, as in a merror, Gods wisdom extendyng his
mercy, and maintainyng his justice.
O the unsearchable wisdom of God our gracious Lord, which by the holiness,
and suffering of Christ his Son, has both extended his mercy, and maintained
his justice: Extended his mercy, 1. Gods mercy extended
in forgiving his elect their sins, and that through Christ's Holiness: 2. Gods
justice m^intained.
Maintained his justice, in punishing the nature of man, for the sins of men,
and yt through christ's suffryng. And thus much concerning ye Second quality of
the Sacrificer, which is the suffering of Christ our Lord.

4, The sacrifice was offered for us.
The fourth circumstane in our redemption to be observed, is, Who they are for
whom this Sacrifice was offered Paul lays that down, when he uses these
words, Ephesians, 5.2,
For us. In the words before, the Apostle exhorting the Ephesians, to lead a
godly life, speaks unto them in this manner: Ephesians. 5, 1,
Be ye folowers of God, as Children and walk ye in love: but, describing
the manner of love wherein we should walk, by the example of Christ, he
alters the person joining himself which wrote, with the Ephesians to whom
he wrote, and adds, 5.2.
Even as christ has loved us, and given himself for us.

Hereby we learn that the believing Iwes, as was the writer, and the believing
Gentiles, as were they to whom the Epistle was written, are they for whom
Christ offered himself.

Christ offered for the beleeuyng, 1, Jews 2. Gentiles.
But here more deeply must be considered the state and condition of both. And
that shall we find, when by Gods word we learn, what we are by nature, we
are by nature the children of wrath,
Luc. 6.44.
the lances must be such, as is the tree: Iam. 3.11.6
the surges must be such, as is the fountain. But Adam Genesis 3.6
fallen from god by transgression, is the tree from whence we spring: Adam 3,
7.
stained with sin, is the fountain from whence we slow. So are we by our
parentage alienated from God, and stained with sin, Genesis 5.3.
being descended from Adam after his fall. Such were we for whom Christ gave
himself. So many Sacrifices, being all figures of the sacrifice of Christ,
ordained of god to be Leu. 4.2,
offered for the sins of the people, do euidenly prove that Gods people, for
whom Christ was offered are all polluted with sin. It is true, that the
ancient Israelites were grievously* Exo. 1.11. etc,
oppressed in Aegipt by the tyranny of Pharao, and from thence Exodus 14.1,
delivered by ye commandment of God, through the conduction of Moses, but
with all, thereby is prefigured, that we be all through sin, became slaves to
Satan in this world, and through the will of God, by the power of Christ
delivered from that spiritual captivity. The Prophets, Christ, and the
Apostles teach, that they, for whom Christ died, are Romans 5.8.
steined with sin, 1. Tim. 1, 15
transgressors of Gods law Gal. 3, 13.
and subject to his curse. Esaye propheciyng of our redemption, calls us Esa.
53, 4.
weak, 53.5
wounded, and sinful 53.6,
. Christ, speaking of the same matter, pronounces Mat, 9, 12,
That the whole need not a physician, but they, that are sick: Mat. 9.13,
And that he came not, to call the righteous, but the sinners to repentance.
And Paul, speaking of the accomplishment of our salvation, leaves it thus
recorded: 1. Tim, 1, 15
This is a true saying, and by all means worthy to be received, that Christ
Jesus came into the world to save sinners,

That christ saves sinners, teacheh us two things, our own misery 2 gods
mercy.
It may be, ye some will demand, why I urge so greatly this point. I answer:
Chiefly for two causes.

1. our own misery,
First to teach us, by acknowledging of our sins, Mat, 23, 12
to humble our selves under the mighty hand of god that he may advance us:
Ioh. 3.16
and to seek unto christ by faith, that he may deliver us: knowing that 11 32,
God has shut up all in unbelief: that he might have mercy on all. And to
this end does Paul dispute mightily in the Epistle to the Romans, proving
that, Rom, 3, 20
by the works of the law, no flesh can be justified in the sight of God. But
that, 24,
we are justified freely by grace, through the redemption, that is in Christ
concluding, that 28.
a man is justified by faith without the works of the law.

2, Gods mercy,
Then, to set before the eyes of our minds, the exceeding measure of the love
of God toward us, Io. 3, 16,
which so loved the world, that he has given his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have eternal life. But seeing
Rom, 5, 10
God has thus loved us, when we were his enemies, that he reconciled us unto
himself, by the death of his Son, ought not we then Ephesians, 5, 1,
to be followers of god, as dear children, 2.
and to walk in love, as Christ has loved us, and given himself for us (to
be) an offering and a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to god. Hitherto
concerning the persons, for whom christ died, even for us miserable sinners.

5, This sacrifice was offered to God.
The fifth circumstance, in our redemption diligently to be considered, is unto
whom this holy sacrifice was offered by Christ for our reconciliation. This
does Paul in this text evidently show, when as he teaches, that it was
offered Ephesians, 5, 2,
to god. When parties at unity grow to discord, then is there occasion
offered of reconciliation, which cannot be accomplished, but by the good
discretion of a dayes-man, by whose means, the party offending is reconciled
to the party offended. So stood the case between god and man continued in
that perfection, Gen, 1, 26.
wherein God had created him. 5.27.
But when Man had transgressed the laws of his God Gen, 3, 6.7,
by eating of the forbidden fruit, then grew there discord between God and
Man Man the creature, Man the party offending God offended,
became the party offending: and God the creator, the party offended. But
such was the peril of this falling out Gen, 2, 17,
that Man became subject to gods wrath and judgment. Hence grew the occasion
of an holy reconciliation, wherein the favor of God only, which was offended,
was to be obtained for Man only, which had offended. Christ the Dayesman,
But what fit days-man could than be found to reconcile man unto God? Only
Christ, both God and man, as more at large before I showed. And how then? God
would not, yt this reconciliation should be wrought by diminishing ye least
jot of his justice.

The justice of God considered in two points: 1, obedience, punishment.
Herein stands the justice of God, urged by him in this reconciliation. 1.
That mankind keep the law given: 2. That mankind be punished for the law
broken. And thus was he affected, unto whom the sacrifice of pacification
was, to be offered. Mark now ye discretion of christ our dayes-man. In his
Manhead he 2, Cor. 5, 21
obeys Gods laws: In his man-head he is Pet, 2, 22,
punished for the breach of Gods laws* he obeys Gods law, by his innocent
life:? Obedience yielded by Christ's innocent life.
He is punished for the breach of Gods law, by his dolorous death. By his
obedience, he satisfies Gods justice: By his suffering, punishment sustained
by Christ's dolourous death.
he pacifieth Gods wrath. Thus did Christ our dayes-man offer himself obedient
and patient, to God the party offended, so to win his favor to Man the
party offending. By this means Christ, 2, Cor, 5, 21
which never committed sin, made himself to be reputed a sinner for us, that
we which are full of sin, should be reputed in him righteous before God. That,
Gal, 3.13
he becoming accursed for us, 14
we might become blessed thorough him. So was it necessary, that unto God this
sacrifice should be offered, that we thereby unto god might be reconciled. Of
this point this much may suffice.

6: This sacrifice wrought our full redemption.
The sixth and last circumstance of our redemption, proposed by Paul in this
text to our consideration, shows, what effect this sacrifice wrought, and
what success Christ had in this his attempt, thus to reco^cile mankind unto
god. This point is therefore the more deeply to be considered because therein
either is the rising again into consolation, or the downfall into desperation.
For, if Christ prevailed in this his mediation, then are we saved: but if he
failed, then are we damned. Paul therefore to heal the wound of the
conscience pierced with sin, concludes, that this Sacrifice, thus offered by
Christ, yielded, Ephesians. 5:2:
as a sweet smelling sauoure in the nose-therles of God. By this metaphorical
speech borrowed from the manner of offering incense, and burnt Sacrifices the
Apostle shows, that Esa: 53, 10
the devise of the Lord prospered in the hand of Christ: That is to say, that
Gen 3, 15
Christ the seed of the woman has troaden down the head of the Serpent: That
Heb, 10, 14
christ our high priest, with this his one offering, has consecrated us for
ever, unto God, which are sanctified: That Gal, 3.13
Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law Deu: 21:23:
being him self made a curse for us: That Heb: 10:16
the Lord in the blood of his son has made with us his elect his new
covenant: that he will put his laws in our hearts, and write them in our
minds: 17,
And that he will remember no more our sins and iniquities. And this is the
mighty effect of the gracious reconciliation mercifully undertaken, and
wonderfully accomplished by Christ our Lord. I showed before that the oblations
and Sacrifices of the old law were all figures of the Sacrifice of Christ, and
their Priesthood a sine of his priesthood Then must it proportionably follow,
The acceptatio^ of christ's sacrifice figured in the approbation of the
oblations and sacrifices of the Fathers,
that the acceptance of their sacrifices before god, was also a figure of the
allowance of the sacrifice of Christ. Gen: 4.4.
So had the Lord in ancient time respect unto Habell and unto his oblation,
Heb. 11:4:
insomuch that god himself testified of his gifts. Genesis 8.21.
So did the Lord smell a sweet favor from the whole burnt offering of Noah,
after the flood, offered upon the alter. Leu. 9.24. 2. Chro. 7, 1.
So did the Lord eftsoons send down fire from heaven which consumed the burnt
offeringes and the sacrifices, which in his law he had appointed to be
offered to him. What shall we think? Does the Lord delight in bulls flesh,
and in the blood of goats? Psalm. 5, 8, 9.10.11, 12.13.
No: But the Lord our god, by accepting these sacrifices, prefigureth the
allowance before his majesty, of the sacrifice of Jesus christ whereof these
were shadows and figures, as before I said. Thus was Heb. i9.28.
Christ once offered to take away the sins of many, 24,
and is entered into the very heavens to appear now in the sight of god for
us: 26.
who, by the sacrifice of himself, has put away sin, Psalm, 110.4. Heb.
5.6.
remaining a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech: and is set down
at the right hand of god the Father in power and glory Psalm. 110.1. Mat.
22.44.
until his enemies be made his footstool. And this much concerning the last
point of our redemption.

The conclusion exhortatory.
Seeing threfore, brethren (that I may conclude the whole with the words of
holy scripture) that by the blood of Jesus we may be bold to enter into the
holy place, Heb. 10.19,
By the new and living way, 20.
which he has prepared for us, through the veil, that is his flesh (And
seeing we have) an high Priest which is over the house of god, 21,
let us dravv near with a true heart, 22,
in assurance of faith, our hearts being pure from an evil conscience, 23.
And vvashed in our bodies with pure water let us keep the profession of our
hope, without wavering, (for (he is) faithful that promised). And let us
consider one an other, 24.
to provoke unto love, and to good works.. Not forsaking the fellowship, 25,
that we have among our selves, as the manner of some is, but let us exhort
one an other, and so much the more, because ye see that the day draws near,
So shall we be followers of god, as dear children, and walk in love, even as
Christ has loved us, Ephesians. 5.1.2
and given him self for us, to be an offering and a sacrifice of a sweet
smelling savor to god which the Father of heaven, and the god of all mercy
work in our hearts for Jesus christ's sake, by the operation of his holy
spirit, unto whom, father son and holy ghost, three persons and one true,
omnipotent, gracious, glorious, and eternal god be al honor and glory, praise,
power, and dominion for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

