A PEARL FOR A PRINCE, OR A PRINCELY PEARL.

As it was delivered in two SERMONS, By JOHN TRASKE.

MATT. 7.6. Give not that which is holy unto the Dogs, neither cast ye your
Pearls before Swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and turn
again and rent you.

1. COR. 1.25. The foolishness of God is wiser then Men: and the weakness of
God is stronger then Men.

LONDON, Printed by William Stansby for Matthew Lownes. 1615.

To all that desire the sincere Milk of the WORD, Grace and Peace be
multiplied.
I Have sent you here a Princely Pearl, as a help to supply your many
wants: the price is very small, the commodity may prove exceeding great: to
those that purchasing, pray: having prayed, read; and having read, receive:
that which the word approues. I desire no more, the word requires (...) less.
But in reading this, or any other such: beware no conceit of the man prevail
more, then the truth of the matter: lest thou make Man a God, and God an Idol:
but be sure thou search the Scriptures diligently, whether these things be so,
for the neglect of this is the cause of many fearful errors, and of much
gross ignorance. Wherefore having once read it over, at the second reading,
try every Scripture whether they be pertinent, thus shall thou reap much
benefit, and this short Sermon will prove a large Volume unto thee. And knowing
that if thou be one of those little ones, for whose sake I penned it, thou
shall have cause to praise God for it, and that thou will continue to help with
fervent prayer, that the Gospel may have free course, and be glorified, as
also desiring thee not slightly to consider of this advise in thy course of
reading men's writings, as thou tendrest thy souls escape, the rocks of so many
dangerous errors, as are now abroad, especially in writing. I r^st Mar. 30.
1615.

Yours that be the Lords, JOHN TRASKE.

A PEARL For a Prince.
MARK. 16.16. He that believes and is Baptized, shall be saved, but he that
believes not, shall be damned.


THis Chapter contains three principal parts. In the first we have the
resurrection of our blessed Savior witnessed by women, by an Angel, by three
several apparitions: In the second we have the Apostles Mission in their
great Embassage; In the third Christ's glorious Ascension into Heaven. In the
second part there are four principal point^ obseruable. First, To whom the
Apostles were sent. Secondly, What to do. Thirdly, The effects of their
labor. Fourthly, The signs that should follow in those that did believe. The
two first are contained in the fifteenth verse. The last in the seventeenth and
eighteenth. The third is my text. Where we see the twofold effect of preaching
laid down in two Propositions: The first containing a Promise, the second a
Threat. In the promise we may observe two things: First, to whom it is made?
Secondly, what it is? As if it should have said in more words thus, He (that
is) whosoever, be he, Jew or Grecian, young or old, bond or free, rich or
poor, man or woman that believes (that is) that understands, and
understanding assenteth to, and assenting, applies to himself the message
that you bring, and is baptized, (that is) that does manifest the truth of his
faith by the use of the means for the confirmation of the same, or does
observe conscionably those things that I command (Baptism being a part for the
whole) or is indeed (not only with outward water) baptized into the name of
the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost, is truly baptized by the new birth
of the water of regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost, is made
conformable to his death, and does know him, and the power of his resurrection,
and the fellowship of his sufferings. Such be they, of what nation, condition,
sex, or age soever: shall be saved, that is, shall assuredly receive all the
good things that do concern soul and body, this life, and that which is to
come; Grace here, and Glory hereafter. And thus the instructions do
naturally arise. First, from that the promise is made indefinitely, to every
one: he that believes. The doctrine is,

That all the Privileges and Promises that appertain to believers, do
indifferently stretch to every one as well as to any one. The truth of this may
appear by many testimonies of Scripture, of which sort are these following:
Io. 1.12.
But as many as received him, to them gave he the privilege to become the
sons of God, even to as many as believed in his name. And Io. 3.16.
So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. In the first,
you see, as many as, twice repeated: in the later, whosoever, which extends
to all.

The reason is, to show Gods equality and his impartial dealing with the
sons of men: which Peter took notice of, where he said: Act. 10.34.
Of a truth, I perceive that God is no accepter of persons, but in every
nation, such as fear him, and work righteousness, are accepted with him.

Seeing then that the promises of God do belong to all, as well as to any
believer: We may learn, to be Ephesians. 5.1
followers of God, as dear children.

The Magistrate may hence learn, to judge impartially, to execute judgment,
without respect of persons, to deal uprightly, between the rich, and poor,
the bond, and free. Hereby he shall draw Iam. 4 8
near to God, and be most like him: he is no respecter of persons, he not
only offers, but bestows salvation upon all sorts indifferently. Let such
call to mind that worthy example of good Iehosaphat, who said to the Judges,
2. Chron. 169.
Take heed what you do: for you judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is
with you in the Judgment: Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon
you, take heed and do it, for there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor
respect of Persons, nor taking of gifts.

The Minister has hence an Instruction to inuit all to the Supper of the
Lamb. Christ says, Mat. 11.28 Io. 7.37
Come unto me all yet that travel, and are heavy laden. And again, If any
man thirst, let him come unto me and drink. Revel. 22.17.
And the Spirit and the Bride say. Come And let him that is athirst, come. And
let him that hears, say, Come. And whosoever will, Isay 55.1
let him take the water of Life, freely. So Isaiah, Ho, every one that
thirsts, come ye to the waters. Iam. 2.1


All may learn, not to have the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of
Glory, with respect of Persons. Secondly, this reproves the practice of those
Magistrates, that regard men's persons in judgment, favoring some for their
riches, and oppressing others that are but of mean estate. Herein they differ
from God, and do manifestly discover themselves not yet to be his.

Also such Ministers are reproved as flatter the rich, and fawn upon the
mighty, but scorn the weak, and despise the poor. These swarm in all parts
where the Gospel is preached: Not only amongst those of Babels side, but also
even here amongst us. Yea those that are so conversant about Touch not, Taste
not, Handle not, these that would be reformers of others, are herein most
irreformed themselves. Oh, fearful is the condition of such: surely the Lord
never sent them; or if they say he did, they must prove it, by that they have
such a commission, as Christ himself never had. He professes himself to be
sent Isay 61.1
to the poor: and he rejoices, that Mat. 11.5
The poor received the Gospel: verse 25
that babes understood that which the rich and wise were ignorant of. Io. 7.49.
The people of least esteem were his chief followers.

Here also by this, are discovered the dark courses of such as, dare
impudently to affirm, that women have no souls: and that servants, are of no
esteem with God; or that children, shall be damned. Albeit the very naming
such things, is grievous to an honest heart: yet we will a little touch these,
for satisfaction of any poor ignorant soul. Such might read of 1. Pet. 3.5.6
Sara, that she is termed a holy woman, yea, the mother of faithful women: Of
Priscilla, famous for knowledge and practice, for Act. 18.26.
knowledge, able to instruct learned Apollos, for To. 16.3
practice, ready to lay down her life for Paul. There is also an elect Lady,
and her elect Sister, and many other women, whose names are registered in the
Book of Life.

For servants, besides the Apostles mention of servants, where he writes to
none but Saints, Onesimus being a servant, Phile. 16.
has such a title given him, as no reprobate ever had

As for children, it is evident also in the Gospel, by our Saviors behavior
toward them, his speeches of them, Mar. 9.36 Act. 2.38
his promises to them and such as they are; that it is without controversy,
Heb. 8.11
they are within the Covenant, and the promise extends even as far as them
also.

To conclude this point, Paul professes himself, A debtor both to Greeks,
Romans 1.14
and to the Barbarians, both to the wise, and to the unwise. And the Holy Ghost
has testified, that in Christ there is neither Jew, Col. 3.11
nor Greek, circumcision nor uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scithian, bond nor
free: but Christ is all, and in all.

Lastly, this serves for the comfort of all that either desire Christ, or
already have obtained the possession of him. It is as a shield, for the one,
and a great encouragement, for the other, when Satan shall labor to
discourage, or affright. Desire thou to come to Christ? and does Satan tell
thee, it belongs not to thee, and that because of thy nation, age, or
condition? Thou may holdly tell him, that God inuites all, therefore thee,
as well as another.

Art thou in Christ? and would Satan cause thee to doubt of any thing that
concerns the life to come, or distrust for this life? Thou may boldly say,
The promises run indifferently to all believers: Thou art a believer:
therefore to thee.

Thus having concluded the first point, That the promi^es of God do stretch to
every believer as well as to any, We see in the next place from the restraint,
He that believes:

That the Promises of God do extend to none but those that are believers. So
we see in the forecited Scriptures. Io. 1.12
But as many as received him, to them gave he the right to become the sons
of God. To them, and to none but them. To. 1.16
So also in another place, The Gospel of Christ, is the Power of God unto
salvation, Io. 3.16.
to every one that believes. And, So God loved the World, that he gave his
only begotten son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but
have everlasting Life.

Whosoever, is the extent: Whosoever believes, the restraint.

The reason hereof is, Without Faith it is impossible to please God. In Christ
alone, Heb. 11.6 Mat. 3.17
God is well pleased. Hence it was, that Paul spoke such excellent things of
Faith, and so highly prized it, Phil. 3.8
Thus he esteemed all things but doung, that he might win Christ, and be
found in him, Verse 9
not having his own righteousness, which was of the Law, but the
righteousness which is of Faith. And hence it is, Heb. 11.101.
that Faith has so excellent titles and effects mentioned in holy Scripture.

Seeing then that the promises of God are restrained only to believers: As
thou desire comfort by the promises of God, so must thou be diligent in this
search or inquisition. Neither is it any ground of Comfort, that a man say, I
have Faith: or, I do believe: as many presumptuously affirm. For some there
are that believe the Scriptures, to be true. Iam. 2.19
The Devils do this, and more, they tremble. And it were fearful to affirm,
that they have right to the promises of God. Yea, it may be, these have
attained such outward reformation, that they are ready to censure all that are
not so forward, of Profaneness, and all that are more forward, of
singularity. These promise to themselves, that Abraham is their Father. There
they do begin, as did those that were taxed for it by John Baptist. Luc. 3.8.
Of such believers, I do not speak. For the difference between such and
Infidels, is but this: Infidels not believing at all, are sure of condemnation:
and these believing as they do, Luc. 12.48.
of a greater condemnation.

Therefore not standing on the definition of Faith, we will rather consider of
the ground where it is sown, and of the companions that it has. The ground
where Faith is sown, is an humbled soul, a wounded spirit. Isay 66.2 Iam. 4 6.
or rent heart; to such God gives the grace of Faith, as are so prepared for
it; Mat. 5.6 Zach. 12.10.13.1
such as hunger and thirst for it; such as mourn for it, to such, and to none
but such, does he open a fountain for sin, and for uncleanness. Hereby
then thou may examine thy self: Have thou sought to God with fear and
trembling, Act. 16.19. Act. 2.37
as the Iailor did? Have thou come with a pricked Conscience and cried, What
must I do to be saved? Mat. 9.12 Mat. 11.28
Have thou felt thy soul sick with sin? Have thou been pressed down with
the burden thereof? Has thine heart melted within thee, and thine eyes gusht
out with tea^es, for thy sins?

This wounded spirit, this sick soul, this rent heart, this burdened
Conscience, this is indeed the ground where GOD does sow Righteousness, Hos.
10.12. Psa. 126.5.
this is the man that shall reap in Mercy. They only that thus sowin tears,
shall reap enjoy.

Thus much of the ground where Faith is sown. Now of the companions that it
has; of these there are very many, of which I will name some, especially
those which are inseparable, or peculiar to true believers.

The first which I will name, is peace: That Peace which passes all
understanding. Romans 5.1. Phil 4.7.
This may be illustrated by a quiet calm, after a great tempest, or a swo^^e
sleep, after a sharp sit of an ague.

The second is Joy. Romans 14.17 Romans 15.13 1. Pet. 1.8.
The Joy of the Holy Ghost. This is that which Peter calls, Joy unspeakable
and full of glory. This does swallow all other joys, even as the Sea does
swallow all other waters. This may be illustrated by safety, after great
danger, or by great plenty, after much penury or want.

Gal. 5.6. 1. Tim. 1.5. Mat. 12.37.
The third is Love out of a pure Heart. This extends to God, to our Neighbor.

This Love is expressed by our pliablenesse to do his will, 1. Io. 5.3.
For this is the love of God, that we keep his Commandments, and his
Commandments are not grievous.

To our Neighbors, To all; but especially to the household of Faith. Gal. 6.10.
1. Pet. 1.22 1. Io. 3.16.
To Gods children: This Love is fervent: yea so fervent, as that we can lay
down our lives for them. Mat. 5.44.45.46.47.48.
This Love stretches even to Enemies. This can no Reprobate ever have.

A fourth may be boldness: To confess Christ before men. Prou. 18.1.
The righteous are bold as a Lion. To. 10.10. Dan. 3.17.18. Dan. 6.10. Act.
21.13. Act. 4.19.20. Heb. 11.37. Romans 5.3. Heb. 10.36. Romans 8.17. Iam. 5.11.
He. 12.1.2. Phil. 1.23.
This is an inseparable companion of true Faith. This was in Daniel, in the
three children, in Paul, in the other Apostles, in all the blessed Saints who
have died for the testimony of Jesus.

A fifth Patience to bear the Cross, to endure tribulation, to suffer with
Christ. This was evident in Job, who is therefore proposed to believers as a
Pattern thereof. But our perfect pattern is Christ Jesus, who endured the
Cross.

A sixth, a desire to be ever with the Lord, to see him face to face. 2. Cor.
5.2.
An earnest groaning to be clothed upon with our house, which is from Heaven,
to be unburdened of this body of death, Romans 8.13.
and that as God is become the Father of our spirits, so he would become the
Father of bodies and spirits, That our vile bodies may be changed, Phil. 3.21.
and fashioned like unto the glorious body of our Lord Jesus Christ.

A seventh, is a holy waiting for the time of our dissolution, which may be
termed Hope, Romans 8.24.25. Job. 14.14.
and is so called by the Holy Ghost: We are saved by hope: and If we hope for
that we see not, we do with patience wait for it

These are the Companions of true saving Faith, and within the compass of one
of these all the rest may be couched.

Hereby thou may try thy self. Have thou been troubled, and terrified with
the sight of thy sins? Isay 57.19. Is. 61.1.2.3 Mat. 5.4. 1. Tim. 1.13. Psalm.
119.103. Mat. 10.42 Psalm. 16.3. 1. Io. 5.1.
And art thou now at Peace? Have thou mourned? And do thou rejoice? Have thou
hated God in his Word, in his Prophets, or poor children? And do thou
delight in his Law, receive his Prophets, because they are his Prophets;
delight in the Saints, because they are his children?

Have thou bin greedy of revenge, and ready to requite evil with evil? And
do thou love thine enemies, bless them that curse thee, Mat. 5.44.
do good to them that hate thee, pray for them which despightfully use thee,
and persecute thee? Romans 12.21
In a word, can thou now desire, to overcome their evil with good?

Have thou blushed to be seen at a Sermon, or reading the word, or in the
company of the poor Saints, or have thou withdrawn thy self from the
performance of any duty for fear of persecution? Act. 21.13. Act. 5.^9. H^st.
4.16.
And do thou now resolve to do whatsoever God commands, and to suffer for
not doing, that which he forbids?

Have thou been impatient in crosses and ready to murmr? and art thou now
able with alacrity to hear any thing, especially for the name of Christ?

Have thou feared death, and trembled at the time of dissolution? And is the
day of death (now in thy esteem) better then the day that thou wast borne?
Eccles. 7.1.
do thou long for it, Act. 3.19.
and thirst after it, as for the time of refreshing? A^^ ^5.18.
Have thou foolishly desired the day of the Lord in thy desperate passions? And
can thou now wait with Patience for the time of thy dissolution? Then may
thou take comfort to thy soul, that all the promises of God do belong to
thee, be thy nation, estate, s^x, or age, what it will. But if thou find no
such change, but that thou art the same thou were ever, as thou wast borne, so
thou have lived, and excepting a little swimming knowledge in thy brain, and
cold performance of outward duties, thou find no such singular thing? Mat.
5 47.
Do not then deceive thy self, thou art not that believer, of the which I
speak: to whom the promises d^e belong.

Now having an eye to the text, again we will see what more will arise. He
that believes, and to baptized.

Not to speak her^, of the substance of Baptism, which is chiefly aimed at:
but of the sign, which is also included. Though the former might well serve for
the confutation of Papist, who ascribe as much to the sign, as to the truth:
most foolishly affirming, that those that die without the sign, (...) ^. 1.
Cor. 1 2. (...). 1.3^. (...) 5.2^.2.
are dam^ed as also of the Anabaptist, who d^nie children the sign, though
they can by no means deny them the substance: for that were to cross the
whole Book of God. Both these doting too much upon the bare letter and order
of the words; whereby they show their Ignorance of the Scriptures, Mat. 22.19
Isay 65.23.
and of the power and love of God to his and their seed: but leaving this at
this time, seeing Faith and Baptism are joined together. Hence I do collect
this point of instruction:

That true Faith, and the diligent use of the means for confirmation thereof,
are inseparable.

Wheresoever the one is in truth, there is also the other. This may appear by
that the Apostle writing to the Saints, at Colossa: and having proved unto
them their effectual calling, he wills them, as the Col. 3.11.12.
Elect of God, to put on the bowels of tender mercy, kindness, humbleness of
mind, long suffering: as if he would say, Because ye are the Elect of God,
therefore put on these things: for those that are the Elect of God, cannot
after their effectual calling, be separate from these. So again the same
Apostle writing to those at Thessalonica, bids them not sleep as others, but
1. These. 5.7.
to watch and be sober: for God has not appointed you to wrath, (says he)
but to obtain salvation by Jesus Christ. As if he should say, Those that God
has ordained to eternal life, they watch, they are sober.

So writing to Phil. 1.6.
Philippi, and being confident of their salvation, he yet presses them to
obedience, and Phil. 2.12
to work out their own salvation with fear and trembling.

And Peter also having proved the truth of the regeneration of those Saints,
to whom he writes, presses them to 1. Pet. 2.2
desire the sincere milk of the word, that they might grow thereby.

The reasons of this may be many: but I will only urge one, which is this,
That whereby our assurance is made known unto us, the knowledge of it does not
take away, but establish. But it is made known unto us, by the use of the
means for the increase thereof: Therefore the knowledge of Gods assured love
does not take away, but establish the use of the means. So that it remains
firm, That true faith and outward obedience can be no more separated, then the
light and the Sun, or heat and the fire. This being so, it may help to stop
Satan's mouth in his Instruments, who will not stick to call in question, the
truth of the doctrine of Predestination, and of the assurance of the savor of
God, in this life. For say they, If this be true, that God has predestined
us to the obtaining of eternal life, do what evil we can, we shall be saved;
or if we are predestined to death, do what good we can, we must be damned.
These suppose they have reasoned wisely, this wisdom being so pleasing to the
flesh. They never consider that Scriptures are plain against them, clearly
showing us, that he that ordained to the end, ordained to the means whereby
the end is attained. As the Apostle plainly shows, where he says, We are
bound to give thanks always to God for you, 2. The. 2.13
brethren, beloved of the Lord, because God has from the beginning chosen you
to salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the Truth.
And again, As many as were ordained to eternal life, A^t. 13.18.
believed.

Neither do such wretches consider, into what blasphemy they break, by
questioning the truth, because their carnal reason cann^t reach it. But if
they would but hearken to arguments drawn from their reas^n, it might serve to
conui^ce them. They will grant, if a man will go a journey, he must go the
way that leads to the end of that journey; If he will be warm in Winter, he
must make use of the fire, of wa^me clothes, or some bodily exercise: if then
they be so wise in things of this life, why should they not understand this
also? That he that ordained men for glory, 2. These. 4.3.
Willed also then holiness here, created them to good works, redeemed them,
Lu. 1 68.75
that they might serve him without fear in holiness and righteou^nesse before
him all the days of their life, ^^t. 2.14.
that they should be zealous of good works, called them not to uncleanness,
but to holiness. 1. The^. 4.7. 1. Pet. 1.1.
And as Peter says, He elected them to obedience.

As for example: God decreed, and told Rebecca so: Genesis 25.23
That Esau should serve Jacob. Yet he also decreed, that Rebecca should use
the means for Jacobs escape, G^^. 27.43
from his brothers rage.

He had decreed that Paul should witness at Rome, and told him so: Act. 23.11.
Yet he also decreed, that he should use the means by his sisters son, to
the chief captain, (...) 17.
for to escape the cruel vow of the Jews.

He decreed that not one o^ those should be lost, which were with Paul in the
ship. Act. ^7 24.31.
Yet he also decreed, that the means should be used for their escape. He
decreed to bestow many things on his people: Eze. 36.37.
but he also decreed, they should pray for them.

And surely, those that remain obstinate, affirming, that if we may be assured
never to fall away, then we may commit sin, and live how we will, may have
their mouths stopped justly with this; namely, That it is evident, they never
were assured of the favor of God, and so consequently, Ephesians. 2.12.
they are yet without, and are mere strangers to the life of God, and aliens
to the Commo^wealth of Israel. For such as have this Faith, or this assurance
of the Love of God, Heb. 12.28.
have also a delight in the Law of God, a desire to hold it fast, by serving
God with reverence and godly fear, and do know, that they that are justified,
are also sanctified: and that they that are Christ's, Gal. 5.24.
have crucified the flesh with the lusts thereof.

Let this teach all those that have assurance, to labor for the increase
thereof, and to strive unto perfection in knowledge, Heb. 6.1. 2. Cor. 7.1.
and perfection in holiness, and not always to look to be fed with milk.
For as knowledge does increase, so does faith increase, and as faith
increases, so obedience increases. There is no standing at a stay, or sitting
idly here, Psa. 128.1. 1. Cor. 9.24. 2. Tim. 4.7.
it is a walk, and must be gone; a race, and must be run; a combat, and
must be fought.

Every plant that is planted here, must flourish more and more. Psalm. 92.12.
Ioh. 15.2.3. Revel. 2.19.
Every branch must bring forth more fruit. The last works of believers must be
more then the first.

This may be as a s^urre to such as are almost settled on the ^ees of
security, such as formerly have been forward in hearing, and now are almost
careless whether they hear or no, and such as have been much in prayer, and
meditati^n: such as have desired conference with Ministers and Saints. But now
they are grown almost cold in all these. Oh let such take heed whither they
are falling, and labor to recover themselves speedily, lest their lamps go
out, Mat. 15.1.2.3.4.
and they be to seek of oil when the Bridegroom comes.

Lastly, this does plainly discover such as scoff at the outside, and are
enemies to hearing, prayer, conference and such like, that (say they what they
will) they do not yet believe, because wheresoever Faith is (I mean always
true Faith) there is outward obedience, and a willing submission to the
ordinances of God for the increase of the same.

Now if we look again to the Text, we shall find another Doctrine from these
words, he that believes, and is baptized. For seeing (as before has been
proved) that outward obedience and inward truth are inseparable, and seeing the
promises are made not to one alone, but to both, if they may be had: and that
here is meant not so much the outward sign, as the truth of Baptism:

That the sign without the thing signified, the outward show without the
inward truth, is of no value. Romans 2.28.29.
So we read, He is not a Jew which is a Jew without, neither is that
Circumcision, which is outward in the flesh: But he is a Jew, which is one
inwardly, which Circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in
the letter, whose praise is not of man, but of God. Jer. 4.4.
And Jeremy wills those that before were circumcised, To circumcise
themselves to the Lord. E^^. 44.9.
So Ez^chiel, No stranger uncircumcised in heart, nor uncircumcised in flesh,
shall enter into my Sanctuary. So that here, those that are uncircumcised in
heart, are excluded out of the true Sanctuary, and are accounted strangers.

The reason is, God desires truth in the inward parts, he requires the heart:
Psalm. 51.6. Pro. 23.26.
He judges not the affection by the action, as Man: but the Action by the
affection, 2 Cor. 8.12.
as God. Seeing it is so, that shows without substances, will not serve turn:
let this teach us to make clean the inside first, to give our hearts unto the
Lord, to labor for truth in the inward parts: Let us labor for approbation
with God, and praise with him. This is that which will cheer our souls, and
comfort our spirits, and make us truly merry, when we can say, If I regard
wickedness in my heart, Psa. 66.18.
the Lord will not hear me; but God has heard me.

This reprooues such as slatter themselves with the outward performance of
duties. If they be baptized (as they say) and bring their children to outward
Baptism; If they assemble themselves outwardly to the hearing of the word, the
receiving of the Lords Supper; If by their good Memories they be able to bear
in mind the Doctrines delivered, and repeat them to their Families, show much
love to Ministers, kindness to professors, such as they themselves are, though
in the mean while they feel no Peace with God, or Joy in the Holy Ghost: yet
here they rest, and do esteem themselves of the best sort of believers Albeit
a man may do all this, and be damned.

Were there not formerly, That could say, The Temple of the Lord, Ier. 7.4.
The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord, are these? and others that
could say, Isay 65.5.
Stand by thy self, come not near me; for I am holier then thou.

Were there not that appeared before the Lord, Is. 1.11.15.
with a multitude of Sacrifices, and store of long Prayers, stretching out
their hands even like unto the children of God?

Were there not that fasted, and hung down their heads like a Bulrush for a
day? Isay 58.5.


Romans 2.17. Verse 18.
Were there not that did rest in the law, and were called Jews, and made their
boast of God, Verse 19.
and knew his will, and approved the things that were more excellent, being
instructed out of the Law, being also confident that they themselves were
guides of the blind, Verse ^0.
lights of them which were in darkness, instructers of the foolish, teachers of
babes, having the form of knowledge, and of truth in the Law.

And yet these holy ones (as they thought themselves) were threatened vengeance
for their hypocrisy. They were they that trusted in lying words and
counterfeit shows, a smoke they were in Gods nose, abhorred and accursed in
all their courses. They were they that caused the Name of God to be
blasphemed, even in their fasts, finding their own pleasures, and exacting all
their labors, fasting for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of
wickedness, as those Scriptures do manifest. Luke 13.24. Mat. 25.11.12. Mat.
7.21.22.23.
Are there not some that shall seek to enter, and not get in: that shall cry
earnestly, and knock aloud, and be sent away: that shall be able to say, they
have cast out devils, and done many great works, and yet rejected? 2. Tim. 3.5.
Are there not others, that have the form of godliness, and yet must be
separated from? what shall we say to this then?

Surely as we began: It is not the sign, but the thing signified; not the
show, Mat. 23.25. Luke 11.39.
but the substance; not the making clean of the outside, but the inside; not
the form, but the power of godliness that is available.

Now never could our Savior more justly say in his time: Woe be to Scribes,
and Pharisees Hyp^crites* then we may at this day say the like of outside
Christians (if I may so say) I do not mean those only that are openly
profane, whose sins are written in their forheads: but those especially,
that have a strict outside of godliness.

Col. 2.21.
England does swarm with Pharisees: such as are conu^rsant about Touch not,
Taste not, 2. Pet. 2.
Handle no^. Such as having voluntary humility, and pretended sincerity, do
despise government, and speak evil of dignities. Presumptuous they are, and
selfe-willed, and speaking evil of the things they understand not, they creep
into houses, 2. Tim. 3.
and lead captive silly women laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts,
and as Iannes and Iambres withstood Moses, so do these men resist the Truth,
men of corrupt minds, of no Judgment concerning the Faith. These are they that
take advantage of weak consciences, ceazing on them as their own, by cumbring
them with outward things, and by telling them, here is Christ, M^^. 24.23 26.
or there is Christ; when if the truth were known, they never yet had Christ
themselves: yet hereby they draw Disciples after them, and therehence suck they
no small advantage. Of such I dare say, that notwithstanding their outward
flourish, Mal. 21.31
yet Publicans and Harlots shall enter into the Kingdom of GOD before them.
Yea, that open profane ones are sooner drawn to sincerity, Pro. 26.12.
then these, and apter to receive instruction. So wise are they in their own
eyes, Pro. 30.12.
and prudent in their own sight, that there is more hope of Fools then of
them; yea, Ier. 5.26.27.28.
that there is more humanity and greater love amongst those whom they term
profane, then amongst themselves.

Here let none so forget the former Doctrine, to mistake me, as if I did oppose
my self against all outward show. No, far be it from me, to think that the
inside can be clean, and the outside filthy: howsoever I say, there are a
multitude of such as seem to such as themselves are, to be clean without,
who are notwithstanding foul within.

To conclude then, begin to make clean the inside, and then all is clean.
Get true faith, and outward obedience will certainly follow. But if thou get
never so much of outward constitution as thou think, and remain foul
within, Thy hatred being covered with deceit, shall certainly be discovered in
the whole Congregation. Pro. 26.26. Job 20.5.22.27.
And thus much of the first point, to whom the promise is made. Now we are
come to the promise it self; Shall be saved.

The promise is salvation, which contains all the good things that concern
soul or body, this life or that to come, as it is written, 1. Tim. 4.8.
Godliness is profitable to all things, having promise of the life that now
is, and of that which is to come. Psalm. 84.11.
And, The Lord will give grace and glory. That all good things that do
concern this Life, or that which is to come, are of right due to those that
do believe: or, That those that do believe, and are indeed baptized, or made
conformable to Christ's death, and do feel the power of his resurrection in
themselves, such may challenge as their proper right, and claim as their
heritage, all the good things that do concern this life, or that which is to
come.

1. Cor. 3.21.
This the Apostle affirms plainly, where he says, All things are yours,
whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the World, or life, or death, or things
present, or things to come, all are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is
Gods.

The reason is, God has promised, and he cannot but perform. Deuteronomy. 32.4. Tit.
1.2.
He is the God of Truth, Righteous in all his ways: The God that cannot lie.

Another may be this, He has given the greater, and cannot deny the lesser,
as it is written, Romans 8.32.
He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all: how shall
he not with him also freely give us all things?

Will any man give Gold, and deny Dust? Will a man give his Life, and deny
his Goods? or will a man give goods, and not afford good looks, nor a good
word?

The consideration of this may cheer up the hearts of those that are
believers; Esaias 25.6. Genesis 18.25. Exodus 32.11.12. Neh. 1.8.9. Dan.
9.16.17.18.19. Act. 4.24.29.30. Heb. 13.8. Isay 59.1.
here is a Feast for them of fat things, full of Marrow, of Wine on the Lees
well refi^ed. So that believers may challenge Gods promises as boldly, as ever
Abraham, Moses, Nehemiah, Daniel, The Church in the Apostles time, or any of
the Saints ever did. The Lord is Jehovah, the same for ever: His hand is not
shortened, that it cannot save, neither his ear heavy, that it cannot hear.

Do thou then want wisdom? Thou may ask it of God. Prou. 2.6.7.
He is the giver of wisdom, out of his mouth comes knowledge and
understanding. He lays up wisdom for the Righteous. Here you see, God
sets forth himself as his childrens treasurer. 1. Kin. 3.9.
Solomon asked wisdom and was not denied. And James extends this to all the
Saints: Iam. 1.5.6.
If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that gives to all men
liberally, and vpbraideth not; and it shall be given him.

Pro. 3.33. Pro. 10.22. Psalm. 112.3.
Do thou want riches? Thou have the blessing of the Lord. This only makes
rich. And it is written, That wealth and riches are in the house of him that
fears the Lord. Mat. 19.29
And it is also written, That whosoever forsakes Houses, Mat. 10.30.
or Lands for Christ's name sake, for the Gospels sake, or the Kingdom of God,
Luke 18.19.
shall receive even in this Life manifold, yea an hundred sold more, even in
this present time.

Mat. 10.30
Is it friends thou do desire? Thou have the promise of Fathers, and Mothers,
Brethren, Iam. 5.16.
Sisters, and Children. What greater friends then such? The prayers of one of
them being more available for thee, then the power of a whole Kingdom against
thee.

These will lay down their lives for thee. Their love is fervent love. 1. Ioh.
3.16. 1. Pet. 1.22 2. Sa. 20.17
Even as was the love of Jonathan to David, Who loved him even as his own
soul: And as the love of Aquila and Priscilla to Paul, who were ready, and
did in effect lay down their own necks for Paul's life. Romans 16.4.
This is that we find written in the Proverbs of Solomon. There is a friend
that sticks closer then a brother. Pro. 18.24.


Is Honor desirable? What more honorable, Ioh. 1.12. Ps. 149. vlt.
then of a son of a Mortal Man, to become the son of the Immortal God?
Such honor have all the Saints. And who have been more honorable then the
Children of God? As Joseph, Mardochey, Daniel, and the rest?

Is safety a good thing? Isa. 54. vlt.
This is thine heritage, and thou may therefore claim it as thy proper
right, as the servants of God have done. Psalm. 91.4.
Let thy truth (O Lord) be my shield and buckler.

Thy defense is, A wall of Fire, The munition of Rocks, A guard of Angels,
Psalm. 68.17. Zach. 2.5. Isay 33.16.
as Chariots of Fire, and Horses of Fire does compass thee round about.

Is Peace pleasant unto thee? Thy Habitation is Peaceable. They shall not hurt
nor destroy in all mine holy Mountain. Isay 6.9.
No Lion or ravenous beast does walk in that way. Isay 35.8.9 Isay 9.6. Nah.
1.15.
Thy Prince is a Prince of Peace: All those that are his Ambassadors, are glad
tidings bringers. Thy own feet are shod with the shoes of Peace: Ephe. 6.15.
Mat. 5.9.
All thy Companions are Peacemakers. God has promised to extend Peace like a
River to those that dwell in Sion. Isay 66.12.


Delightest thou in many followers or servants, Psalm. 91.11. Psalm. 34.7.
to wait on thy person? God has given his Angels charge of thee. The Angels
do encampe about thee wheresoever thou art: Heb. 1.14.
They are ministering Spirits, sent forth for the good of them that shall be
saved. And it is written, Mat. 18.10
Take heed that ye offend not one of these little ones that believe in me,
says Christ; for I say unto you, Their Angels do always behold the face of
my Father which is in Heaven.

Is victory over adversaries a good thing? Romans 8 37. 1. Pet. 5.8. Gal. 5.24.
1 Ioh. 5 4.
Believers are more then Conquerors. By Faith the Devil is resisted, the flesh
crucified, and the World overcome.

Is mirth desired by thee? What greater joy, Romans 14.17
then the Joy of the Holy Ghost? This will make thee to eat thy bread with Joy,
and drink thy wine with a merry heart, Eccles. 9.7.
when thou art once a believer: for then, and not till then shall thou know,
that God accepts thy works. This joy is termed, Joy unspeakable, and full
of glory. 2. Pet. 1.8.


Is long life a blessing in thy Judgment? Thou have a promise to live long,
Psalm. 34.12.13.14. Psalm. 128.6. Psalm. 84.11.
and see good days, if thou be a believer, yea, to see thy childrens children.

So that there is no good thing to be withholden from believers.

Let this not only comfort, but instruct thee against Satan's fiery assaults.
Does he persuade thee thou art foolish? Thou may reply, Christ is thy
wisdom. 1. Cor. 1.30.
Does he vpbraid thee with thy poverty? Answer him, Thou possessest all
things, 2 Cor. 6.10. Iam. 2.5.
and art able to make many rich.

Tells he thee, Thou art friendlesse? Ephe. 2.19. Mar. 10.30 1. Cor. 12.26.
Oppose against this, The promise of friends, as dear as Fathers, Mothers or
Children: And that thou have all the Saints in the World thy friends.

Does he object? That thou art base and despised? Answer, It is a great, yea,
1. Io. 3.1.
the greatest honor, to be a child of God.

Does he affright thee with danger? 2. Kin. 6.16. 1. Chron. 32 7.8.
Tell ^im. Thou have more with thee then against he.

Would he amaze thee with many troubles? Phil. 4.7. Io. 14.27. Io. 10.33. Romans
8.28.
Say, That thou have Peace within, that cheeres thee, and that trouble without
shall not hurt thee: All things working together for good to them that fear
and love God.

Would he have it grieve thee, that thou art not waited on as others are? Ioh.
5.22.23. Hos. 2.18. Hest. 6.11. Da. 6.18.23
Thou may tell him, that Angels are thy servants, and all the Creatures are
at thy command: yea, Kings shall stoop to thee, if it be good for thee.

Would he make thee doubt of an overthrow in any doubtful combat? 2. Cor. 10
4. Romans 8.38.
Thou art now sure of the conquest.

Is it a sorrowful thing (says he) to be a believer? Isay 51.11.
Thou now well know, that here is abundance of joy.

Would he sear thee with sudden death? Phil. 1.21.
Christ is with thee to live, and to die is gain. But thou have the promise of
length of days, Ephesians. 6.2.3
if it shall be good for thee.

Thus which way soever Satan seeks to wind in his poisoned sting, or to throw
in his fiery dart, thou have armor to defend thy self.

Yea for thy further instruction know that if the contrary to these be good
for thee at any time, thou shall be sure of the same. As for sharpness of
wisdom, thou may have dullness of spirit, for a time to humble thee: For
riches, thou shall have poverty to instruct thee: For friends, Enemies to
stir thee to prayer: For honor, disgrace to purge thee: For safety, thou
may seem to be in danger, to try thy boldness: For Peace thou shall have
trouble, to exercise thy Patience: For attendants, thou shall have desolation
to work contentation in all estates.

For victory, thou shall have some foiles, to prove thy constancy:

For Joy, thou shall have Sorrow, to increase thy thankfulness, when Joy
shall return and to make thee temperate:

For long life, thou shall have a speedy death, to free thee from misery, and
to bring thee to Glory. Neither is this all; Heb. 11.13.
but we may look further yet; Believers can see a far off: They see things to
come, as if they were present, not so much looking at temporal, as eternal
things. 2. Cor. 4.18.


And this is that which does put life into the souls of believers, when they
consider of their estate at the resurrection of the just. Would it not comfort
a man that were in a doubtful combat in the Judgment of others, if he were
himself sure of victory; or one that were in Prison, though straightly kept,
if he were sure of freedom after a few days?

And verily such is our condition; though we are scorned, persecuted,
slandered, imprisoned, buffeted, slain, here: yet it is a righteous thing with
God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble his, 2. The. 1.6.7
and to those that are troubled, rest.

That is, God has promised, and he will perform his promise of certain
deliverance, to them that are his. Wherefore such may challenge this issue, as
of right to them appertaining. It is our heritage, Christ has purchased this
for us, as well as the rest, and we shall assuredly receive it.

So that we may lay claim to our right of coming gloriously at the last day,
with the Judge of the whole Earth, when he shall come in his own glory, Mat.
25.31
in his Fathers Glory, and the glory of his holy Angels. It is the right
(even then) of believers, to be caught up, 1. These. 4.17 Mat. 13.43. 2 Th. 1.8
9.
and to meet Christ in the Air, and to come gloriously, even as so many bright
Suns, to be admired with him. And this is not all: for then shall we be as
so many Judges, to judge men and Angels, 2. Cor. 6.2.
when it shall be said unto them, Go ye cursed, into the fire eternal, Mat.
25 41.
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. For so it is written, The Saints shall
judge the World. And again in the same Chapter, The Saints shall judge Angels.
1. Cor. 6.3.
And in an other place, Behold, the Lord comes with ten thousands of his
Saints, Jude 14.15
to execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among
them, of all their ungodly deeds, which they have ungodly committed, and of
all the hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him.

And yet this is not all: for after that, we shall be ever with the Lord, We
shall be as the Angels in heaven, Mat 22.30 Reave. 2.10. Matt. 5.12. 2. Cor.
4.17. Psalm. 16.11.
we shall receive that crown of life, that great reward, that exceeding
surpassing and eternal weight of Glory, that fullness of Joy, those pleasures
at Gods right hand for evermore. This may we also challenge at Gods hands, by
virtue of his promise in this Scripture which is the Text, and of Christ's
intercession in another, where it is thus written, Father, I will that they
also whom thou have given me, Io. 17.24.
be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory which thou have given
me.

A man would think it were a good thing to be a believer, if all this be
true: and surely either this is true, or the Scriptures are false, which were
blasphemy to say. Romans 3.4.
Let God then be true, and every man a lier.

And let the consideration of this stir up every one to seek diligently for
the favor of GOD. Luke 10.42.
Get this one necessary thing: Get Christ, and get all: In this life, Wisdom,
Riches, Friends, Honor, Safety, Peace, Attendants, Victory, Joy, Long-life.

At the day of Judgment, we shall come gloriously and triumphantly, with the
Judge of the whole earth: Angels and Men shall tremble at our Glory, and
admire our excellency. They that have judged us, shall be judged by us. After
the day of judgment, we shall possess that Kingdom peaceably, into the
which we have here entered violently, and for which we have fought valiantly.
We shall see God face to face: We shall have knowledge without ignorance: Love
without Hatred: Joy without Sorrow: Light without Darkness: Beauty without
Deformity: Strength without weakness: Plenty without Want: Health without
Sickness: Honor without Disgrace: Peace without Trouble: Courage without
Fear: Safety without Danger: Life without death: Al good without any evil.
This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord, Isay 54.17.
and their righteousness is of me, says the Lord.

FINIS.
If thou will now follow me, to find the truth: it must be in the last, and
most excellent translation of the Bible: commonly called the new translation.

PSALM. 115.1. Not unto us, but unto the name of the Lord give glory.

Errata.
Faults escaped, page 2. l^^e 13. should have been said, page 3. line 3. read
Christ's death.


