A SVPPLICATION MADE TO THE PRIVY COUNSEL BY Mr WALTER TRAVERS.

AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes, and are to be sold by John Barnes
dwelling near Holborne Conduit. 1612.

A SVPPLICATION MADE TO THE COUNCIL BY Mr WALTER TRAVERS.
RIGHT Honorable, the manifold benefits which all the subjects within this
dominion do at this present, and have many years enjoyed, under her Majesty's
most happy and prosperous reign, by your godly wisdom, and careful watching
over this estate night and day: I truly and unfeignedly acknowledge from the
bottom of my heart, ought worthily to bind us al, to pray continually to
almighty God for the continuance and increase of the life and good estate of
your honors, and to be ready with all good duties to satisfy and serve the
same to our power. Besides public benefits common unto all, I must needs,
and do willingly confess my self to stand bound by most special obligation
to serve and honor you more then any other, for the honorable favor it has
pleased you to vouchsafe both oftentimes heretofore, and also now of late, in a
matter more dear unto me then any earthly commodity, that is the upholding
and furthering of my service in the ministering of the gospel of Jesus Christ.
For which cause, as I have been always careful so to carry my self as I
might by no means give occasion to be thought unworthy of so great a benefit,
so do I still, next unto her Majesty's gracious countenance, hold nothing more
dear and precious unto me, then that I may always remain in your Honors
favor; which has oftentimes bin helpefull and comfortable unto me in my
ministry, and to all such as reaped any fruit of my simple and faithful
labor. In which dutiful regard, I humbly beseech your Honors to vouchsafe to
do me this grace, to conceive nothing of me otherwise the^ according to the
duty wherein I ought to live, by any information against me, before your
Honors have heard my answer, and been thoroughly informed of the matter. Which
although it be a thing, that your wisdoms, not in favor, but in justice yield
to all men: yet the state of the calling unto the Ministry, whereunto it has
pleased God of his goodness to call me, though unworthiest of all, is so
subject to misinformation, as except we may find this favor with your
Honors, we cannot look for any other, but that our vnindifferent parties may
easily procure us to be hardly esteemed of; and that we shall be made like the
poor fisherboates in the sea which every swelling wave and billow raketh and
runs over. Wherein my estate is yet harder then any others of my rank and
calling, who are indeed to fight against flesh and blood in what part soever of
the Lords host and field they shall stand marshalled to serve, yet many of
them deal with it naked and unfurnished of weapons: but my service was in a
place where I was to encounter with it well appointed and armed with skill and
with authority; whereof as I have always thus deserved, and therefore have bin
careful by all good means to entertain still your Honors favorable respect of
me, so have I special cause at this present, wherein misinformation to the
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and other of the high commission has bin able
so far to prevail against me, that by their letter they have inhibited me to
preach, or execute any act of Ministry in the Temple or elsewhere, having
never once called me before them to understand by mine answer the truth of
such things as had bin informed against me. We have a story in our books,
wherein the Pharisees proceeding against our Savior Christ without having heard
him, is reproved by an honorable Counselor (as the Evangelist does term him)
saying, does our law judge a man before it hear him, and know what he has
done? Which I do not mention to the end that by an indirect and covert speech,
I might so compare those, who have without ever hearing me pronounced a heavy
sentence against me, for, notwithstanding such proceedings, I purpose by Gods
grace to carry my self toward them in all seeming duty agreeable to their
places: much less do I presume to liken my cause to our Savior Christ's, who
hold it my chiefest honor and happiness to serve him, though it be but among the
hindes and hired servants, that serve him in the basest corners of his house.
But my purpose in mentioning it, is to show by the judgment of a Prince and
great man in Israel that such proceeding stands not with the law of God,
and in a princely pattern to show it to be a noble part of an honorable
Counselor, not to allow of indirect dealings, but to allow and affect such a
course in justice, as is agreeable to the law of God. We have also a plain
rule in the word of God not to proceed any otherwise against any elder of the
Church; much less against one that labors in the word and in teaching:
which rule is delivered with this most earnest charge and obtestation, I
beseech and charge thee in the sight of God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the
elect Angels, 1. Tim. 5. verse. 19.21.
that thou keep those [rules] without preferring one before another, doing
nothing of partiality, or enclining to either part; which Apostolical and
most earnest charge, I refer it to your Honors wisdom how it has been
regarded in so heavy a judgment against me, without ever hearing my cause,
and whether, as having God before their eyes, and the Lord Jesus by whom all
former judgments shall be tried again, and as in the presence of the elect
Angels witnesses, and observers of the regiment of the Church, they have
proceeded thus to such a sentence. They allege indeed two reasons in their
letters whereupon they restrain my ministry, which, if they were as strong
against me as they are supposed, yet I refer to your Honors wisdoms, whether
the quality of such an offense as they charge me with, which is in effect but
an indiscretion, deserve so grievous a punishment both to the Church and me, in
taking away my ministry, and that poor little commodity which it yields
for the necessary maintenance of my life; if so unequal a ballancing of
faults and punishments, should have place in the commonwealth, surely we
should shortly have no actions upon the case, nor of trespass, but all should
be pleaes of the Crown, nor any man amerced, or fined, but for every light
offense put to his ransom. I have credibly heard, that some of the ministry
have been committed of grievous transgressions of the laws of God and men,
being of no ability to do other service in the Church then to read, yet has
it bin thought charitable and standing with Christian moderation and
temperancie, not to deprive such of ministry and beneficency, but to inflict
some more tolerable punishment. Which I write not because such as I think, were
to be favored, but to show how unlike their dealing is with me, being through
the goodness of God not to be touched with any such blame, and one who
according to the measure of the gift of God, have labored now some years
painefully, in regard of the weak estate of my body in preaching the Gospel,
and as I hope not altogether unprofitably in respect of the Church. But J
beseech your Honors to give me leave briefly to declare the particular reasons
of their letters, and what answer I have to make unto it.

The first is, that as they say I am not lawfully called to the function of the
ministry, nor allowed to preach according to the laws of this Church of
England.

For answer to this, I had need to divide the points, and first to make answer
to the former, wherein leaving to show what by the holy Scriptures is required
in a lawful calling and that all that is to be found in mine, that I be not
too long for your other weighty affairs, I rest.

I this answer, my calling to the ministry was such as in the calling of any
thereunto is appointed to be used by the orders agreed upon in the National
Synods of the low Countries, for the direction and guidance of their Churches,
which orders are the same with those whereby the French and Scottish Churches
are governed, whereof I have showed such sufficient testimonial to my L. the
Archbishop of Canterbury, as is requisite in such a matter: whereby it must
needs fall out if any man be lawfully called to the ministry in those Churches
then is my calling, being the same with theirs, also lawful. But I suppose
notwithstanding they use this general speech, they mean only my calling is
not sufficient to deal in the ministry within this land, because I was not
made minister according to that order which in this cause is ordained by our
laws. Whereunto I beseech your Honors to consider thoroughly of mine answer,
because exception now again is taken to my ministry whereas having been
heretofore called in question for it, I so answered the matter, as I continued
my ministry, and for any thing I discerned, looked to hear that no more
objected unto me. The communion of Saints (which every Christian man professes
to believe) is such, as that the acts which are done in any true Church of
Christ's according to his word, are held as lawful being done in one Church, as
in another. Which as it holds in other acts of ministry, as baptism,
marriage, and such like, so does it in the calling to the ministry; by reason
whereof all Churches do acknowledge and receive him for a minister of the
word, who has been lawfully called thereunto in any Church of the same
profession. A Doctor created in any University of Christendom, is
acknowledged sufficiently qualified to teach in any country. The Church of Rome
it self, and the Canon law holds it that being ordered in Spain, they may
execute that belongs to their order in Italy, or in any other place. And the
Churches of the gospel never made any question of it. Which if they shall now
begin to make doubt of, and deny such to be lawfully called to the ministry,
as are called by another order then our own, then may it well be looked for
that other Churches will do the like: and if a minister called in the low
Countries be not lawfully called in England, the^ may they say to our preachers
which are there, that being made by another order the^ theirs, they cannot
suffer them to execute any act of ministry amongst them, which in the end
must needs breed a schism and dangerous division in the Churches. Further I
have heard of those that are learned in the laws of this land, that by
express Statute to that purpose Anno 13. upon subscription of the Articles
agreed upon Anno 62. that they who pretend to have been ordered by another
order then that which is now established, are of like capacity to enjoy any
place of ministry within the land, as they that have bin ordered according to
that is now by law in this case established. Which comprehe^ding manifestly all
even such as were made Priests according to the order of the Church of Rome, it
must needs be that the law of a Christian land professing the Gospel should be
as favorable for a mimister of the word as for a Popish Priest, which also was
so found in Mr Whittingames case, who notwithstanding such replies against him,
enjoyed still the benefit he had by his ministry, and might have done until
this day if God had spared him life so long, which if it be understood so and
practiced in others, why should the change of the person alter the right, which
the law gives to all other. The place of ministry, whereunto I was called,
was not presentatiue, and if it had been so surely they would never have
presented any man who^ they never knew; and the order of this Church is agree
able herein to the word of God, and the ancient and best Canons, that no man
should be made minister sine titulo. therefore having none I could not by the
orders of this Church have entered into the ministry, before I had charge to
tend upon. When I was at Anwerp, and to take a place of ministry among the
people of that nation, I see no cause why I should have returned again over
the seas for orders here, nor how I could have done it, without disallowing the
orders of the Churches provided in the country where I was to live. Whereby J
hope it appears, that my calling to the ministry is lawful, and makes me
by our law of capacity to enjoy any benefit or commodity, that any other by
reason of his ministry may enioie. But my cause is yet more easy, who reaped
no benefit of my ministry by law, receaving only a benevolence and voluntary
contribution, and the ministry I dealt with being preaching only, which every
Deacon here may do being licensed, and certain that are neither Ministers nor
Deacons: thus J answer the former of these two points whereof if there be yet
any doubt, J humbly desire for a final end thereof, that some competent
judges in law may determine of it; whereunto J refer and submit my self with
all reverence and duty.

The second is, that I preached without license, where unto this is my answer.
I have not presumed upon the calling I had to the ministry abroad, to preach,
or deal with any part of the ministry within this Church with out the consent
and allowance of such as were to allow me unto it: my allowance was from the
Bishop of London, testified by his two several letters to the inner Temple,
who without such testimony would by no means rest satisfied in it; which
letters being by me produced, J refer it to your Honors wisdom, whether I
have taken upon me to preach without being allowed (as they charge) according
to the orders of the Realm. Thus having answered the second point also, J have
done with the objection of dealing without calling or license.

The other reason they allege is concerning a late action wherein J had to
deal with Mr Hooker, Master of the Temple: in the handling of which cause they
charge me with an indiscretion and want of duty, in that I inveighed (as they
say) against certain points of doctrine taught by him as erroneous, not
conferring with him, nor complaining of it to them. My answer hereunto
stands in declaring to your Honors the whole course and carriage of that
cause, and the degrees of proceeding in it, which J will do as briefly as I
can, and according to the truth, God be my witness, as near as my best memory,
and notes of remembrance may serve me thereunto. After that I have taken away
that which seems to have moved them to think me not charitably minded to Mr
Hooker, which is because he was brought into M. Alveyes place, wherein this
Church desired that J might have succeeded; which place, if J would have made
suit to have obtained, or if J had ambitiously affected and sought, J would not
have refused to have satisfied by subscription such as the matter then seemed
to depend upon: whereas contrariewise, notwithstanding J would not hinder the
Church to do that they thought to be most for their edification and comfort,
yet did J neither by speech, nor letter, make suit to any for the obtaining of
it, following herein that resolution which J judge to be most agreeable to the
word and will of God, that is, that laboring and suing for places and charges
in the Church is not lawful. Further whereas at the suit of the Church some of
your Honors entertained the cause, and brought it to a near issue, that there
seemed nothing to remain, but the commendation of my Lord the Archbishop of
Canterbury, when as he could not be satisfied but by my subscribing to his
late articles, and that my answer agreeing to subscribe according to any law,
and to the statute provided in that case, but praying to be respited for
subscribing to any other, which J could not in conscience do, either for the
Temple (which otherwise he said he would not commend me to) nor for any other
place in the Church, did so little please my Lord Archbishop, as he resolved
that otherwise J should not be commended to it. J had utterly here no cause of
offense against Mr Hooker, whom J did in no sort esteem to have prevented or
vnderminded me, but that God disposed of me as it pleased him, by such means
and occasions as I have declared. Moreover as J had taken no cause of offense
at Mr Hooker for being preferred so there were many witnesses that J was glad
that the place was given him, hoping to live in all godly peace and comfort
with him, both for acquaintance and good will which has been between us, and
for some kind of affinity in the marriage of his nearest kindred and mine:
since his coming J have so carefully endeavored to entertain all good
correspondence and agreement with him, as I think he himself will bear me
witness of many earnest disputations and conferences with him about the
matter; the rather because that contrary to my expectation, he inclined from
the beginning but smally thereunto, but joined rather with such as had always
opposed themselves to any good order in this charge, and made themselves to be
brought indisposed to his present state and proceedings. For both knowing that
Gods commandment charged me with such duty, and discerning how much our peace
might further the good service of God and his Church, and the mutual comfort
of us both, J had resolved constantly to seek for peace, and though it should
fly from me (as J saw it did by means of some, who little desired to see the
good of our Church) yet according to the rule of Gods word to follow after it.
Which being so (as hereof J take God to witness, who searches the heart, and
reins, and by his son will judge the world, both the quick and dead) I hope
no charitable judgment can suppose me to have stood evil affected toward
him for his place, or desirous to fall into any controversy with him. Which
my resolution I pursued, that whereas I discovered sundry unfound matters in
his doctrine (as many of his sermons tasted of some sower leaven, or other)
yet thus I carried my self toward him. Matters of smaller weight, and so
covertlie discovered that no great offense to the Church was to be feared in
them, I wholly passed by, as one that discerned nothing of them, or had been
unfurnished of replies. For other of greater moment, and so openly delivered,
as there was just cause of fear, least the truth and church of God should be
prejudiced and perilled by it, and such as the conscience of my duty and
calling would not suffer me altogether to pass over, this was my course, to
deliver, when I should have just cause by my text, the truth of such doctrine
as he had otherwise taught in general speeches, without touch of his person
in any sort, and further at co^venient opportunity to confer with him in such
points. According to which determination, whereas he had taught certain things
concerning predestination otherwise then the word of God does, as it is
understood by all churches professing the gospel, and not unlike that wherewith
Coranus some times troubled his church; I both delivered the truth of such
points in a general doctrine, without any touch of him in particular, and
conferred with him also privatlie upon such articles. In which conference, I
remember, when I urged the consent of all churches, and good writers against
him that I knew, and desired if it were otherwise, what authors he had seen
of such doctrine, he answered me that his best author was his own reason:
which I wished him to take heed of, as a matter standing with christian
modesty and wisdom in a doctrine not received by the church, not to trust to
his own judgment so far, as to publish it before he had co^ferred with others
of his profession, laboring by daily prayer, and study to know the will of
God, as he did, to see how they understood such doctrine: notwithstanding he
with wavering replying that he would some other time deal more largely in
the matter, I wished him, and prayed him not so to do, for the peace of the
church, which by such means might be hazarded; seeing he could not but think,
that men, who make any conscience of their ministry, will judge it a
necessary duty in them, to teach the truth, and to convince the contrary.
Another time upon like occasion of this doctrine of his that the assurance of
that we believe by the word, is not so certain, as of that we perceive by
sense; I both taught the doctrine otherwise, namely the assurance of faith to
be greater, which assures both of things above, and contrary to all sense and
humane understanding, and dealt with him also privatlie upon that point.
According to which course, of late, when as he had taught that the Church of
Rome is a true Church of Christ, and a sanctified Church by profession of that
truth, which God has revealed unto us by his son, though not a pure, and
perfect Church: and further that he doubted not, but that thousa^ds of the
fathers, which lived and died in the superstitions of that church, were saved
because of their ignorance, which excuses them, misalleaging to that end a 1.
Tim. 1.13.
text of scripture to prove it: the matter being of set purpose openly and at
large handled by him, and of that moment that might prejudice the faith of
Christ, encourage the ill affected to continue still in their damnable ways,
and other weak in faith to suffer themselves easily to be seduced to the
destruction of their souls; I thought it my most bounden duty to God, and to
his church, whilst I might have opportunity to speak with him, to teach the
truth in a general speech in such points of doctrine.

At which time I taught that such as die, or have died at any time in the
Church of Rome holding in their ignorance that faith, which is taught in it,
and namely justification in part by works, could not be said by the
scriptures to be saved. In which matter foreseeing that, if swaded not warily
in it, I should be in danger to be reported (as has fallen out since
notwithstanding) to condemn all the fathers: I said directly and plainly to
all men's understanding, that it was not indeed to be doubted, but many of
the fathers were saved, but the means (I said) was not their ignorance, which
excuses no man with God, but their knowledge and faith of the truth, which it
appears God vouchsafed them by many notable monuments and records extant of
it in all ages. Which being the last point in all my sermon rising so naturally
from the text I then expounded, as would have occasioned me to have delivered
such matter, notwithstanding the former doctrine had bin sound, and being dealt
in by a general speech without touch of his particular: I looked not that a
matter of controversy would have been made of it, no more then had been of
my like dealing in former time. But far otherwise, then I looked for Mr Hooker
showing no grief of offense taken at my speech all the week long, the next
Saboth, leaving to proceed upon his ordinary text, professed to preach again
that he had done the day before for some question that his doctrine was drawn
into, which he desired might be examined with all severity.

So proceeding, he bestowed his whole time in that discourse, concerning his
former doctrine, and answering the places of Scripture, which I had Apoc ^3 4.
Gal 5^ 3 4.
alleged, to prove that a man dying in the Church of Rome is not to be judged
by the Scriptures to be saved. In which long speech, and utterly impertinent to
his text, under color of answering for himself, he impugned directly and
openly to all men's understanding the true doctrine which I had delivered, and
added to his former points some other like (as willingly one error follows
another) that is, that the Galathians ioining with faith in Christ
circumcision, as necessary to salvation, might not be saved. And that they of
the Church of Rome may be saved by such a faith of Christ, as they had, with a
general repentance of all their errors, notwithstanding their opinion of
justification in part by their works and merits. I was necessarily, though not
willingly drawn to say something to the points he objected against sound
doctrine, which J did in a short speech in the end of my sermon, with
protestation of so doing, not of any finister affection to any man, but to
bear witness to the truth according to my calling. And wished, if the matter
should needs further be dealt in, some other more convenient way might be
taken for it; wherein, I hope, my dealing was manifest to the consciences of
all indifferent hearers of me that day, to have been according to peace, and
without any uncharitableness being duly considered.

For that I conferred with him the first day, I have showed that the cause
requiring of me in duty at the least not to be altogether silent in it, being
a matter of such consequence, that the time also being short, wherein I was to
preach after him, the hope of the fruit of our communication being small, upon
experience of former conferences, my expectation being that the church should
be no further troubled with it, upon the motion I made of raking some other
course of dealing. I suppose my differring to speak with him till some fit
opportunity, cannot in charity be judged uncharitable.

The second day his unlooked for opposition with the former reasons made it to
be a matter that required of necessity some public answer; which being so
temperate as I have showed, if notwithstanding it be censured as uncharitable,
and punished so grievously as it is, what should have been my punishment if
(with out all such cautions and respects as qualified my speech) I had before
all, and in the understanding of all so reproved him offending openly, that
other might have feared to do the like? Which yet if I had done, might have
been warranted by the rule and charge of the Apostles, them that offend openly
rebuke openly, that the rest may also fear, and by his example, who when
Peter in this very case which is now between us, had (not in preaching) but
in a matter of conversation not gone with a right foot, as was fit, for the
truth of the gospel, conferred not privately with him, but, as his own rule
required, reproved him openly before all, that other might hear, and fear,
and not dare to do the like: all which reasons together weighed I hope will
show the manner of my dealing to have been charitable, and warrantable in
every sort.

The next saboth day after this Mr Hooker kept the way he had entered into
before, and bestowed his whole hour and more only upon the questions he had
moved and mainetained, wherein he so set forth the agreement of the Church of
Rome with us, and their disagreement from us, as if we had consented in the
greatest, and weightiest points, and differed only in certain smaller matters:
which agreement noted by him in two chief points, is not such as he would
have made men believe. The one in that he said, they acknowledged al men
sinners, even the blessed Virgin, though some of them freed her from sin, for
the Council of Trent holds that she was free from sin. Another in that he
said; they teach Christ's righteousness to be the only meritorious cause of
taking away sin, and differ from us only in the applying of it. For Thomas
Aquinas their chief schooleman, and Archbishop Catherinus teach, that Christ
took away only original sin, and that the rest are to be taken away by our
selves; yea the council of Trent teaches that righteousness, whereby we are
righteous in Gods sight, is an inherent righteousness: which must needs be of
our own works, and cannot be understood of the righteousness inherent only
in Christ's person, and accounted unto us. Moreover he taught the same time,
that neither the Galathians, nor the Church of Rome did directly overthrow the
foundation of justification by Christ alone, but only by consequent, and
therefore might well be saved; or else neither the Churches of Lutherans, nor
any which hold any manner of error could be saved, because (says he) every
error by consequent overthrows the foundation. In which discourses and such
like he bestowed his whole time, and more, which, if he had affected either
the truth of God, or the peace of the Church, he would truly not have done.
Whose example could not draw me to leave the Scripture I took in hand, but
standing about an hour to deliver the doctrine of it, in the end upon just
occasion of the text leaving sundry other his unsound speeches, and keeping me
still to the principal; I confirmed the believing the doctrine of
justification by Christ only to be necessary to the justification of all that
should be saved, and that the Church of Rome directly denies that a man is
saved by Christ, or by faith alone without the works of the law. Which my
answer as it was most necessary for the service of God, and the church, so
was it without any immodest, or reproachful speech in Mr Hooker, whose unfound
and wilful dealings in a cause of so great importance to the faith of Christ,
and salvation of the Church, notwithstanding I knew well what speech it
deserved, and what some zealous earnest man of the spirit of John and James
surnamed Mark. 3 17.
Boanerges sons of thunder would have said in such a case: yet I chose
rather to content my self in exhorting him to revisite his doctrine, as 2.
Sam. 7.2.3.4.5.
Nathan the Prophet did, the devise which without consulting with God he had
of himself given to David concerning the building of the Temple: and with Gal.
2.11.14
Peter the Apostle to endure to be withstoode in such a case not unlike unto
this. This in effect was that which passed between us concerning this matter,
and the invectiues I made against him, wherewith I am charged; which
rehearsal, I hope, may clear me (with all that shall indifferently consider
it) of the blames laid upon me for want of duty to Mr Hooker in not conferring
with him, whereof I have spoken sufficiently already: and to the high
commission in not revealing the matter to them, which yet now I am further to
answer. My answer is, that I protest no contempt nor wilful neglect of any
lawful authority staide me from complaining unto them, but these reasons
following.

First I was in some hope, that Mr Hooker, notwithstanding he had been
overcarried with a show of charity to prejudice the truth, yet when it should
be sufficiently proved, would have acknowledged it, or at the least induced
with peace, that it might be offered without either offense to him, or to such
as would receive it; either of which would have taken away any cause of just
complaint. When neither of these fell out according to my expectation, and
desire, but that he replied to the truth, and objected against it, I thought
he might have some doubts, and scruples in himself, which yet if they were
cleared, he would either embrace some doctrine, or at least suffer it to have
his course; which hope of him I nourished so long as the matter was not
bitterly, and immodestlie handled between us.

Another reason was the cause it self, which according to the parable of the
tares (which are said to be sown amongst the wheat) sprung up first in his
grass. Therefore as the servants in that place are not said to have come to
complain to the Lord till the tares came to show their fruits in their kind: so
I thinking it yet but a time of discovering of it, what it was, desired not
their sickle to cut it down.

For further answer it is to be considered, that the conscience of my duty to
God, and to his Church, did bind me at the first to deliver sound doctrine in
such points, as had been otherwise uttered in the place, where I had now some
years taught the truth. Otherwise the rebuke of the (...)
Prophet had fallen upon me for not going up to the breach, and standing in
it, and the (...)
peril for answering the blood of the City, in whose watchtower I sat, if
it had bin surprised by my default. Moreover my public protestation in being
unwilling, that if any were not yet satisfied, some other more convenie^t way
might be taken for it. And lastly that J had resolved (which I uttered before
to some dealing with me about the matter) to have protested the next Saboth
day, that I would no more answer in that place any objections to the doctrine
taught by any means, but some other way satisfy such as should require it.
These I trust may make it appear, that I failed not in duty to authority;
notwithstanding I did not complain, nor give over so soon dealing in the
case. If I did, how is he clear, which can allege none of all these for
himself, who leaving the expounding of the Scriptures, and his ordinary
calling, voluntarily discoursed upon school points and questions neither of
edification, nor of truth, who after all this, as promising to himself, and to
untruth a victory by my silence, added yet in the next Saboth day to the
maintenance of his former opinions these which follow.

That no additament takes away the foundation except it be a privatiue, of
which sort neither the works added to Christ by the Church of Rome, nor
circumcision by the Galathians were as one denies him not to be a man, that
says he is a righteous man, but he that says he is a dead man: whereby it
might seem that a man might without hurt add works to Christ, and pray also,
that God and S. Peter would save him.

That the Galathians case is harder then the case of the Church of Rome,
because the Galathians joined circumcision with Christ, which God has
forbidden, and abolished: but that which the Church of Rome joined with Christ
were good works which God has commanded. wherein he committed a double fault;
one, in expounding all the question of the Galathians, and consequently of the
Romans, and other Epistles of circumcision only, and the ceremonies of the law
(as they do who answer for the Church of Rome in their writings) contrary to
the clear meaning of the Apostle, as may appear by many strong, and
sufficient reasons: the other in that he said the addition of the Church of
Rome was of works commanded of God, whereas the least part of the works,
whereby they looked to merit, was of such works, and most were of
supererogation, and of works which God never commanded, but was highly
displeased with, as of Masses, Pilgrimages, pardons, pains of Purgatory, and
such like: further that no one sequel urged by the Apostle against the
Galathians for ioining circumcision with Christ, but might be as well enforced
against the Lutherans, that is, that for their vbiquitie it may be as well said
to them, if ye hold the body of Christ to be in all places, you are fallen
from grace, you are under the curse of the law, saying, cursed be he that
fulfilleth not all things written in this book with such like: he added yet
further, that to a Bishop of the Church of Rome, to a Cardinal, yea to the
Pope himself, acknowledging Christ to be the savior of the world, denying
other errors, and being discomforted for want of works whereby he might be
justified, he would not doubt but use this speech; Thou hold the foundation
of Christian faith, though it be but by a slender thread; thou hold Christ,
though but as by the hem of his garment, why should thou not hope that virtue
may pass from Christ to save thee? That, which thou hold of justification
by thy works, overthrows indeed by consequent the foundation of Christian
faith; but be of good cheer, thou have not to do with a captious Sophister,
but with a merciful God, who will justify thee, for that thou hold, and
not take the advantage of doubtful construction to condemn thee. And if this,
he said, be an error, I hold it willingly; for it is the greatest comfort I
have in this world, without which I would not wish either to speak or to live.
Thus far, being not to be answered in it any more, he was bold to proceed; the
absurdity of which speech I need not to stand upon. I think the like to this
and other such in this sermon, and the rest of this matter has not been heard
in public places within this land since Queen Mary's days. What consequence
this doctrine may be of, if he be not by authority ordered to revoke it, I
beseech your HH. as the truth of God and his gospel is dear and precious unto
you, according to your godly wisdoms to consider.

I have been bold to offer to your HH. a long and tedious discourse of these
matters. But speech being like to tapestrie, which, if it be folded up, shows
but part of that which is wrought, and being vnlapt and laid open shows
plainly to the eye all the work that is in it; I thought it necessary to
unfold this tapestrie, and to hang up the whole chamber of it in your most
Honorable senate: that so you may the more easily discern of all the pieces,
and the sundry works and matters contained in it. Wherein my hope is your HH.
may see J have not deserved so great a punishment as is laid upon the Church
for my sake, and also upon my self in taking from me the exercise of my
ministry: which punishment how heavy it may seem to the Church, or fall out
indeed to be, J refer it to them to judge, and spare to write what I fear;
but to my self it is exceeding grievous, for that it takes from me the
exercise of my calling. Which I do not say is dear unto me as the means of
that little benefit whereby I live (although this be a lawful consideration,
and to be regarded of me in due place, and of the authority under whose
protection I most willingly live, even by Gods commandment, both unto them,
and unto me:) but which ought to be more precious to me then my life, for the
love which J should bear to the glory and honor of Almighty God, and to the
edification and salvation of his Church, for that my life cannot any other way
be of like service to God, nor of such use and profit to men by any means: for
which cause, as J discern, how dear any ministry ought to be unto me, so it
is my hearty desire, and most humble request unto God, to your HH. and to all
the authority I live under, to whom any dealing herein belongs, that I may
spend my life according to his example, who in a word of like sound of fuller
sense * comparing by it the bestowing of his life to the offering powered out
upon the sacrifice of the faith of Gods people, and especially of this Church
whereupon I have already powered out a great part thereof in the same calling,
from which I stand now restrained. And if your HH. shall find it so that J
have not deserved so great a punishment, but rather performed the duty, which a
good and faithful servant ought in such a case to do to his Lord, and the
people he puts him in trust withal carefully to keep; I am a most humble
suitor by these presents to your HH. that by your godly wisdom, some good
course may be taken for the restoring of me to my ministry and place again.
Which so great a favor shall bind me yet in a greater obligation of duty
(which is already so great, as it seemed nothing could be added unto it, to
make it greater) to honor God daily for the continuance and increase of your
good estate, and to be ready with all the poor means God has given me, to
do your HH. that faithful service, I may possibly perform: but if,
notwithstanding my cause be never so good, your HH. can by no means pacify
such as are offended, nor restore me again, then am I to rest in the good
pleasure of God, and to commend to your HH. protection under her Majesty's my
private life, while it shall be led in duty, and the Church to him, who has
redeemed to himself a people with his precious blood, and is making ready to
come to judge both the quick and the dead, to give to every one according as
he has done in this life, be it good or evil, to the wicked and unbeliever
justice unto death, but to the faithful, and such as love his truth mercy and
grace to life everlasting.

Your Honors most bounden, and most humble suppliant, Walter Travers Minister
of the word of God.


