The three Questions OF Free Justification. Christian Liberty. The use of the
Law.


Explicated in a brief Comment on St. PAVL to the Galatians, from the 16. ver.
of the second Chapter, to the 26. of the third.

By SAM. TORSHELL Pastor of Bunbury in Cheshire.

(...). Basil hom. 29. adv Ca um S. Trin. LONDON. Printed by I.B. for H.
Overton, and are to be sold at his shop in Popes-head-Alley, at the entering
into Lumbardstreet. 1632.

The right Worshipful, the MASTER, the WARDENS, and the rest of the Company of
HABERDASHERS in London.
It Is not custom but a right, that challenges the Dedication; They are Sermons,
which were preached, in that Interim while I was yours, though at London, and
to that people whom I still equally both love and honor, and who at that time
owned my Preac ings, yet after your choice had separated me from them to a
remoter Country, and greater task, Their desire first called it to the Press;
but it is a trodden Complement to plead Importunity; nor do I love it, but
must freely confess, That it is not only by enforcement that I am abroad.
Every one that vouchsafes to bestow his eye so meanly, may read, and with
welcome. Nor would I beg acceptance from Censure; let men verdict as they
please: It were Pride, and Selfe-seeking to crouch unto opinion. My intendments
are but to do service to my great Master, and them that are his, The Humble;
and therefore from him only are my expectations. If God might have honor, and
Gods people benefit, harshest Censure should not discourage me from publishing
this, or more.

I affect not their Niceness, that will be their own Closets, and Cabinet up
their own labors. If we have but one Talent, it must be put unto the Bank;
God endures not the Napkin. Let God and the Church have our Studies, if we be
conscionable, we cannot lose by our sweat. The Subject of this discourse
cannot be unusefull, the frame is but rude, I intended not ornament; much
ornament becomes not a Sermon: That Trumpet of the Gospel, the learned Paul,
determins to know nothing among his Corinths, save Jesus Christ, and him
crucified. But what ere it is, I have made it you-s, as a testimony of those
respects I bear you, and how justly I owe them, upon Bonds not few, nor
ordinary. The Lord add unto what he has bestowed upon you, and make you
answerable to your wonted goodness; It is the prayer of

Your servant in the business of God, SAM. TORSHEL.
Bunbary. 1631.
OF JUSTIFICATION BY FAITH.
THE Questions of Free Justification, of our Christian Liberty, and of the use
of the Law, are agitated of late, not without much heat, while one side
careful, the other side fearful of good works, do both strive for Christ, and
mistake each others grounds. They are untoward names wherewith Christians brand
one the other: while one is called a Legalist, another pointed at for an
Antinomist, and this man repayes the former, with the hateful name of
Iusticiary; peevish expressions of weak minds; Can we not dispute unless we
contend? It were a presumption to endeavor a reconcilement, unfit for my few
years, and not much fit for this place. I shall only say so much as may best
suit for popular Sermons, for an audience not nicely curious.

If we begin an analyze at this chapter, there are two parts.

Gal. 2.
I. The continuation of the Apostles narration, where he relates two passed
Acts: 1. That at Jerusalem, with the Apostles, from the first, to the eleventh
verse. 2. That at Antioch, with Peter; In which, 1. The sum of the whole
business; verse. 11. 2. The particulars of the several passages, they, these:
1. What Peter did, v. 12. 2. The consequent of that error, verse. 13. 3. Paul's
following reprehension: In which we have, 1. The manner of it by way of an
interrogation, to press it thereby more closely. 2. The matter of it; That is
double: 1. He prooves the Hypothesis, that those present Gentiles ought not in
that to have Iudaized; which he proves from Peter's own contrary fact, verse.
14. 2. He proves the Thesis, That the Gentiles ought not at all to seek
righteousness from the law: This, 1. He proves from the common fact of all
the Apostles, verse. 15. We who are Jews by nature, etc. If any might look
for righteousness from the law, then we might by the best reason do it,
having privilege above all other people; for we are borne Jews, born to the
righteousness of the Law; we have the Fathers, the Covenant, the Promises;
and are not sinners of the Gentiles; alieni faederis, strangers from the
Covenant, as they are; yet we know that a man cannot be justified by the Law.
2. He confirms it from the general doctrine of Justification, verse. 16.







II. The second part, is, the Return of the Apostles speech to the Galatians:
wherein 1. He lays down the doctrine of free Justification, the maine
Argument o his Epistle, verse. 16. For this verse is both the close of the
former, and beginning of this part, by an artfull, and almost unperceiued
transition, passing from one to the other. 2. He proves it by several
arguments, which take up the rest of this Chapter, and eighteen verses of the
next. 3. He makes use of it by deduction of some consequents from the 19. verse
of the third Chapter, and so following.


I shall go on in an easy method, and follow Paul in his; therefore I lay
down for the ground of my following discourse, this general Doctrine: That a
man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ.

This truth I shall, first, explicate; secondly, confirm; thirdly, apply*
which being done, we shall somewhat comprehend those controverted tenants.

The explication is in this 16. verse; Knowing, that is, 1 Explicat.
We do know: (...), for (...). But that we may take the explication more
full, we will observe those particulars which the verse affords us; they are
these: 1. What Justification is. 2 The exclusion of false causes of it. 3. The
true meritorious cause. 4. The means of application.


Concerning the first, that we may take the whole nature of it, we will see, 1.
What Justice is. 2. What is Justification.


1. Concerning Justice; Thus: Justice, or righteousness, is a perfect
conformity, or agreement with the Divine Law; which admits a double name.

1. Legal, which is that righteousness or conformity to Gods Law, which is
inherent in our selves; a justice of works; and it is either, 1. A justice of
obedience in doing all, in leaving undone nothing. Or, 2. A justice of
satisfaction, in enduring the penalty for default of obedience.


2. Evangelicall, which is that rig^teousnesse or conformity to Divine law, not
inherent in our selves, but being in another, is reckoned ours. A justice of
faith.

2. Concerning Justification; therein, 1. Of the Name. 2. Of the Thing. For one
gives light to the other.


1. Of the name; the word Iustifico is not of ancient use, as not being found
in old Latin Authors, but signifies to make one just. Now a man may be made
just;

1. By infusion, when an habitual quality of Justice is wrought any way in any
person. So was Adam just, God made man righteous, but they sought out many
inventions, Eccles. 7.29. So are regenerate Christians just, being sanctified,
having grace infused. This the School calls formal righteousness, and the
corrupter Schoolmen say, that Christian righteousness is such, so in them, as
whiteness is in a wall Inherent; and that a man is in this sense Justified. But
the sense is different from our usual acception, and therefore,

2. A man may be Just by Plea: that is, when being accused, he is Iudicially
acquitted; when his Justice being questioned, is cleared. Such forms we have
in our usual speaking; I Will make him a knave, when we mean to convict a man;
or, I Will make him an honest man, when we mean to clear him. So the word is
used, Esa. 5.23. Woe to them which justify the wicked for reward, and take
away the righteousness of the righteous from him. Not that our undue praises
can make a wicked man just, nor that our unjust slanders can make a good man
unrighteous. Take the sense but in one other expression; we say, when a Judge
condemns a malefactor, the law will justify him; not that the law does make
the Judge just, but does approve and justify the sentence that he gives: This
is the more proper sense. And thus much of the name

2. Of the Thing it self: herein, 1. The nature of it. 2. The Degrees. 3. The
Kinds.


1. The nature of it; this, It is the declaring or approving one Just, when
suspect, and accused. So we gather it, Deuteronomy. 25.1. The matter of Justification,
is Justice, which must be before this, in nature, as the ground. The form, is
the pleading of such a justice. Then it is little differenced from Plea, or
Apology.

2 The degrees, are, 1. In regard of matter: 1. Complete, which is, full; or
incomplete, to which refer Justification by comparison. 2. Universal, which
we call Justification of the person; or particular, which we call, Justification
of the cause.
2. In regard of form: 1. By assertion only, or both by assertion and
demonstration. 2. In color, or in truth: separately or jointly. 3. The kinds
are,



1 Of one inherently just: here Justification is made, either by pleading the
act committed, no fault; or if a fault, not committed. This is to be justified
by a righteousness of ones own, by declaring the party clear, the accusation
false. It is of use, and only in the Court of man: Ierem, 26.15, 16.

2. Of such as are not inherently just: here Justification is by confessing the
fault done, and by pleading satisfaction. For satisfaction, and Non-commission,
are alike equal in Justice. Now satisfaction may be made legally in a man's
own person, or Evangelically, by another, a Surety. These things in the
general premised, we proceed to the other particulars to be explicated, where
we shall apply what has been laid.

The second is the Exclusion of false causes; Papists have an untoward conceit
of a double merit, whereby they would bring in works. Take what they say,
plainly and briefly: There is a Merit of congruence: It is the doing of that
work which is good in it self, and though it deservedly merit not, yet being
good, there is a congruence or fitness that God should reward it, he being
also good, and a lover of good, where he sees it: So that if a man, merely
natural, do say a Mass, give an Alms, or the like, there is a fitnes, or
congruence to reward. There is a merit also of condignity, which is a just
deserving upon the former merit. A man by doing a good work, deserves by
Congruence, though he be yet natural, that God should give him grace; and having
grace, now he justly deserves, because Gratia gratum facit, and being gracious
in Gods eye, God must needs reward him. This is all, and all is nothing,
coming under this strict exclusion, with the works of the Law. But they have
one refuge somewhat more subtle.

They say, the works of the Law, which are excluded from Justification, are
the works of Free Will, such as go before faith: but such as follow after
faith, are not excluded. They would seem to draw this gloss from the words of
the Text, reading them according to the vulgar Latin Translation, Non ex
operibus, nisi per fidem; Not of the works of the Law, unless by faith.

Thus they argue, Indeed works are excluded, unless they be done by faith; but
from faith, they receive a Justifying power: and thus they bring in works to
share in the business.

But to this we answer,

1. That the works of the Law, and the works of Faith, are not set in
opposition, but the works of the Law, and Faith. For they would have a false
supposition granted, that though Works of Law are excluded, yet Works of Faith
are not.

2. That such works as are done in Faith, are peremptorily excluded. Look
only upon Abraham, a faithful man, the father of the faithful, his works
were many, they were glorious, nor can we deny them to proceed from faith, yet
the Apostle fully enough proves it, Romans 4. that he had not in his works,
whereof to glory before God.

3. But we answer more pressely, by vindicating the Text: (...), which they
translate, Nisi, unless, is not Conditional; but either exclusive, so it is
taken for (...), only; or adversative, so it is taken for (...), but: and thus
it is used in many Scriptures, Gal. 1.7. (...), But there are some that trouble
you: Matthew. 12.4. (...), But to the Priests only: Revel. 21.27. (...), But
they that are written in the Lambs book. Besides, (...) and (...), or (...),
seem to be the same in the very word; for Alla, is of the Syriacke, Ellos,
which is from the Hebrew Im lo, and that is in Greek rendering, Ean me.
Moreover, to clear Hierome, by Hierome: he, though he translate it, Nisi
unless, So Aug. de Spir. and lit. c. 13.
yet in the allegation of the place, he frequently uses, Sed, But. But there
need no other words, where Saint Paul determines it so plainly in another
place, Romans 3.28. We conclude that a man is justified by faith, (...). Absque
operibus, Without the works of the law. I will but name one other cavil,
because it is obvious; They say, If works be excluded, then are we justified by
faith alone, if by faith alone, then would ^atch justify if it were alone. Si
sola, tum si esset sola.

I answer, That faith which iustifies, cannot be alone, so the Apostle to
these Galatians, cap. 5. ver. 6. (...), Faith that works by love: yet the
inference is unworthy the quickness of a Jesuit, as if a man should say, If
the eye see alone, then it will see if it be alone. Whereas we know, (to give
you the thing clear by this similitude) that although the eye alone see, yet
if it were by it self alone, it could not see at all. There is no part of my
body can see an object visible and presented, not my eyelid, not my forehead,
not my brain, but my eye only: yet if my eye were taken out of my head, I
could discern nothing. We dare not separate works from faith, that were to
leave it naked, and show it dead: yet it is an untoward translation which
Bellarmine renders, Bell. de Just. lib. 2. c. 4.
not without a manifest barbarism, when he reads thus, Faith that is wrought
by love: so making charity the form and soul of faith. But let us retain
that form of words, We are justified, Sola fide, by faith alone. The Fathers
are so usual in that phrase, that I could easily weary you with the
allegations. Let me refer to some that have the very word, Sola fide; Orig.
in loc. Basil in conc. de humil. Ambr. cap. 9. in Romans 3. Hier. in Romans 4. Pet.
Chrysol. sermon. 34. de Haemorroissa Bern. sermon. 22. in Can. August. in 83.
Quaestionibus, quaest. 76. But no more, for I remember where I speak, only let
me add the words of two testimonies. That of Chrysostom in 3. ad Galat. is
very pertinent: (...). Again (says he) some say, he that relyes on faith
alone, is execrable: But the Apostle speaks the contrary, he that relyes on
Faith alone, is blessed. This Theodoret, septimo Therapeuticon, almost repeats,
(...). Nor do we obtain those secret good things, by any of our own merits,
but by faith alone.

This for the second, The exclusio^ of false causes; the third thing propounded
for explication, is, The designement of the true meritorious cause of our
Justification: The Text declares it to be Jesus Christ. His merits, Hic videtur
esse implicatio terminorum. Consule pa. 14, ad finem
his obedience, in doing, in suffering. Take it in a brief head, thus; Where
there cannot be Justification by plea, it must be by some other proportionable
means, which we call, Satisfaction. This Satisfaction must be proportioned to
the offense; this being infinite, that must be alike infinite. Man therefore
cannot satisfy, for both his doings, and his sufferings, are limited. It must
be done by another; now all creatures are both unholy, and finite; and the two
requisits necess^rily to be in the satisfier, are, righteousness and
infinitenes: These are solely in God, but God cannot be satisfied by himself,
that were only to forgive, so he should not be fully just. It falls therefore
into this, that he who must satisfy, must be God, truly righteous, truly
infinite; and in somewhat different from God, that there may be a complete
fitnes. Let nature search this mystery, she will easily be confounded; nay, let
the soul that sinned, be put upon the search, it leaves studying, and falls to
despairing. Briefly, it must fall, upon the appointment of an higher wisdom,
namely, Christ, in whom those fitnesses do all meet. Therefore, the
Righteousness of the Justified, is that which formally is in Christ only. See
how the Apostle inlarges and explaines himself in this, in his holy zeal,
against proud Zelots: they being ignorant of Gods righteousness, and going
about to establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves to
the righteousness of God, Romans 10 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

See the same Apostle, in a more practique expression, his own Resolve; I
count all things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus
my Lord; and do count them but dung, that I may win Christ, and be found in
him, not having mine own Righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which
is through the faith of Christ: Phil. 3.8, 9. The determination of a spirit,
made Divine: Let us so go out of our selves, and fly unto our Christ. He is
our hiding place, and must be our strength Surely, shall one say, In the Lord
have I righteousness and strength, even to him shall men come, and all that
are incensed against him shall be ashamed: In the Lord shall all the seed of
Israel be justified, and shall glory, Esaias 45.24, 25. We must not look upon
the Law, or Works, but see them hid in Christ. This mystery was excellently
shadowed, when God commanded the Ark, wherein were the Tables of the Covenant,
to be covered with a Propitiatory, upon which the Cherubs stretched their
wings, Exodus 25.17, 18, 19, etc. Heb. 9.4, 5. Christ is that Pro^itiatory, Romans
3.25. Let us not presume to uncover the Arc, or to take out the Decalogue, for
it is happy, that the Law is kept shut, and enclosed from us: but let us fasten
our eyes upon the Mercy-seat, see how sweetly the Cherubs sit, and mind not
what the Chest contains; for to lift up the lid of that, were like the opening
of the box of the harmfull Pandora, and would present horror to the curious,
the unwise Iusticiary.

The last head propounded for explication, was the means of application: Christ
is that Righteousness, how is he ours? By Faith (...) man is justified, not by
the works of the Law, but by faith in Jesus Christ; so the Text. We will here
consider, 1. What Faith is. 2. How Faith justifies.


1. I intend not a dispute, a word may give us what may suffice the present
purpose. It has seat both in the intellect, and in the will; and we observe in
it, both Assent and Appresion. This, indeed, is faith; or if we look upon it,
a little extended, we perceive the thrusting away of somewhat, the accepting of
somewhat, the exclusion of works of worth, the acceptance of Christ. The
Apostle to the Hebrews gives us this in a like phrase speaking of the
Patriarchs faith; These dyed in the faith, not having received the promises,
but having seen them a far off, (...), and were persuaded of them, (...) and
embraced them, Hebr. 11.13.

2. This faith justifies, the Scripture is full, Romans 3.24, 25.30. Romans 10, 10.
Ephesians. 2.8. Concerning the manner, take it negatively, positively, in these
Theses.

1. It iustifies not by bare profession, then should all hypocrites be
justified: but S. James disputes strongly in his second Chapter, against them,
and against that Faith. In that sense he lays down his cavilled and mistaken
conclusion v. 24. (...). By works a man is justified, and not by faith only.
His intent is but the same with Paul, in that place alleged and vindicated,
Gal. 5.6.

2. Nor are we justified by faith, as by an action which has worth and merit
in it, whereby to deserve our justification.

3. Nor is Faith such an action, which, though it have not merit, yet by
favorable acceptance, is taken as if it were the perfect righteousness of the
law.

4. But it iustifies, as it is in relation to that object which it embraces,
and which object is our Justification. It iustifies, Relative et Organice,
relatively and instrumentally: ut terminatur in (...) Christi, Faith looks
upon, lays hold on Christ, on his merits, on his sufficiencies, and thus is
termed Justifying Faith.

These I laid in this manner, to clear this Truth from a double error.

1. One is of the Papists, and more gross, who say, That Faith iustifies per
modum causae efficientis et meritoriae, as an efficient and meritorious cause.
This is delivered by Cardinal Bellarmine, lib. 1. de Just. cap. 17. and by the
Jesuit Pererius, Com. in Genesis cap. 15. I answer, if Faith had merit to
justify, it should then go before Justification, et ratione, et tempore, both
in nature, and time; which we may not grant; for Faith is by it self, a part
of sanctification, and that we cannot conceive to go before our
Justification; that, namely, which is Foro Divino, in Gods sight. But I meant
but to name this, because it is enough known.

2. The other is later, and a little more subtle; They say, Faith justifies,
sensu proprio, in a proper sense; That, (...) credere, the very believing, is
imputed for righteousness: Non quidem merito suo, sed propter gratuitam
acceptilationem Dei; Not (say they) for its own merit, but because of
favorable allowance, it is accepted, as if it had merit: so in a gracious
acceptilation, it is received for righteousness. This was delivered by Faustus
Socinus, lib. 4. cap. 4. page 334. F^rwarded by others also.

But to clear our selves of this, we argue against it briefly, thus:

1. No man is Justified by an act of his own; This proposition is true from
express Scripture, Ephesians. 2.5. By grace ye are saved; ver. 9. Not of works: Now
the chain is surely linckt, justification and salvation; Romans 8 29, 30. Or
more in the words, Tit. 3.6, 7. Not by works of righteousness which we have
done, but according to his mercy he saved us, being Justified by his grace. And
if by grace, then it is no more of works, otherwise grace is no more grace,
Romans 11.6. But to believe, is an act of our own; I mean not any exclusion of
the spirits help, for God works all our works in us; only this I would say,
that the work takes its denomination from the next agent, and man is said to
believe: Therefore it is clear, no Justification by the Act of believing.

2. God accounts that for perfect righteousness, which is so indeed: The
Apostle witnesses the honor of Gods truth, Romans 2.2. We are sure that the
Judgment of God is according to truth. But they dare not but confess it, that
Faith is not indeed true righteousness of the Law: or, if otherwise, yet this
were enough against it, that if Faith were that Righteousness, and
Justification were by it, then a man should be Justified by two
righteousnesses, which no reason will admit; for if one be sufficient, there
needs not any other; and to grant it, what were it but to thrust out Christ
and all his merits, as if he were needless, and they insufficient.

They reply somewhat, and strangely, in an odd distinction of a double
Judgment in God: Iudicium Iustitiae, et Iudicium misericordiae: They say, God
sometimes judges with a Judgment of Justice, and then he accounts nothing
for such, but what is truly such: Sometimes with a Judgment of mercy, and then
laying aside rigor, he graciously allows, what in truth is not such.

But what impiety is this, indistinguishing of God, to separate God from God,
his Truth from his mercy; Nay, they do ever meet in God. In another kind, we
will admit the distinction, and not divide: God looks upon the righteousness
of Christ that is perfect, here is a Judgment of Truth; God looks upon that
righteousness as imputed to us, not otherwise ours, here is a Judgment of
mercy; the double Judgment that they speak of, yet Mercy and Truth are met
together.

^
I have done with what I first named, 2 Confirmation.
the Explication: I propounded, secondly, to prove what is so explayned; and
we may see it strengthened, partly, by Testimony, partly by Arguments.

1. 1 By testimonies.
The Testimonies of parallel Scriptures are plain: see one or two.

Romans 3.28. (...), id est, (...), We conclude, That a man is justified by
faith, without the deeds of the Law.

Romans 5.1. Being justified by Faith, we have peace.

Rom 4.6. David describes the blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputes
righteousness, without works. Verse 9 We say that Faith was reckoned to
Abraham for righteousness. ^his he took out of the witness of sacred history.

Genesis 15.6. He believed in the Lord, and he accounted it to him for
righteousness.

To omit others, the Apostle here subioynes one, in the latter end of this 16.
verse, which he receives from that Psalmist, Psalm. 143 2. In thy sight shall
no man living be justified. The Hebrew original, strictly renders it self by
the Septuagint, thus, All flesh shall not be justified: (...), but the Greek
frames that Hebraisme thus, (...), No flesh; and so the present Text reads it.

2 By Arguments.
2. The arguments are many, which the Apostle has disposed into a just method,
and is large in them, as containing in them a great deal of matter, full of
mystery, and full of comfort.

1. The first argument is verses.

The Text.

GAL. 2.17. But if while we seek to be justified by Christ, we our selves
also are found sinners, is therefore Christ the minister of sin? God forbid.

VERSE. 18. For if I build again the things that I destroyed, I make my self a
Transgressor.

VERSE. 19. For I through the Law, am dead to the Law, that I might live unto
God.

Verse. 20. I am crucified with Christ. Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but
Christ lives in me, and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the
faith of the son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.

Chrysostom and Hierome refer this in the 17. verse. to Peter; but more
genuinely is it referred by others to the Galatians, to al, and the force of
the Argument, This: Christ calls us from the Law to faith, but if faith be not
sufficient, unless the law be also brought in, then shall Christ seem to
patronize sin, by calling us from that Law, by virtue of which, sin is
expiated. If we, who, that we might be Justified, have given our names to
Christ, do yet want righteousness, unless we embrace Circumcision, and the
Ceremonies of the Law, then we shall be enforced to acknowledge that Christ is
a Minister of sin. A Minister of sin is he which teaches us what to do for
Righteousness, and so terrifies and shuts us under sin; thus, in stead of a
Savior, Christ should be a tyrant, a destroyer. But this were false, and
abominable to conceive, therefore the Apostle adds his Absit, God forbid.
Moses only was a Minister of sin, Christ is a giver of righteousness, and
the Scriptures are wont to promise it only by the benefit of him, The Redeemer
shall come out of Zion.

In the 18. verse, he amplifieth the former argument; comparing the law to a
Building, a similitude frequent, and used elsewhere by Paul, who calls himself
A wise master builder, 1 Cor. 3.10. I have pulled down that frame and structure
of the Law, that it may not reign in the Consciences of Christians; if I
return to the Law which I have formerly forsaken, I shall manifest my self to
be a deceizer, so the vulgar, or as the Greek carries it; (...), I declare my
self to be a sinner, a Transgressor, and, as the Greek Scholies add, still
obnoxious to death and damnation. He has given us his own Character, and the
true difference of Preachers: True ones, they destroy the Law, and build up the
faith of Christ: Iusticiaries, false Popish Teachers, destroy the kingdom of
Christ, while they raise up the Building of the Law, and maintain their own
Righteousness. The Argument is continued in the 19. verse; no recourse is to
be had unto the Law again, for by the Law, I am dead unto the Law, Deo vivit
qui sub Deo est; Legi autem, qui sub lege. Aug.
that I might live unto God; So that now the Law has no power over us, which
he speaks directly against them, who say, We must live unto the Law, if we
mean to live unto God. Nay, we are dead to the commands of the Law, not only
free, but dead; so though the Law live still, it has nothing to do with us; a
slave once dead, is no longer subject to the hard usages of his tyrannous
Master, though he call upon, and urge him, he hears not, obeyes not, because
he is dead. So are we to the Law, in this business of justification. Here is
mention of a law, and a law; some understand both to signify the same: By the
sentence of the Law it self I am dead unto the Law: it self tells us, that it
is not perpetual, but Christ is the End of it, when Christ comes, it cease
to rule. This affords a fit sense; yet I see not, but that of Hierome may be
rather admitted, who understands the former, of the Evangelicall Law, the Law
of Faith: the Exposition is sweet; Our Savior is become our law, by him we are
dead unto that of Moses: Now the Binding Law, is bound it self by Christ, and
we by him are set at liberty. By this interpretation, we are fallen,
necessarily, upon that great Question of Christian Liberty, which because it
falls in so fitly into this verse, I will spend some more words upon it, more
largely.

THE DOCTRINE OF CHRISTIAN LIBERTY.
THe knowledge of this Question is very necessary, and yet dangerous;
Necessary, that the consciences of men be not kept unstablished; Dangerous,
because carnal men do wantonly abuse it. I intend not so much as maybe spoken
of it, but so much as may be fit for this Comment, and an ordinary Sermon.

There is a various Liberty: 1. A liberty in causes and effects, that mutable
order between an Agent and an Effect, both voluntary. That the Agent may either
work, or not work such an Effect. This is opposed to Necessity. 2. A liberty
in the Will, a natural faculty of the reasonable creature, to choose or refuse
an object of its own proper motion. Libertas in genere, est status secundum
quem quis est sui Juris et alteri no^ obligatus. Armin disp. pub. 20.
Thus the reasonable is left to his own Election. This is opposed to Coaction.
3. That Liberty which is the right of a creature, either Person, or Thing, to
work of its own proper motion, according to natural Law; with the enjoyment
of uninterrupted convenient good things together with which it works, and the
freedom from such defects as are hindrances, and burdenous to that natural
law. The two former are not here meant, only this third, which is opposed to
servitude, is proper to this place: yet not in all respects; for again, this
Liberty is twofold; Civil, and Spiritual: The latter is that which concerns
our Question, and concerning which, I would propose to speak of.

1. The Description of it. 2. The Ends of it. 3. The consequents from it.
1. Concerning the Description, we have found it in the third kind of Liberty,
which is opposed unto slavery, and may therefore call it, A spiritual Immunity
from the evils and burdens of the servitude of the Law.

1. It is an Immunity; therefore it supposes we were once bound. The words in
our Common Law, which gives light unto this piece of Divinity, Immunity,
Freedom, Franchise, Enfranchisement, do all signify an exemption from somewhat
we were under before. The word Liberty, is of a more restrained signification,
Bracton. lib. 2. cap. 2.
and notes a privilege held by grant or prescription, whereby a man enjoyes
some favor beyond an ordinary subject. But the other words are more
expressive. Manumittere, Manumittens, manumittendum manutenebat, quam deinde
cum solveret inquiebat, Hunc liberum esse volo. Justinian.
which signifies to Make Free, is properly to send one out of his hand, because
so long as a slave continues in his servitude, he is in the hand of his Master.
Liberty from the law, is the delivering us from that hand, or power of the Law,
by which we were formerly held. So a Franchise is a privilege from ordinary
Jurisdiction, and that is called a Franchise Royal, An 15. Ric. 2. cap. 4. An
2. Hen. 5. cap. 7.
in some Statutes, where the Kings Writ runs not. Such an exemption has the
Christian from Mosaicall Power, yet we were once under it. Crompt. Iurisd. f.
141. Brit cap. 19 Bract. lib. 2. Bract. lib 5 Tra. 5.
For again in our Common Law, we say a man is Enfranchised, when he is
Incorporated into some society, or body Politic. He that by Charter is made
Denisen of England, is Enfranchised. Now a Denisen is an Alien enabled. My
readings in this business out of the compass of my proper study, may mistake,
but that I entend it for, is true, that we were before Aliens, till we became
incorporate into the body of Christ, by which only we plead our Freedom.

2. It is a Spiritual Immunity, therefore not Civil; again, therefore not
Carnal. We are neither exempted from obedience to men, nor God.

3. An Immunity from the evils and burdens of the Law, or more largely of
servitude.

1. From the evils of servitude: They are two:

1. From the curse of the Law. The law Iustifies none, we must therefore be
either freed from the law, or not at all Justified; For as many as are of the
works of the Law, are under the curse; for it is written, Cursed is every one
that continues not in all things in the book of the Law to do them. Gal.
3.10. Deuteronomy. 27.26. But here is our freedom. Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us
from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us. He became a curse for
us, and was made, for our sakes, as the greatest sinner, he stood in place, as
David the Adulterer, as Peter the Denyer, as Paul the Persecutor. We must see
our Christ, wrapped as well in our Sins, as in our flesh. He was numbered with
the Transgressors, and he bare the sin of many, Esa. 53.12. He was made sin
for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in
him, 2 Cor. 5.21. Thus is he pleased to call our sins, his; and he speaks
in David his Type, Psalm. 40.12. Mine iniquities have taken hold upon me, so
that I am not able to look up, they are more than the hayres of my head.
Christ standing thus a sinner, the law accused him, and after accusation, killed
him. But he has satisfied, and the Law is overcome; we have learned to
triumph: O death where is thy sting? The sting of death is sin, and the
strength of sin is the Law; but thanks be to God, which gives us the
victory through Jesus Christ our Lord, 1 Cor. 15.55, 56, 57. When the Law
curses, sends out Writs, sues out Attachements; we plead Immunity, and send
the law to Christ, by whom we aree freed.

2. From the power of sin, the other evil of servitude. Yield your selves
unto God, Ante legem non pugnamus, sub ^ege pugnamus, sed vintimur, sub gratia
pugnamus, and vincimus* in pace ne pugnamus quidem. Aug. in Romans 6.
for Sin shall not have dominion over you, for ye are not under the Law, but
under grace, Romans 6.14. They are encouraged to the Combat by a double motive,
the goodness of their cause, the easiness of their conquest. When we are
freed from the Law, which only commands, but gives no strength to obey, rather
takes away our strength, and adds strength to sin, then are we under grace,
which beside that it forgiveth that which is past, Quae praeterquam
prioradimittit, ad futura quoque cavenda animat. Chrysostom.
it does arm us to take heed of that which is to come: as Chrysostom sweetly
expounds the Romans: To whom the holy Apostle glories, Romans 8.2. The Law of
the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the Law of Sin.
From the Osiander.
accusing, the Calvin.
power, the Lyranus.
bond, the Erasmus.
right, the Chrysostom.
guilt of sin, the P. Mart.
law of the members.

2. We are freed not only from the evils, but from the burdens of servitude.

1. From the Coaction of the Law: for the Law does burden a man, and hinder the
alacrity of his obedience. A precept of the Law is,

Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy mind, with
all thy strength.

To be empty of all other loves, to set the sole affection upon God. Here the
most perfect fail, for though our love unto God be sincere, yet we are, many
times, drawn off with other lusts. But the Law tells us, He is cursed that
continues not in all. Now we see what ever we endevor, we are still under the
Curse; our works are, Mala quia imperfecta, therefore evil, because not
perfectly good. This dulleth the heart, and discourageth it from any offer. The
peevish eye of a froward Master, makes the servant heartlesse. What should I do
any thing, seeing whatsoever I do, I cannot please. This is the burden of the
Legally righteous: the task it set, they must either do it, or smart for
neglect. The Israelites are beaten i^ they bring not in their tale of bticke,
Exodus 5.14. But here is our Liberty, God spares us, as a man spares his own
son that serves him; Mal. 3.17. The Command is given, Let not sin reign
in your mortal Body: and the Promise is added with the Command; Sin shall
not have dominion over you. The Law cannot coact us, but grace unloads us,
removes our burdens, and sweetens our labors.

2. We are freed from Indifferents, when they prove burdens.

1. Things. The Jews were bound to use and refuse many things, the Using and
Refusing of which had else been Indifferent. They must abstain from Swine,
from things strangled, and the like. We have liberty of a freer use of Gods
creatures; being not subject to ordinances; Touch not, Taste not, Handle not,
Col. 2.20.21.

2. Men. We are not subjected to such commands, as whereby they would bind the
conscience. Now the constitutions of men are either,

1. Civil and political; These we have a rule for, that we must obey them,
though in 1 Cor. 7.23. he seem to give exemption; Ye are bought with a
price, be ye not the servants of men: yet, Romans 13.1.5. we have that other
expounded, Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, for the powers
that be, are ordained of God. Who resists the power, resists the ordinance
of God: Wherefore ye must needs be subject for conscience sake.

2. Ecclesiastical; These concern either,

1 The matter of Gods worship; then we renounce them as great presumptions; for
Divine worship cannot have institution from humane command.

2. Or the manner of worship, tending to decency: Here Constitutions may order,
not bind; order the carriage, not bind the conscience.

But concerning both these and those Constitutions, I mean, both
Ecclesiastical and Civil, I would deliver my self a little more fully; and
to that end, will present a few conclusions touching Indifferents, their nature
and extent.

1. An Adiaphoron or Indifferent, is, Res media, a middle thing, which stands
so to two extremes, that it may alike incline to both. And in the ordinary,
though not proper use of the word, Medium Abnegationis. Medium Participationis.
Aquin.
it is a Medium between moral good and evil. Now such a Medium, is either of
mere Abnegation, so all Substances, whether natural or artificial, are Res
mediae, Indifferent things; or of some participation, which so far agrees
with either extreme, as the extremes agree between themselves; so no Substances
are properly Indifferents, but Actions only: Actions therefore which are
neither commanded nor forbidden, and which in their intrinsicke nature, have
neither obedience, nor disobedience, are indifferent.

2. Indifferent Actions in their own intrinsicall nature, nothing differ among
themselves, but are all equally far from good and evil: But there are some
which, for the most part, have evil circumstances accompanying them, and
therefore sound in the worse sense, as if they did incline to evil; as to be an
accuser may be indifferently good or bad, yet we ill interpret that name. On
the contrary, some Actions commonly accompanied with good circumstances, as to
be studious, sound well, and are conceived to tend to good, though a man's study
may as well be evil and corrupt.

3. Indifferents cease to be Indifferents, when by Authority, they are
commanded or forbidden. Nothing ought to be commanded, but only good; nor any
thing but evil prohibited. What is indifferent in the nature, cannot simply,
absolutely, and perpetually be forbidden, or commanded; but commanded as it
comes nearer to good; and as nearer to evil, forbidden.

From these grounds we may draw Rules, for our freedom from, or obedience to,
for changed Indifferences, and the Constitutions of men.

2. We have the nature of our freedom described; now the Ends both of it, and
of the doctrine of it, are;

1. To pacify the conscience, that that great Director, may not be left
floting, but may know what ground it has, and how it may proceed.

2. To remove away superstition, that the mind may know, it is not tied to a
throng of needless observances, and discouraging fears.

3. To direct us in our work, in the comfort and readiness of our set working.

3. There remains the third proposed, The Consequents from the former.

1. The freedom is spiritual; therefore,

1. Not Civil: Then are the Anabaptists mad, who would reject all law, and
make the whole world level; denying obedience to Laws and lawful
Magistrates; a disease begun in the distempered heads of John of Leiden, and
the mad men of Munster; opposed among others chiefly by the holy zeal of
Luther, whose doctrine of Reformation was dangerously mistaken by those
fanatickes: which I ^he rather note, because some half issues of that
monstrous Birth, call that blessed Apostle of our later times, to patronize
their conceits and errors about the moral Law.

2. Not Carnal whence then are our ordinary excesses in the use of good
things; our surfeiting tables, and variety of delicates do sufficiently
witness our carnal licenciousnesse, that I need not instance the pride of our
fashions, the immoderatenesse of our pleasures. But these are Indifferents:
True, if they be used indifferently, but Excesses are not. What may be
lawfully used, by an inordinate desire to it, and delight in it, is made
unclean. Such Inordinates are defiled, and by the witness of the Apostle,
Titus 1.15. To them that are defiled nothing is pure. Our Savior has showed a
difference, Luke 6.2. Woe unto you that are rich, for ye have received your
Consolation: Woe unto you that are full. It Is lawful to enjoy an estate; Why
then is the Woe against them? They are immoderate, when being Rich, they
receive their Consolation, and are Full: It argues, they have made their state,
their Happiness. This is the peoples sin: Amos 6.1.6. Woe to them that are
at ease in Zion, that drink wine in Bowls, and annoint themselves with chief
ointments.

When we come to be at ease in our enioyments, we abuse our Liberty. But these
things are then truly Indifferent, when we are come to Paul's Resolve, Philip.
4.11, 12. I have learned to be content, I know how to be abased, and how to
abound, to be full, and to be hungry.

2. Though Spiritual, it is an immunity. Then if we have a Charter from
heaven, how dare any deny it, or withold it. Those miserable men that are
under the Popish yoke, have many heavy loads laid on their Consciences; the
Pontificials dealing with the Abused, as Pharaohs Taskemasters with the
afflicted Israelites, they load them hard, and then beat them, when they are
laden.

3. The ends are:

1. To quiet the Conscience; therefore not to afflict the Consciences of
others. They abuse their Liberty, that use it unseasonably, to the hindering of
the weak. Some young Christians of Corinth would eat Idolothyts, meats
offered to Idols, to that end only, to show their Liberty, but they are
answered by the Apostle, Licent quae expediunt, 1 Cor. 10.24. Theod. reads with
Interrogative. Omnia mibi licent? Sed non expediunt. Chrysostom. Ambros. read
without.
All things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient. And in
another place, he applies it more directly, Brethren, ye have been called
unto liberty, only use not liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but by love
serve one another: Gal. 5.13. Christ has loosed the yoke, not that we should
be more wanton, but more cheerful; as S. Chrysostom has well followed the
mind of the Apostle; who, Non monet, ut illegitima fiat vitae ratio, sed ut
legem transcendat Philosophia: soluta enim sunt legit vincula, non ut
dejiciamur, sed ut erigamur ad altiora: Etenimtam is quiscortatur, quam is qui
in Virginitate persev^rat, legis terminos excessit, verum non eodem m^do, sed
hic quidem in deteriora prolapsus, ille ^ero ad meliora provectus, sic ut alter
praetergr^ sus sit legem, alter super-gressus; Hoc itaque dic Paulus, Christus
Iugum vobis relaxavit, no^ ut exilati. aut calcitretis, sed ut absque jugo
composite incedatis Chr. in loc. Qui per charitatem servit libere seruit. Aug.
1 Cor. 8.11. strongly argues against this abuse, from the great danger of it,
to the perverting of a weak brothers soul. If thou have knowledge, and eatest
Idolothyts, another shall be encouraged to do it ignorantly, and therefore
sinfully. Through thy knowledge, shall thy weak brother perish, for whom
Christ dyed? Will thou suffer thy brother to perish for so small a cause, he
taking occasion to doc as Tuo actu illum occidis, quando a te fieri videt, quod
ille aliter inteligit, and tu eris occasio mortis fratri, quem Christus ut
redimeret, crucisigi se permissit. Amb. in 1. Cor. cap. 8.
Ambrose speaks, what he understands not: or as Christus pro fratre mori non
recusavit, tu autem ne in anima quidem inducis ^ad^^^tis ^^becillita^ te
de^tas, and ^mmo^? Chrysostom.
Chrysostom, Christ dyed for him, and wilt not thou deny thy selft for him?
But the danger is not more to the weak brother, then to the wilful offender;
for it follows in the next verse, (...). ^^hrys. Aug de verb. Dom. Sermon. 16.
But when ye sin so against the brethren, ye sin against Christ.

2. A second end is, to remove superstition, therefore it does plainly
condemn such as use their liberty to superstition. They dare venture upon any
observations, unwarranted by any thing, but blind Custom, and plead, All is
lawful.

3. A third end is, to direct us in our walk; we therefore have liberty, and
are made acquainted with our liberty, that we might know how unconstrainedly to
frame our obedience; making use of the Law, but not in servitude unto it; which
therefore condemns such as quite cast away the Law, as if of no use, and prove
themselves of lawless and ungoverned humors, true Libertines.

Give me leave to make a double application, or use, of this Truth.

Use 1. If we be at liberty, by the Law dead unto the Law, let us then stand
fast in our liberty, and labor (...) ders. Nor desire we so to plead, for
thou will say to such, Depart from me. We have not sought such a
righteousness, and therefore we sing for joy.

I now proceed, to follow the Apostle again in his own method; we are still
upon his first argument, which is continued in the 20. verse. He had told us
before, that he was Dead unto the Law; Now he expounds his meaning, I am
crucified with Christ. Christ was upon the Cross as a public person: he was
dead to the Law, because crucified; being dead the Law could no more command.
And he being dead to the Law, we being crucified with him, are dead with him;
We are crucified with Christ, for he was in our stead, as a burgess in a
Parliament, for a whole Corporation: or there is a Donation to us, of Christ,
and al his, so that his death is ours. Yet this death gives life and liberty;
Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. Christ lives in us,
in our hearts, so that this our spiritual life, is no other, than the life of
Christ living in us, really, and numerally the same; for as the life of the
natural body and head, Rollocus in loc.
is really and numerally the same, because of that strict conjunction of the
head and body; so, and much more is this, as the conjunction is greater, and
more close: and therefore is Christ called, Amb lib. 2. de poen. c. 20
Our Life, Col. 3.4. He that lives in Christ, cease to be what he was
before: It is a pretty story which we find in Saint Ambrose; A young man who
had loosely misspent his time, taking a iourny into other parts, was, by the
mercy of God, converted; at his return home, he is met, and saluted by his
wanton Love; he entertaines her with a coy and strange look; She wondering at
his carriage, and thinking his Travel might make him forget his former
acquaintance, begins to tell him who she was, It is I, it is I: but the new
Convert returns an answer much like rhis of the Apostles, Sed ego non sum ego.
Ambr. ib.
But I am not I. When we are crucified with Christ, we live not any longer Non
vivit ille, qui quondam viuebat in lege, qui^pe qui persequebatur Ecclesiam:
vivitautem in eo Christus, sapientia, fortitudo, sermo, pax, gaudidium,
caeteraeque virtututes, quas qui non habet, non potest dicere. vivit in me
Christus. Hier. in loc.
our own life. He says not, He lives in Christ, but which is more divinely
elegant, Christ lives in him. As sin is said to live in us, when we obey it;
so, when Christ guides us, he lives within us. This he seems to promise, Ioh.
14.19. Because I live, ye shall live also. We must not live only in our own
person, but must still have our eye on Christ, as it were, the form of our
soul, whereby it lives, and is actuated. If we separate Christ's person from
ours, Then we abide under, and live in the Law. Thus has the Apostle by
preoccupation, answered that objection, If you are dead, how do you then live?
He answers by distinction of a double life; Non sufficit nostrarelinquer^, nisi
retinquamus et nos, etc. Aliud sumus perpeccatum lapsi, aliud per naturam
conditi, etc And a little after, Extinctus fuerat saevus ille persecutor, and
vivere coeperat pius praedicator. Greg. in Evang. Hom. 32.
Natural, that is my own; Spiritual, that is the life of another, made mine;
I, as Paul, am dead, but I live as a Christian. The furious persecutor was
crucified, the godly preacher now lives, as Gregory excellently explicates that
of our Savior, He that will be my Disciple, let him deny himself. But again
they might object, thou live by thine own life, we see thee breathing,
moving, performing the actions of a natual life. We see thy flesh, but Christ
we see not. That he cleares, Indeed I live in the flesh, but it is as no life. I
see, speak, eat, drink, sleep, but it is not the flesh that leads me; in
these very outward things, I am also guided by my Christ. This he pleads
against the malicious, 2 Cor. 10.2, 3. There are some which think of us, as if
we walked according to the flesh, though we walk in the flesh, we do not
war after the flesh: We live not so, as to obey the command of our lusts. He
lives by faith, and in the latter words of this verse, he notes to us the
causes of his faith; I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and
gave himself for me. These together, firm the believer, that Christ is the
Son of God, that the Son of God loves us, that he manifests his love by his
death for us. Faith stays not upon the Son of God, as simply such, but upon
the Son, loving and dying; therefore it is said, Romans 3.25. through faith in
his blood.

Hitherto have we pursued the first Argument of this Apostolic truth; or
according as our method calls it, The first Reason of Paul's Doctrine; I shall
pass the others more briefly, to hasten to his use or application.

is in the last verse, the 21. verse of this second Chapter.

The Text.

VERSE. 21. I do not frustrate the grace of God; for if righteousness come by
the Law, then Christ is dead in vain. IT is an argument, ex absurdo, from a
double absurdity, that would easily follow upon the granting of a contrary to
this truth.

1. If we should seek Justification by the law, then we should make
frustrate the grace of God. (...), I do not make frustrate. The word, Ambr. Non
sum ingratus gratiae Dei. Aug. Non irritam facio gratiam Dei.
(...), does signify.

1. To contemn, as Heb. 10.28. the word is used, (...), He that despised or
contemned Moses Law.

2. To reject, as Ioh. 12 48. (...), etc, He that rejects me, and receives
not my words.

3. To disanull, as Gal. 3.15. (...); If it be a man's Covenant, no man
disannulleth it.

How great is that evil, and consequent absurdity, by seeking a legal
righteousness, to make frustrate, that is, to contemn, to reject, to
disannull the grace or free dispensation of mercy of God? What sin is there
more heinous? and yet what more common? When we do expect of our own, we
do, as it were, spit upon Christ, contemning him as vile: We, as it were,
tread him under foot, casting him away as unusefull; we, as it were, frustrate
all his merits, as being of no value; High and fearful sins, of a bloody
Dye, and treasonable nature. For thus we set works in the place of Christ, and
rebelliously displace from the Throne, the right Sovereign.

2. The second absurdity is, that then it would follow, That Christ dyed in
vain. If righteousness come by the Law, then is Christ dead, (...), that is
the word in the Greek Text. (...), commonly signifies, gratis, gratuito,
freely; Romans 2.24. (...): Being justified freely. But here it signifies,
without merit, or rashly, or to no purpose, Hieron. and omnes Graeci Tum mors
Christi Supervacanea. Ambr. and Aug. Hilar. in Psa. 119. in lit.
or without a cause; as the Ancients consent. So does Reason; for of one
effect, there can be but one proper cause, and by it self: Nature saw this,
and Vnius effectus non potest esse, nisi una causa pro. pry, and per se.
Arist. lib. 2. post. cap. 16
delivered it.

Righteousness cannot be of both, it must be of the law, or of faith; if of
the law, then Christ died to no purpose, which were blasphemy to imagine: for
then should God be unjust, for no cause to load him with his wrath. They are
but little less blasphemous, who dare affirm, that he dyed but to merit,
First grace: That is to say, he dyed (...), to no purpose. But it is our
comfortable knowledge, he dyed to merit, not primam gratiam, but integram
Iustitiam, not only the first grace, but perfect righteousness, and therefore
dyed to great purpose, for good cause.

3. The third Argument is in the first and second verses of the third Chapter.

The Text.

GAL. 3.1. O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you, that you should not
obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ has been evidently set forth,
crucified among you.

VERSE. 2. This only would I learn of you. Received ye the Spirit by the works
of the law, or by the hearing of faith?

IN the first verse of this Chapter, before he adds new arguments, he uses
a reprehensory Apostrophe, to the seduced Galatians, he prepares them to
hear, before he proceeds to teach; a wisdom fit for all that dispense the
Word, lest being unprepared, and unbroken up, instead of sowing, we scatter and
lose the seed. He calls them, Vet lat. Insensati Aug. Stulti. Hier Rudes
Foolish Galatians; not as a National brand, as Hierom Hier in praef. in lib.
hunc.
imagines: so as the Cretans were called Liars; the Dalmatians furious; the
Graecians light or inconstant, and so of others, but only as a fit expression
of his vehement zeal against their sin. Nor is it against the precept of
Christ, Chrysostom in loc. Iran lib. 4. cap 27. Imp ^pu^ in Mat 5 Homil 2. Aug.
deserin non. l. 1.
Mat. 5.22. for, we may be angry; Paul, Peter, Christ himself was so: and it
is lawful to reprove. It was rash and causeless anger which our Savior
condemned; there may be an anger of reproof whereby God may be honored: that
must be our caut^on and care, lest otherwise we serve not the Lord, Aug ut su
pra, cap. ^0. Tho. Aquin ^^ae. quest. 72. a^. 2.
but our passions, as both Saint Austin and Thomas have divinely explicated it.
'Twas a just reprehension, for they are all Fools that overthrow Christ. Is
it not extreme folly to overthrow our peace, our comfort, the means of our
reconcilement? To oppose the righ^eousnesse of Christ, is to ^orfeit all these,
and to make our selves miserable.

This reproof, ^e partly mitigates, and partly aggravates.

1. He mitigates, by translating the fault, in a kind, from them upon others.
(...)? Who has bewitched you? (...) signifies sometime to Symmach lib 6 c 78
Sidonius. lib. cap. ^.
Envy. In this sense, his reproof is not only moderate, but mixed also with
the tacit commendation of their virtue, which has procured its own usual
attendant Envy, from the Devil, and wicked men. Plin l. 8. c. 8 Theophras. lib
de Cha. Arist. in probl. Plutar. Convi^. lib. 5. Virg es. 3. Nescio quis
teneros oculus mihi fascinat agnos. Gei innoct. lib. 9. cap. 4. Leon. V^r. lib.
3.
But more properly we may take (...), for (...), to kill with the eyes; as more
ancient Philosophers, and more lately, Leon, Varius, have handled and proved
it. Thus the Apostle might seem, according to the vulgar opinion, to allude
unto that, That they were blinded and misled by impostors. Heretical teachers
are bewitchers, that as those made false things appear as true, so these. They
fell not through malice, but deceit, being bewitched, that they should not obey
the truth. It is the great policy of the Devil, and his, to keep nature
blind, or if not blind, yet rebellious, that men might not understand the
Doctrine of free Justification; which Doctrine most strongly fights against the
kingdom of Satan. Thus the Apostle has wisely dealt his blow, by a gentle
mitigation, while the offenders might see affection in him, without Arrogancy.

All are not fitted for a rough handling; in our reproves we must endeavor
^^th to be plain and pleasing; by the former, we shall show our selves
honest, by the latter, discreet.

His pleasingnesse has appeared in the mitigation, his plainness will appear
in the aggravation of their fault.

2. He aggravates by the evidence of that doctrine which they had received.
That others did bewitch them was their malice, but that they would be
bewitched, having been so clearly taught, was their extreme weakness. They
^ell not from a truth, that they were scarcely acquainted with, but what was
drawn before them with a pencill, clearly wrought and discerned. It is a
dangerous matter to leave a known Truth. When Christ is evidently taught, he
is, as it were, painted forth unto us. They had so understood the Gospel, that
they had seen him, as it were, spit upon, scourged, reviled, crucified, and
yet had forsaken the faith in him. I cannot leave this, (though I intended but
a short Comment) without touching at two or three observations very briefly.

Obser. 1. By faith believing the Gospel taught, they saw Christ before their
eyes.

Faith sees things that are far removed, and makes them ours; The evidence of
things not seen. Reasons eye is far more dull than this: This sees truth in
a promise for after times and beholds it with such a steadfastness, as if it
were already present. Because God has promised it shall be, my faith sees it
already here. Let me instance one more particular; In the Sacrament of the
Communion, an unworthy Communicant discernes not the Lords body; Natural men
see but a covered table, some outward signs, Bread and Wine, poor alas, and
inglorious Elements; But Faith beholds much under those vailes, it sees Christ,
his body and blood, it tastes and feeds upon Christ in the Eucharist, and
attracts nourishment from what it feeds upon.

Observe. 2. When Paul taught the Gospel, Christ was drawn forth before their
eyes. It was Paul, whole work but to paint out Christ. Himself had determined
to know nothing but Jesus Christ, and him crucified: And he will teach; but
what he might savingly know; And my speech, and my preaching was not with
enticing words of man's wisdom, 1 Cor. 2.24. Our preaching must be plain and
lively: plain, that Christ may be truly painted before us: lively, that in
the fresh knowledge of his death, he may be crucified among us. They are bad
Preachers that paint themselves in their own colors, instead of Christ. While
in our ordinary Sermons, we do unnecessarily tell you, how many Fathers we
have read, how much we are acquainted with the Schoolmen, what Critical
Linguists we are, or the like: It Is a wretched ostentation; we do over much
affect our own picture, and paint unto you our own Schollership. It is not
fit, that Divinity should be sordidly attended, but with such words as may
both take the sense and the understanding. Yet there is most wisdom and
efficacy in Gods Oratory, the sacred Scrrpture-expression; and we preach with
most authority, when we deny our selves. I speak not, as affecting a sluttish
ha^dling, but a Sermon well dressed with fit words, rather tha^ fine; but
especially in the evidence of the Spirit, and with power. This way we shall
draw the heart into the ear, and as well Touch, as Affect. So our Savior
taught, it was the will of the Father which he published, and has received
that praise by the Evangelist, from the Spirit of God, He taught as one having
Authority, and not as the Scribes, Mat. 7.29.

Obser. 3. The doctrine of Christ crucified, is set before their eyes. Let me
now direct you, what is the best ornament of your houses, and your hearts too,
The Crucifix. Let that be hung every where: I mean, not a wooden, or brazen,
or though of some purer metal, gold or silver; but the saving knowledge and
contemplation of Christ in the heart. Let him be before your thoughts, as if
your eyes saw him stretched along, and nailed to the Cross, his head bending
in a solemn and yielding posture, his arms spread, as if wooing our embraces.
This, let this be all our Superstition; not to adore an Image, but to make use
of more profitable Preaching. Images were not brought into the Church, till
preaching grew slack. I need not instance you the Canon of Eliberis, Conc.
Elib. An. 305.
the Judgment of Origin, the zeal of Epiphanius, Hieron. in Epist. Epi. Greg.
lib. 9. Epist. Ep. 9.
the decision of Gregory to his Massilian. That of an ancient, in the Library
of the Fathers, is express for all; Biblioth. patr. Tom. 9
None of the Ancient Catholics ever thought that Images were to be adored.
Away with those new superstitions, let this be our Crucifix, our Image, to
believe in Christ, and make use of his death.

The Apostles reprehension of these Galatians, has kept us from the third
Argument, delivered in the second verse. That by which ye received the Spirit,
that is it which iustifies you, you received not the Spirit by the works of
the Law, but by the hearing of Faith. Spiritus (...).
There is the Spirit of Sonship, and the Spirit of Gifts; Chrysostom
understands it of the latter: Accepistis Spiritum Sanct. edidistis miracula,
etc. Chrysostom. in loc.
but the Argument of the place seems to mean the former. The Law is not the
Minister of the Spirit and life, though the Spirit work by the Law, Ioh. 16.8.
Therefore they could not receive the Spirit by the works of the Law; an
assurance of their Sonne-ship. But the Gospel is properly the Minister of the
Spirit, that works confidence and faith. Now the Spirit is not given but to
them that are Justified, and by that by which they are justified. He referres
the truth of this unto themselves, that they might be (...), the own self
condemners. He speaks, as Saint Ambrose has the phrase, Loquitur au^em ad
huc cum Stomacho. Amb. in oc
still with some stomach against them. Or as another urges it, If I added no
more subtle and accurate reasons, this were enough which I will now require of
you, and which the rudest and most unlearned will grant me; This would I know,
Received ye, etc.

verses, the third, and fourth.

The Text.

VERSE. 3. Are ye so foolish? Having begun in the Spirit, are ye now made
perfect by the flesh?

VERSE. 4. Have ye suffered so many things in vain? If it be yet in vain.

What is foolish and absurd, is not to be believed or entertained. But it is
an absurd thing to be persuaded, That such as have begun in the Spirit may be
made perfect in the flesh. The one proposition is employed, the Minor is
expressed, and not without the former vehemence; (...), Are ye so foolish? The
folly or absurdity will appear, whether we consider the thing logically, or
physically, or theologically. 1. It is logically absurd, to expect a more noble
effect from an ignoble cause: to seek perfection from the flesh. 2. It is
physically or naturally absurd, to attribute more efficiencie to that which is
passive, than to that which is Active; more to the flesh, than to the Spirit.
3. It is theologically absurd, or absurd in Divinity, whether we understand it
properly, or metonymically: 1. properly, The flesh is as grass; The voice
said, Cry; All flesh is grass; and all the goodlinesse thereof, is as the
flower of the field: The grass withers, the flower fades because the Spirit
of the Lord blows upon it; surely the people is grass, Esa. 40. 6, 7. It is
a withering fading thing. But the Spirit is Divine; and powerful, and
constant, because Divine. Shall a thing, begun by Divine agency, be completed
by weak flesh? 2. Metonymically, the Spirit is Spiritual grace and faith; the
Flesh is ceremony, and the works of the Law. It was an error brought in by
those seducers, They would admit of Paul's doctrine concerning Justification,
but they would have the Law added to; and give up their sentence peremptory to
the council, Except ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses, Orig. lib 3.
in Romans 3.
ye cannot be saved, Acts 15.1. An absurd error; As if the beginning of Light
should be from the Sun, and the increasing of it from the nights darkness.
And what else do the Papists mean, when they call faith, Radicem
Iustificationis, The root or beginning of Justification? The Jesuits explain
themselves when they say, They therefore call it the beginning, because faith
does dispositively beget charity and meritorious works, by which properly we
are justified formally and materially. This is that doctrine which the Apostle
has pronounced absurd and foolish; which absurdity is further confirmed in the
fourth verse; If that were their expectation, then had they suffered much in
vain for the Faith which they now rejected. The proposition observes unto us:
1. That the Galatians suffered much. 2. That the sufferings of the Galatians,
as of all Gods people, tend to Reward, not of desert, but of appointment. 3.
That the Reward is to persevering in those sufferings. 4. That all sufferings
for the faith are lost, if the Galatians turn unto Law-workes again. The
fifth verse has but the same force of Argument with the second, and therefore
I omit it, though if it were seasonable to the questions in hand, and that I
intended not brevity in this Comment, I might dispute it; How far Aug. de
Civit dei. lib 22.^.8. Chrysostom. hom. 14. ^n mat.
miracles do confirm the Faith, and are necessary; what the Hegesip lib. 3.
cap. 2. Epiph. Har. 66. Greg. ^uron hist. Fran. l. 2 c. 3. Pa^ ^iac. Re. Romans
lib ult
impostures of Heretics have been about them; what the lies of the Lyndanus
Alan copus, Dial. 6.
Papists have been concerning ours: but I hasten, and therefore omit them.



The Text.

VERSE. 6. Even as Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him for
righteousness.

VERSE. 7. Know ye therefore, that they which are of faith, the same are the
children of Abraham.

VERSE. 8. And the Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the Heathen
through faith, preached before the Gospel unto Abraham, saying, In Thee shall
all Nations be blessed.

VERSE 9. So then they which be of Faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham.

Sed quid juvat ^sta su ^^ss^, cum caete^a qua re equit, insania ipsius adversa
sint? Hier.
MArcion the Heretic, tore out these four verses out of his Copy: but as
Hierome answers roundly: But what will it help him to have taken away these
when those things that are left, do sufficiensly oppose his madness.

As Abraham, the Father of the faithful, was justified, so also are his
Sons. But Abraham was Justified by Faith: Therefore, We in the same manner.
The proposition, though not in the Text, is plain by an Argument, A pari,
there is the same Covenant, made to the Father, and the Sons; Genesis 17.7. I will
be thy God, and of thy seed after thee. The Covenant was the same, and the same
Iraen lib. 4. cap 38.
Condition; Romans 4.11, 12. He received the sign of Circumcision, a seal of
the righteousness of the faith, that he might be the father of al them that
believe, though they be not circumcised, that righteousness might be imputed
to them also; and the Father of Circumcision to them who are not of the
Circumcision only, but also walk in the steps of that faith of our Father
Abraham which he had being yet uncircumcised.

The Assumption is in the sixth verse, cited from the Testimony of Moses, Genesis
15.6. He believed in the Lord, and it was counted to him for righteousness.
Though Abraham were abounding in works, Tert. de pati. cap. 6.
and glorious in his obedience; yet not them, but his faith is imputed. The
conclusion in the seventh: (...), The old Latin renders that; Ye know; which
we read, Know ye: Thus referring it to their own collection; which is only
amplified and cleared, in the two following verses: out of which I would only
touch at some observations.

1. The same way of Justification was had both in the Old, and the New
Testament.

2. The Gospel is not New; as the Romish are wo^^ to (...) the Reformed with
the title of New-Gospellers: It was preached to Abraham, In thy seed all
Nations shall be blessed. And long before him, to Adam; in the promise of the
same seed.

3. The New Testament has much foundation in the Old, and therefore we may
confirm the Doctrine of this by that: Against the froward cavills of some, who
in their reasoni^gs will not admit of those writings. But, chiefly, let me not
omit that which Luther has observed, M. Luth. in Gal, in loc.
How much the children o^ the believing Abraham, and the begetting Abraham
differ. The begetting Abraham was a worker, the believing was righteous: His
faith was upon Christ, the object of his faith. We are blessed, not with the
working, but the faithful Abraham.

6. The sixth Argument

The Text.

VERSE. 10. For as many as are of the works of the Law, are under the curse,
for it is written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which
are written in the book of the Law to do them. AS many as are of the works
of the Law, are under the curse of the Law: Therefore the Blessing or
Justification is not of works. The proposition is proved, Deuteronomy. 27.26. That
continues not; Manner, is, Omnia implere perfect, to continue or rem^ine in
all, is to perform a^l perfectly; as a Quadrat, (...)
a Cubicke or square figure, to stand unmoved. The phrase in the beginning, is
metaphorical, The that are of the law, as it were retainers to the Law, and
go after that. Nat^re loves that course, and the young man comes with such
like desire, Master, what shall I do, to inherit life? Matthew. 19.16. But such
shall have repayed bitter wages, They are under the Curse. The Papacy then is
the way to perdition, because it sets men to that service. But are there not
precepts in the Law? Have not those precepts promises annexed? How then are
such under the curse? The works of the Law performed, put us not under the
Curse; but the works attempted and failed in: for if we could perfectly
fulfill them, we should be saved by them. But the Law is not Doeable, which
is not from the Law, or from God, but from our selves; and comes to pass,
thus: Romans 8.3. What the Law could not do, it could not do, in that it was
weak through the flesh. Let me observe:

1. The Artifice of Paul; he pleads upon sure ground, It is written. All have
recourse to some first principles, Physicians to experimented Aphorisms,
Lawyers to the Statute, Divines to the Canon: So our Apostle here, It is
written. This he pleaded to Agrippa, as his warrant, Act. 26.22. I continue
unto this day, witnessing both to small and great, saying none other things
than those which the Prophets and Moses did say should come.

2. They are Under the Curse, that continue not in all; not only that violate
all, but any: So that Apostle, Iam. 2.10. For whosoever shall keep the whole
Law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all. 3. The Curse named, is
eternal; for it is opposed to Justification and life, the eternal Blessing.

verses.

The Text.

VERSE. 11. But that no man is Justified by the Law in the sight of God, it is
evident; for the Just shall live by faith.

VERSE. 12. And the Law is not of faith; but the man that does them, shall live
in them.

Righteousness is by Faith; the Law is not Faith: Therefore Righteousness is
not by the Law. No man is Justified by the Law, Coram Deo, before, or in the
sight of God; before men, works may Justify: Was not Abraham our Father
Justified by works, when he had offered Isaak his son upon the Altar? Iam.
2.21.

Men judge, (...), according to appearance; but says the Apostle, Romans 2.2.
We are sure that the Judgment of God is, (...), according to Truth: Therefore
they that live before God, that is, attain life, must live by Faith. This he
cites from the Prophet Habakuk, chap. 2. verse. 4. A Scripture which Paul has
seemed much to have delighted in, by his often Quotation of it. We cannot live
by the Law; the reason is added. The Covenant of it, is to them that do it.
Ye shall keep my Statutes and my Judgments, which if a man do, he shall
live in them; I am the Lord. Lev. 18.5. He that has walked in my Statutes, and
has kept my judgments to deal truly, he is just, he shall surely live,
says the Lord God, Ezekiel. 18.9. But the Covenant is other to Faith; so that
Legal and Evangelicall Justification, cannot meet together, as this same
Apostle disputes in another place, Romans 11.6 And if by grace. then is it no
more of works; otherwise grace is no more grace. But if it be of works, then
is it no more grace, otherwise work is no more work. It cannot be of both, it
must be of one: Now it is not of that, therefore of this: Not of that, the Law;
for it is expressed, (...), No man is Justified by the Law, it is evident.

8. The eighth Argument is in the thirteenth verse, and fourteenth.

The Text.

VERSE. 13. Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a
Curse for us: for it is written, cursed is every one that hangs on a Tree.
WE are Justified by that, by which we have redemption from the Curse: But by
faith in Christ we have redemption. Therefore by that are we justified. The
Minor proposition, is the maine of the 13. and 14. verses. The Consciences of
the Galatians might have been straightned and burdened with the mention of the
Curse; but are met, and sweetened with this; Confidite, salva res est, Be not
dismayed, there is a way of freedom found, Christ has Redeemed us. This
Argument is the sum of comfortable knowledge, drawn from the marrow of the
Gospel, and delivers to our notice, Hier. in Esa. 50. Vide Ambr. in Loc. Et si
propius aspicias videbis Christum maledictum torum factum a quibus eccisus est.
Crux enim Salvat^ris peccatum, and maledictum est Isdaeorum. Septuag Aquilam,
and Theodotionem Maledictio dei est, qui suspensus est. Symmachus Quia propter
blasphemiam dei suspensus est
those great mysteries: 1. Who has redeemed us; Christ. His was the work, and
to him, by the glorified, is the praise of the work, Thou art worthy, for thou
wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood, Rev. 5*8. 2. Whom he
has redeemed; Us: Abraham, and Moses too. None, but by him. 3. From what; The
Curse: from active and passive, from both wrath and pain. 4. How it was done.
He was made a curse: (to omit the variety of reading, and propriety of the
word) He derived unto himself what was our due, being made, of God, and of
himself, Sin for us. Thus Christ's death is our life, his Cross our Triumph,
his Malediction our Blessing. 5. To what end all was wrought: that the blessing
might come. The blessing of Abraham could not come, unless the curse were
taken away. The blessing, is the grace of Reconciliation, Adoption,
Justification and Life; which he calls again, (...), The promise of the
Spirit; Spiritual grace. 6. The mean by which, His, Ours: faith. That we
might receive the promise of the Spirit through Faith.

We cannot but observe, 1. The greatness and heinous nature of sin; such,
that it made Christ a Curse, and put him to death. That spear, those nails,
were thrust in, not so much by the Jews malice, as by our sins. At length,
let us learn the price of them, and together to avoid them. How dare we with
so much secure boldness, rush upon that which cost so dear a rate, the blood
of Christ? 2. The wisdom and goodness of Gods order, Crux Christi amaras
aquas vertit in dulcem saporem, et securim perditam, nissa influenta Iordanis
levavit. Hieron.
blessing by the Curse, sweetness from the Cross of Christ. It was the wonder
of Gods power, and the glory of that wonder, that in the Creation, God did
produce, Aliquidex nihilo, something out of nothing; here is more; good out of
ill, heaven out of hell, the Blessing to us, by Christ a Curse for us.



The Text.

VERSE. 25. Brethren, I speak after the manner of men; though it be but a man's
Covenant, yet if it be confirmed, no man disannulleth, or adds thereto.

VERSE. 16. Now to Abraham and his seed, were the promises made. He says not,
And to seeds, as of many, but as of one. And to thy Seed, which is Christ.

VERSE. 17. And this I say, That the Covenant that was confirmed before of God
in Christ, the Law which was four hundred and thirty years after, cannot
disannull, that it should make the promise of none effect.

VERSE. 18. For if the inheritance be of the Law, it is no more of promise: but
God gave it to Abraham by promise.

The Inheritance is of promise: Ergo, not of the Law. That is the argument and
the conclusion in the 18. verse. He frames it by an occupatory Apostrophe,
turning his speech, as it were, more directly to them, to answer an Objection,
they might make.

Object. The Inheritance was of promise, before the Law was given; but after
the Law given, it came to be of the Law: for the latter Sanction does derogate
from the binding of the former. He answers, It Is true; unless the former were
ratified or confirmed. West. par. prim* Symb. l. 2. sect. 50. Fitz de not ^re.
fo. 169. B. 116. Vlpian, l. pactum. H. de pol^^cit.
In our Common Law, we call a ratification or confirmation, a strengthening of
an estate formerly had, and yet voydable, though not presently void. But the
Inheritance by promise was confirmed and four hundred and thirty years before
the Law was given; verse. 16, 17. Brethren, whom before he called Fools, now
he calls Brethren: we must lay aside the spirit of bitterness; and though
there may be a division of Judgments, yet there should not be of hearts. I
speak after the manner of men, with humane and popular similitudes and
expressions. Our Sermons may have somewhat of the Scholar, and of the Orator,
though we speak Gods Word, yet in man's language, when either the matter or
occasion requires it. If man's be, much more is Gods Covenant inviolable.

Object. But the Reason does not hold. Others indeed, cannot undo men's
Covenants, but themselves by consent can.

Ans. Yet here it cannot be so, for when Covenants are made to be perpetual,
if one break, he is perfidiout; if both, they are inconstant. God is neither;
the one were to admit wickedness, the other infirmity in him; either of which
were to make him not God. The Law could not make void the promise; for, 1.
(...), The Covenant was before confirmed. 2. (...), of God; who has liberty,
and Saveraignty. 3. (...); in Christ, the Mediator of the Covenant. The
promises of the Law, and the Gospel, do much differ. The promises of the Law
are to particular persons, those of the Gospel to us in Christ. It comforts us
abundantly in our infirmities; we neither expect nor receive the promises
immediately from God, but from Christ's hand. Again, (...), excludes merits. God
gave the Promise to Abraham, though the Law were afterward given, it could not
make the gift void. If a rich man adopt another freely, and after some years
lay some commands upon him, yet it hinders not, that the Adoption is free; for
the Inheritance is not because of those commands.

There needs no more for the Argument; only the Text of it does occasion a
double question; one Hystoricall, another Chronologicall.

The Hystoricall Question, is, what Ratification the Apostle speaks of? We read
of three Confirmations: 1. One by a faederall Sacrifice, Genesis 15.18. when upon
Gods command, Abraham had offered, and divided his Sacrifice, in that same day
the Lord made a Covenant with Abraham. 2. Another, by a general expression,
Genes. 17.1, 2. when Abraham was ninety years old and nine, the Lord appeared
and said, I am God All sufficient, walk before me, and be upright. 3. A
third by a solemn oath, Genesis 22.16. By my self have I sworn, says the Lord,
In blessing I will bless thee. Here the first of these is signified: For, 1.
Though a Promise were made, there is no mention of a Covenant before this. 2.
And from this we have the right number of years, after mentioned.

The Chronologicall question depends upon that former, how the years may be
computed. Steven names but 400. years, Act. 7.6. so was the prophecy, Epist.
ad Dam Quest. 47. in Exodus and De Civit Dei. lib. 16 cap. 24.
Genesis 15.13. Hierome has troubled himself, and left the knot so fast as he
found it: So has Saint Austin. No less Genebrard and Dunus, reckoning from
the descent of Jacob; and others, from Abraham's departure out of Haran, Gen
12.4 But if we reckon from his 85. year, we shall find a right Computation.

From that time, till the birth of Isaac, were 15. years: And Abraham was an
hundred years old when his son Isaac was borne unto him, Genesis 1.5. From the
birth of Isaac, till the birth of his son Jacob, were 60 years: And Isaac
was threescore years old when she bare them, Genesis 25.26. From the birth of
Jacob, t^ll his descent into Egypt. were 130. years. And Jacob said unto
Pharaoh, the days of the years of my pilgrimage are an 130 years: Genesis 47 9.
From Jacobs descent unto his death, were 17. years: And Jacob lived in the
Land of Egypt seventeene years, Genesis 47.28. From his death, till the death of
Joseph, were 53. years; which appears from some compared Texts, Genesis
41.46.45. 6 50.26. From the death of Joseph, till the birth of Moses, were 75
years, as is gathered from received Chronologers. And from his birth, till the
departure of ^srael from Egypt, were eighty years: And Moses was fourscore
years old, when he spoke to Pharaoh, Exodus 7.7. Now the peoples departure, and
the giving of the Law, were the same year; That the first Month, the
foureteenth Day, This the third day of the third month These being summed,
make up the proposed number.

I have done with the two former general parts of the Apostles method; 1. The
Explication of the Doctrine of Free Justification. 2. The Confirmation of it,
by testimony of Scripture, and by nine Arguments.

Applic. 3.
I now proceed to the third general part, the Application of this Doctrine.

He applies it by discovering the Use and Abrogation of the Law. Which he
performs in this manner.

1. By clearing two Objections against what he had delivered.

2. By a more plain discussing of the Question, concerning the Law; how
abrogated, how useful.

1. He cleares Objections; They are two:

1. The first Objection,

The Text.

VERSE. 19. Wherefore then s^rveth the Law? It was added because of
Transgressions, till the Seed should come, to whom the promise was made, and it
was ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator.

VERSE. 20. Now a Mediator, is not a Mediator of one, but God is one.

THe objection may be thus; If the Inheritance be by Promise, what need the
law then be given so long after? So Augustine understands it. But let us see
it in the fuller force. Aug lib. 1. Retra. c. 24.
(...)? To what end then serves the Law? Either Righteousness is by the Law,
or the Law is in vain. But the Law is not in vain. Therefore, Righteousness
comes by it. This is the false pleading of Iusticiaries. If, say they, the Law
is not to Justify, why then is it given? Why are we burdened with it? Why
bound to obey it? The envious workmen in the Vineyard, could not endure that
such as had not wrought so much as they, should yet receive the same wages: Why
have we toiled the whole day, if others, as well as we, receive every one a
penny? Merit-mongers endure not the Doctrine of a free grace, but murmr
against the Gospel, as the Chiefe-Priests against Christ's Sermon. He had told
them, Mat. 21.31. Verily I say unto you, That the Publicans, and the Harlots
go into the kingdom of God before you. This they cannot bear, They perceived
that he spoke of them, and would have laid hands upon him, but that they feared
the multitude; Mat. 21.45, 46. What? Have we been so strict in our Legal
Observances? Have we worn so long Phylacteries? Shall Publicans? Shall poor
men? Shall sinners? Shall ignorants? Shall women be equal with us? Then the
Law is to no purpose; and to as little purpose is our Observation of it. Then
let us sin; let us break the Law; let us do nothing; nay, let us do any
thing, if this Doctrine may be Preached. When our Savior Preached, they said,
he made men Rebels unto Caesar: So when we Preach Free Justification, they
say, This is to make men lawless, to make them altogether careless, to hinder
good works. If the Law Justify not, then wherefore serves it? This is the
objection.

But the Apostle answers, They make not a sufficient enumeration, for there is
a third end of the Law, by them not mentioned. This, Logicians call, Fal^acia
conseque^tis, vel non causae.
A fallacy of the Consequent; They are not true, but fallacious in their
arguing. So the Papists are wont to wrangle: If works do not Justify, why
are they then done? If the Sacraments confer not grace, and ex opere operato,
by the very work done; why are they administered? To what are they profitable?
If Christ's body be not really present in the Sacrament, if it be not orally
eaten, to what purpose is the Supper? Is it but a bare naked sign? These are
Paralogismes, captious argumentations. Is there no end, because not that end
which we will needs appoint. The law does not Justify, ergo, it is in vain: A
vain Consequence. My money cannot Justify me, my eyes cannot, my hands
cannot: are they all therefore in vain? Or shall I cast away my money, pull out
my eyes, or cut off my hands? Away with such frowardnes. All have their proper
uses. Money for traffic, eyes for sight, hands for action, works for
gratitude, the Law for direction, Faith for Iustistcation. The Law is good, if
it be used as Law, if it keep within its own bounds. As things are distinct,
so are their uses. The Sun has use and operation suitable to it self; So the
water, so the earth; the Sun sends influence and refreshes, the water cooles
and moystens, the earth gives increase. So the Law has it is use.

It was added,] (...), it was set or added to, that is, Posita, pro Appost^a
(^) ad^cta pro missioni.
it was adjected or added unto the Promise. God gave the Promise, that the
Inheritance should be by that; Cries. ^om 4. Hier. tom 9 -- Latam superbienti
populo, ut quonia^ gratiam Charitatis nisi humiliat acciperenon posset, and
fine hac gratia nullo modo praecepta legis impleret transgressione
humiliaretur, ut quaereret gratiam, nec se suis meritis salvum fieri
opinaretur, ut es set non in sua potestate and viribus iustus, sed in manu
mediatoris iustificantis impium. Aug.
afterward he added the law, as an Accessory; Not that the Inheritance should
be by it, but for another end.

It was added, (...), because of Transgression] The Law was not unprofitable or
purposelesse, but for transgressions; which Chrysostom and Hierom understand,
that it might keep and restrain them from sin; Augustine, that it might teach
them to know and acknowledge their sins. So the Apostle frequently, Romans
3.19, 20. Now we know whatsoever things the Law says, it says to them who
are under the Law; that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may
become guilty before God; for by the Law is the knowledge of sin. Romans 4.15.
Where no Law is, there is no transgression. Romans 7.7. I had not known sin,
but by the Law; for I had not known lust except the Law had said, Thou shall
not lust. Briefly, the Law was added,

1. To manifest sin, that it might be instar speculi, as a glass to discover
the deformed.

2. To restrain sin, that it might be, instar fraeni, as a bridle to curb
us from our forward venturings.

3. To punish sin by Threats, that it might be, instar verberis, as a
scourge to correct our wantonness: Cursed is every one that remains not in all
things.

4. To increase sin by irritation, that it might be, instar stimuli, as a
spur to irritate; But this is by accident, for the Law is holy, and the
Commandment is holy, and just, and good, Romans 7.12. The Law then causes sin
to increase, Chrysostom in loc. Gennad. in loc. Lyranus.
Non causaliter, sed consequutive, Consequently, not causally; and that, Non ex
part legis, but, nostri; through our defect, not from the nature of the Law.
For;

1. We rush upon that more greedily which is forbidden, like a River which
makes a greater noise, and overflowes with more violence when it meets with a
stone or bank in the way. Whether it be that our desires are more toward such
things as are without our power, as things prohibited are; neglecting what is
easy and soon accomplished: or whether it be only from the nature of our
human passions, which the more they are suppressed, the more they are inflamed;
like fire kept in, which breaks forth the more violently: Perer. numer. 78.
Or whether it be only from the perverseness of man's will, and his mere
opposition to the will of God. Whether it be from any, or all of these; we find
it in our nature, Nitimur in vetitum, cupimusque negata, we tend to forbidden
things, and the Law by accident increases sin.

Minus peccati est, si quod non prohibetur, admittas. Orig. Amb. lib. de Job.
cap. 4. Aug lib. 1. qu, ad Simp^ic qu. 1.
2. The Law by accident increases sin, because then we sin with
aggravation. His sin is greater who offends against a known will, than he
that out of ignorance does it.

3. Again, the number of sins is multiplied, by reason of the variety and
multiplied number of precepts given by the Law. The Apostle often mentions
these ends of the Law, and with some phrases, not easily perspicuous. Romans 7.8.
Calu. lib. 1. de pec. Hyperius. Tolet. Annot. 11.
Sin taking occasion by the Commandment, wrought in me all manner of
Concupiscence. The burning of an house may be the occasion of the building it
anew; and a rub in the way may occasion the turning out of the path. Yet
neither of these are so in themselves, but are taken as occasions: So our
corrupted natures take occasion to sin, when the law of commandments intends
the destruction of our building, and, the hindering of our course. So the
Gangrena, and the Elephantiasis, Ambr. li. 1. de patr. Iac.
are the worse for medicine. It follows,

Added because of transgressions, (...), until the seed should come;] Who the
Seed is, was before declared, verse. 16. He says not, And to Seeds, as of
many, but as of one; And, (...), To thy Seed, which is Christ.

But does the coming of Christ terminate the duration of the Law? Does the Law
cease to reveal, to restrain, to punish, to irritate sin, after Christ is
come? How then is our Saviors witness of himself true? Think not that I am
come to destroy the Law or the Prophets, I am not come to destroy, but to
fulfill, Mat. 5.17. Is not the Law eternal? Or why is the mention of such a
period?

Yes: The Law continues, and the use continues to the worlds end; but neither
in a Mosaicall manner. Thus what the Apostle speaks, It was added till the
Seed; we may understand,

1. Simply, concerning all Laws judicial, ceremonial, moral, as Mosaicall.
The Law did convince by Rites, and by precepts, as by them: So the handwriting
of Ordinances was against us. Israel was a stiff-necked people, modo frenis,
modo calcaribus indigens, therefore the yoke was laid upon them, which those
Fathers were not able to bear, Acts 15.10. Thus they cease; for Christ has
blotted out the Handwriting of Ordinances that was against us, which was
contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his Cross, Col.
2.14. In the Law, there was a full revelation of sin, but a dark revelation
of grace. In the Gospel, there is a more plentiful discovery of both, of
sin, and grace.

2. Limitately, in respect of the moral Law; Iraen. lib. 5. cap. 21. Si usque
ad ad Christi ventum data lex est, quid eam longius ultra tempus praefixum
proferre conaris? Chrysostom-
It is an universal and perpetual glass, yet somewhat abrogated, in regard of
coaction and condemnation, when the Seed comes.

To whom the Promise was made, (...),] He speaks of the Seed to whom was the
Promise; But how are the promises said to be made to Christ, seeing rather
they belong to us? Some Greek Castigations, Muscul. in loc.
instead of (...), Cui promissa, To whom, do read ^, Quod promissum, The
Promise which was made. So there were no Question; but the Original, is,
(...), Cui, referring to the word, (...), The Promise which was made to
Abraham's Seed, verse 16. In thy Seed, that is Christ, shall all the Nations of
the earth be blessed. It is said, made unto Christ; either because for his
sake and merit, or because unto us, in Christ as the head; in him is our hope
and health, there is no other name. To Christ properly and primarily is the
Promise, we have else no interest in it, nor title to it. It follows:

And it was ordained by Angels.] Thus he prevents an Objection; If the Law
were added only for such a period; it is then vile, and we may say, the Law is
sin, Romans 7.7. This is answered, by describing those two Elogies of the Law,
commended from the manner of its promulgation, Ordained by Angels, and in the
hands of a Mediator.

First, It was ordained by Angels, (...).
(...) being put for (...), Ordination for Ministration; so Steven uses the
word, Acts 7.53. (...), They received the Law by the Disposition of Angels.
Chrysostom. in loc. Amb. in loc.
Chrysostom restraines it to Moses and Aron; Ambrose somewhat enlarges the
sense to all the Prophets until John the Baptist. Rollocus in Gal. 3.
That learned Rolloc. understands it, both of the Angels, and of Moses. But it
seems more properly meant of the Angels; who, 1. attended upon the mount,
servants in ordinary attendance, who constantly wait in Gods court. 2.
Witnessed the delivery of the promulged law to the hand of Moses. 3. It is most
likely, there was used an Angels voice, when the Sound of a Trumpet, and the
voice of words was heard, Heb. 2.19. And therefore the same Episteler calls it,
The word spoken by Angels, Hebr. 2.2. As Princes deal and confer by their
Commissioners and delegated instruments; so might they personate God; and may
be said to ordain the law, because the work of the chief Agent is applied to
the Instrument; as in another case, if Timothy continue in sound Doctrine, he
shall save himself, and them that hear him; 1 Timothy 4.16.

It was ordained by Angels, Therefore,

1. The Law is a treasure of God, of great price, and to be valued by us, at a
fit and high rate: Haec lex praestantior ali^s, quanuis promissione in^erior.
Though it be inferior to the Promise, it excels all other Laws, and the
rather in the manner of the ministration.

2. We may fear the breach of such a Law, that had so glorious an ordination:
The Angels were witnesses, and will be revengers: Steven speaks this to the
aggravation of their sin, They received it from Angels, and have not kept it.
The company sometimes restraines a sinful purpose; There is an invisible
Company to behold us; Let be our fear, or rather our sincerity, to preserve
the Law without breaches.

3. Those Angels that were faithful to give the Law, will be joyful to
witness our Repentance, when we have broken it. Our Savior has told us,
There is ^oy in heaven at the conversion of a sinner. An untaught sigh, or a
tearefull drop of a penitent, is pleasing to God and Angels.

4. Lastly, if upon our neglects or contempts, we break that law, and are not
penitent for our breach, we may, we must justly fear and expect to be made
a public shame before the faces of those glorious Angels, in the day of
account and retribution. For as the Lawgiver was accompanied, so shall the
Judge, He shall come with the multitudes of his holy Angels.

In the hand of a Mediator. This is the second Elogy o^ commendation of the
law* Ordained in the hand of a M^diator. (...), The same phrase is used by
Steven, of the Ministry of Moses, i^ bringing the Law; and in both a double
Hebraisme. The Praeposition, In, ofttimes signifies an instrument, and
intermediate cause: Hos. 12.10. In manu prophetarumassimulatus sum. Vul. Lat.
In manu Chaggai.
I have used similitudes in the hand, or, by the Ministry of the Prophets.
Hag. 1.1. The word of the Lord came In the hand of Haggai. Again, the word
Hand is put sometimes for a primary praecipient Cause, Is not the Hand of Ioab
with thee in all this? 2 Samuel 14.19. Sometimes for a cause, though praecipient,
yet secundary. And ordinarily for an instrument, so here; By the ministry of a
mediator.

The word (...) is diversely translated: By some Tertul. pax sequestra. Virg.
Sequester, one that stands disposed, yet indifferent to both parties. By some,
Caietan.
Dimiator, a parter of stakes between two: but the Jesuit corrects the
Cardinal, and is bold to call it, A new and false word. Vox nova and falsa.
Tollet.
By some, Intercessour, but such an one, refers but to one party, Erasmus.
as the Tribune of the people to the Senate. The word that we have rendered to
us, A Mediator or a Middeler, Not (...), of (...), but (...)
does most express it. The Current of most runs to expound this of Christ:
but yielding to those Chrysostom. Theoph. Occum. Ambr Primasius Lombar. Thomas.
Gagnaeus.
Ancients their own Due, yet I cannot see how that sense can free it self
from an unthought of touch of Arrianisme, to make Christ an instrument and
inferior to the Angels, by whom it was ordained, We will rather admit it as
spoken of Moses: For the Law was given by Moses, Ioh. 1.17. While the Apostle
preferres Christ before Moses, He is the Mediator of a better Covenant. Heb.
8.6. He seems to allude to what the people desired, Exodus 20.19. Speak thou
with us, and we will hear, but let not God speak, lest we dye. And to what
Moses concerning himself, witnesses, (...).
Deu. 5.5. I stood between the Lord and you, at that time, to s^ew you the
word of the Lord. Neither does this interpret^tion wan^ Antiquity, for we have
found it in Epip^^^^^ and in Gennadius, Gennad. apud Gr. Scholia. Epiphan.
Haeres 66. Contra Manich Theodor.
among the Greek Scholiasts in the works of Epiphanius.

The Papists do uniustly infer from hence, That the Angels or Saints may be
Pet Aur. parad. 85. Richeomus de Sanctis, cap. 18. Salmero in 1 Timothy d sp. 17.
Lind. Pan. l. 3. c. 30.
Mediators, because Moses was; for,

1. Moses was ordained to be a Mediator, they never had commission.

2. He was present with whom he was a Mediator, these have no fellowship with
us.

3. He was but once, and in one thing, These are pretended such, at al times,
and in all things.

4. He was a Mediator to the people from God, these are employed to God from
the people. In all of which they fail in their ground, and derogate much from
the sole Mediatourship of Christ. How far is such a Doctrine from the least
shadow of reason; (...). Ath de Tri. dial 5 Constit. Ap. l. 2 ^. 28. Chrysostom. ^e
paen^t 5. Homil Ignatius ep. ad philad. et ep ad Antioch. (...).
Must not a Mediator be Medius, between God and man? But so an Angel, or a
man cannot. And Christ himself, if he had been only God, or only man,
could not have been a Mediator. It follows in the Text:

Now a Mediator is not of one, (...),] They that interpret Christ to be the
Mediator, are disquieted for a fit sense. Some give this; If Christ be a
Mediator, he cannot be of one, but must needs be of two at least; but God is
one, but one; Therefore he must be Mediator, as of God, so of men also. But
what is this, either to the place, or the mind of Paul? Others please
themselves in this; A Mediator is not of one, but of two at the least, if then
Christ be a Mediator, as indeed he is, It is of God and men, yet so, that
Christ the Mediator being true God, it follows not that there are two Gods, of
which, one gives satisfaction to the other; But Christ is one and the same God,
with the Father and the holy Spirit. But for what reason should they imagine
the Apostle here to insert the doctrine of the Trinity. That of Ambrose,
Mediator non est unius tantum a populi, sed duorum, id est, Gentilis, ac
Iudaici, quos Christus tum inter se copulavit sublata di stinctionis ratione
tum utrumque Deo conciliavit, interim tamen Christus est unus ac verus Deus.
Ambros.
of the two people; and that other of some others, of the two natures, are more
subtle, yet of as little agreement to S. Paul's intent, as the former. They
have entangled themselves in their own conceptions: But understanding it of
Moses, we may find a more open passage from among these difficulties, in this
more genuine exposition. A Mediator is between two, or more parties that are
at difference: Now the Cause of a Difference, is some transgression done either
by both against each other, or only by one of the parties against the other.
Now the transgression or offense cannot be in God, for God is one, he is
always the same, ever just.

Thus it appears how this belongs to the former Argument, The Law was added
for transgressions. The people were at odds with God, Moses is the Mediator,
or Minister of that Law, which shows transgressions, and makes the people to
Justify God, and condemn themselves as transgressors against him.

Before I leave this, let me make a double application from the main thing
intended in the Objection and the Answer, namely, the Observation.

1. Of the use of the Law, Ie was added for Transgressions.

2. Of the continuance of that use, Added till the Seed came.

1. Concerning the use of the Law: The same phrase notes it to be, 1. Civil.
2. Spiritual.


1. The Civil use is for Transgressions, to restrain sin: yet by this we
may press the Apostolic Argument, That Righteousness cannot be by the Law; for
when the Law restraines us from being sinful, it does not therefore make us
not sinful, or truly righteous; but rather shows us to be unrighteous, and
for that cause we need a Law of restraint. A man that abstaines from murder or
theft, for fear of the halter or the rack, is not therefore less murderous
or theevish in his disposition, but Cares not venture upon the strictness of
the Law. A Bear is a ravenous and devouring creature; when it is tied in a
Chain, it cannot devour; Is it therefore not a Bear, or less ravenous,
because tied; nay, the chain rather argues it to be cruel. So, we we see
fierce Mastiffs musled, and tied up, not that they are gentle, but the chain
is an argument of their fierceness. If man had not been sinful, there had
not needed a Law. Now restraint by the Law, is not righteousness, but a proof
of our unrighteousness, and shows that we would be evil, if we either could
or durst.

2. The Spiritual use, is for transgressions, to increase sin to our sight;
to discover unto us, the nature of it, and of misery consequent. The Law, as
another strong Hercules, sets upon, and subdues the Monster of the presumption
of our own Righteousness. It is an ordinary and most dangerous disease, to
be strong in the opinion of our own Something. Men that are not notoriously
evil, think themselves holy: Such was the Pharisees vaunt, I thank God I am
not as other men, nor as this Publican; because he was no extortioner, no
drunkard, he thought himself exactly what he should be. The Law is to
remove us from such boastings, to melt our swellings, to destroy our strengths.
Is not my word like a fire, says the Lord, and like an hammer that breaks
the Roches in pieces? Ier. 23.29. Our hearts are those Rocks, we stand high,
and exalted against God, till the hammer batter us, and bring us into shivers.
We are proud in our standings, and therefore the Law is in its right place,
when it speaks Command and Terror, and says to the amazement of the
conscience, See what thou have done, and what thou art like to suffer. We may
consider this somewhat better in the observation and application of that story,
of the manner how the Law was given. The people of Israel were an holy people,
they had, according to the precept, sanctified themselves, washed their
clothes, abstained from their wives. Their fault was, they were but too holy,
they had it too much in their thoughts and tongues, We are an holy people, the
people of God.

They must be driven from this, if ever they be fit for an humble service.
The Law must be given with terror, that when they should see and hear and
conceive nothing but horrors, fire, and smoke, and clouds, and thunders, and
earthquakes; rattling and confused noyses, flames darkely, yet dreadfully
appearing through pillars of smoke, they might, affrightedly, run from the
foot of the mountain. The Text tells us, Exodus 20.18. And all the people saw
the thundrings, and the lightnings, and the noise of the Trumpet, and the
Mountain smoking, and when the people saw it, they removed, and stood a far
off; and they said unto Moses, Speak thou with us. Now they see their
cleansing and their holiness to be nothing worth: Before, they were holy,
very holy; now they find, they were not able to abide in his presence. Ah
Lord, how wonderful art thou, and fearful in thy speakings! O royal law,
and powerful Lawgiver! There was a Light upon Sinai, but it was only such a
flame, whereby they might see themselves to be miserable. The Law and the
Gospel are both Lights; the Light in the Gospel, is to show us Christ; it is
as the star which led the Sages unto Bethlem, and shows us the place where
the Babe lies, but the Light in the Law is not without smoke, or as Lightning
from a crack of Thunder, and to that end, that we may discern our selves
wretched. The Law and the Gospel are both voices; the voice of the Gospel is
a still small voice, it cheares up in speaking; the voice of the Law, is a
wind, and earthquake, and thunder, 1 Kin. 19.11, 12. And both the fire, and the
noise, is, that we might be humbled, for then we are fitted for mercy. The
whole need not the Physitia^, but they that are sick; Christ came not to call
the righteous, but sinners to repe^ta^ce. We cannot expect help from Christ,
til we be sick, til we be sinners. Ah, we are too sound, we are too holy;
wonder not at such expressions: We are too holy, and while we are thus
righteous, Christ does not call us. He comes to save sinners, that is his
work; till we be sinners, Christ cannot come unto his work: If ever we
would have mercy, let us see that we need it. If we dare challenge mercy, we
know we shall be repulsed. Come humbly unto God in the acknowledgeme^t of
wants and doubt not of supply. If a Beggar tell me, though he crave a penny,
yet he has money enough in his purse, meat enough in his bag, and friends
that will provide for him, he moves me to no compassion; but if his distresses
cry, and he pleades himself moneylesse, and breadlesse, and friendlesse, and
altogether helpless, I cannot tell how to deny him. God would have us such
supplicants; we are strengthlesse, and meritlesse, and altogether worthless;
Mercy, Mercy, only. This the Law drives us to, and then we are fit for a
Bounty.

2. This is the Laws use, now let us see the continuance of that use: It was
added till the Seed should come. As the phrase is in another case; If the days
of the Law had not been shortened, no man could have been saved: But the
tyranny is now limited, and we, by Christ, may cry Victory, Liberty. We may
understand it;

1. Literally; The Messiah come, is the end of the Law; All the Prophets, and
the Law, prophesied until John, Mat. 11.13.

2. Spiritually, The Law stays in force, but till it has made us tremble; now
we leave the Law, and lay hold upon the Faith. One Deep calls upon another,
Psalm. 42.7. When all the water-spouts, and billows are gone over us, then
shall our prayer be unto the God of our life. The Law, when it has acted its
own part, This is to be understood of the law as given by Moses, not as it is
a new commandment given by Christ, as you shall hear hereafter.
must go off the Stage; if it have humbled us, and brought us low unto the
Dust, The act is done, let it withdraw into the Tyring-roome to be
disapparelled. Let Music now, and Grace enter. But i.e. the paedagogy of the
law.
the Law will not easily give place, it would be working still. When we are
humbled to lowness, to nothing, yet then we begin to enquire, What shall we
do? What shall ye do? It is suggested by the usurping Law, and the proud
enquiry of Nature not enough humbled. We are not now i.e. To be led on still and
only by Moses his law.
to do, it is Faiths Scene. We ordinarily meet with this Imposture from the
Devils both malice and subtilty. Take an instance, A man that has lavisht out
his time of health, without heed, or care, or conscience of his ways; when he
is laid weak and sick upon his pillow, and his conscience begins busily to
present unto him his former sins, and the wrath due unto his sin; when now he
sees himself sinful, and therefore miserable, and apprehends Death and Hell
ready to swallow him, he falls upon this resolve, I have loosely misspent my
time heretofore, but if I live, and recover strength, I will mend, and endeavor
to serve God better. Mark, I pray, he thinks not at all of Faith, but only of
his Works, as if he were still under the paedagogie of Moses. Ah deluded man,
see at length the policy of that Tyrant, to draw you from Believing; he would
set you only on working. Let me speak a bold word, but a true one, The
remedy is as dangerous as the disease; for this is to use the paedagogie of the
Law still, when the Seed should come. A man in that case, upon the apprehension
of wrath, should speed himself to Christ, and when he has gained assurances
there, then his former resolve, viZ. of mending his life, would be very
seasonable; for without this method, he seeks his Righteousness but from
himself. Beloved, our task is then at the hardest, when we think it is done.
Be acquainted with Satan's methods: When the conscience is very much humbled,
and a promise of grace is offered, the distressed readily replies, Ah, but I
have no money to purchase it withal. Suffer not these Law-thoughts to dishonor
Christ's freeness. He offers freely, Come and buy without money, without
price. Ah, but I have no friends to deal for me: It is the Law that speaks
still; but he is a friend to the friendlesse, in him the fatherless find
mercy. But will he respect such a poor worthless wretch as I am? If I had any
thing, if I had but that Faith you speak of, I could come more confidently to
him, and expect performances. They are proud reasonings, under the show of
Humility, and it is the humor of Ephraim, Wherewith shall I come before the
Lord? The Law loves Sovereignty, and would still have us his, according to the
Apostles phrase, To be of the works of the Law. But the Law of Moses serves
but till the Seed comes; when faith and grace appears, let Moses resign the
Chair unto Christ.

I have spent more lines than I intended, upon this application, and the
clearing of the first Objection.

2. The second Objection, and the Solution of it, are contained in the four
following verses, the 21, 22, 23, 24.

The Text.

VERSE. 21. Is the Law then against the promises of God? God forbid: for if
there had been a Law given which could have given life, verily righteousness
should have been by the Law.

VERSE. 22. But the Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise,
by Faith of Jesus Christ, might be given to them that believe.

VERSE. 23. But before Faith came, we were kept under the Law, shut up unto the
Faith, which should afterward be revealed.

VERSE. 24. Wherefore the Law was our Schoolmaster, to bring us unto Christ,
that we might be Justified by Faith.

Medium, or third, put In, unto the solu^ion of the former objection, then it
will follow, If the Law be not for Transgressions, which was supposed in that
answer, then either the Law Iustifies, or it is in vain. But the Law is not in
vain; Therefore Justification is by the Law. This is the strength of the
Objection.

But the Apostle answers,

1. Reiectione, Shortly, and yet sharply, by rejecting such an absurdity: God
forbid.

2. Ratione, Soundly, by good argument. It would rather follow, That the Law
were against the Promise, if righteousness were by the Law. And so his
Retorsion, and the Argument stands thus; If righteousness should be by the
law, it could not be by promise. But the Law is not against the Promise.
Therefore it cannot Justify; Righteousness cannot be by the Law.

God forbid. Because we failed in the condition, shall God fail in the
promise, that the Inheritance should no longer be by it, but by our observation
of a stricter added Law? God forbid; for our sins cannot hinder Gods promise;
nor is God a liar, because we are liars. Though we change, he is immutable.

Again, we may observe something more, in one phrase used by Paul, To give
life, is of the same signification as to Justify. If there had been a Law
which could have given life; that is, which could have Justified. We may find
one by the other; if we be truly Justified, we shall find our selves truly
quickened Away with a dead faith, it is the stain of our Doctrine, of Free
Justification. There are many plead, The witness of Blood, that they stay upon
the merits of Christ, yet can find no witness of water, the life of
Sanctification. But both are joined by the Apostle, and must be found in the
conscience; There are three that bear witness in earth, The Spirit, and
Water, and Blood, and these three agree in one, 1 Ioh. 5.8.

He proceeds to prove that the law could not give life:

1. From the contrary effect of it, The Scripture has concluded all under sin.

2. From the accidentary use of it, That the Promise by faith might be given.

1 The contrary effect of the Law, The Scripture has concluded all under sin.

The Scripture, (...)] It is referred unto God, Romans 11, ^2 God has concluded
all under unbeleefe: The conjoined sense is, God in the Scripture. Chry. in loc.
Some understand it of all Scriptures; others say, this (...), is that (...),
the killing-letter, mentioned elsewhere. Rather the Scriptures of the old
Covenant. By the way, we may observe, that God, the Law, Panigarolla lect. 1.
Discep Cathol. carranza. Con^r. 1. Lorichius in Fort^l haeres. 5.
the Scripture, those words are promiscuously used; How then do the Papists
call the Scripture a dead letter? What is so honored by the Spirits witness,
(...). Chrysostom. in 2 ad Cor. Homil. 13.
we may safely receive as the judge of controversies. Hence that holy Chry.
spoke it with so much zeal, Wherefore I entreat and beseech you all, that not
much heeding what this or that man thinks of these things, you would require
all these things out of the Scriptures. What could have been spoken by us more
directly: That it is a wonder, the Jesuits proclaim him not, a Lutheran, an
Heretic.

Has concluded under sin, (...),] The Scriptures have showed men their guilt,
by which sight they are so imprisoned and fettered, that they can see no
escape, unless there be a freedom by Christ.

The Scripture shuts up, thus,

1. By promises, Genesis 3.15. The Woman's Seed shall bruise the Serpents head.
Genesis 22.18. In Abraham's Seed shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed:
These imply that we are under the Curse, which in this manner, and thus only
is to be removed.

2. By the Law: Deuteronomy. 27.26. Cursed be he that confirms not all things
written in the Law to do them. But is God the cause of sin, because he
shuts all under sin? No: The Judge who imprisons a malefactor, is not the
cause of his offense; his is an act of Justice, because he has offended But
how then does he shut up? Is it because he Orig. O^d. glos. Tollet. Gorrhan.
only permitted? That is not enough. Or that by his Law he Chrysostom.
pronounced them guilty? That is not enough. Or Hier. Oecum.
Decreed it only for the glory of his grace to others? That is but too much.
But he Aug cont Jul. l 5 c. 3
punished them with their own gives and fetters. The sta^e of nature is a state
of bondage; men as they are sinful, so they are shut up under sin, punished
with it, and kept unto wrath. Like an imprisoned malefactor, burdened equally
with his memory, and his fear, while the one presents sin, the other
execution; so is man under the law.

Concluded all) The word is large, and signifies both men and actions, (...),
Al things. For things created unto man's use, follow the state and condition of
man; he being shut up under sin and misery, they, in a manner, are imprisoned
with him. Vide Bez. Annot.
Unto them that are defiled, nothing is pure, Tit. 1. 15. The creature is
subjected unto vanity, and not of its own mind, Romans 8.20. This being the
contrary effect of the law, to shut up all, it could not give life.

2. The accidentary use of it, is, That the Promise might be given. Quoniam
Iudaei ne sentieb^nt quidem sua pecca^a, non sentientes autem, nec desiderabant
remissionem: deait legem* quae proderet vulnera, quo medicum requirerent. Chrysostom.
By it self, and properly, the law is for transgressions; but by accident,
being shut up, we are sent by it unto Christ for deliverance.

That the Promise: It Is a Metonymie; The promised Blessing.

By Faith: This referres not to the next word before, The Promise by Faith, but
to a word following, (...) daretur, That the Promise might be given by Faith.

By Faith of Jesus Christ: A limitation of Faith, from the proper object of it.
As faith is, upon a word, and living practike Faith is upon a word of promise,
so special Justifying Faith, is upon a word of promise of Jesus Christ; it
lays hold only upon that.

Might be given] The law is not contrary to the promise. We are not shut up,
that the promise might be ^^verted, taken away, or h^ndered: but that way might
be made for it, and the promised blessing might be given; for subordinates are
not contrary.

To them that believe, (...)] To them that are so qualified, therefore not unto
all. The Promise is not Universal, therefore, neither is redemption.

This use of the Law, is, but ex accidenti; it is in its own way, when it
reveals unto us our evil, when it terrifies the conscience with such sensible
apprehensions, when it kills: But all this, that God may raise us up again. The
Law was from Sinai with thunder, but that the people might be made bettter, not
with a slavish, but a Sonne-like fear; And Moses said unto the people, Fear
not; for God is come to prove you, that his Fear may be before your faces,
and that ye sin not, Exodus 20.20. The Prison is intended to shut men up, and
hold the enclosed, but by accident, it makes men seek out for Bail, and to
find Sureties.

But before Faith came] The word, Faith, is used in many senses, sometimes for
the habit of Faith, sometimes for (...), that full persuasion which is from
Faith; sometimes for the Doctrine of Faith* sometimes for the knowledge of the
Faith, sometimes for the profession of Faith, sometimes for the Truth, and
sometimes for the gift of working miracles; Amequam Christus natus, mortuus,
surrectus esset, et praedisaretur. Justinian. in Gal.
but the word, (...), To come, agrees with none of these; but most properly
referres to Christ; but before Christ came. The Phrases, (...) (...), and
(...), unto faith, and unto Christ, are of the same value and signification.
Christ is our Faith, and in such a sense, he is elsewhere called our Hope. We
must know this, that we may know.

1. That the old Fathers were not without faith, though Christ were not yet
come in the flesh, he was the same then, and might come unto their
apprehensions.

2. How Faith is imputed to us for Righteousness; Metonymically so understood,
Christ is imputed.

We were kept under the Law, (...), Lex veluti muro quodam continens illos, et
recte vivendi quasi necessitatem imponens illos venturae sidei reservabat, quod
erat praecipuum Iudaeorum beneficium. Chrysostom.
some understand it of the Laws Restraint from sin; Legem Evangelicam
intelligit, quae Christi liberationis mysteria credenda proponit. Clem. Alexan.
Strom. lib. 1.
Some of the Laws accidentary use to send to Christ: Others, that as a thing
deposited, so were we treasured. And some, That as children in their pupill-age
are defended from dangers, so we by the Laws care. These are strained. The
word used in the Text, (...), is more than (...), To keep, or have custody; It
signifies to be kept up as in a prison, or a place of strength and safety; to
be circled with a compassing strength. The Law was a wall unto the Jews to
hinder their passage, and exorbitances: So the sense of Chrysostom is true: It
was also as a Frontier to separate the Jews from other people, thus were they
nigh unto God, Deuteronomy. 4.7. and differenced from their neighbors, When God showed
his Word unto Jacob, his Statutes and his Judgments unto Israel: Psalm. 147.19.
But what the Apostle means, is more clearly expressed by another of the
Apostles words, (...), We were shut up as it were close prisoners. The prison
is a place, in which captives are held, and without escape; they are rounded
about with strong walls, and have no way to get forth. Such are those terrors of
conscience, which arise when the Law has done its work, they straiten the
soul, and keep it closely fettered, that it sees no way to escape wrath; and
then it speaks despairingly, Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? Or whither
shall I fly from thy presence? Psalm. 139.7. I am locked up, and know not
whither to turn; Thus the Law shuts us up; But,

Shut up unto the faith, which should after be revealed, (...); There is the
time of our imprisonment, and our comfort: we are straightned, but not to be
kept in the dungeon. He is the right Divine, I mean, the true practicke, that
can join these two together in time of his temptation: The Lord takes
pleasure in them that fear him, in them that hope in his mercy, Psalm. 147.11:
We must fear before God, as prisoners bound, and yet hope that he will be
merciful, because he is a gracious God: and then he takes pleasure in us.

This is the true Art of Divinity, and wicked men have not this skill, but they
divide instead of joining* they either divide fea^e from hope, and grow
presumptuous, or hope from fear, and grow desperate: So Caine when he was in
fear, lost his hope, and being straightned, made his fetters more close and
hard upon himself. Sometimes he was too peremptory, and no fear, when he
made no matter of murder and the hiding of murder, but answers boldly, to the
demand of God, for his brothers blood, Am I my brothers keeper, Genesis 4.9. At
another time, when he grows sensible, he is altogether dejected and without
heart, he answers despairingly to Gods censure, My sin is greater then can be
forgiven, my punishment is greater then I can bear, Genesis 4.13. An untaught
man, that could not better distinguish of time, and collect to his own
advantages; we must study this knowledge; The Law can be our Iaylor but till
Christ come into the conscience.

Wherefore the Law was our Schoolmasters to bring us unto Christ, (...): The
Schoolmasters is appointed to instruct, and to keep youth as it were in
prison, til that looser age be tamed and guided. But they continue not under
the rod, but are fitted for a higher Master, or higher employment. Moses was
but an under-master, and therefore his methods of teaching are corrected by a
greater. Moses describes the righteousness which is by the Law, That the man
which does those things, shall live by them: but the righteousness which is of
faith, speaks on this wise; If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord
Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart, that God has raised him from the
dead, thou shall be saved, Rom 10.5.6.9. The Jews were in the Lowerschoole,
and all the parts of the Law, sent them unto Christ. 1. The precepts requiring
a righteousness, showed their unrighteousness, and sent them elsewhere to
seek it. 2. The Promises were on such a condition, the condition of doing, as
was to them impossible, and put them upon their farther search. 3. The
Threatenings set them directly under the curse, which could be escaped only by
Christ. 4. The ceremonies of Sacrifices and washings, and whatever of the same
kind, lead them typically to their end. All Laws sent them, only with this
difference: 1. The moral, by an accidentary direction: 2. The Ceremonial, by
direct signification, and duration: 3. The Judicial, by duration, and
distinction. How the Law leads us, has bin aptly, yet diversely expressed by
expositors; as a severer Master over a wanton youth; So Saint Lex Mos^s populo
lascivienti ad instar paedagogi severioris, appo^ita est, ut custodiret eos, et
futur^ fidei prapararet. Hi ^ D al. 2 con Pela.
Hierome. Not that the Law is against Christ; the Schoolmaster is not adverse
to the Master, but helps; so Saint Paedagogi non ^^^versatur praeceptori, sed
ad uvat arcens ^^olescen tem ab om ni vitior eddens illum ideneum. Chrysostom.
Chrysostom And that to fit us unto an higher being, another form, as he
Scholar fitted by the ^aedagogue, for Philosophical searches, or
State-government; so Clem Ale. l. 1. pad. c. 6. Paedagogus parvulis assignatur,
ut lasciviens refraenetur alas, et prona in vitia corda teneantur, dum
tenerastudije eruditur infantia et ad majores Philosophiae, ac regendae
reipublicae disciplinas, metu poenae coercita preparatur.
Clement Alexandrinus. A Scholar, though instructed by him, yet expects not
his inheritance from his Paedagogue, but when the time is fit, he leaves him
for what he was intended for; when we give our names to Christ, Tutor a
nobis, Curatorque discedunt, then in that kind our Master leaves us; so both
Gre. Naz. Orat 42.
Nazianzen, and Tert. l. de monagamia
Tertullian, and Iran. l. 4. c. 5.
Iraeneus. We are young ones while the Law does ferule us; so Roll in Gal.
Rolloc. The expressions are all good, if weighed with their due grains. The
Law is the Schoolmaster or Paedagogue; the Gospel is the Master, or higher
instructor: Here is the manner of our salvation, there are two Forms, and two
Masters: The Vnder-forme, Status, 1. Captivorum. 2. Puerorum. 3. Pupillorum.
Roll. ibid.
or Classes, under the Law, in which we are Captives, Children, Pupils: And the
higher Form, or Classes, under the Gospel, in which we are free, at fuller
age, and from under Guardians. Which Divinity discovers and condemns two sorts
of Scholars.

1. Such as learn nothing in either School or Form; the thundrings of the Law
no whit afright them, nor the sweet voice of the Gospel please them, but under
both remain unbetrered.

2. Such as learn, but with a false method, in the higher form first, who
being never humbled, yet take hold of mercy, with which they have nothing to
do, and unto which they can lay no challenge; as being not wounded, and
therefore not fitted for a plaster. It follows;

That we might be Justified by Faith] The Law brings us unto Christ: But what?
as to another Law? No; but that we might be Justified by Faith; and Faith leads
us to him, as a Iustifier, not as a Lawgiver; though in a second relation he
be our Lawgiver, and we owe him our obedience.

Thus are the Objections cleared, now proceed we to the second thing
propounded according to the Apostles method in this third general part, namely,

2. The more plain discussing of the Question, concerning the Law, How
abrogated? How useful? This is laid down in the 25. verse.

The Text.

VERSE. 25. But after that Faith is come, we are no longer under a
Schoolmasters. THe paedagogicke use ceases, and the Law lays down the
Ferule. When Christ reigns in the conscience by his Spirit, then the Law lives
no more in the conscience to our Burden. He has quickened you together with
him, having forgiven you all trespasses, blotting out the Handwriting of
Ordinances that was against us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of
the way, nailing it to his Cross, and having spoiled Principalities and
Powers, he made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in it, Col. 2. 13,
14, 15. And now, as that honored holy Luther applies it, Bened Just Com in
Gal. 3.
If the Law begin to vex us, let us not hearken unto it. When a man is come to
the age of man, though the Paedagogue shake his Rod over him, at which he was
wont to quake, when the Paedagogue had power to use that masterly Scepter, yet
now he fears it not. It Is true; while sin remains (as it does remain, so
long as we remain men) the Law comes often, to our humiliation; but for fear
of danger, Christ must likewise come often spiritually into the conscience,
that while we see sin, we be not overwhelmed. So the Law is still for our
mortification, according to our more or less of Faith. There is leaven hid in
our Dough, but we are not al leavened* when we see our ^elvs i^ (...) Christ,
(...) nothing (...) leaven; but when our selves as our selves, we find much
unleavened, and the Law comes again and again. But I Will not more enlarge my
self in a paraphrase, but fall more strongly to the Question, that great
Question, How far the law is abrogated.

Of the Abrogation and use of the Law.
THe work is difficult, for the Rule seems to fight; Scriptures appearing to
oppose Scriptures.

1. Some Scriptures seem to deliver us this position, That the Law is
altogether abrogated. You shall see it if you consult these Quotations: Ier.
31.31, 32, etc. Psalm. 110. a new Priest is promised, and the Rule is, The
Priesthood being changed, Translato Sacerdoto, Translatio Legis.
there is a change of the Law, Heb. 7. As, new Kings, new ^awes: Hebr. 7.18. So,
Romans 3.5.7. Romans 6.15. Romans 7.1, 2, 3. where he speaks of the moral, as
appears, verse. 7. 2 Cor. 3.9.11. Gal 3.19.24. Gal. 4.5. 1 Timothy 1.9. Rom 8, 2.
Call. 5.18. In my Preachings I repeated the words of these several Texts, and
not without inlargements, but in a written Copy, it suffices to direct the
Reader.

2. Some Scriptures seem to oppose this position to that other; That the whole
Law is not abrogated. Mat. 5.17. Romans 3.31.

To Reconcile these, and to find out the Truth, we must conclude, that both
are true, though in diverse respects; which we shall discern by observing
these three particulars: 1. To whom the Law was given, and to whom not. 2. The
Causes, why the Law should be abrogate. 3. What things are signified under the
word, Law.


1. To whom the Law was given: The Law, as given by Moses to the Jews, it
pertained not to the Gentiles: and thus it cannot rightly be said to be
abrogated unto them, for none can be freed from the Law, but they that were
under the Law, Gal. 4.5. The Gentiles were no more under Moses his Law, as
being the Law of Moses, than the Romans under the laws of Lycurgus or Solon,
the lawgivers of Lacedemon and Athens. The Gentiles sinned not against Moses
hi^ law, but against the law of Nature; and therefore are they said to have
sinned without Law, Romans 2.12. Yet for substance, this Law is the same with
that of Moses, the Decalogue; for when the Gentiles which have not the Law, do
by nature the things contained in the law; These having not the law are a law
unto themselves, Romans 2.14. Concerning the s^aelites, some of them believed,
some of them persisted in unbelief: of the former of these, there is not any
Question but they were freed; Christ was given, to redeem them that were under
the Law, that they might receive the Adoption of sons, Gal. 4.5. And of
these, we may understand the Scriptur^s of the first position. The latter sort,
though they were not freed by Christ, because not in Christ; yet now they are
nec Mosaici, nec Christiani, properly, neither Christians, nor Mosaickes,
because Christ, howsoever, is the end of the Law; therefore they are without
ceremony and without law, as being but usurpers upon that which they still hold
and use. To Believers it was not given, as from Moses, and therefore none of
them are obnoxious to it, as his: for though they embrace the same commands
that Moses gave, yet they are not subjects to it, but as now theirs by Christ.
A New Commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another, John 13.34. 'Tts
a Commandment, for Christ is a Savior and a Lord; It Is a New one, for we have
it from the hand of our Christ.

2. The Causes why law should be abrogated. These were,

1. That the Gentiles might be called; Now in Christ Jesus, ye who sometimes
were afar off, are made migh by the blood of Christ; for he is our peace,
who has made both one, and has broken down the middle wall of partition
between us, (...)
Ephesians. 2.13, 14 Whatsoever was Intergerinus paries, A middle wall of partition
between Jews and Gentiles, is broken down and abrogated. But the substance
of the Law did not hinder their consociation; for these did by Nature the
things contained in the Law, Romans 2.14. The Curse was that among other things
which divided, and equally divided them both from Christ; now that they might
be subjected to, and meet in one Christ, the Curse must be abrogated.

2. A second cause was, because it was an intolerable burden; as Peter tells
them in the Council, it was such a burden as neither they, nor their Fathers
were able to be^re, Act. 15.10. He speaks of the whole law, all the kinds;
and the Apostle applies it, I testify again to every man that is circumcised,
that he is a debtor to do the whole Law, Gal. 5.3. That which makes the Law
heavy, and proves it to be a burden, is abrogated; and therefore Christ calls
us to another burden, an easy one; Take my Yoke upon you, for my yoke is
easy, and my burden light, Mat. 11.29 30. This is the love of God, that we
keep his Commandments, and his Commandments are not grievous, 1 Ioh. 5.3.

3. A third Cause was, because the Law was unprofitable; There is, verily, a
disanulling of the Commandment going before, for the weakness and
unprofitablenes thereof; for the law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in
of a better hope did, by the which we draw nigh unto God, Heb. 7.18, 19. In the
first Tabernacle, were offered gifts and Sacrifices, that could not make him
that did the service perfect, as pertaining to the conscience, Hebr. 9.9. Saint
Paul more particularly of the moral, What the law could not do, in that it
was weak through the flesh, Romans 8.3. The law being unprofitable unto
Justification, therefore in the business of Justification it is abrogated.

4. A fourth cause, was, because the law was pernicious; though not of its own
nature, yet through the flesh, The Minister of sin, working wrath; But where
the Spirit is, there is liberty. And therefore the law, as a coacter, Aug. 3.
Tom lib. de Spir. et Lit.
is abrogated.

3. I have passed these two more briefly, yet enough of them, to the Question;
the third will challenge a longer stay, to enquire, what things are signified
under the word Law, and to apply what we enquire for; the difference of the
abrogation. It signifies;

1. The whole Scripture; The blessed man's delight is in the Law of the Lord,
and in that Law he does exercise himself, Psalm. 1.2, The people understood it
in this sense, when they answered, We have heard out of the Law, that Christ
abides for ever, Ioh. 12.34. So the Law is not abrogate, not one Title of it
fails.

2. The Books of Moses; All things must be fulfilled which were written of me,
in the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms, Luke 24.44.
Neither thus is the Law abrogate, for the Doctrine and writings of Moses
remain.

3. The paedagogy of Moses in his four last books; Had ye believed Moses, ye
would have believed me, Ioh 5.46. So it is, not wholly, not simply abrogate.
There are in it, Promises, Types, and Commands.

1. The Promises and Types do cease, because the things typified are
fulfilled, the things promised are received: The house is built, and now no
more need of the Idea or exemplar.

2. The Commands, which were all those things, whatsoever were delivered, in
nomine Dei, in Gods name to the people; These are not simply abrogate, some are
eternal; all are called Law. Of which, 1. In general. 2. More specially.


1. In the general, we may take our description of Law;

1. From the end. It is an ordination of right reason to the common and
singular good of all and singular subordinates, given by him who has the care
of the whole Community, and every singular in it.

2. From the form. It is an Ordinance commanding what is to be done, and to be
omitted, made by him that has right to require obedience, binding the apt
creature to obey, with an holy promise of reward, and a threatening of
punishment. Both of these are either Divine, from God; or Humane, from man; as
collected from Gods Law. Here we speak of Divine; which may be considered;

1. As impressed on men's minds by an innate speech.

2. As enuntiated by speech declarative.

3. As comprehended in writing. Here, of the last: And this in general.

2. More specially; the Law written, is called Moses Law, which is threefold,
as is the variety of the object; (...), Moral, Ceremonial, Judicial. The two
latter are as Accessories to the first, the Ceremonies being added to the
first, and the Judgments to the second Table. The Ceremonial, as also the
Judicial Law, has two parts; one external, the other internal, the body and
the soul, or the substance and the accidents, or the shell and the kernel. The
inward thing of the Ceremonial, is Faith and Piety; of the Judicial, is
mutual love and piety; these are eternal. The outward thing of both, is only
abrogate; yet not all equally. Some Ceremonies are so abrogated, that they
cannot be revoked again without denying Christ. Some, and some politic Laws
may be received. But we shall best discern by handling all severally.

1. The Ceremonial law is an ordinance containing precepts concerning
external worship given to the Israelitish Church, when it was yet an infant.
The use of it, was,

1. To keep the people under hope.

2. As a midwall to separate them from the Gentiles.

3 That by the observing of this, they might be kept from the Idolatry of their
neighbors. This Law is abrogate by Christ's coming, and by these degrees;

1. In truth, in regard of necessity of the observation.

2. In fact, by the Doctrine of the Apostles, and by the destruction, both of
Jerusalem the City, and of the Temple, the more special place assigned for
the worship.

2. The Judicial Law is an Ordinance containing precepts concerning the form
of government. Some of the precepts being of general, some of particular
Right. The use of it, was,

1. That there might be to all a certain rule of public equity: That in this
sense, Jerusalem might be as a City well built, compact together, Psalm. 122 3.

2. That by their outward policy, they might be differenced from other Nations.

3. That the government of Christ might be typified unto them. Concerning the
Abrogation;

1. So far as this Law is typical, so far it cease.

2. These Judgments, simply, are neither forbidden, nor prescribed unto any
people.

3. Such things as are of common and general right, are still in force, and
must be obeyed, for what is in substance moral, is perpetual; we may know
the common, natural, moral, perpetual Judgments, by two rules:

1. If they directly fence and give the guard unto a moral command; such are
those, Deuteronomy. 13.6. Exodus 21.12. Exodus 22.18.

2. If they follow from the light of Nature, and common right; as that, Deuteronomy.
22.5. and others of like nature.

3: The Moral Law is scattered throughout the whole Bible, and summed up in
the Decalogue. It Is an Ordinance commanding those things, which simply, God
accepts, and will have done, of all men, at all times, every where; and
forbidding the contrary. This is that constant and immutable rule, which is the
image of the Divine will, by which the creatures live; and the sum of which
is the love of God, and the love of our neighbors. To enquire into the
abrogation of this, we will see, 1. The Substance of it. 2. The Circumstances
of it. 3. The Uses of it.


1. The Substance of the moral, is Love; which our Savior divides, To God,
that is the first and great Commandment, and to the neighbor, that is the
second like unto the first, Mat 22.37, 38, 39, 40. The Apostle gives it in
another method and division, Tit. 2.12. A godly, a righteous, and a sober life.
Thus the law is not abrogated, for the Substance is eternal.

2. The Circumstances were many;

1. Of the giver, Moses; A man, an Hebrew.

2. Of the Subject recipient, the Jews, a limited people.

3. Of the place, Sinai, a bounded hill, and within the Jews pale.

4. Of the time, fifty days after their departure from Egypt, a period that
had beginning, and the beginning long after man had his.

5. Of the exhibition, given in Tables, and by the ministry of Angels.

6. Of the Curse, which was annexed, or hung as a Tablet to the Tables of stone.

These are abrogate, for we have nothing to do with Moses, nor is the
substance of the Law less ours because we are not Jews: We look not to
Sinai the hill of Bondage, but to Sion the mountain of grace; and we take the
Law as an eternal will, written in our hearts by the Spirit of God, from which
we do not expect life, not fear rigor.

3. The uses of this Law, vary as a man's estate vavaries.

1 Before sin entered, the use was for life and Justification; that is now
abrogate, for else Righteousness should be by the law, but that being weak
through the flesh, it is now of promise.

2 Under the state of sin; the use intended, was, 1. To argue of sin: 2. To
convince of weakness: 3. To compel to seek grace, to have recourse to
Christ. And in this is abrogate, in respect of curse and condemnation.

3 Under the State of grace, it has an use convenient to it, to be a
perpetual Rule of life.

1 A Glass, wherein we may better know Gods will. The servant, or the son,
that is willing, must learn yet how to actuate his willing disposition. Though
we, as sons, are guided by the Spirit of God, and in our love unto God, are
ready unto all our services, yet we need the word to be a light unto our feet,
and a lantern to our paths, Psalm. 119.105.

2 We need exhortation too, and our sluggish flesh wants a sweet Monitour,
that we may be forwarded in our slackings and wanderings: I am a stranger in the
earth, hide not thy Commandments from me, Ps. 119 19.

3 There Is another benefit; Nec hodie minus quam olim, doctrina legis locum
habet in Ecclesia.
All Scripture is profitable for reproof, and for correction, 2 Timothy 3 16.

We cast not away that holy and good Law, but know our sins provoke our
dullness, rule our carriage by it. I Will add no more here, because I shall be
occasioned to speak more unto the Question, in the use that I en end to make
of what has been positively laid: the use shall be for Instruction, for
Confutation, for Exhortation.

1 An use of Instruction. This former Doctrine has given a foundation to clear
unto us that mystery, How the Promise of the Covenant, the Law, and the Gospel,
refer one to another; how they agree, how they differ.

The Law, the Promise, and the Gospel, may be considered as opposite, or
subordinate.

1 As Opposites. The condition of the Law, as given unto Adam, excludes the
necessity of making a promise, and proclaiming a Gospel. And the necessity of
making a promise, and publishing the Gospel, declares that man obeyed not the
Law given, for Justification might not be, Simul ex gratia et debito, at once
both of grace and of debt, It implies contradiction.

2. As Subordinates: The Promise ought to go before the Gospel, and to be
fulfilled by it; It was not fit so great a good as the Gospel, should be had
undesired, nor was such desire to be made frustrate. It was sit that the Law
should be given, that the necessity of the promise of grace might appear, that
being convicted, we might fly unto our Refuge, so the whole Law served the
Gospel; and the moral law still, now that the promise and the Gospel are
both received, yet serves as a Rule, and is still Subordinate.

But because there is weight in this Instruction, I will be more particular in
it; and discover,

1 The comparison of the Law and the Gospel.

1 How the agree. 2 How they differ.
2. The comparison of the Promise and the Gospel.

1 How they agree. 2 How they differ.
1 In the comparison of the Law and Gospel, we must deal as Plutarch in his
Greek and Roman lives, to examine the proportions and disproportions, so we
shall best find the just difference.

1 How they agree; and therein;

1. Generally, both as the Law was first given to Adam, and afterward again by
Moses; So it agrees with the Gospel, in the general consideration of the
Author, the Matter, the End, and the Subject.

1 The Author of both, in a general consideration, was God.

2 The Matter of both, in a general consideration, was Commands and Promises.

3 The End of both, in a general consideration, the glory of Gods Attributes,
his Wisdom, and his Goodness, and his Justice.

4 The Subject of both, in a general consideration, Man.

2. Specially, As the law was given to Adam, it agrees with the Gospel, in the
then possibility of performance.

2 How they differ; and herein again consider we the Law, 1 As brought to
Adam. 2 As given by Moses.


1 As the law was brought to Adam, it much differs from the Gospel.

1 In the special consideration of the Author. God the Trinity gave the Law,
without having respect to Christ: but God, gracious and merciful, having
respect unto his Christ, gave the Gospel. Now to apprehend God, as he then
intended himself to be known, merely as a Creator, and a Sovereign rule,
were to make ourselves miserably uncomfortable.

2 In the Special consideration of the (...) the first Covenant was of man's
works; the second of Gods grace* the Law, Do this and love; the Gospel, If
thou beleevest thou shall be saved* (...) faith also, or believing, is not here
required as a work. These two are very opposite, and mutually destroy each
other: If by grace, then it is no more of works; otherwise grace is no more
grace: but if it be of works, then is it no more grace, otherwise works is no
more works, Romans 11.6.

3 In the special consideration of the manner of exhibition: the first
Covenant stood on man's righteousness; the second on another, Christ's imputed
and made ours: the first mutable, because upon the mutability of man's will: the
second firm, upon the foundation of Gods immutable will; it is an everlasting
Covenant.

4 In the manner of remuneration: the reward or the added good, was there of
debt, is here of grace. there no other reward was revealed, but what earthly
paradise afforded; but here heaven is set open.

5 In the special consideration of the subject: 1 The Law, was to man
innocent; the Gospel, to man a sinner. 2 The Law was to Adam, and universally
to all his posterity: the Gospel only to the seed, to the elect in Christ.

6 In the special consideration of the End; that was for the glory of Gods
wisdom and justice; this for the glory of his mercy and justice tempered:
that Law was a Covenant of Justice without assisting mercy; this Gospel is a
Covenant of Justice and mercy together. I see the Justice of my God fulfilled
by my Christ, and the mercy of my Father extended in and for Christ.

2 As the Law was given by Moses, it differs from the Gospel.

1 In some maines;

1 In the distinct consideration of the Author; God, as angry, gave the Law; as
reconciled, gave the Gospel: therefore the Lawgiving was accompanied with
signs of wrath; the Gospel, with the tokens of Gods good pleasure; as the
Apostle fully puts the differences, in that description of either, Hebr. 12.18,
19, 20, 21, 22.

2 In the mediator; S. John has cleared this, For the Law came by Moses, but
Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ, Ioh, 1.17. A servant was the Mediator of
that, the Lord the Mediator of his.

3 In the blood confirming each; that Testament was confirmed by the blood of
beasts, this by the blood of the Son of God.

4 In the Adjuncts 1. The Law was poor and weak, unable to give life; but the
Gospel is Gods strong Arm, the power of God unto salvation. 2. The law was a
burden, which they were not able to bear, the Gospel is a light Burden, and
an easy Yoke.

5 In the effects: the Law is a killing letter, the Gospel is a quickening
Spirit; the Law is the ministry of death and condemnation; the Gospel, the
ministry of Spirit and life: Hagar generates unto bondage, and they that are of
the Law, are captive; Sarah generates unto liberty, and her sons are free.
The law ^s an hand-wr^ting of Ordinances against us, the Gospel is an
acquittance for us, the Sermon of the Cross, upon which that Handwriting is
nailed, and made of no use. When the law shows me a bill of my sins, sealed;
I can show the Gospel, a general discharge: See, your evidence is not valid,
it is cancelled upon the Cross.

2. In some circumstances:

1. Of the Subject, wherein the Covenants were written; the Law upon tables of
stone; the Gospel in the fleshy Tables of the heart: that former was an hard
Covenant, without me; this is made easy to me, because written in me.

2 Of the place; Sinai, and Sion: Sinai, from whence was the Law, was a Mount
that might not be touched, that burned with fire, a place of blackenesse, and
darkness, and tempest; But Mount Sion, the City of the living God.

3 Of the Time. 1. Of promulgation: 2. Of duration: that till Christ; this unto
eternity.

2 We have seen the comparison of the Law and Gospel, in their agreeme^ts and
differences; now the comparison of the Covenant of Promise and the Gospel.

1 They agree together in substance.

1 In the efficient cause, from the sole gracious mecy of God respecting us in
Christ.

2 The matter of both the same, the obedience of Faith unto life:

3 The end of both, the praise of Gods glorious grace.

4 The subject the same, both made to sinners, not that work, but that do
believe.

5 The effects are the same, for both do generate unto liberty.

6 Lastly, they are both sealed by the same Spirit, both were confirmed by
oath, and therefore neither of them to be abolished, but one to succeed the
other, the former to be fulfilled by the latter.

2 They differ only in some accidentals;

1 Of the Object; the Promise respected Christ to come, the Gospel Christ now
already exhibited.

2 Of the Faith; the Faith of the Promise was more dark, the Faith of the
Gospel more clear; for Christ appeared to them in types; now, as it were,
face to face.

3 Of the Subject;

1 That to them only, this to all people: the water of that promise ran
within the Channel of Israel; this is an Ocean, and compasses the earth.

2 To them, but not so freely as to us.

1 They were as in their Nonage, we Adulti, at our fuller time.

2 They, though heirs, yet young; and such differ not from servants; they were
under the Economy of Moses; but we have an entrance on the inheritance.

3 In a word, They were under the Spirit of Bondage, we are free.

I have endeavored with as much clearenesse in the method as I could, yet
briefly to deliver my self of this mystery, and to set together, in one view,
the Promise, the Law, and the Gospel, in their true difference; the true
knowledge of which, will help much unto the evennesse of our walking; and the
ignorance of which, either too much bladders, or too much despaires the soul.
This enough of the first use.

2. We may make use of the former Doctrine for confutation.

1. Against Jews.
1 Against the Jews, who would have the Ceremonial and Judicial laws, in
regard of the externals, still to be in force. We have concluded them
abrogated, and shall but touch at what they do object.

1. That God made with them a Covenant for ever. Exodus 12.24. an everlasting
Covenant, Genesis 17.13. I answer, The word, ever, may be taken strictly, or more
largely: If strictly, then it is true, the Internal thing, the Substance, Of
Circumcision and the Passover, is for ever: But if more largely, as the word
is used in Scripture, chiefly in that place, Exodus 21.6 The bored servant shall
serve his master for ever; then it signifies nor eternity, but a long period,
or duration of time; so the external thing of those laws was to continue a
long period of time.

2 They object for theit judicial law; that it being the best and justest form
of policy and government, it ought to be retained. We answer to the due glory
of the wisdom of God their law giver, by confessing it such as they do
plead; but such to them, not to us; for it was Gods wisdom, to fit them a
just law suitable to their condition; and others now to ours.

3 Lastly, they say, Christians may use Greek laws, or Roman laws; therefore
the laws of Moses. We answer, it is a part of our liberty, and we may; it is
lawful for the State of England to entertain a French, a Venetian law, so also
a Jewish, so far as it is not Mosaicall; all laws that be of common and
natural right we may use, though given by Moses; because that being the
internal thing, is not Mosaicall.

II. 2. Against Antinomists, and libertines.
Against Libertines and Antinomists, altogether contrary to the Jews; they
would have all their laws in force; these will have nothing but remove the
Moral law quite, as being of no use. They say it is so wholly ab^ogate, that
Christians have nothing to do with it: they say, we have a false mixture of
Christ and Moses, while we mingle together, confusedly, Law and Gospel.

But for the removal of this scandal, we appeal unto our Doctrine, and by
it, will answer unto their objections.

Object. 1. That which cannot be performed, is needlessely and unprofitably
taught.

Answ. It Is a fallacy of the consequent, Fallacia non causae.
when they put that for a cause which is not: We teach not the law for a full
performance, so to be legally righteous, but by it, in the a^cidentary use, to
be brought nearer unto Christ. Till the conscience be wounded, Christ will
have nothing to do with the conscience.

Object. 2. Christ is not a Lawgiver.

Answ. In respect of the principal office of his Mediatorship, he is not; yet
he gives laws, A new Command I give unto you; and our Faith, when it looks
rightly upon Christ, beholds him both as a Savior and a Lord, as we expect
salvation from him, so we must resolve to obey him.

Object. 3. Go is Justice requ^res satisfaction to be made, and because he is
Just, he requires sati^faction but once; we must either obey, or submit to a
suitable penalty; but we have satisfied in Christ, by undergoing punishment,
and therefore are not bound unto obedience.

Answ. These are resolved mistakings: Do they not know, that we require
obedience, not satisfactory, but Declarative, to manifest our thankfulness? We
could not, Christ has satisfied; now all that we can do, is but nothing, yet
henceforth we must not live unto our selves, but to him that dyed for us, 2
Cor. 5.15.

Object. 4 Christians are led and ruled by the Spirit ^f God, and therefore
need not a Law.

Answ. The Law indeed would be but dead, if it were not an isntrumental in
the Spirits hand; he makes use of the Law, and guides us by it. But of this
more fully hereafter, against the Enthusiasts.

Object. 5. The Apostle presents unto our memory our own knowledge, We know
that the Law is not made for a righteous man, 1 Timothy 1.9.

Answ. The Apostle to his instructed Timothy, condemns such as were desirous
to be teachers of the Law, understanding not what they said, but would condemn
the conscience against the Gospel; and he clearly means, the Law is not for
the Coaction of a righteous man. But what is the Coaction of the law? The
Papists say, that righteous men are not coacted, because they obey willingly,
chearefully, from the instinct of charity; but it coacts the unrighteous,
because they spurn at the law, and must be constrained to obey. But this is
not enough; for a slave is still a slave, though he work, nay, though he be
willing to work. Therefore we add, and explain it thus, The law does not
coact the Ri^hteous, because they are free from the necessity of fulfilling the
law for life and salvation. But it coacts the unrighteous, because being under
the law, they are bound to an exact performance, upon pain of damnation: So we
are free, because they are servants, and we sons; yet not free from the
direction of the law, for so a son is not free. Direction is a bare
prescription of a Rule; Coaction is a compulsion upon a penalty. A Son, Bern
in Cant Sermon. 15.
A King, is under Direction of Law, and yet who freer.

Object. 6. The Law is a killing letter, The ministration of death, 2 Cor. 3.6,
7.

Answ. It Is so to them that are unregenerate, and while it remains in its
coacting and condemning force. The ground of this objection, is their wrong
understanding of Scripture; they raise it thus; Say they, When the Apostle
preached Christ, some opposed it; and argued against his Preaching, saying, The
Law was given, and we must do that, we must be saved as our Fathers were,
they were holy, and lived in the Law, and pleased God, and so must we.
Hereupon, say the Antinomists, the Apostle began to oppose the Law, and to
teach them, that all the Fathers, who lived in the time of the Law, were under
the Law, carnal; and the sons of Agar, in bondage. And that all that use the
law, are carnal, and in bondage likewise. But how dangerously do they
understand Scripture? They shall bear their own burden, for our Savior has
spoken it, Whosoever shall break one of these least Commandments, and shall
teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom o^ heaven, Mat.
5.19. The faith of the Fathers, was the same with ours, and though they lived
in the Law, yet not under the Law; Eusebius eccl, hist. l. 1. c. 1 Idem de vita
Constable. l. 2 Philastr. cont Haer. cap. 61. Aug in Io. Tra. 45 Prosper Aquit Ob^.
8 Niceph Ca^^i^t. ^c^^ his^ l. 1. c. 2, 3, 4, 5.
but had the same Christ with us: Therefore our Savior gave testimony to that
ancient Abraham, He saw the day of Christ, and rejoiced.

Object. 7. They say we do much injury, to join together what God has
separated.

Ans. Nay, we confound them not, but say, the Gospel is more glorious than the
Law, and the mysteries in it, are far clearer. It Is Chrysostoms expression,
that the Doctrines differ, as a picture rudely drawn with a Cole, or lined
forth more exactly with a pencill.

These are their weapons and their strengths, but ye see how invalid: But where
they have not strength, they have enough of humor; for, (as the Apostle
gravely unto Titus) There are many unruly and vain Talkers and Deceivers,
whose mouths must be stopped, who subvert whole houses, teaching things which
they ought not, for filthy Lucres sake, Tit 1.10, 11. The holy Spirit of
Calvin, Pacessat. long ex animis nostris profana istaec opinio. Ca^v. Inst. l.
2. c. 7 sect. 13.
was zealous against this injury done unto the Law, when he dared peremptorily,
to call that opinion profane; Away with that profane opinion out of our minds.
But we will follow them no longer in their triflings, but proceed to a new
encounter, against other confederates of theirs, who build much upon the same
grounds.

3. 3. Against Enthusiasts.
Against the Enthusiasts, and vision-boasters, who neglect the Law, and presume
altogether upon the Spirits revelation. In Saxony, about the year of Christ,
1521. there were diverse together with Nicholas Storke, who preached, that they
had visions and revelations, that there should be a new world, all wicked
Princes should be killed, and that righteousness should reign. Thomas Muncer
followed this Sect, and Preached against the Ministers and Magistrates; they
did brag of the Spirit, which they said, was efficacious in them: Some of them
were extasied, and used strange gestures in their bodies; Some affirmed they
had visions which revealed unto them, that Infants must not be baptized; Some,
that in their visions they saw Zuinglius, and such as he, in hell; Some, that
it was revealed unto them, when the day of Judgment should come. Fancies,
which men are led unto, by the Father of lies. Mahomet, that great impostor,
had such ways of delusion; So many of those Popish Fathers of Brotherhoods,
when they would institute their Orders, have pretended vision. Hence these men
had their name, Spirituals, or Enthusiasts, whom Luther, that hammer of
Anabaptisticall Heretics, opposed in their greatest heat. It Is true, that in
the prophecy of Joel, there is mention of dreams; I will power out my Spirit
upon all flesh, and your sons, and your daughters shall prophecy, your old
men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions, Joel 2.28. But let
me add to that of Joel, out of another Prophet; I have heard what the
Prophets said, that do prophecy lies in my name saying, I have dreamed, I have
dreamed; they are Prophets of the deceit of their own heart, which think to
cause my people so forget my name by their dreams: He that has my Word, let
him speak my Word faithfully: Behold, I am against the Prophets, says the
Lord, that use their tongues, and say, He says: Behold, I am against them
that prophecy false dreams, Ier. 23.25, 26.28. 31, 32.

Talmud. in Sanhedr. c. 1
The Hebrew Doctors have a Proverb, and are wont to say, That after the latter
Prophets were dead, the Holy Ghost went up from Israel: They mean, after
Zachary, and Malachy, and those other Prophets, none had any more that
extraordinary gift: In this sense, we may understand, that in the Acts, when
Paul asked the Disciples at Ephesus, Whether they had received the Holy Ghost,
they answered, We have not so much as heard whether there be any Holy Ghost,
Act. 19.2. Paulus Fagius, in exodus 28.
They doubted not of the distinction of persons, having been instructed in
that mystery; but had not bin acquainted with those extraordinary abilities of
prophesying and visions. We reject such Impostures, and therefore cannot but
be agrieved at that Popish Scandal, who call it, The Instinct of the
Lutherans. Ioh. Vigu. natu. et Christi. Philos. c. 15.. 2.
That holy Luthen opposed these fooleries, and we may oppose the life of
Luther, against the foul mouth of that railing Viguerius.

But let us dea^e with them a little more particularly in their Tenants.

They said, that our Preachers were not sent of God; that they Preached not the
true Word; that the Scriptures and external Word, is not the true Word of God;
but we m^st only have the Testimony of the true Word, which is Christ; which
is taught, not by Script^res and Sermons, but inwardly. And therefore if we
allege Scripture unto them, they answer,

What have I to do with the dead letter, when I have the living Word of God in
the living Spirit.

Thus they purposely reject Scriptures, that they may more freely bring in
their fancies. But is not that which is in the Prophets mouth, the same that is
from the Spirit? Therefore the Prophets, in all their Preachings, declared
their Authority, Thus says the Lord And though the Ink and Paper be not the
Word, yet thus is the word conveyed unto us; Jeremiah had the Word from God,
Baruch from Jeremiah, the Ink and Paper from Baruch, and we from that, have
Gods will and message to that people. Then Baruch answered. He pronounced all
these words unto me with his mouth, and I wrote them with Ink in the Book,
Ier. 36.18. It was the Thessalonians praise, that they entertained the
Ministry, and saw God in the Ministry: For this cause also thank we God
without ceasing, because when ye received the word of God, which ye heard of
us, ye received it not as the word of men, but as it is in truth, the word of
God, 1 These. 2.13. And when they oppose the Spirit unto the Word, they make the
Inditer contradict his own writings. But the word of the Lord endures for
ever, and this is the Word which by the Gospel is preached unto you, 1 Pet.
1.15.

Again, they say, That Preaching must now cease, for, We are all taught of
God, Ier. 31.34. And that we need not the Sacraments, because we have the
Spirit and the Thing signified by them.

They still abuse Scripture, though in the general, they will reject
Scripture; and that which they most strongly urge; Ye need not that any man
teach you, but as the same anointing teaches you of all things, and is truth,
and no l^e, 1 Ioh. 2.27. That is not for them; the Apostle there entends but to
plead for the Apostolic Doctrine; that they needed no other Doctrine but what
God had delivered unto them: He gives himself explained in the former verse,
that he would arm them against seducement, Iran l 4. cap 43.
These things have I written unto you concerning them that seduce you. The
Apostolic Church it self, had the Spirit; the Holy Ghost came down upon
them, yet they had Preaching likewise, witness their Sermons frequently
recorded in the Acts. But how dare they so much dishonor the wisdom of
Christ, seeing he pleased to Institute them, to call the Sacraments needelesse?
Would that only wise God institute things to no purpose? But though we have
the Spirit already, yet we may use the Sacraments. Christ had the Spirit, and
yet he was baptized, Mat. 3.15. Non ratio ne sui, sed spectantiu^. Qu^a vita
mea moru^ disciplina. Glos Ord.
He then received the Spirit in the form of a Dove, for our sakes, not his
own. Cornelius had the Spirit before he was baptized. We must examine whether
we be in the Faith, and so we must eat. And what though no other thing be in
the Seal, than in the Promise; yet though I trust a man well, I have more
ground for my trust, when I have his. Bond; so the Sacraments are intended for
the strengthening of our Faith.

I Will not longer pursue these; Io. Sleid. Hist. lib 10. Lamb. Hortensi* lib.
Tumult. Anab. Henr. Dorpius, Edit. 1536.
they have been strange Pitches, to which many of these Enthusiasts have been
lifted; They called David Georg their singular prophet, and himself was
blasphemously bold to call himself, The Christ, the Messiah. It Is enough to
name such horrible blasphemies; now let others enter to their part and acting.

4. Against Anti vetera testamentaries.
4. Against such as receive not the Testimony of the old Testament. They say,
the face of Moses is veiled, we neither can, nor may see him. They urge that of
the Apostle to the Hebrews, In that he says, A new Covenant, he has made
the first old, Heb. 8.13.

But while they destroy the old, they destroy the new together with the old;
That very quotation of their own is urged by the Apostle from the old
Testament, Christ made use of it when he Preached upon the Book of the
Prophet Esaiah, Luke 4.17. And after his resurrection, beginning at Moses and
all the Prophets, he expounded unto them the Scriptures, Luk 24.27. And Peter's
Sermon, Act. 2. has much from that Tes^ament. But if they say, This was for
the Jews sake, we have to oppose that example of Philip to the Eunuch, a
Gentile, an Ethiopian, at that time a Christian; to him Philip expounded
Esaiah. And how often are such Scriptures, urged by Paul the Apostle of the
Gentiles?

But Moses is veiled? What will they infer? Most of the Ancients understood
it only of his dark way of delivery; Long aliter nos Evangel^um promulga
mus, quam Moses veterem legem* ^llo p lam, ac aperte loqui non ^usus est, ed
velo faciem obduxit, nos vero nihil patimur esse opertum aut oc^u^tum Chry, in
loc. Tert. lib de Resur c. 55 Id^m. lib. 5. A^vers. Mar ca 1 Israel^tae rudes
non potuerunt videre, quod finem hahe ret lex, quodque abroganda for^t
Th^ophil. Cyril. in Io. lib. 3. cap 34. Orig. hom. 12. in exodus
He gave things obscurely, by the Gospel they are more. Theophilact, indeed,
speaks a little to what they seem to mean: The rude Israelites could not see
that the Law should have an end, and should be abrogated. But he speaks
soundly enough in that, and not to their purpose. But the Apostle has best
interpreted the mystery; We use great plainness of speech and not as Moses,
which put a veil over his face, that the children of Is^ael could not
steadfastly look to the end of those things, but their minds were blinded, for
unto this day remains the same veil untaken away, in the reading of the old
Testament, which veil is done away in Christ; But even unto this day when
Moses is read, the veil is upon their heart, 2 Cor. 3.12, 13, 14, 15. It Is
Anselms note, There is a double veyle, one of Obscurity in those Typical
things, another of want of faith in our hearts; neither of these will be plea
for them to deny acqua^ntance with old Scriptures. I shall deal but with one
other adversary, but a dangerous.

5. Against Pure Sinlesse Anabaptists.
5. Against pure Anabaptists, such as were the Novatians and Catharists of old.
They say, They are pure without sin; the glorious Church, not having spot, or
wrinkle, or any such thing, Ephesians 5.27. Yea, that they cannot sin, He that
commits sin, is of the Devil; Whosoever is borne of God, does not commit
sin, and he cannot sin, because he is born of God, 1 Ioh 3.8, 9.

But we may answer Saint John by Saint John, If we say we have no sin, we
deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us, 1 Ioh. 18, We must therefore
Reconcile him to an answer Interpreters are not agreed. 1 Ambrose, Aug. l 4 ad
Boni^. c. 7.
as Augustine relates his opinion, Aug de not. et great. c. 14
understands it of the state of future glory. But he speaks of this life. 2.
Others, as the same Augustine relates, not de facto, that they do not sin;
but de iure, that they ought not. Electos adver^t quasi nunquam pec^asse,
quoniam et si qua deliq^isset, in tempore vid ntur, non apparent in
aeternitate, quia charitas patris ipsorum operet multitudinem peccatoru^. Be^n
sermon ^^. in Cant. Bern sermon. 1. Septuag.
But thus they are not differenced from unregenerate, for they also ought not
to sin. 3. Bernard yet more strains it, to that covering love in Gods
praedestination. But it is not meant of imputation, for that phrase, he cannot
sin, it cannot be meant, God cannot impute sin. 4. Augustine, in one place,
seems to understand it of the different condition of man, that the Regenerate
in this li^^, Renatos in hac (...) partim esse filios Dei ratione generationis
et inchoatae renovationis, partim filios huius seculi, respectu vetustatis in
caern^, vel huc reliquae, quod ergo dicuntur non peccare id de illis dici
quatenus sunt Dei fisii, quod vero iuben tur fateri, se adhuc habere peccatum,
id ^^ill^ dici, quaetenus sunt filii huius seculi. Aug. lib. 2. De pecs mer et
Remis. cap 8. Aug. Tract. 5. in Io. Hier. l^b. 1. adven. Pelag Idem, lib 2.
adven. Iovin. Gernard. D^sp. 1. cont. Fanat. Thesibus, 53, 59. ad 70.
are partly the sons of God, in regard of generation and inchoate renovation,
partly the children of this world, in regard of the oldnesse of the flesh still
remaining in them: That therefore they are said not to sin, is spoken of them
as they are the sons of God, that they are commanded to confess that they
still have sin in them, is spoken of them as they are the children of this
world. All which is true, as he intended it against the Pelagians, but not to
the mind of this place. 5. But what the same Father delivers in another place,
is consented to by others, understanding it of Reigning sins, wasting the
conscience; This is a sin unto death: whereupon Saint John distinguishes and
clears the objection made from his own writing, cap. 3. All unrighteousness
is sin, and there is a sin not unto death. We know that whosoever is borne
of God, sins not, but he that is begotten of God, keeps himself, and that
wicked one touches him not, 1 Ioh. 5.17, 18. Howsoever we must admit of
sin, He that is Jmpossibile puto non contaminari extrema animae, etiam in
viris qui perfecti putantur. Orig Aug. ad ^el^u^. epist. 108.
clean, yet has need that his feee be washed, Ioh. 30.10. None of the Saints
ever bragd that they were sinnelesse. How shall I choose out my words to reason
with God, whom, though I were righteous, yet would I not answer, but I would
make supplication to my Judge, says that holy Patient, Job 9.14.15, And he who
had the Testimony of a man to Gods heart, yet bends; If thou, Lord, should
mark Iniquity; O Lord, who shall stand? Psalm. 130.3. Enter not into judgment,
with thy servant* for in thy sight shall no man living be justified. Ps. 143.2.
Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? Prove. 20.9.
And all these, Job, David, Solomon, though they lived in the time of the Law,
had one and the same Christ with us. And the Justified Paul, I know nothing by
my self, yet am I not herby Justified, 1 Cor. 4.4. It Is that which the holy
Spirits of the Ancients have inveighed against. They say, Basil. lib. de
c^nstit. Monast. c 1. Greg. Mor. l. 5. c 7. 8. 23 Cassian coll. 22. c. 7.
The Regenerate cannot sin, the flesh only can. But what? Is it not their
flesh? Where are themselves when the flesh sins? Or if they be Regenerate,
are they not also men? It Is true, that the Flesh lusts against the Spirit,
and the Spirit against the Flesh, these are contrary the one to the other, Gal.
5.17. But the word Flesh, is here taken not phusically for the musculous
substance of the flesh, but theologically for the vitiousnesse of nature. And
supposing it true in their literal sense, yet the very flesh, which is called
the vessel, must he kept holy; This is the will of God, even your
sanctification, that ye should abstain from fornication. That every one of you
should know how to possess his vessel in Sanctification and Honor, for God
has not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness, 1 These. 4.3.4.7. I
endure not to mention those filthy those filthy doctrines of David Georg,
concerning Spiritual marriage, and the lawfulness of having many Spiritual
wives, Ad augendam prolem. Doctrines contrary to an express Apostolic Rule, 1
Cor. 7.2. And more Bestiall and impure, than the unclean heresies of the
Valentinians and Gnostickes.

They have another conceit suitable to the former, That in their prayers they
will not make confession of their sins, nor petition for pardon. And
therefore would have the petition of Remttte debita, Forgive our Trespasses,
wiped out of the Lords prayers. Ah, bold presumers! Did Christ teach it, and
shall they despise it? Are they so rich with Laodicea, that they stand in need
of no pardon? We may say of them, as Tully against his Anthony, O te miserum!
Wretched Anthony! And by so much more wretched, because thou know not that
thou art so. The estate of such is more dangerous, than of the most profane,
those are diseased with a fever, these with a Lethargy. The violence of the
seaver may make the man sensible, that he needs physic; an open course of
profaneness often strikes a man at his private and separated times. But the
Lethargy is a dull disease, and the man, nor sees, nor cares. They cannot have
heaven, Conc. Afr. Conc Miler Aug de Spir et lit. cap. 2. Basil Hom. de poenit.
Amb. in Luc 1. Idem, lib. de fuga Saculi. Gennad de eccl. Dogm. cap. 31.
unless they have pardon. 'Twas an ancient error, and anciently opposed.

All these several errors flow from the opposition of the Law, or the unjust
maintenance; The Jews do unjustly maintain: The Antinomists, the
Enthusiasts, the Anti-vetera testamentaries, the Sinnelesse Anabaptists, do as
unjustly oppose it. We will not longer pursue them, but proceed in the last
place, by way of conclusion of the whole Tractate, to another use.

III. An use of exhortation. Let us not reject the Law, but make of it its own
proper use. God will not have it contemned, there is morality in that command,
Deutr. 32.46, 47. Set your hearts to all the words which I command you this
day, for it is not a vain thing for you. And the man is described to be
blessed, who meditates in the Law of God, and does exercise himself therein
day and night, Psalm. 1.2. Let not Moses take the place of Christ, but yet make
a right use of Moses: when works come in their own place, we can never
perform enough of them: if we use them as our life, this were indeed to
trample the blood of Christ under our feet, and to set Moses in the chair; but
let the servant follow his Master; let Moses follow Christ, let the Law follow
Grace, let Works follow Faith, that all may act their proper and designed
parts. Let me call for works, that God may be Honored, that your own
consciences may be comforted, that wandrers may be called, that weak ones may
be encouraged. It Is an end of our being, an end of our redemption; we are
intended for action, we are created to good works, we are redeemed that we
might serve; All those, all these considerations do call for working. Let me
instance but the work of Redemption, because most agreeing to the argument in
hand; Being delivered from the hand of our enemies, we must serve him in
holiness and r ghteousnesse all the days of our lives, Luke 1.74, 75. Let us
contemplate the state of our misery, the estate of our deliverance. A poor
Gally-slave that is wearied out by his continual tugging at the Oar, whose
Arms do grow Brawny with excessive labor, and nothing more ordinary to him,
than strokes and hard usage, so that he spinnes a poor and wearisome life,
worse than death it self; if a ransom be freely paid for him, by one who
commiserats his case, would he not gladly spend himself in the service of his
Ransomer? It Is our case, we are the men. In what a slavish thraldom were we
by nature, being chained, and servants to diverse lusts and pleasures? Christ
was pleased to deliver us, and to pay his blood, a ransom: Oh let us live unto
him that dyed for us. Work, and be Thankful; I may change the word of the
Martyr, Pray, Pray, Pray, into another, seasonable for these times, Work,
Work, Work. Beloved! They are dull times that we are fallen upon, let us not
be dully negligent with the times I may bespeake you, as our Savior in that
parable to the Loyterers, Cur statis otiosi? Why stand ye all the day idle? Why
do ye dishonor your faith? Open the mouths of the adverse part; Bring a
stain upon the professed Religion: Work, for Gods sake, for the Faiths sake,
for Religion sake, for your own sake, work. We spend a away our times idly,
one talks away his time, another sports away his time, another trades away his
time, almost all do lavish it away. Why stand ye, all your youth, al your
age, all your life time idle? Has no man hired you? Was not the blood of
Christ laid down for you? Let us at length be ashamed of our barrenness and
unfruitfulnesse in good works. Let us be acquainted with our Masters will, and
to that end make use of the Law, That the Righteousness of the Law may be
fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, Rom 8.4.
The Law is a royal Law, and must be observed; If ye fulfill the royal Law,
(...), according to the Scripture, Aquinas. Gorrhan. Faber.
ye do well, Iam. 2.8. Some understand it of the Gospel only, but unfitly.
The Royal Law, is as the Royal way, the Kings highway, a plain Rode,
without turnings or bypath. (...), ex (...), et (...). Regia lex sicnt via
Regia fine diverticulis.
A byway, is a compassing way, the Law, the will of God is only straight. The
passage by the Law, is like the passage intended by Israel through Edom, they
would go by the Kings Highway, and neither turn to the right hand nor to the
left, Number. 20 17. Let us use that way co^scionably, let us use it, and receive
not the Grace of God invain, 2 Cor. 6.1. That we may receive that grace into
our hearts, as well as into our ears. And by this we may make a trial also of
our works. 1. If we receive not that grace in vain we shall receive a power
to enable us, together with the command; and if we receive the Law, the Word
in power, it begets us more then to a mere form. 2. If we receive not that
grace in vain, we receive a will to obey, so well as we do obey; and we
shall obey willingly, though there were no Law nor no curse. The Christian
delights in the command, and so the yoke is easy; they are a willing people in
the day of Gods power, Psa. 110.3. and serve God not in the oldnesse of the
letter, but in the newnes of the spirit, Romans 7 6.3 If we receive not that
grace in vain, we shall prize Grace, and make it our endeavor to express our
selves thankful. Let it be our care to know the will of God, and to do it.
And because we shall never perform the Law well, till the Law be within us,
let us challenge of God the Covenant, That he would write the Law in our
inward parts.

FINIS.
The Contents.
THE Analysis of the second Chap. to the Galatians, page 2, 3, etc. Doct. A man
is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ. p.
7 Explication of the Doctrine. ibid. What Justice is. p 8 What Justification
is. p.9 The Explication of the Name. ibid. Of the thing it self 12 The nature
of Justification. ibid. The Degrees. 13 The Kinds. ibid. The false causes of
Justification excluded. 15 Papists Tenet of Justification by works, their
evasion of a twofold merit, confuted. ibid. and to 24 The true meritorious
cause of Justification, Christ Jesus. 24. to 29 How Christ is our
Righteousness; viz. by Faith. 29 What Faith is. ibid. Faith seated both in the
will and intellect. 30 The manner how Faith Iustifies: 1. Negatively. 31 2.
Positively. 32 Faith not the meritorious cause of our Justification. 33 Faith
Justifies not because of Gods gracious acceptance. 34 Justification by Faith,
confirmed by Testimony. 39 By Arguments. Argument. 1. 40, etc. The Doctrine of
Christian Liberty. 48. etc. Liberty diverse. 49 Liberty described 51 What we are
freed from. 54 Of Indifferents. 60 Indifferents twofold; Things, Men. 60, 61
Constitutions of men twofold, Political, Ecclesiastical. 61, 62. Conclusions
touching the nature and extent of Indifferents. 63 The ends of our freedom,
and of the DoctrIne of it: 66 and 71, 72, 73 False conceits of Christian
Liberty. 67 Exhortation to stand fast in our Liberty. 75 Objection answered. 79
Exhortation to rejoice in our Liberty, 80 Argum. 2. of our Justification by
Faith. 91 A twofold absurdity in the tenet of Justification by the Law. ibid.
etc. Argum. 3. Of Justification by Faith. 95 How far forth we may be angry.
97 Heretical Teachers, bewitchers. 99 In our reproves we must labor to be
both plain and pleasing. 100 Doct. 1. Faith sees things that are far
removed. 102 Doct. 2. All our Preaching must be to paint out Christ to the
people. 104 Argum. 4. Of Justification by Faith. 111 The absurdity of expecting
Justification by the works of the Law. 112 Argum. 5. Of Justification by Faith.
117, 118, etc. Argum. 6. 122 Argum. 7. 126 Argum. 8. 129 Six things observable:
1. Who has redeemed us. 2. From whom. 3. From what. 4. How it was done. 5. To
what end. 6. By what mean. Gal. 2.13. 131, 132 Argum. 9. 134, 135 Objection
against the inheritance being of promise, answered. 136 The promises of the Law
and Gospel, differ. 138, 139 Confirmation in Scripture, threefold. 140
Application of the Doctrine of Justification by Faith. 144 objection 1. If we be
justified by Faith only, to what end serves the Law? 145, 146 Answered. 149
The use of the Law. 152, 153, 154 Reasons for the continuing of the Law. 154
Question concerning the duration of the Law. 158 By whom the Law was ordained.
16^ Two commendations of the Law. 161 and 166 The inference of the Papists for
the Mediation of Saints and Angels, from the Mediatorship of Moses, confuted.
170 Christ is not a Mediator of one 171 A Mediator what. 173 The cause of
disagreement ibid. Twofold Application; 1. From the use of the Law; 2. From the
continuance of that use 17^ The use of the Law two fold. 1. Civil: 2.
Spiritual. ibid. The Civil use of the Law, to restrain sins ibid. The
Spiritual use to discover the nature of sin to us. 177 The way to get mercy,
is to know we need it. 183 The Law was added till the Seed should come,
expounded literally and spiritually. 185 Objections of an humbled conscience.
Objection 2. Against the use of the Law: If it be for transgressions, then it
is against the Promise. 192 The Apostles answer. 193 To give life, the same
that to Justify. 195 The Law cannot give life proved two ways. 196 The
Scriptures shut up under sin two ways: 1 By Promises: 2. By the Law. 198 The
extent of the word Concluded. 200 The accidentary use of the Law. 201 The
diverse acceptions of the word Faith. 204 To come unto Faith, and to come unto
Christ, of one signification. 205 The knowledge of this necessary for two
things; 1. To know that the Fath^rs were not without Faith; 2. How Faith is
imputed to us for Righteousness. ibid. To be kept under the Law, expounded.
ibid. The right Divine described from Psa. 147.11. 209 The difference of the
righteousness which is by the law, and that by faith. 211 How the Jews were
directed to Christ by the Law. 212 How the Law leads us, diversely expounded.
213 The manner of our Salvation; there are two Forms or Classes, one under the
Law, the other under the Gospel. 215 Two sorts of Scholars hereby condemned.
ibid. Faith leads us to Christ, not as to a Law giver, but as to a Iustifier.
216 The Question, How the Law is abrogated, and how useful, discussed. 217*
etc. Some Scriptures seeming to prove the abrogating of the Law; some, that it
is not abrogated, reconciled. 222 To whom the Law was given. 223 The causes why
the Law should be abrogated: 1. That the Gentiles might be called: 2. Because
it was an intolerable burden. 3. Because it was unprofitable: 4. Be-it was
pernicious. 226, etc Three things signified by the word Law. 230 1. The whole
Scriptures, 2. the Books of Moses, 3. the paedagogie of Moses in his four
last books. 231 The Law as taken for the paedagogie of Moses, is not wholly
abrogated. ibid Three things in the paedagogie of Moses; Promises, Types, and
commands. ib. The Law taken for promises and types, abrogated. ib. The law
taken for the commands, not abrogated. 232 The general description of the law,
1. from the end. 232. 2. from the form. 233 Law twofold. 1. Divine, 2. Humane.
233 The Divine Law considered three ways: 1. As impressed on men's minds by an
innate speech: 2. As enuntiated by speech declarative: 3. As comprehended in
writing. ibid. The more special description of the Law. 234 The Law written,
called Moses law, is threefold, Moral, Ceremonial, Judicial. ibid. Two parts
of the Ceremonial and Judicial law; External, Internal. ibid. The inward
thing of the Cer^moniall law, is Faith and Piety. ibid. The inward thing of the
Judicial, mutual love and piety. ib The Inward things in the Ceremonial and
Judicial law, are eternal; the outward only abrogated. 235 The Ceremonial
law, what. ibid The use of the Ceremonial law threefold. ibid. and 236
Abrogated by Christ's coming. ibid. By what degrees the Ceremonial law was
abrogated: 1. in truth: 2. in fact. ibid. The Judicial Law, what. ibi. The use
of it threefold. 237 The abrogation of it. ibid. The judicial Law so far as it
is typical abrogated. ibid. The judgment of the judicial law neither simply
forbidden, nor prescibed to any. ibid. Such things as are of common and
general right in the Judicial law, are still in force. 238 How we may know
them ib. The Moral law what. 238 The Moral law how far forth abrogated. 239
Love, the Substance of the Moral law. ibid. Six Circumstances of the Moral
law. 240, 241 The use of the Moral law, before sin entered. 242 The use of it
under the state of sin, threefold. ibid. The use of it under the state of
grace. ibid The Law, the Promise, and the Gospel, considered as opposites. 245
As Subordinates. ibid. The comparison of the law and Gospel, how they do
agree and differ. 247. etc. to 256 The comparison of the Promise and Gospel,
how they agree and differ. 256 The Objections of the Jews, for the continuance
of the Ceremonial and Judicial law, answered. 260 Against Antinomists and
Libertines; their Objections answered. 263 Against Enthusiasts; their false
Arguments. 273 Against those that receive not the old Testament. 284 Moses
veil, what. 286 Against pure sinlesse Anabaptists. 288 The Exposition of
diverse interpreters on those words, Whosoever is borne of God, sins not. ib.
Use of Exhortation, not to reject the law. 297 The estate of the law ib. Three
rules to try our Works by. 304
FINIS.

