THE House-holder: OR, Perfect MAN.

Preached in three Sermons lately by ED: TOPSELL, preacher at Saint Buttolphs
without Aldersgate.

Prou. 27, 23, etc. Be diligent to know the estate of thy Flock, and take heed
to thy herds, etc.

The Contents follow in the next leaf.

Printed for Henry Rockyt, and are to be sold at his shop in the Poultry, under
the Dial. 1610.

Contents of the first Sermon.
1 DIfferences of men, because few be good, 2. A perfect man, described by the
text, 3. Wisdom, needful for all; especially for the teacher of other, 4.
The way to attain it. 5 Neglecters of the means, reproved, 6. multitude of
fools, and a remedy for them, 7. All wants sensible, except the want of true
Wisdom, 8. odiousness of spiritual folly, by Doctrine, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13,
14, 15, 16, 17, 18. And by comparatiue examples, 19, 20. Exhortation to
wisdom, and dehortation from folly.

Contents of the second Sermon.
1 THE subject of private wisdom, 2. Diligence described, 3. The necessity
thereof, 4. The diligent shall bear rule, 5. And is rewarded, 6. The praise of
diligence, 7. Dispraise of negligence and sloth, 8. Commodities of diligence,
amplified in mo rewards, 9. As Nobility and acquisition of honor, 10. comfort
to the diligent, and good presidents to other, 11 Discommodities of negligence.
12 Education to labor, and desert of hire necessary for all men.

Contents of the third Sermon.
1 THE general charge of Householders, and praise of knowledge. 2. Every man
should know his own estate and affairs, 3. And not only believe other, 4.
Comparison of Faith and Knowledge. 5. Dignity of knowledge; especially Divine.
6. Ignorance, cause of many evils, 7. Who, and what must be known in
Oeconomicks, 8. God and reason commands it. 9. Honor of Household,
provision and cares, 10. Yet with predominancy of spiritual things. 11. The
Householders Storehouse necessary. 12. This store must be given forth:
commanded by God. 13. By Nature. 14. By Men. 15. Exemplified in Beasts and
Creatures. 16. 17. yet so, that we leave rather then lack. 18. It must be
spent on our Country. 19. 20. 21. 22. And on Wives, Children, Servants, and
Strangers.

To the Right Honorable, and right worthy young Plants of Nobility, highly
borne, Divinely educated, and happily married, the Lord RICHARD SACKVILL, Earl
of Dorset, Baron of Buckhurst, and the Lady ANNE, his beloved wife, sole
Daughter and heir to the renowned Lord, GEORGE, late Earl of CVMBERLAND, and
the truly Religious Lady, MARGARET, Countess Dowager of CVMBERLAND.
Great LORD and LADY,
IT were vain to excuse this enterprise, your goodness will not refuse it, it
were folly to commend it, your wisdoms might justly explode it. I will not
say, I contrived and compiled it for your sakes, so should I seem to beg
your thanks, and deprive my self of a universal benefit; for we that labor
in the Church, must not be personal. Yet I will say, that I would not divulge
it to the world, but under the honor of your names: And if it could add either
Goodness or greatness to your Honors, (as I hope Almighty God in time will
both) I would every line had been a leaf, and every page a volume, till both
your souls and selves could say with Solomon, Eccle. 2, 25
who could eat or have to these things more then we?

You are now become other then you were, and the graces of your Noble Natures
and education, begin to appear to the view of all that will behold you: for
your great places have mounted you on the highest seats, whereby you cannot
be secret though you would; for you may not descend that Theater of Honor,
till you dye, Principibus regnare est viuere, and non regnare est mori, Princes
and Rulers, their life is to be eminent, and when they cease to be eminent,
they dye, and cease to live. Wherefore you see (without my Narration) the good
and evil in great personages will disclose it self, so as all the enemies
shall not stain their Virtues, which will break forth like the Sun in his
height and heat; nor all the flatterers, with their several false colors,
and false praises, so enammell and gilte over their vices, Conscientia^ mala^
lauda^tis preconiu^ non sandt, nec bonam vulne rat conuitiu^ Aug. contra petil.
but they will discover themselves, and if they would not, yet an evil
conscience is not cured with false praises, nor a good one wounded by unjust
reproaches.

Your Hon: are greatly blessed by Almighty God, and I am assured you will, as
you ought, ever acknowledge his goodness and greatness, the Author of yours:
For you have not forsaken your Fathers houses, with Abraham, Jacob, and other,
but you are both heirs of your Fathers houses, and in their houses, to your
mutual glory, your conjunction has increased their honor for you acquired.
And that which happens to few, is fallen upon you, even in your first and
younger years, to be rich, and good, God grant it to continue, and (without
blemish, to the Noble Stemmes from which you are descended) I will not cease to
pray, that you may be glad Parents of many children like your selves, and
you, and your Posterity, be greater and better then they, if it be Gods good
will and pleasure.

The first thing wherein your Hon: must now show your selves to the world,
Your Lordshipp shall find them anciently divided into Regra, satrapicia
ciuilis and priuata, of which the second, which is the Lordly House, fitteth
your Honor.
is your Household government. Household Government, I say, the Parent and first
beginner of Commonwealths, the Seminary of Kingdoms, and Counsels; the
discerner of natural wisdom, the Architect of honor, and Disciplinarie
school of a wise, virtuous, and happy life: from which Almighty God setcheth
his Bishops. The Romans, and best common-wealth-men, fetched their Consuls
and Tribunes, and many times Kings have been chosen out of this rank. The
wise Solomon is an Author of this government, as you may read in the
succeeding discourse. Antoninus was made an Emperor, out of this sight, proof,
and hope, who is commended for taking away all wages from the idle, and leaving
nothing to his Daughter, Iul. Capitolinus.
but his private Patrimony. Hermion, the fifth King of Germany, who lived after
the flood, Auenti. lib. 1. annal. Bocor.
four hundred and eleven years, much about Abraham's time, is likewise
remembered for his economy. When he went abroad to fight, he gave diligent
order for his Husbandry at home. I could speak of Eberhard a Duke of
VVittenberge, for this cause honored like a God. Of Galeacius, of Columella,
and of Cato the wise, who wrote hereof, and is commended for this saying,
Plutarch.
Non deterior domus rector quam ciuitatis. A Householder is not inferior to the
Governor of a City, and he that is not wise in Domestical matters, shall
never be trusted in the Commonwealth.

For these causes, when I came unto Hartfield, after seauenteen years absence,
(the first Pulpit that ever I ascended, and the first place of my Ministerial
function) I chose to speak hereof, how, and with what success your Hon: have
heard, and I am not now bound to make relation thereof, or trouble my self,
against rash, idle, false, and at the best, ignorant censures; yet as evil
Laws gave occasion to good manners, sins to Sermons, so has contradiction
to many good Books, and therefore I resolved first for your Honors
satisfaction, and in you for a more universal commodity to all my
Contrymen, to give my Sermons a public birth, through my further travel,
praying your Hon: to be the witnesses of their Christendom, that they contain
nothing but Christian doctrine, and let them be called, the Householder.

Conueniunt rebus nomina saepe suis, I trust that either their Ancestor (I mean
Salomons Text) who was a Preacher, from which I have lineally derived them. Or
at the least, some Angel of God, may give me (with blessed Zachary) a
sufficient warrant, to take Tables and write, Their name is the Householder,
Luke 1, 63
and so I hope they shall grow in favor with God, and all good men.

To conclude therefore, right Noble and happy Earl and Countess, you have
already begun as much as I have observed, your Family, and Domestical affairs
are handled, not as though their Governors were but twenty, yea rather, sixty
year old. You have done as well for the time (I think by inspiration) as all
the Divines could have advised you, Purging out the old leaven from the family
to you descended. Yet give me leave to say one thing, for the enemy of mankind
is cunning. When Humericus purged his Court from the Manichees (a pestilent
kind of Haeretickes, which made two Gods) in crept the Arrians, which denied
Christ to be God: and thereof, there was a vision: First, a holy man saw a
Church full of men, and presently after they were driven forth, be saw it
full of Swine. Victor. de persecv. va^d. lib, 2.
I compare not your Hon: to Humericus (a wretched and Haeretical Vandall) nor
the justly expelled Domesticals to such me^, but only the profane beasts which
will be any thing, or of any religion, for your Hon: favor, and entertainment.
These I compare to beasts and swine, living in eating and drinking, Swearers
and drunkardes are no more tolerable in a family the^ Arrians in a Church.
and pleasure, whom I pray God to weed out, if any such be, or to keep out of
your Family, them that by any preferment of friend or so may be commended unto
you. I could say more, but I will not trouble your patience with these plain
discourses. I hope that Jesus who has formed your Hon: before you were, and
now reformed you since you were, will make you not Cypresses only, but Olives
and Vines, for his own glory, for the Church, for your Nation, for your
families, and for your own souls estate, which I entreat you to prefer
before all earthly honor and glory, and so I rest.

At your Honors command, EDW. TOPSELL.

To the right Noble and Honorable House-holders, feeders of the Poor: ANTHONY
BROWN, Viscount Mountacute, at COWDREY. Sampson Lennard, Esquire, at
Hurstmounseaux. Thomas PELHAM, Esquire, at Halland. Richard Blunt, Esquire, at
Dedsham. AND TO all other wise, temperate, provident, and liberal
Housekeepers within the County of Sussex: EDWARD TOPSELL Parson of Hartfield
and Preacher, wishes them continuance of their HOSPITALITY, and reward of
their CHARITY in the World to come.
My LORD,
SEe and read how impartial we are: our Pens are like your house, open to
all that are to be praised, as that is open to all that are to be relieved. If
they want, you examine not their Religion, for GOD has made you a feeder, and
not a corrector; the faults of a vicious man in want, extenuate not the
Charity of the liberal. Being a stra^ ger in Midhurst, in August this year,
1609 I heard by one whom I believe, that at Cowdrey were fed daily and
relieved, well near 200. of all sorts.
Your praises (without respect of Religion) are commendable before us al, for
your charity abounds above many: and I think (if fame be no Liar) above most
of your rank. I never saw your Lordship, and know you not, but by the Fame of
your liberality, which I was glad to hear, for your own sake, for the poor,
but sorry, you have no mo fellows or followers. Trust me, my Lord, I would to
God, you were ours, for why should the Christian-worke of such a hand, be lost
and unrewarded, for the want of true love, or the love of the truth? Oh, that
your Honor had missed your instructors, and that your youth had not ben
corrupted as fast as it increased: that good Nature, and studious Devotion,
sober mind, and Noble birth, had bin to your country a greater Ornament, and
to your Family and Soul, afar more assured means of the Heaven you desire,
then the way you walk in. But I trust, nay, we all pray, with S. Austens
mother, Ne harr^ lachrimaru^ filius pereat. You are great and nobly born,
disce^ded of a Grandfather, in all things like your self, just, te^perat,
wise, liberal, merciful, prouide^t, a lover of his country, but not of his
Countries Religion. You are his true heir, he did Auizare his religion, you do
the like in your religion and charity. Well, God has made you happy, in that
you are able to give: and I hope, that as one of your eyes is opened, and sees
the object of your mercy, and the true use of your large Patrimony, so in
time, he will open the other, to see the infallible object of a Christian
faith, for the possession of your far greater Patrimony in heaven. Lady
Mou^tacute daughter of the late fia. of Dorset, and. Aunt to the now Earl.
To this I am sure, your second self, your noble, virtuous, and truly
sanctified wife, says Amen, Amen. She is a true confessor, she has kept her
own as well as Queen Clotildis, the wife of Almaricus, she is most like her,
Procop. de bell. Goth. lib 2.
of all Ladies alive, though your Lordshippe be a far more kind husband,
Vxorem euntem adsacra christianorum, stercoribus pro^ectis defoedari curauit,
and verberibus came immanitur, tractau^^t.
then that Heretic King, and therefore I hope if you might with the Law, yet
your noble nature (for your own particular) would not restrain her free
liberty to visit the sacred meetings of the good Christians. In ^onfidence
whereof, I will honor you both, and ever pray that your Lordship may never
leave off your charity, nor that Noble Lady change her Religion, the assured
and undoubted way to life eternal. Farewell.

Master LENNARD,
YOu are a Householder by birth, for your aged and most provident Father, was
the best that ever I knew, except yourselfe. You have truly performed his last
charge to you, which was to do the like. You have done it in two Counties,
Kent has missed you, Seuenoke (the place of my birth and education) has wept
for your absence: Sussex has found you, and God provided for you therein, the
noble Patrimony of the Dacres of the South. So that now, I cannot decide,
whether your worthy father your noble wife (being a Baroness by birth, and
most loving to you) or your own disposition, have made you happiest. He
blessed you as Isaac did Jacob, she enriched you, and ennobled you, as Acsah
did Othniell. But your self is best to your self, obeying Father, honoring
wife, feeding many, good to all. Let your latter end be late, and all your
posterity possess the same blessings, till the worlds end.

And for your self, I will pray for your reward, that if it be Gods will and
pleasure, you may have such reward at one time or other, as had Miltiades.
Herod. lib. 6 They were Thracians, called Dolonci.
When the inhabitants of Hellesponte Chersonesus, were warned by the Oracle,
that they should choose him for the Prince and restorer of their Country, who did
first of all inuit them to his house after their departure out of the Temple,
who passing by this Miltiades, and he by their apparel knew them to be
strangers, he called to them, and offered them entertainment in his house,
which they accepted, and the next day they showed him the Oracle, and entreated
him to go with them, and possess their Countries principality, which thing he
did, and happily enjoyed many years, the reward of his hospitality. Even so,
the Divine Oracles, I know, have provided for you, and your posterity (in
Testimony that almighty God loves Hospitality) more honor on earth, They
shall be Barons of Dacres in the right of their Mother.
and an incorruptible kingdom in Heaven.

Master PELHAM,
WHo may in all your Country say better then you? Psalm 23.
My shepherd is the Lord, his rod and his staff comfort me. My head he has
anointed with Oil, and my Cup does ouerflow. My table is decked in the
presence of my foes, I dwell by green Pastures, and still waters. You are
seated in the Eagles nest, Gilbertus de Aquila, was the Lord of Laughton.
it is a regal Bird: you (if I be not deceived) are descended of that race.
Royal things do therefore become you. (Good Sir) let me not slatter you, the
fame and name of your Antecessours, have long sounded in those parts. Honor
of Arms commended your Father and Uncle: Sir Nicholas Pelham. Sir William
Pelham. Sir John Pelham.
Love of his Country, your Brother; Hospitality in peace has bin your honor,
and I trust you have not, nor will not give over to feed. Your Patrimony has
been by your thrift augmented, and there is no cause why your mind should not
ever taste of her prime and most honored graces; mercy, liberality, and
hospitality. These things brought me first unto you. And I confess, as I had
heard so I found, neither want nor wast, neither an evil eye, nor a sparing
hand: and in that time of your greatest expense on your poor Countrymen, you
increased most in fame and wealth. I cannot forget that note of a neighbor of
yours, M. William Morley of Gliude.
(the woorthiest, learned, iustest, and most ingeniously affable Gentleman,
that ever I knew in all my courses, to whose noble memory, Iowe a better
Sacrifice then now I give) that your house and hand were open, when your mouth
was shut, and other men had their mouths open, when their houses and hands
were shut. You have ennobled your family, by honorable alliance in marriage. M.
Henry Carey, son and heir to the Lord Hunsdon.
I need not commend him, he honors your family, and none that knows him,
but honors him, being a lover of the means of Honor, Learning, and Arms;
without which, no man is Noble or worthy of Honor. It is the basest and
unworthiest mark of a Gentleman, to care for nothing, nor to dignifie his
house, but by purchases, gallant. Suits, Rapiers, and Spurs, gaming and playing
scores and hundreds, and never to do any part of Honor, whereof he boasleth.
A man may say unto them, as Herodes Atticus did to Bradeas, his Wives Brother,
when he had praised his race and descent, and yet being unworthy himself,
Coelius. Erasmus.
Tu equidem in astragalis nobilitatem gestas. They have no Honor, but in old
bones. I will pray that your Son may Patrizare, M. T. P.
and that (if Heaven resist not) you may live to see him most happy, for you
will make him Rich. And I will end, as Stratonicus said of his Host, who
received him kindly, and welcomed him most heartily, although he knew him not,
and after him, two or three in the same courteous manner. Discedamus o puer, nam
inuenimus pro columba, palumbum, and pro hospite pandocheum. Let us be gone
and depart, for insteade of a Dove, we have found a Ring-Doue, and where we
thought to find a special favor, to be received alone, we find a
Housekeeper that entertaineth all.

Master BLOVNT,
YOu are my latest acquaintance, and therefore with you I must conclude, not as
the least, but as the upper most in my heart, and if I would praise you for
houskeeping, you might give me leave to say as much of you as of the residue,
and in your proportion equal to the best. For with the Centurion, you have
ever loved our Nation, I mean the Preaohers: and unto your commendation do all the Prophets, and Children of the Prophets, give Testimony. You and your nobly
borne and minded wife, Mistress Blount was daughter to the Lord La-ware.
never refused him, that came unto you in the name of a Prophet. Wherefore
faint not, but expect a Prophets reward; a prophets reward, what is that?
Nothing in earth but an empty Cup, Heathy and Barren Land? God forbid: so the
world rewards us, and would admit us but one foot before the Beggar (viz.)
we must stand in the Porch, and the beggar without the door, but a Prophets
reward is to be partaker of all the good and labors of the Prophets. For the
lovers of goodness are respected (before God) with the Preachers. But
especially, the reward of the old Prophets, was the assured performance of all that they had foretold of Jesus Christ, and thereof they are not now ashamed;
no more, nor no less is the assurance of those things, which you believe and
hope, for they that trust in the Lord, shall not be ashamed. These lines (I mean
the succeeding Book) were written in Dedsham house, and how unthankful should
they be, if they did not leave a long lasting Monnument upon that Householder,
under whose roof they had their first being in letters. Believe me Sir, I was
never better pleased, nor had more cause of content then in your house. Where
besides Leuies large feast, we had Christ at the table every day, I mean the
holy scriptures, we wanted nothing fit for Christians, or fitting us for
heaven, only the prime part of your family, your own worthy self was absent,
and the hope of your name, M. W. B.
your son: Oh, that you had more of such hope, so you had more inheritances for
the^: and for the residue of your hapy issue, you are blessed in them al, and
they for a father and a mother, are as happy as ever were any of their blood,
and yet by father and mother nobly descended. Now must I your latest Orator,
and as it were, a child of yesterday, bless you all in the name of al my
brethren the Prophets, your ancient and well respected ghests, to who^ with the
Sumanite you have given lodging and light, with the Sarepthian widow, Oil and
Meal, with Lazarus, Mary and Martha, meat drink, entertainment and obedience,
and with Onesiphorus sought them out, being not ashamed of their chains. So as
Candala Q. of Panonia, and niece to Lewis the 12. of France, said to the
Venetians, for her royal entertainme^t, that she never knew her self to be
Queen, til she came to their teritory: so may the Preachers say, they know not
themselves to be Christ's Ministers, til they come to your house. The Lord
show mercy to this house, Luke 10, 5.
and the peace of Christ (which the Apostles preached) and the son of peace
rest in it to the worlds end. So be it.

FInally unto al other Noble, worthy, and Worshipful Householders, I present
this Treatise, for you (like the Sheep of Christ) are every way profitable.
Who keeps the Fatherless? the Housekeeper. Who relieueth the Widow? the
Householder. Who traineth up children and servants in the fear of God, and
service of the Commonwealth, and common good? the Householder. Who norisheth
Arts, Learning, and them that serve at the Altar? but the Householder that
pays Tithes. Who maintains the world, and defends the Country? the
Householder; who having a posterity, loves it thrice so well as the barren, and
mariage-hating Inmate. Who is a monster among men? hated, of God, disdained of
the angels, shame of his Parents, and burden to his country, but he that
lives, by whom no other lives; that is, no Householder, and yet rich enough:
no liker a Christian, then an Ape is like a man, whose flesh is not good for
meat, as a sheep, nor his back for burden, as the horse and Ass, nor skins
for warmth and Ornament, as the Conies, Squirrels, and Martins, nor good to
keep a house as a Bandogge. Simia quam similis, turpissima bestia nobis.

You renowned Householders, that love this kind of life, purge out of your
families, the Drones which eat and consume that whereupon the Bees should
live; o drunkenness, the horror of Religion, the consumer of youth and
strength, the deuourer of al goodness, the bane of the Householder, can no
judgment of God or man, dry thee up, but like Deucalions floude, thou must
ouerrun and ouerslow all, except two only: the Temperate, and the Religious?
Stand up ye worthies of the time, find a remedy for this evil, or else your
honor is in the dust, in the Kennell. For as when your best land is
ouerslowed, it yields nothing: so if you suffer your families to be drenched
in this vice, rottenness and barrenness will devour you all. It makes your
families like Fennes, and the ditches of Marish Land, wherein nothing but
Snakes and Serpents, and ugly Frogs do engender. It is the pit of hell, as
out of hell no man can come again; so out of drunkenness are none recovered.
Aug. ser. de ehrlet. caue^d
Your Dogs and Beasts are better then your drunken Children and servants. For
says S. Chrisostom, Hom. 1.
Ebriosus est voluntarius demon, ruinae excusatione carens, et comune generis
nostri opprobrium. A drunkard is a wilful Devil, the shame of mankind, and
one that cannot be excused in his destruction. Never shall drunkard come to
heaven, for as when the Ship is sunk after a Tempest, the wares and lading
are quickly washed out, but the bark is filled with sand and water, so as all
the strength of man cannot weigh it up again, nor the best Nauigator, and
sails make it sail again: no more when a man is once sunk in drunkenness
(and sink he shall, for the Devil will not leave him, till with the Swine in
the Gospel, he drown the^:) all the persuasions of God and man cannot set him
upright again in the Sea of this world. For like to Bonosus the drunke^ Emp.
Nati sunt vt bibant, non vt viuant, they are borne to drink and not to live. It
has bin lawful to put away a man's wife for drunkenness among some Nations:
but it is needful that drunkards be excluded men's company, and with
Nabuchadnezzar live among beasts (who are never drunk) til they have learned
this abstinence from them. And believe me, if you nourish drunkards, your
families shall never want woe. From which, the Lord deliver you, and from
Drunkards the Lord deliver us. And so I end for your Liberality, and
Hospitality, with the Prayer of Nehemiah, Cap. 5, v. vlt*
Lord remember these Housekeepers in goodness, according to all that they have
done to this people. September, 1609.

Your Honors, worships, and all that will believe my report, EDWARD TOPSELL.

The Householder.
Prou. 27. 23 etc. Be diligent to know the estate of thy flock, and take heed
to thy herds.

24 For riches remain not always, And is the Crown from generation to
generation?

25 The Hay discovers it felfe, and the grass appears, and the herbs of
the Mountain are to be gathered.

26 The Lambs are for they clothing, and the male Goats a price of the field.

27 And let the milk of thy Goats be sufficient for the food of thy family,
and for the sustenance of thy Maidens.


Whatsoever is Life (according to man's weak understanding) must either be
vegetative or growing, as in Plants; Sensitive, ye^ without motion, as in the
Oyster and such like; Sense and motion, as in all Beasts, Fishes, and Fowls;
and lastly, Reason, as in Aungelles and Men. Now, almighty God has given unto
Man all these: Growth, with the Plants; Sense and motion with the Beasts;
Gravity of substance with all corporeal things; Spirituality and reason with the
Angels: that whereas his divine Majesty is the Ioh. 11. 25
Life and the Fountain from whence issues all other life, it may most aptly
agree with us, not only that we live, but that we more then live, and Act. 17.
28
that in him we live, and move, and have our being. And verily, seeing we
participate in the variety and dissimilitude of so many creatures, it is no
marvel, although the faces, and inclinations of so many men, be also so
various, diverse, and estranged one from another: for our minds are as many as
our persons, and our senses more then our heads, and yet in all these, man
taking this, of the Fish and Beast, that, of the Tree and Metal, may be
compared unto the Beast and Money that perrisheth, Psalm. 49, 20. Acts 8, 20.
o vtinam periret tantum pecunia (says S. Bernard of Simon Magus) sed pecunia
tecum: Would God the Money or Beasts might perish alone, but that cannot be;
for we having destroyed them, and they having infected us, we perish together
with them (like the Philistims and their banqueting house, Judge. 17, 30
or Sodom and their fruitful plain.) But I know not whence it comes, that
there live scarce so many kinds of Worms, Beasts, and Fowls, as there be
kinds of men, that dye to God, and perish everlastingly, for more perish, then
live for ever. Many are the persons and faces of men, but not so different one
from the other, as are the minds and inclinations of men; which intruth only
make Men; insomuch, considering the defects herein, it is a rare, difficult,
and almost impossible thing, to find a man: For in King Psalm. 14. 3.
David's time, Psalm. 14. there was not one, no not one, and yet for strength
thirty and one Worthies, 2. Sam. 23.
besides Prophets and Priests. But in Salomons time, there was some increase,
or rather one increase, or to speak more properly, an increase of one, Among a
thousand men I have found one; Ecc. 7. 30
one God in Heaven, one Sun in the Firmament, one Phoenix among Birds, one
perfect man among all.

2 There be four things whereby a man is declared a perfect man: First,
Wisdom, whereby he teaches himself and others. Secondly, Government,
whereby he rules himself and others. Thirdly, Frugality and Labor, whereby
he provides for himself and others. Fourthly, Liberality, and Mercy, whereby
he feeds himself and others: All these make a perfect man, and without
them, our perfection is imperfection and lamenesse: And all these were in
Solomon, a Type of the mirror of perfection, Jesus Christ. First, he was wiser
then all his predecessors, and taught himself and others, as appears by his
writings: Secondly, he was of excellent government, for he was the King of
peace, or a peaceable King. Thirdly, his frugality, in laying up grain,
feeding and breeding of Cattle, and building of houses, for himself and other,
was great, yea he made gold and Silver like stones in Jerusalem Fourthly, 1
Reg. 10, 27.
and lastly, he was libera^ and merciful, for he was the first that observed,
as riches increase so are they increased that eat them for his servants were
many thousands, and at one Sacrifice. 2. Chro 8, 9. he offered a thousand
Cattle Out of this practice of Solomon, h^ delivers all these in my Text unto
other, first expressed in his own person. First, his Wisdom, while he
advises, Be diligent to know the state of thy flock, etc. Secondly, h^^
Government, while he says, The riches endure not always, nor the Crown from
generation to gener^tion; intimating he had tasted (...) Crown and riches.
Thirdly, h^^ Frugality and Labor, The hay di^couereth it self, and the grass
appears, and the herbs of the mountains are to be gathered: Namely, for
the use and fodder of men and Beasts: and because money and garments are also
the beauty and spirit of a family, especially if they be well gotten; he
teaches how to obtain them, while he says, The Lambs are for thy clothing,
and the Goats a price of the field, (Viz.) to get by sale and exchange of
them, Money, for other commodities. Lastly, his liberality and mercy, in
housekeeping, and let the milk of thy Goats be sufficient for the food of
thy family, and the sustenance of thy Maids.

The first thing is Wisdom, observed in Solomon by Collection, because out of
the fullness of his Wisdom, he gives Counsel for other: a note, which I
here note, not out of one word only of my Text, but out of all of them
together, and I trust not out of order, or curiosity of nicety, but naturally,
as the scope of my Text gives me occasion, considering my Preface* and
therefore I will speak of it at this time in my visitation of this place,
after many years absence, that although you need it not in regard of your
continued instruction, yet I will endeavor (that I may be remembered when I am
gone) to help forward your Faith and Wisdom both together, wherein the
bounds that I will walk, shall be Truth; my matter, Plainness; and my Method,
Brevity.

3 Solomon is therefore wise, because he teaches and gives Counsel of all
things, from the Court and Crown, to the Cart; from the Master to the
Servant, from the Cofer full of Gold, to the Barn full of Hay; from the
Family full of Men and Maid-seruantes, to the Field and Commons, stored with
Cattle and Flocks: him and his Wisdom, let us not only admire, but imitate:
for they do not only win the Game, which strike the white mark, but also they
that shoot near the pin: and we also shall win by endeavor (although we
miss and fail to hit aright) if we strive to draw nere in assurance of Faith.
Heb. 20. 22*
Be wise therefore that you may be men (Christ says) As Serpents, Mat. 10, 16
I say as Solomon, to teach your selves and other, for Serpents are wise in
danger, unto which our Savior alludeth, That we should be wise in and against
persecution, but the storms of tirany are past, and the bands of danger to our
profession are broken, The snare is broken, and we are delivered. Be
therefore wise as Solomon, in the Port, in the Harbor, in your peace, in your
prosperity. Every man takes himself to be wise, and therefore every man (as a
Physician) gives Counsel to other when he is well, and is not able to heal
or advise himself in evil. The highest piece and part of Wisdom is, to
Counsel our selves, not others. Solomon never failed in teaching others, for
that is easy, but in teaching himself, and distinguishing Vice and Virtue
assunder, when it came to practice, there he failed. Solomon has many
disciples in his defection, not in his perfection, for they are provided for
all but themselves.

He therefore that will be wise, and give Counsel to other, whether to King
and Superior, or to Servant and Inferior, let him first inform himself, for
the wise man is a worthy and excellent Master, also a dexterious, and
industrious Scholar: How can he teach other that teaches not himself? And
there is no greater fool in the world, then he which is not provided for his
last day, for his farewell to the world, and last estate. His soul is his
chiefest care, his greatest price, his honorable charge, and his endless
hope; he which is wise for his soul, cannot be a fool in other things,
although he know them not, for they belong not unto him as the essential
Office of his life, but accidentally, and at pleasure, to know or not to know
them. For this cause, or for the souls sake, the wiseman inricheth his mind, by
all that ever he hears, sees, or that comes under sense or fancy, by
observing things present, by recording and calling to mind things past and
absent, by foreseeing the ends and events of things to come; whereby diligence
makes him like a Prophet for another life, for another world. Wisdom makes
him give precepts of life, by comparing things passed, with things present, and
judgment so preuenteth future dangers, that he is never at a loss, even for
the things he misseth, but he is still the wiser by defaults and defectes, and
like a wise and artificial Arithmetician, by a false number finds a true,
and by a wrong way discovers the right. His eyes are like man and wife, or
like David's host, some went to fight against the enemy, and some stayed to
keep the stuff and carriage: no more do they wander, both from home
together, one still keeps house, as one Pigeon still sits on the Eggs. So
the food wherewithal it is sped abroad, is not decrely bought by the death and
danger of the young ones at home. If he buy wit, he makes much of it; to
keep it, to value it, to occupy it, that he may have the Treasure of
knowledge, his Counsels the infallible Oracles of certainty, though no medler,
yet seeing into every man's business, and yet best experienced in his own. For
he knows, He that is wise shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament,
Dan. 12. 3.
and he that turns many unto righteousness, as the Stars for evermore. Here
is wisdom; namely, to shine, and here is the fruit of Wisdom, to convert
others, and I may say of such a man, as it is in the Psalm, Who is wise that
he may observe these Psa. 107. 43
things, for he shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord. O happy man,
which is such an obseruer! more happy, then by observing times of sowing, and
season of reaping; yea, then Rules of policy, Precepts of Art, course of the
skies, Lord or Lady, Master or Mistress: yet most happy, because he shall see,
hear, and know, the loving kindness of the Lord. Here is the end of
Wisdom, to enjoy his loving kindness, to know his will, to have his Wages, to
work in his Vineyard, to receive his penny, to keep his Sheep, to enjoy his
Rachell, to hear his word, to possess his promises, to live in his fear, and
to die in his favor.

4. Now, for the attaining of this Wisdom, to counsel and teach our selves
and others, we must (as the Husbandman) carry our seed abroad, out of the
Barn into the field, and as he for his increase, does (as it were) crave
help of the Earth, of the Ox, of the Plough, of the Sun, of the Rain; yea,
of the Marle and compass, things strange to the seed: so must we seek
this wisdom abroad out of our selves, in holy and divine books, as in a
field; craving help of the laborious and diligent Pastor, of the assiduous
and daily reading, and Prayer; of the powerful illumination of the Holy Ghost,
and of the hopeful event, success, and perpetuity of our diligence. For our
way to heaven is by compass, as the Israelites came into Canaan out of Egypt,
and the Lord does exercise us by windings and turnings, and going out of the
nighest way, to humble us; for he could bring us a nearer way to heaven, to
teach us to value and prize our calling at a higher estimate and rate: for if
the heathen could observe, that earthly knowledge was sold for sweat, much
more worth is Heavenly wisdom, even water and blood, which our Savior
endured for our sakes, before we could be converted. Turn therefore your eyes
to all things, to gather this wisdom, not only to Heaven, but to Earth, to
Men, to Beasts, to hell, to seas, to all. For a Heavenly knowledge of earthly
things, will help to Heaven, and an earthly knowledge of heavenly things,
will send to hell. He that will first see the Sun when it arises, must not
(like common fools) set his face to the East, expecting her body, but
contrary, let him sasten or roll his eyes Westward, upon the tops of hills
and Trees, where he shall see her shining, before her self; and that is as
much light, comfort, and assurance, as if he saw her self; even so, if we
turn our eyes from the inscrutable, and unsearchable Majesty of the eternal
Trinity, and look upon the radiant beams thereof, shining upon the
creatures, we shall sooner see, both the beginning and ending of our wisdom,
then by dazzling our weak sight and judgment, against the impenetrable body of
his infinite goodness, which yet in due time we shall behold, if in the mean
season we remain contented and studious, in his word, works, and creatures.
Saint Basil to stir up the Christians of his time, De gentib. scriptor.
unto an earnest and laborious searching after this Divine Wisdom, by
familiar comparisons shows, that even in nature it shines, and in the works
or writings of men, we must also look for the same. For (says he) even as
Dyers in their tincture of Purple, first set a Gloss by some flowers, or other
Artificial invention upon their wool, and then after it has bin well dipped,
and as it were stained and altered by that first color, (which yet is not the
same wherewithal, and whereinto it is to be changed) then they cast into it
the Purple or Scarlet, which does work the more easily and effectually upon
the substance to be changed and died; even so, they which will seek and find
this perfect purple and Scarlet of divine wisdom, must first seek it in the
tincture of Nature, of humane Inventions, and Principles of reason, that
thereby the Divine Oracles, may more easily bring them to a perfect conformity
with Jesus Christ, their Heavenly Wisdom. And whereas it might be objected,
that it is supersluous to seek for these things, which we must forsake,
because they cannot continue, when the better is come, even as John Baptist
gives place to Christ, and the shadows of the Law, to the substance of the
Gospel: The said Father answers it by another comparison, that although the
fruit be the end of the Tree, without which it were good for nothing but
burning, yet Est aliqua gloria frondium, there is some glory and comely use of
the very leaves, which show the life of the Tree, before the fruit buddeth,
and also covers the fruit in the tenderness thereof, against the violence of
storm and tempest: even so, human Learning, although it (fail like the
leaves that fall) has glory and comeliness in it, and gives much help,
Honor and Grace to this Divine wisdom.

5 Where first of all, I cannot but tax and reprove them, who having wit,
youth, time, health, and other helps, for their better and more easy
accomplishment of this excellent quality (if I may so term it) of Wisdom,
yet sit down and spend out their miserable days in vain pleasures, which
cost them more dear, and most of all in the end. I read of a certain Abbot,
who busying himself in building, and other worldly occupations, was reproved
by his fool in this manner: o stulte quid facis, quid te in huiusmodi
negotijs, etc. O fool (said he) what do thou? Why art thou so troubled with
these laborious affairs? Sit still fool, sit still, with thy good cheer in
thy Parlour, and thy Whore in thy Bedchamber, and Sie seruias Deo quiet, and
so serve God in quietness. This fool, has the most part of voluptuous
persons to follow his Counsel; for besides their bellies and their lusts, they
have no study, care, or travail (and that which is worst of all) they live in
an outward service of God, without remorse of conscience for their vanity, and
think they serve God very sufficiently and quietly; whereas God calls to
them every day, in that renewed reproof of the wicked man in the Parable, who
Bid his soul take his ease, Thou fool this night God will fetch away thy
soul from thee. You fools, which though neuor so Nobly borne and bred, nor
never so richly provided for, with Lands, liuely-hood, and revenues, what
mean you to spend that most precious time, and wast the means of youth, in
Hauks, Hounds, Edifices, Buildings, Horses, Banquettinges, and such like; yea,
even in labors, and toyling at Cart and Plough, Shop or Sea, without respect
of heaven, or heavenly wisdom, because you want nothing: I tell you, this
year, this month, this week, this day, or peradventure this night they will
fetch away your soul from you, oh then one drop or dram of heavenly Grace
and Wisdom, is worth a whole world of honor, wealth, ease, and pleasure,
wherein you have wallowed, and destroyed your selves.

6 But seeing this world is full of Fools, which do not only come short of
Solomon, but plainly reprove him, and such as urge his example, I mean our
Theological fools; Fools in Divinity, who like the Jews to whom Caiaphas
prophesied, understand nothing, and like the rabble in the Acts, know not
wherefore they are come together, no not in their very Sacred and holiest
assemblies; I tell you the host of these Fools are so great, that one wise
man cannot direct them, and you had need to pray, that as the generation of
Fools, (are in Divine matters many) so the seed of the righteous (to conduct)
might also be many. There want laborers in this harvest, O Lord send them
forth, to turn the disobedient to the wisdom of the just. They have a
story in Denmark, that one Craca a Queen of that Country, having three
sons, whom in her natural affection she much loved, and desired to promote:
and especially one amongst the rest, named Ericus. She being given to Magic,
made by the confection of three Serpents, a strange mess of Broth, whereof
none of her sons would taste, save only this Ericus, who eating thereof, his
Mother procured him the Kingdom, and he was afterward called Ericus disertus;
that is, Ericus the Wise. We cannot, I cannot make any such confection for you,
there are many sick for this broth, but what need we go to the Devil for a
Medicine to procure Wisdom? There is Balm in Gilead, there is a Physician in
Israel, there is a Prophet in Judah, there are means sufficient in the Lords
holy word, or else Solomon would never have said. Let him that is simple and
destitute of understanding, come and eat of my meat, Prou. 9, 4.
and drink of my Wine that I have drawn. Every man is become so wise in the
Lords matters that he can teach others, but when death and danger comes upon
him, even then his resolution (like Ice and Snow) melts away, and he is then
to seek of his souls estate. Alas, must fools become teachers of the wise?
Or guides of as very Ingrams as themselves? Or shall the horse teach the rider?
The Ox the Husbandman to Plough? Or the Sow the good wife to spinne? No
verily, this is exorbitant; even so is it for Masters and Parents, and aged
Persons, who will be guiding their Servants, Children or youngers, and yet have
never learned Salomons conclusion and end of all things, Eccl. 12, 13
Fear God, and keep his Commandment, for that shall bring a man peace at
the last.

7 Thus have I discourced of Wisdom, and the benefits thereof, whereunto I
will add but this one complaint, that all wants and defects be sensible, and
their presence doleful to them that feel them, only the want of heavenly
wisdom is not perceived, is not lamented. If a man's Land, or possession, or
leaf be in any danger, presently he repaireth to a Lawier, to declare his
case, either of offense or defense, to secure his own: and worthily, for
wherefore was Law made? Or how shall Justice be honored, except the estates of
men in the differences and controversies of the world, may be thereby
established? If the body be any ways heavy or distempered, we instantly post
for a Physician, to the end, that Maladies prevented in time, may more easily
be avoided, and health preserved; and we do well herein, for God has not made
us for sickness, but for health, and he which placed us in a Paradise, did
signify thereby, that we could not brook a Desert, and what Paradise have
we now left, except our health? Or what Desert is so intolerable as
sickness? Wherein many are forsaken of their friends, and forget their dearest
self. Nay, if our Horse or Ox be but a little ill, and forsake their meat,
we send for a Leach, to the end that it may be helped: but if our soul,
sick of sin and folly, forsake the wholesome food thereof, tarry at home,
forbear the church and Sermons, despise grace and Heavenly wisdom, we are so
wise in our own conceits, that feeling no smart or pain, we care not to be
cured, but like mad men, break our bands, and set light by our best
Physicians, o therefore, I pray God open our eyes, that our souls be not in
worse case then our Oxen and Asses! they fall and are sick, and find some to
help them up, and ease them; we fall and are sick, and find none to help us
up, but like wanton Children, we lie still, and cry against them that would
relieve us. This is folly, this is an evil to be abandoned, and whosoever is
but a mean Christian, as he blesses the hand that feeds him with bread, so
let him bless the hand that feeds him with knowledge.

8 But for the more detestation of spiritual folly, give me leave to argue
against it, and disprove it to your consciences, that this rusticke
sottishness and soliditie, or foolish simplicity in Divine affairs which
concern the soul, may be abandoned; for surely such an one is Salomons
fool: and if our Savior Christ say that he is danger of Hell fire, which
says, thou fool, how much more is he worthy and likely to go to hell, that is
a fool, then he that calls a fool. For certainly, if the wrong to be so
termed, when one is not, be so inexpiable, as that it holds the slaunderer
in danger of eternal torment, what is not he worthy of, that makes himself
so? It is but the action on of the case to be so named, but to be so, is real;
and therefore suffers and yields greater damage. Hearken therefore unto me,
and I will set before you a row of fools recorded in assured stories, whom
every man in the Letter derideth, and loves in the figure; that is, misliketh
and scorneth this folly in other, but loves in himself.

9 Who is more odious in scripture then Esau, Genesis 25, 32, 33.
who to satisfy his present hunger (after his hunting pleasure) sold his own
Birthright for a mess of pottage; this shall be our first fool, whom all
know, and none pity; for if an action demonstrate a fool, surely he
deserves one of the first places. This man God hated, even for this action,
and who dare love him? there was never yet any that showed him any pity, no
not his Father, nor Rebecca his Mother, and him therefore do all other hate.
But tell me, why is he alone thus hated for selling an earthly Patrimony for
so small a price? When as there be many more among us, which sell Heaven for
less. So do all the profane, impatient of poverty, willing to give themselves
to the Devil for riches, and not only out of any want, as Esau had, but out of
pride, that being Seruingmen and Yeomen, they might be Gentlemen; of Gentlemen
they might be Knights; of Knights they might be Lords; of Lords they might
be Kings; out of ambitious thoghts, they are transported beyond those ways
which the Angels watch, whereby they take the Devil at his word, and for
less then the world (which the Son of God refused) they fall down and
worship him; no want, or hunger, or pain causing them, but only licentious
liberty, and wanto^ cares, forcing them forward to fulfill their temptations,
which being acted, they receive not one half so much good by this sin, as
Esau did by his pottage.

10 We will leave Esau and the folly of the profane, who contrary to the
wisdom of Solomon, Devour holy things, and so we will come to a second
fool, and that was a covetous fool, Nabal When David and his men had done him
favors in the wild and wide fields, at last, he sent unto him for a
recompense, and yet it was not a demand of any desert, but an entreaty for some
necessary victuals for himself and his troop; which thing the fool did not
only deny, but to his perrill, and the perrill of all his family, reproached
David and his followers, for Runnagates. And if his wife had not been wiser
then himself, it had not failed, but that their blood had all been that day
shed upon the ground. Here was his folly, that would stand for a little, to
endaunger all; to save one horse-load of Raisins, and Bread, and Wine, would
bring himself in hazard to loose the whole store in his Barn, in his house,
in his seller, besides the life of himself, and his Family. This fool we
also hate and deride, who was so penny-wise, and so pound-foolish. But are not
many of Nabals haters, Nabals followers? Many of his Scorners, his Disciples?
Yes verily, for the very same men, to save their wealth together, deny not
only to David; that is, to men in want, that which should be the fruit and
work of mercy, but unto the Church, the Lords Ministers, their poor and just
deserved portions, pensions, and Tithes; whereby their private cofers (being
not sanctified unto holyvses) are for a while stuffed with the poor
Church-mens liuinges, (like Bladders with wind) and then comes the Lord with
one little prick, and lets all the whole store fly away from their
posterity.

A Reverend Bishop in our nation, Doctor Babington L. Bishop of Worcester upon
Exodus.
has left recorded in writing, this History; that a certain Gentleman,
offered to the Parson for his Tith-wooll, a fleece or two, whereas in truth his
due was to pay more: the Parson (being a Layman) brought the Tyth-wooll to the
Church, and showed it to the Neighbors, desiring them to witness, by the view
of that Fleece, whether he had justly Tythed his Wool or no: which all that
saw, witnessed that he had very falsely dealt therein; then the Parson refused
to take it: whereat the Gentleman grew furious, seeing himself so justly
shamed before all the Neighbors, and in his rage, swore or vowed, that he
would never give him one lock more, although it cost him never so dear. Thus
he rested, and the Parson also forbear his farther vexation; but almighty God
did not forget this false and furious Gentleman, for he sent a consumption
into his wealth, and brought him in short time to such poverty, that he was
content to take Dole or Alms amongst the poor people, which were relieved at
the Funeral of the said Parson. Remember this I beseech you, and never forget
this folly, neither grow rich by unmercifulness or falshoode: for what you
think to save in the Acre, you shall loose in the Field, or what you gain in
the yard, shall be again taken from you in the whole piece; remembering always
the Country Proverb, Covetousness brings nothing home. And so we take our
leave of Nabal.

11 In the next place comes the proud fool Rehoboam, (saving the honor due
unto Kings) so we will be bold to style him, although he were King Salomons
son. His folly was, that when people came unto him, and desired a release of
his Fathers impositions (which thing the Elders of Israel persuaded him unto)
by one proud and scornful answer, following the Counsel of his young
Minions and Play-fellowes, he lost ten Tribes; that is, ten parts of David's
Kingdom at once, and left himself only but two. Here is a fool indeed, for
it is impossible for a proud man to be wise, and Princes cannot hold their
Subjects so fast tied in allegiance unto them with blood and terror, as they
may do with compassion and blandishing words; Courtesy being a great Jewel in
a Princes crown; Compassion the handle, Justice the edge, and Mercy the point
of a Kings sword. But dyed Rehoboam childlesse? and has he no suruiuors in his
State? I will not meddle with kings, nor Lords, or great persons, but let us
come to our selves, and such as are our equals. Austen the Monk, (whom the
Papists call the English-mens Apostle) lost all the British Monks by his
pride: Beda.
so we, like Austen, loose our Friends, our Servants, our Neighbors hearts, by
our Lordlike and proud behavior; we care not whom we devour, upon who^ we
tread, so we may rise; some by slanders, some by fury, some by folly and truth
not to be revealed, fill the world with contentions, rending the Wife from the
Husband, the Husband from the wife; the Father from the Son, the Son from
the Father; the Lord and Master from the Servant, and the Servant from the
Lord and Master, the Land-lorde from the Tenant, and the Tenant from the
Landlord: that there is not so much love and good will left in the Country, as
was betwixt Balaam and his Ass, when he did beat him. I will speak plainly;
Some like Rehoboam speak proudly; others (like the rebellious Israelites) take
it as peeuishly, they will have as little charity in their ears, as other have
in their tongues, a word and a blow, friendship is no heavier then a feather,
which every blast of wind tosseth too and fro. The loss of sixepence will
cause a suit, the gain of a shilling will make a Traitor, and they are more
ready to follow a Crown of Gold, then an Angel of Heaven All their varnishing
is outward; they are like Giants pictures, terrifying the beholders, and if
they have not power to be cruel enough in their own persons, of their own
estate, then they fly to the mightier, and incense them, abusing good Natures
by false tales, and force them, instead of milk, to draw blood from their
Inferiors, and so they make themselves fools, for they live without credit,
and die without pity; saving, It is pity they die no sooner.

12 Yet behold more fools then these: And now, we bring in the man in the
Gospel, who in presumption of long life, destroyed his Barnes, and builded
greater, and bad his soul take his ease, eat drink, and take pastime, Luke 12,
20
for it had much goods laid up for many years: Ah fool (said God) this
night they will fetch away thy soul from thee. And worthily and rightly is he a
Fool, whom God calls a fool, for his judgment cannot be deceived, his
insight into man's heart is so perfect, that it cannot err: for he has
anatomized and dissected more; then all the Physicians that ever have been.
But who does so now adays? Who blesses himself in his riches? Seeks them,
but to spend them; spends them, but on himself; keeps, but for his
pleasure; and makes account to live many years? I will tell you who: he that
will not give, because he cannot tell what he shall want before he die: For,
although Almighty God have dealt never so liberally with him, giving many
houses, and much money, that was borne to none; the sixth part whereof, could
have satisfied him, before he had it; now he will not trust his bounty any
more, but out of his own provident wretchedness, be unmerciful to other, for
fear of want, while they wallow in all surfeit and abundance. Again, they are
such fools, who never cease travailing and laboring, all for their living, as
if they had at the least a lease of a thousand years for their life, dealing
with their souls, as Hackney men with their horses, giving them no rest till
they be dead; And then, such souls cannot rest, because if their bodies give
them so little rest while they be in them, (who yet have great occasion to
honor them) the devils, into whose power the souls of such men do pass,
will show them much less favor, having no other joy, but to afflict and
torment the souls that themselves have beguiled: For if the old Bird be
unkind to her young one, it must look for less favor in the Tallant of the
Hawks. Therefore, never gather or keep, in hope of long life (but only to
obey Gods commandment, who bids thee labor) for as the shadow runs
from him that follows it, so does long life from him that hops after it.
Life (says Ioh) is given to him that desires to dye. And so we leave these
fools, praying God for them, that they may learn to unmber their days, and
apply their hearts to Wisdom.

13 We read of another generation of Spiritual fools in the Gospel (called
Pharisees) and them our Savior called Fools; Mat. 15, 23
Blind, and leaders of the blind, because they were in nothing so wise, as to
beguile themselves, and by observation of their own Traditions, they made the
Law of God of no effect, avoiding (by corrupt and Haereticall Glosses) the
plainest Text of Gods holy word, such as our Savior in those two Chapters
alleges: how wise also, are many rus set and Rusticke persous, to avoid
every one of Gods Laws, having knowledge in nothing but to defend their sins.
Tell them of swearing, they say, the Law respects judgment; Of the Sabbath,
they say, play is not forbidden, but labor; Of coveting house and land, they
say, to desire to buy, is not to covet; and so they condemn God, and justify
Ahab. Sometime they allege, that the Gospel is for the Church of Rome;
sometime, the Brownists at Amsterdam: sometime, they snatch at Gods mercy, when
their own sins are taxed, and refuse his lustice; sometime again, Gods
justice, when they would have their enemies plagued, and disclaim mercy.
Thus, they dare not deny the Scriptures, yet they will not confess them, but
in their own sense. They make no reckoning of Prayer, except in the Church,
and there they are superstitious, and a Holy day is more then a Saboth: If they
be inclined to superstitious fasting, they have Text for that: If to profane
eating and drinking, they have another for that. The pride of women's Garments,
in Esaias and S. Peter, was il in those times, but now (they say) it is good, (so
the holy Ghost was blind, and saw not what should suite with our times.) The
deceitfulness of Merchants, and oppression of rich men, spoken against by
Esaias, Ezechiel, and Michah, was for the Tyrians and the Jews, but all our
honest Merchants are exempted, if once we have delivered our wares, and
received our money and security; and to conclude, twenty deceits in Wares, in
writings, in words, are a far less sin, then to miss payment of a little
money at the day, although it come on the Morrow. But I will leave these
Fools, Which strain at Gnats, and swallow Camels, praying God, that his word
may be our Wisdom, and our minds be subject to his direction.

14 Now we will leave the scriptures, and descend to the human Chroniclers of
Fools; and first, we will show you the stories of such follies, as have been
more general, and then them that were more special, and by Gods assistaunce,
apply both to our purpose: and let my plainness be excused, because I desire
to be remembered, and to profit.

We read of a certain people, (called Atlantes) who dwelling near the burning
line, Herod. lib. 4 Stobaeus ser. 42. vocat eas Apharants.
are every day scorched by the Suns heat, unto whom it is a Customary
Religion, that so long as they feel and see the Sun, even all the day long
they do nothing else, but with hand and mouth, curse and blaspheme it for so
afflicting them with heat, being angry (iniustly) with that glorious light,
that comforreth all living creatures, because in their own particular, it
gives them offense. These are worthy to be accursed themselves, who for to
do them a pleasure, either would have the Sun to remove from her place, or
to leave shining. Can there be in worldly affairs a greater folly? Have they
no wit, to remove their habitations and seek some other Cires and places of
abode? But to continue in a fruitelesse and bootlesse blasphemy from age to
age, against the high Majesty of God, and his most glorious creature of this
visible world? well, they are Blackamoores, and their bodies are not so black
without, as this folly makes their souls black within. So are these in story,
but how are they resembled in figure? Marry against those Wretches I must apply
it, who for their own particular, would remove the gospel, the health of us
all; the Magistrate, the peace of us all; and Learniing, the light of us all:
because for the gospel, they say other Nations disgrace them, and persecure
them; by the Magistrate, they are sometime punished, and forced to right
against their will: by Learning, they are ouertopped in Virtue and honor;
Therefore they are weary of the Gospel, as the Girsites were of Christ; they
rail on the Magistrate, because they may not be protected in their wrong; and
they would pull down Learning, Colleges, Byshopprickes, Cathedralles, and all
Ecclesiastical dignities, that they may reign alone, and be the only Lords
of Virtue and Vice, leaving no better men in the state, then Merchants,
Faulkners, Hunters, Riders, and poor Carters and Seruing-men, to do their base
Offices.

These are verier Fools then the Atlantes, for beside their vain opinions,
neither Church, nor Magistrate, nor Learning, does them any harm, but much
good: and whereas, the Moors curse that which burns them, and scorcheth them
to blackness, these wretches find fault with those that warm them, and wash
them to whitenes. Whenever therefore, you hear any open their mouths against
any of these, then remember this story, and know, that no pretext of reason
can excuse them, either from madness or solly: For we may not buy our Grace
with other nations, (if we be disgraced) with the loss of the Gospel; neither
will we suffer our Rulers to be despised for the pleasure and partiality of
Malefactious offenders; nor so much as draw the Curtain upon Learning, for the
tender eyes of any ignorant vain men whatsoever; And so Lord, If these men
curse, yet bless thou our church, our King, our State, our Learning, our
People, for evermore.

15 Give me leave yet to lead you along in the spirit, Sab. lib. 4. cap. 9.
as God did Ezechiell, Gel. lib. 6. cap. 11.
and as he said to him, Behold more abominations; Herod. lib. 4
so I to you, Behold more fools. We read of a strange kind of foolish people,
called, Psylli, in Africa, who were of a very low stature of body, but of a
much lower and meaner wit and conceit. For they, having a City much annoyed
by the South-winde, upon a season, espying their opportunity, in a calm and
peaceable weather, armed themselves to go out into the sandy Sea, or
wilderness of sand, to seek this their enemy, the South-winde, and to bid it
battle, hoping utterly to vanquish it, so as it might never more blow upon
them: while they ranged too and fro, to seek this their adversary, suddenly
the Winds arose, and so tossed the sand upon them, that in a short space they
were all swallowed up therewith. These are worthily punnished for their folly
(will every man say) for what can a sharp sword do against the cold wind? No
more, then to cast stones; and what simplicity were it to think, that the
Wind were a living creature, and had either blood or spirit to loose? Or if it
had, that mortal men could meet or match it? Well, out of these sands which
drowned these Psylli people, are arose a generation, almost as foolish as they;
Namely, those which think by carnal means to overcome Spiritual dangers. For,
if the soul have no affinity with Gold, the one being a Corporeal, the
other a Spiritual substance, what is there in Magical inchauntment, as a
Fishes Liver, to drive away a Devil? And Gold to satisfy for men's sins? the
grief of Conscience, cannot be cured by Music, nor carnal Precepts overthrow
our Spiritual foe. Your spiritual dangers are greatest, therefore trust in
the Lord, who is a spirit, and therefore fittest to dispel and conquer them;
but as for King, or Man, or Horse, or Spear, or Spel, or Medicine, they cannot
help the soul against the Lords wrath. It is best to yield our bodies to
Spiritual blastes, and let the mind be compassed about with him, whom Wind
and Seas obey. Honesty external, is a necessary Armor against the malice of
man, yet our Spiritual foe will not fear it, unless it be accompanied with
Prayer and Spiritual Weapons also.

16 Thus have I showed you the more general Fools, now I will proceed
against the more particular and special. And in the first place I will rank
the Hypocrite, which takes but the veil or garment of Religion; letting go
the pithe and Marrow thereof. I may well compare him to that Asinus Cumanus,
Herod. lib. 1 Erasmus.
Ass of Cuma. An Ass finding a Lions skin, to the end to make himself more
terrible to the foolish Citizens, put himself thereinto, and then ietted
fearfully up and down in the same, to the terror of as many of that City
as saw him, every one thinking him (indeed to be a Lion: and when he had held
them a good time in that dreadful opinion, at last, a stranger came that way,
who hearing the general brute of this strange Beast, was desirous to see him,
and at the very first, beholding his ears, knew him to be an Ass in a Lions
skin, and went boldly to him, and before all the multitude plucked off the Lions
skin, and so discovered the Asses practice. This (I know) does very well suite
with an Hypocrite, first because no wise man will be a counterfaite, but only
some shalow-witted person, therefore fitly resembled to an ass, apt to bear both
Gods wrath and Man's: Gods, because he disliketh him that is not so good as he
seems: Man's, because men of this world hate him, that seems to be good,
although he be not. Now, the Lions skin signifies Christ, for he is the Lion
of the Tribe of Judah, in whose garments we are blessed of God, as Jacob was of
Isaac, in the garments of his elder Brother. How glad are some men, if for a
season they can counterfeit godliness, (for that is both our Sauiors coat and
skin) and then they beguile simple people that suspect no fraud, for they
will pray, read, hear, give, praise Virtue, dispraise Vice, and what not? So
as they may get an estimation of piety, to cover their more odious and secret
practices. But GOD shall send a man, a stranger, of more skill and Wisdom, to
pluck the skin over these Hypocrites ears, that all the world may know and
deride this folly, and that they themselves may likewise understand, that
dissembled Religion and Piety shall have her shame in this world, and in the
world to come.

17 Worldly men are also very much troubled with Ignorance, and want of
experience in divine matters, (I mean matters of Conscience) whereof one
Callicon (a notable fool) may give them a taste, Eustathius super odyss.
and in his action apt to be derided, they may take a view of their own faces.
This silly fellow being sleepy, and wanting a Pillow or Bolster to bear up his
head, laid uneath it a Vessel of glass, which being very hard, and not
tolerable to his tender head-peece, he remembered that he had heard that
Feathers make Pillowes soft; whervppon he went and filled it full of Feathers,
and so lay down upon it again, but with no more ease then before. And surely
(no marvel) for except the outside were apt to yield upon any pressure, in
vain was it stuffed with any soft matter. You laugh that hear this, and who
can forbear to deride such a folly upon so little harm. But turn to
your-selues (I beseech you) and tell me, Who has the judgment to procure
quiet sleep to his soul when it is weary? First, out of Nature, we know that
it wants rest, and out of that knowledge we labor to provide it: but what
do we rest our souls head upon? Namely, a hard brittle shining heap of
some worldly pelf, upon which our soul can take no more rest, then the fools
head upon the glass, (for as the Lion delights not in straw, nor the Horse
in flesh, no more does the soul in wealth of Gold and Silver.) Then we hear of
another rest more soft then glass, which is learned or gathered from the
Fowls of Heaven, I mean the Saints, which bring unto us the holy word of
God, that we provide, and misplace it in the the former brittle hard Vessel
of worldly heaps, and so think to sleep more easily upon our former Pillowe,
by reason of the new inward stuffing, but all in vain, for if the bottle be
all hard and fast stopped, we may suck the skin off from our lips, before we
draw the Wine through. Put not new Wine into old Vessels, then says our
Savior, it will be lost, and put the soft Feathers of Divine promises into the
hard pots of carnal minds, and there shall be no more rest then before. But
change the mind, according to that saying; Be ye renewed in your mind, and
then the softnes, sweetness, goodness, and quietness, of heavenly promises,
more weighty then Feathers shall yield eternal rest to our souls.

18 I will omit to speak of vain fear, which takes away the wit of man, the
fears of the wicked, which are causeless and easelesse: declared in the folly
of Phanax the Grecian, who ever feared the fall of the Moon, and did often in
a foolish Prophetically pity, Plutarchus.
lament the destruction of the Ethiopians, upon whom he thought of necessity
the Moon must fall; but let men fear their falling into sin, and with sin
into hell, more then the fall of the Moon upon the earth, or a dear year,
cold Winter, or wet Summer. Again, I might speak against that careless
sottishness, and wilful ignorance of those things, which they daily hear
and see; like to one Amphistides, Suidas.
which would never learn to tell above five, or to know whether his father or
mother bore him in her womb: such surely are those, who will not busy
themselves with Divine numbers, and know not certainly God to be their Father,
or the Church to be their Mother.

I will also omit, to discourse against the folly of profaneness in the souls
fits, wherein carnal persons having been stung in their consciences, by some
guilt of sin presented to their memory, by some Text of Scripture, or other
person guilty and privy to their offense: they cast offal care of divine
sayings and judgment; yea, peradventure make away the person guilty to their
crimes, that he may never stand up in judgment against them. These men are
resembled unto us in that fool, who being in his bed grievously bitten with
fleas, did put out the Candle, to the end they might not see him, Gilbert. li.
1 Narrac.
but his foole-ship was deceived, as afterward he found, when he wanted light
to take them out of his bed. Even so, they which think to procure rest to
their secret bytings, by killing the Witnesses of their crimes, or
extinguishing in them the little care they had of godliness, shall be deceived;
for not only they shall have more plague, but also want help and light to
recover a remedy when they would have it.

19 I will conclude all, with another story, Ide^ lib. eod.
against the preposterous folly of worldly men, who first labor for earthly,
and then for heavenly things. I do read of a Noble man's fool, whose labor was
to bring in wood to the Kitchen: when he came to the pyle, he would always
draw out underneath, upon which the whole pyle lies, and let the uppermost
alone, (which had been more ready) saying, that he would do the hardest
labor first, and then the easiest afterward. And by no means could he be
dissuaded from this course, but would spend more time in pulling out a stick,
then he should have done in carrying in an armefull. So are the Children of
this world, they take the most and first pains for inferior things which lie
undermost, and let the superior and heavenly things, (more easy to willing
minds, which yet press and keep down the worldly things) to be last and
least regarded. I refer my self to your consciences, whether I speak not
true; if true, whether you or he are more foolish. Two parts there are in this
Spiritual folly; the first, that men by giving their first labors to the
world, which is undermost, like the foundation of a Wood-pile, loose much time,
and the world, or wordly blessings, come more hardly unto them. For I must ever
rest in my sweet Saviors saying, Mat. 6, 33.
Seek first the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, and all other
things shall be cast upon you. And heavy things come more easily downward
then upward; therefore the Prophet tells us, (...)
God remembers the Heavens the Heavens the Clouds the Clouds the Earth, and
the Earth the people. So al blessings must first be sought for in heaven, and
then (as Agar) we shall have an Angel to direct us to the Fountain of water on
the earth.

Secondly, another part of this folly is, that we cannot be persuaded with this
fool, but that Heavenly things are more easily accomplished of all sorts,
then earthly: and therefore he which is seven years apprentice to a Trade, and
all little enough; yet an hour in a Church at a Sermon, is loss of time in
Heavenly matters, they may do it much sooner. So one of you, which lives
fifty, sixty, or seauenty years, and all that time labors in, and for the
World, thinks it enough for heaven, to have a Minister, and a few Prayers an
hour or two before his death. These are our cares, and our Articles, upon
these we pass our time, and venture our souls. But (o Fools) How long will
you delight in foolishness, and hate Wisdom! Be wise as Serpents, Esaias.
30. 1
be innocent as Doves. If you be only wise for this world, God will destroy
you. None came to the birth of Christ on earth, but the wise men in the East.
There were more men in the East, but none of them looked up to heaven but
these. It is better, you see, to study on the Stars, then the earth, thereby
we are at least admonished, to lift up our heads, and look for Christ in
heaven, as those wise men did hear on earth. We shall find him, we shall see
him, Heb. 9, 28
for unto them that Look for him, he will appear the second time to
salvation.

You are all the children of wisdom, you must justify her, hearken to her
complaint, Can your hearts forbear rending and yearning to hear her cry so
earnestly, o Fools, how long will ye love foolishness, and scorners delight
in scorning! Prou. 1, 22.
Be you turned at my Correction, I will pour out my mind unto you, and make
you to understand my words. Fear not the loss of any thing, the lack of
that you have she has provided, all, both house, harbor, meat, Wine, only
she wants you, you she calls. Wisdom has builded her house, Prou. 9, 12.
she has hewn out her seven Pillars. She has killed her fatlinges, drawn
her Wine, and made ready her Table. She has sent forth her Maids (Viz:) the
Preachers, crying in the high places (out of the Pulpits) and saying; He that
is simple and destitute of understanding, let him come, let him come and eat
of my meat which I have prepared, and drink of my wine which I have drawn.
For sake your way o ye foolish, and you shall live, and walk in the way of
understanding.

20 So cries Wisdom, and let all her children and friends follow her; yea,
not only them to whom David says; Be you wise, o kings, Psalm. 2, 10.
he you learned you that be Judges of the earth. But every Master, every
Gentleman, every Citizen, every husbandman, every Tradesman, every Labourer,
every Man and Maid-seruant, every Old and young man. Receive instruction and
not Silver, and knowledge rather then Gold. Prou. 8, 10.
Wisdom is more worth then precious Stones, and all pleasures are not to be
compared to her. Strive to gain the time you have lost, Strive (I say) that
you may be rescribed in the number of the wise Virgins, and taken out of the
number of the foolish. We read of one Mycernius, that one told him, (take what
course he could) he should live but six years. The Prince (for so he was)
amazed heereat, plucked up his spirits and said, he would live twelve years,
for he knew how to make twelve of six, and this was his course: he bad all
sleep farewell, and provided such abundance of lights, that whithersoere he
went, or wheresoever he was, it was always as light as day, and so he thought he
lived twelve years, because he waked in light, when others sleep in
darkness, which is a kind of death, one half of our life being always cut
off or spent in sleep. Oh that we had so much wit and power to double our
days we have to live, and that the lights of wisdom might never be quenched
in our presence, but shine about us, and in us whether soever we go, so shall
our day excel Iosuahs day, and we walk in the day wherein no man stumbleth.
Beloved, While you have the light, walk in the light, and the God of lights
and peace fill you full, and bring every one of you out of darkness, and the
shadow of death, into the light of Grace and Glory, guiding your feet into the
way of peace, Amen.

The second Sermon.
THus did I discourse of Wisdom and the wise man in my first Sermon, which
was a necessary circumstance in my Text, giving precepts to all. Now it
follows, that we handle his words, and look into the Marrow of his
prouerbiall Doctrine, wherein he first instructs, Be diligent, and take
heed. Secondly, he directs, to thy flock, to thy herds, that is; to al thy
state, calling, dealing; private, common, every where. Or by the Flock you may
understand our goods enclosed within house or hedge, by the Heard, those things
that are more common and wild abroad, for the wealth of those times consisted
in Flocks and Herds. This his instruction he inlargeth by reason. Secondly
by parts. Thirdly, by use. First, the reason, why we must look to our goods
and charge is one, and that a mighty and weighty one. For riches endure not
always, nor the Crown of Kings to all their generations. Secondly, the parts
of the charge, are the several possessions. First, the Hay, that must be
mowed. Secondly, the Grass, that must be eaten by Cattle, and not trodden
under foot. Thirdly, the herbs of the Mountain, they must be gathered;
that is, Grain and Corn of the Mountains for Meat, Medicine, and Ornament.
Fourthly, the Lambs, they must be shorn or clipped, that out of their fleeces
we may fetch garments and clothing. Fifthly, the Goats, that they may be sold,
and bring in money for other uses external, for the saying is wise and true in
Columella. Oportet patrem familias esse vendacem non emacem, The householder
must sell, and not buy, if he will be rich. Lastly, the uses of his
instruction, and all these parts of wealth, Verse 27. which is for the keeping
of a good house, when he says, And let the Milk of thy Goats be sufficient
for the food of thy family and the sustenance of thy maids That is, feed thy
servants, but not delicately, for so he will prove thy equal, if not thy
Master, yet sufficiently, and that out of thine own store, buy nothing for
him, neither for thy Maidens, but that they may better look to thy Goats and
Cattle, let them live upon their Milk, that so they may learn by thy example
to be alike thrifty in time to come: but if once they find thee loose, and
give them boord-wages, they will be negligent in their charges, and bring ruin
to thy estate.

2. [ Be diligent.] That is, as if Solomon had said, in all the ways of thy
life, be laborious and painful; whatsoever passes through thy hands, do it
not by halues, and slightly, but let it still bear the stamp of thy
diligence, And if there be any thing to be done, which is not fit for thy
place, or passing thy skill, yet let thy eyes behold the doing thereof; It is a
virtue (and no shame) to be present at all thy affairs. Diligence is the
Mother, and negligence the Stepmother of human life. By diligence they are
hatched and increased, by negligence they are destroyed and diminished. If we
look up to Divine and Heavenly things, diligence is exemplified, Mat. 18, 10
For the Angels stand always before God; if to the Precepts of the Law and word
of God: Deuteronomy 6, 7.
Thou shall keep diligently the Precepts, Commandments, and Testimonies of
the Lord thy God. If a case come into Judgment (because the Judge has but
one power to do a thing once only, whether good or ill) and because every
sentence of a Judge, is the sentence of God, therefore it must also be done
with diligent inquisition. When a leprous man was brought before the Priests,
Deuteronomy 17, 4.
the Lord commanded diligent inquiry first to be made, and then every man was
bound to rest in the opinion of the Priest. (...)* 58*
When the poor woman in the Gospel had lost her Groate, She lights her
Candle sweepeth her house, and searches diligently every Corner. Without
diligence we can do nothing. The difficulty and hardness of every work is
made easy and foftned by diligence: Prudence without Justice is naught worth,
Justice without Prudence is worth as little* Knowledge, without Diligence, is
of small use, Diligence with Knowledge is worth very much. The life of man is
like an Iron, which use makes bright, and rest makes rusty: like a Water,
which standing, is quickly corrupted, but running, remains sweet and clear,
like the Pulse, which beating, shows life, but ceasing, brings death.
Therefore out of Salomons precept I will amplify this point three ways.
First, I will show the necessity of Diligence. Secondly, the commendation of it.
Thirdly, the Commodity thereof.

3 Touching the necessity of diligence, it was the ordinance of God to subject
us all to labor, to diligent labor; yea, even to sweat, immediately after our
first parents fall, and I verily think, had they never fallen, yet without
diligence they could not have lived, the necessity of all earthly and human
affairs requiring the same. For by dullness, sluggishnesse, and idleness, our
business, our lives labor is intermitted, omitted, and destroyed; neither the
work of God or man, without use, exercitation and diligence can long stand. Al
is a Talent, and every talent must be used (not dug into the ground) which
cannot be without diligence. Through want of exercise, the Arms of Hercules, of
the strongest, are dulled in the body, and the purest and sharpest wits are
blunted in the mind. We see that the Land missing his Tillage, yields
smaller and worser increase, and that which is often turned, compassed, and
Ploughed, is the surer ground to the Husbandmans content. The Merchant, which
by continued diligence, often cutteth the Seas, is much richer then he that
sits at home, and does little or nothing, after one venture or two. The
Iron, of round is not made flat with one stroke of the Smith, but by often
doubling, and redoubling the same. The Colt cannot be tamed and fitted for the
sadle, by once backing and bitting, but by being every day in the hand of the
rider. When Lot went out of Sodom, he must do it with diligence, for he must
be in Zoar, before the Sun rising, and he nor they in his company must be so
idle or careless, as once to look backward, and so by diligence he and his
Daughters escaped the fire and Brimstone. By diligence also, we escape Hell.
Jacob by his diligent service obtained Rahell, the Star in his eyes, the
Jewel of his heart. By diligent and valiant adventure, did David bring the
200. foreskins of the Philistims, and wan the Kings Daughter. By diligence, and
not without diligence were the five Talents made ten; and he which had so
diligently made and multiplied them, was also made the Ruler of ten Cities. I
can never say enough of the necessity hereof, but this I will say, without
diligence the sins and filth of our lives are increased, and by diligence are
they euacuated; for the sea by ebbing and flowing, by flux, and reflux, by
restless laboring and working, is not corrupted, by all the rivers, carcasses,
and carrions in the world, but still it works them out; so as it is without
infection. Wars nor peace, omit or intermit diligence, for in war it co^serueth
from enemy, it helps to victory; in peace it conserueth from corruption of
manners, and brings in plenty of honor and all things.

4 We read that the Milesians having bin in long civil wars among themselves,
so as their forts and houses were ruined, their catle diminished by daily
rapines, their grain consumed and burned, and the Land wasted, and al for the
principality thereof. To help and redress this misery, the contending
claimers pitying the state of their Country, grew to a parley, and laid down
their swords of Hostility, and condiscended to refer their cause to the
Pareyans their next Neighbors, and so under their common Seal, sent by
Embassage their cause, quarrel, request, and submission, to their censure and
arbitrament. The Pareyans accepted the determination of this business, and
having received a more ample reference from the heads of the several
factions, to bestow the kingdom or principality upon whomsoever them pleased
within the Territory, they came to Miletum, and heard all parties, Pro and
con, what could be said for every man's Title. At last, walking abroad, they
saw the desolations of the whole Island, and no man minding so much as the
Tillage, to procure common food, except one Husbandman, which then had sowed
his land, notwithstanding the fury of the sedition. This man they called, and
before all the claimers, they proclaimed him K. as the worthiest member of his
Country, providing for himself, and the common benefit of other, when all in
a desperate idleness gave themselves to sowing and spilling of blood, he in a
diligent hand of providence, attended the sowing of Corn and grain, for the
filling of his Country with store again. And so all upon a little debate,
yielded to him, and praised the Pareians election. Even so is it with the
diligent, their hand must bear rule, as Justinius of a diligent heard-Boy became
a diligent Soldier; of a diligent Soldier, a great Co^mander; of a Commander,
the Emperor of the world, and one of the best.

5 Hearken therefore unto me my beloved, young men and Brethren, be diligent,
for they that are not in the labors of men, are in the labors of Devils. When
I look up to heaven, I see, and find, that without diligent Prayer, fasting,
reading, meditating, and godly continued conversation to the end, we shall
never come thither; Oh, therefore be diligent, it is for a Crown, it will
quite the pains, it will pay the labor richly. If I look upon the earth, the
Husbandman has four seasons, which observing, he is rewarded with plenty,
and with neglecting, he is clothed with Beggary. Be diligent, for God does
speed the Plough. If I look on learning, and learned men, I find that
diligence makes their nights short, their days long, their diet thin, their
bread course, cording to that of the Poet: Multa tulit fecitque puer sudauit
and alsit
Abstinuit vino and venere qui pythia cantat.


Many and many are the miseries of the Student; sometimes he sweateth;
sometimes, he freezeth; and the songs of his Divine Oracles make him forbear
both drunkenness and wantonness. Be diligent therefore, for so, mean men
have attained Kingdoms; Husbandmen, riches; Scholars, Dignities; and
Merchantes, Honors; and without this diligence, God will not bestow his
blessing. And thus much for the necessity of diligence.

6 The second thing I noted of Diligence, is the praise and Commendation
thereof, for this alone was never dispraised. The Turks dispraise Learning;
some Temperaunce, some Fortitude, some Justice, some Religion, but all commend
Diligence. Solomon is as much commended for his diligence, as for his wisdom,
and when he ceased to be diligent, he also ceased to be wise; and when he
renewed his diligence, and forsook his pleasures, then he recovered his
wisdom. Saint Paul inferior to no man, in praise, in desert, has his
Divine parts commended by his diligence; first, in that he never ceased
warning al men night and day, and served the Lord in watching and Prayer: that
he travailed two thousand Miles, and in all that journey preached the Gospel:
for these his many accidents in his labor, is (as he deserved) commended of
all: 2. Pet. 3, 15.
yea, S. Peter terms him his beloved Brother Paul. Saint Chrysostom in
Ecclesiastical story, is memorable for many excellent parts in him, and
especially for that in his banishment he preached diligently, and converted
many to Christ Jesus. He that tilleth the ground shall have abundance (says
Solomon.) We read of Furius Cresinus (a Roman) who having every year better
Corn then his Neighbors, they called him into judgment for the same,
alleging that by inchauntment and witchcraft he spedde so well, and that by
such secret evil means, he drew away the fat of other men's Land into his
own. The poor man appeared at the day, and brought with him all his Tools of
husbandry; waightye Plow-shares, heavy Mattockes and Spades, full fed Oxen, all
his yrons much bigger and stronger then other men's, and lastly his Daughter, a
strong and mighty young woman, who was his helper in all his Husbandry, and
setting all these before his accusers and Judges, cried out in these words:
Haec sunt Quirites veneficia mea. (o Romans) this Daughter, these Oxen, these
Tools are the Instruments of my Witchcraft, and besides these, I use none, and
these I apply with all diligence: whereat his Judges being moved, absolved him
with commendation. Thus we see, diligence procures abundance in time of
want, and favor in time of judgment: who can sufficiently express or admire
her praises, which makes men so praiseworthy, both in Court and Country.
When all Iewry were asleep at our Saviors birth, who had the warning and
notice thereof from heaven, even the very same night, but the Shepheardes that
kept their Luke 2. 8.
flock by night; commended for nothing but for their diligence, to them did
the Angels of Heaven bring tidings of the Birth of Christ our Savior the
son of David. Lo, another Commendation of diligence, and a greater cannot
be to hear the Angels speak, the heavenly Soldiers sing, and to see before
all earthly men (next to Joseph and Mary) the most blessed Babe that ever was.
Diligence is observed by the heavenly powers, and rewarded with the happy
vision of Jesus Christ.

7 Again, the continual brand of infamy and disgrace, that is set upon the
negligent and sluggish, is no mean praise of diligence and industry, and
therefore wheresoever we read of a sluggard or idle person, even in his
greatness he is taxed for this. Esau, who having been a hunting, came home
hungry, to satisfy his present hunger, sold his Birthright, in his
negligence says S. Austen, Malebat emere quam quaerere cibum, he had rather
set his Birthright packing, then tarry, or go seek meat at an easier rate,
wh^rfore he is branded with the Title of very few: Esau Ihate. Claudius, after
he was Emperor, grew so careless and sluggish, that he minded nothing,
neither what he said, nor to whom, nor among whom he spoke. Ptolomy another
careless King of Egypt, would play at Chesse sitting in Judgment upon men's
lives, whereby many times wrong judgment proceeded out of the Kings
negligence, and the blood of an Innocent was shed, which all the kings of the
world, could not make to live again, or give a satisfaction. Theodosius the
younger was wont to subscribe to all Letters or grauntes that were brought unto
him: to draw him from this carelessness, his Sister Palcheria devised an edict
to be made, whereby he banished his wife whom he loved most dearly. And then
she getting the writing again after the Emperor had signed it, brought it
unto him, blamed him, he denied it, she produced it, and the shame thereof made
him more diligent ever afterward. Thus by negligence are al other Virtues
stained, because diligence gives grace to all. Learn (I beseech you) to be
diligent, and not to break off your diligence in any point; and in all your
actions, join labor and Prayer together: Labor, without Prayer is a
presumption against God; Prayer, without Labor is a temptation of God. Let
Judas Macchabeus witness this for me; before al his batels, he ever prayed,
except two, one against Eupator, and then he was overcome, and lost the field;
the other, against Alcimus and Bacchides, and then he lost his life. Although
his praises were many, for valor and fighting, yet his diligence had not bin
so fortunate, if he had not joined his Prayers to his sword. Be faithful and
diligent in small things, so shall God make you rulers over many, and he which
is negligent in the smallest, shall not be trusted with greater. I cannot
forget, I will not conceal the worthy saying of Bernard. Seruans doctrinam
raro accusabit fortunam, diligentiam cum infortunia raro sociabis, pigritiam
raro separabis. That is, He which keeps good Doctrine, shall sildome accuse
fortune. You shall not seldom join diligence and misfortune together, you
shall as sildom separate misfortune and sluggishnesse: and ^o I end this
second part of the praises of diligence.

8 The third part I propounded to my self, are the commodities of diligence,
which are many, and therefore neither this place, nor this time will not permit
me to set down either all, or those few, so largely, which I will here
describe. First, Almighty God, allureth and draws on men in all kind of life,
by, and for the hope of reward and profit. Noah's Arc, Moses message to
Pharaoh, David's fighting against Goliath, our Savior Christ's passion, and our
profession, have all their several rewards and promises annexed to them, so
has diligence: for it cannot be, that the same virtue which blesses mankind
with so many benefits, but that also it should receive many commodities for
them. First ( Solomon says) The diligent hand shall bear rule; Verily, there
is none of us all, but still retain both an Image of honor, and an aspiring
to Government, for God made not us for servile and base slavery, but to bear
rule over the creatures of the world. By diligence we have already showed how
many Emperors and Kings have been advanced from mean estate, and now I will
add a few more. The Kings of Hungary were derived from Lechus the second, who
was a Husbandman, and by a divine demonstration, taken from the Plough to be
the Virgin-Queenes Husband; in rememberance whereof, he caused his wodden soles
or shoes to be reserved in his Castle for all posterity to remember, how, and
in what sort he came first into the Court. All the world knows that the
Byshoppricke of Metz is one of the greatest of Christendom, the Bishop being a
Sovereign, and a Prince Elector, the seat which Princes and great Lords have
sought after for their sons. We read of one of their woorthiest Bishops
called Centur x. In his Chapel, where none came but the Emperor, and himself,
he caused to be written, Villegese prioris fortunae esto memor, and qui nunc
ses considera.
Villegesus, who was but a Basket-makers son, yet would he have the Badges
of his Fathers occupation to remain in his Palace, as well to make other
studious, whereby they might come to honor, as also to put him in mind of his
mean descent.

9 The Graecians said, Ponos eucleias Pater, Labor was the Father of Honor,
for the blessing of God does so follow it, that many more are made honorable by
diligence, then by Birth, witness all the Romans, who raised their
Commonwealth, and stood not upon terms of blood (although it be honorable)
some of them were fetched from the Plow, some from other mean places; then
Virtues gave Titles, now Titles sell Virtues. Cicero, Fabius, Quintius, and
other, Witness these things. When Demosthenes was asked how he came to that
excellent facility of speaking, so as he led his Auditory to what part he
pleased, being the glory of the Greeks, and an honor to himself, he gave
this answer; that by spending more Oil then Wine, he came to that habit of
perfect speaking; Meaning, that he was in his study, writing and reading by his
Lamp, when other were at the Tavern, or in their banquettes eating and
drinking; soft beds, and much learning are hardly gotten together, good
cheer and painful diligence are sildome matched together, therefore as
Lazarus his sorrows went before his joys, and Dives his joys before his
sorrows, so Humility and Labor go before honor, and Honor abused and taken
before the time, is seconded with shame, misery, and (peradventure) hell.

10 Again, another commodity we receive by labor and diligence, is the
comfort of a good heart, when we must sit down in age, and can work no
longer: for the night of age comes, when we cannot work, and therefore if a
good Conscience be any thing unto us, and we know any thing of our selves,
then may we with Authority reprove the idleness of other, and repeat
(without boasting) with glory and praise our own practice: whereby posterity
and the younger will admire us, and praise us, and Noble Spirits, (whereof
there be some in every age) will by our example be provoked to do the like.
But if we remain in idleness and sluggishnesse, what arises in our minds,
but filthy Lusts, impure thoughts, abominable actions, such as we read were
in the Sodomites. Be not deceived, a little cranny lets the wind into the
house, and a little leake ouer-turneth and drowneth a great Ship; even so, a
little idleness suffers Satan's Wind and Water, to enter into the soul to
the eternal perdition thereof.

11 By all this we may see the commodities of diligence, both as it is in it
own Nature, and as it is also in the contrary. And indeed, we may urge this
second a little further, to the shame of Drones, sluggards, and idle persons;
God does worthily punnish them, so as they are not like to other me^, their
hands and faces spotted or stained like the green sickness, and their bellies
either blown up like Eglons with fat, or (deserved hunger following them)
lanke and flat down like the bladder that is pricked. Nothing runs in their
mind but the Torment of labor, from that they post as fast as Moses from his
rod, when it was turned into a Serpent, crying out against those that provoke
them, as the Devils against our Savior, Why art thou come to torment us before
our time. Yea, labor grieueth them so much, as they watch late, because they
will not put off their clothes, and lie long in bed, because they are loath to
take the pains to put them on again. The sluggard (says Solomon) when he
turns himself, makes a noise like a Cart-wheele: Why? Because he is not
liquored with the Oil of labor and diligence, he is ever murmuring and
complaining: In Summer, he complains of long days, and trifleth them away at
the Market, or at the Alehouse, or at other men's shoppes, or sleeps after
every Meal, or does nothing but ask for news. He is at defiance with his
own house and Lands, so long as there is a meeting or assembly abroad, either
at Bowling, Shooting, Drinking, or other vain occasions; being happy in
nothing so much (to his own conscience) as that such company and occasion
drives his business out of his head. After meat, if pleasure call him not
away, he goes to sleep, and if the Sabbath come, that he must be forced to
his Monthly day, yet shall Prayers be first half done, and the residue he
passes over with desires that they were ended, and like a merry Soldier whom
I knew taken by the enemy, and led from Tree to Tree to be executed, was wont
to say, that when he had escaped one Tree, he thought long till he had also
escaped another.

12 Well, as riches and honor are the end of labor and diligence, so is
poverty the end of idleness, and such a poverty as is less ashamed to steal,
then to beg, for his inward guilt of ungodly liberty takes away from him the
boldness to ask for Gods sake, and bids him be his own Caruer, to want
nothing till he come to the Goal among his fellows. But woe be to them that
bring not up their Children to some honest and diligent labor, they spoil
them in their youth, doing them more harm for want of seven years
Apprentiship, then they do them good by an hundred pound a year Land. For ease
slays the foolish, and the prosperity of fools destroieth them. Woe worth
them also, that get, and gain, and take, and receive from other men's labors,
not giving them good words for their benefitts, nor ever opening their mouth
for their large allowances, either in the Church, or at the Bar, yea, both in
the Church, and at the Bar: sometimes Demosthenes coynancy (not squinancy)
stopping their mouths, as if their throats were sore: sore indeed of a
Pestilence never to be cured. Sometimes, possessed of a dumb and deaf
devil, whom they will not suffer to be cast out, least their Consciences
should rend them at his departure. These are they which give unto Physicians a
groat, unto their Counselors smoke, unto their Flatterers a pound, unto their
Minions and Harlots a talent, unto Divines and Preachers, a halfepeny of
custom.

To conclude, let us all beware of negligence, and not only cry out against
it, as the soldiers did of War in the time of Vitellius, when one had in the
wars slain his own Father, yet did every man continue the wars: and so
while we dislike idleness, we nourish and maintain it; but let the Son of
God be your example, not in his Miracles, but in his labors, that when death
or he calls for you, it may find you working, or praying, or Meditating, or
hearing, or Counselling, or persuading, or resisting evil, or but saying this
will I do, if the Lord Jesus give me life and leave, that the fruits of your
labors, like the coat of Tabitha, may remain when you are dead and gone.

The third Sermon.
YOu have heard in the first Sermon, I taught you to be wise; in the second,
to be diligent; now in the third, I must exhort you to the Christian care of
your own estates and goods; both in their parts, and in their Uses, as they
are comprised in my Text. First, for your Cattle (for good men are merciful to
their Beasts) provide for them Hay and Grass. Secondly, for your selves,
Corn, signified by the herbs of the Mountain, (for in Israel they sow upon
mountains) and Money out of the price of the Goats. Thirdly, for your servants,
meat, and Milk. And lastly, for you and them together, clothing, out of the
fleeces of your flock. And of all these Solomon bids us, Know their states,
and take heed to them. Whether they live with us more familiarly in the house,
or enclosure, or whether they are more foreign and wild, signified under the
name of herds. In this knowledge there are many sweet flowers, may profitable
trees or Plants, and many fair growing seeds. For to speak a little of
knowledge in general; without knowledge, we never have our selves, nor
Almighty God. All are bound to know (except Children) who cannot by their
infancy of years; and natural fools, who cannot by privation of natural
faculties. The knowledge of God, is both the cause of loving and inioying him:
for, How can we love him whom we know not? And how can we have him whom we
love not? The knowledge of God is the beginning of Wisdom, the knowledge of our
selves is the fullness of Charity. If we be ignorant of our selves, that
ignorance begets Pride, if we be ignorant of God, that ignorance draws to
Desperation: for if we know not God, we cannot hope in him; if we know not our
selves, we cannot be humble, and then we cannot be blessed. By the knowledge
of our selves (says Saint Bernard) we Sow in tears, because we feel and
see to our sorrow, the defects of our Nature. By the knowledge of God, we reap
in joy; because, we feel and see, and hear, the plenty and copiousnesse of
his Redemption: therefore let us go forth and carry our seed weeping, that we
may return with our sheaues ioying; and both, for our knowledge, and for our
Humility, neither with the Pharisees, let us boast our selves above others, nor
with the base multitude, be contented to be like others. For, in giving Honor
(says Saint Paul) go one before another; that is, the rule of our Humility,
to wish with Martinus Turonensis, Centur. 11.
that all our Virtues could be concealed. 1 cor. 14 31
And again, Covet the best gifts, there is the rule of knowledge; the best
gifts are the greatest knowledge, and the greatest knowledge, (if it be
sanctified) makes the best men. Difference of knowledge, makes difference of
men; and as David's grace and knowledge preferred him in the sight of God and
Samuel before his Brethren (though he were lower in stature, and they taller and
more personable men:) even so, God delights not in men's legs, or strength,
but in their heart and souls; The Angels are pictured, not great, but full of
wings, and we that are in the last part and end of the world, and therefore
less in our marriage bed, then our Fathers in their Cradle, let us fly about
the world, about our calling, up to Heaven, with the wings of heavenly
knowledge.

2 Solomon therefore commands, to be diligent to know our Herds, and take
heed to our flocks, for they signify but one thing. Whereby he means, that
we should inform our selves, of al our possessions, and not only refer
their care to our Balyffes and Stewards, who many times take more pains to get
our Liueries and Badges, then to do us service and deserts. It is well
observed, that Almighty God has given every man a mind and a state equal,
one fit, or at least fitted for another, and no man is so poor, but his
estate, is big enough to occupy his mind, and set that on work; for a little,
with righteousness, will keep an honest man in action. But if righteousness
be absent, what is then the condition of such a person? Namely, to busy
himself in other men's affairs, to talk of their livings, of their stock, of
their pedigrees, of their sons and daughters, and servants, and of the prizes
of Corn and Merchandise, as if he had ten Characks at sea, when he has
neither Money to buy, nor ware to sell away. This man is never a stranger, but
at home; knows every man, but himself; sums up all men's reckoninges, but
his own; is eeuen with all accounts, till he leave himself, even nothing.
From the root of this vanity, arises the idle humor of seeking after news,
in Italy, Spain, France, Turkey, Morocco, or the Low Countries, and wanting
good matter, he coyneth some of his own; then he posteth to one Lord or Lady,
or other great person, (but of mean intelligence) and there he venteth the
wind in his brain. Such is the nature of man's mind (my beloved) as is the
Nature of good ground, if you Till and Sow it, will it not bring forth good
fruits? But if you Till it not, and let it alone unoccupied, will it not bring
forth weeds or Grass? Even so, our minds sowed with knowledge of good
discipline, yields a happy harvest of honest faculties; but let alone, and
not filled with some better matter, becomes stuffed with the wind of vain
humors, lying Tales, credulous lies, and unprofitable discourse. From hence
also it comes, that men have leisure to sow debate, by immagining faults,
where none are, and discovering imperfections and follies of other men, which
lying hid in secret, were better buriand forgotten, then remembered. For what
comes of it, but shame to our Countrymen, contentions in the Law, troubling
of the seats of Judgment, hatred and division among honest families,
exhausting of Treasure, and setting the soul either wide open (by malice) to
the devil, or closed up, by shaking off grace and shame. This is the fruit of
them that are ignorant of their own estates, and yet be turbulent discerners
of other men; and the best is, the world pays them well again. For, if they
have as many Masters, as they have hearers, every one pays him with hatred,
reuilings, and reproaches; so as he labors without fruit, Sowing the
wind, and reaping the Whirlwind, discovers, without thanks; speaks,
without credit; eats, without welcome; lives, without reputation or love;
dies, without tears or pity; saving, it is pity such wretches tread upon
Gods dear earth.

2 But you (beloved) which either hear this, or hear of this, bind and
buckle your selves to knowledge, if it were possible, of every thing, Art,
Trade, and Occupation; but especially, of your estates, without which, a
Christian is unlike to God, and shameth his profession, which crediteth other
men, where only he should believe himself. You have but two things in your
estate to look into, your souls, and your Temporalties: do in the one as you
do in the other. I read of one Pomponianus a Mantuan, that he was in secret
accused for denying the soul, and at last (as all secret faults shall be
renealed) it came into the light, and he was called into Judgment for it. His
Judges demanded of him, whether he did believe he had a soul or no; he
answered Negatiuely, he did not: whereat his enemies and accusers rejoiced,
his grave Judges reproved him sharply, and gave sentence upon him. The
Prisoner meruailed, and told them they were too hasty, for (said he) do you
believe you have souls? Yea, said they al, and accurse them that do not. But
said he, do you no more then believe it: said they, that is sufficient: then
says he, Non credosed scio. I do not only believe it as a thing absent; but, I
know I have a soul, and faith, gives place to knowledge. So my beloved, do
not only believe you have Leases, and Lands, and Friends, and Cattle, and
goods, and Souls, but know it: it is better to know, then to believe it.
Heavenly things I must believe, till I may know, but earthly things I must
know, or else I cannot believe. I will love my Servant for his obedience, but
I will not believe or trust him for all my state. Know your selves to be rich,
and do not only believe it: know your selves to be Christians, and do not
only believe it: know your selves to be in the way to heaven, for if you do
but believe it, you are deceived: Know your selves to have Hope, Faith, and
Charity; report and opinion are many times false. Faith is the beginning of
life eternal, knowledge is the perfection and complement. Faith goes before,
(as Grammar before other Arts) or as the scholar belieueth his Master, but
knowledge comes after, and either confuteth or confirms the Masters
precepts.

4 There be causes, there be effects, there be contraries to Faith, all which
known and discerned, do no only confirm Faith, but transport, and
transform it into knowledge: and true faith will never cease, til it come to
knowledge, as true love is not at quiet, till it have the seal of Marriage,
because it traineth to experience, and experience rests in knowing. The
trial of many things begets Wisdom, and Wisdom the better part of
experience, makes trial of evil things (yet without sin) and keeps that
which is good. It was the fault of Hieron his wife, that having never kissed
man (except her Husband) thought that every man's breath did smell as ill as her
husbands: whereby her husband blamed her, and she was not thought careful
enough of him. Until, and unless we know what difference is betwixt a Jews
faith, a Turks faith, an Anabaptists faith, and a true Christian faith: none
at all, in respect of the form, but the matter, the efficient, and the end of
believing, which is not discerned without knowledge. I call the form of
believing, not the essence of a true Faith, which is a word impropriated to
Divinity, but the being of faith, in the minds Morrall and Natural Virtues.
Wherefore out of a good doctrine arises a good faith; not on the contrary, and
out of good Doctrine and Faith, a sound knowledge, defending, maintaining, and
persuading both.

This is that knowledge, that Solomon says, is better then Gold and Silver,
and is not therefore to be misliked, because it is not always honored and had
in reputation. I have seen (says the Preacher) an evil under the Sun, Eccl.
9, 11.
The race is not always to the swift, the victory to the strong, nor bread to
men of knowledge. What then? God himself is not always so respected as he
ought, shall not we therefore regard him as much, as if all the world did
agnize him? Bread (then which nothing is more needful to mankind) yet is not
always respected of wanton and full-fed Children; shall the hungry therefore
cast it away? God forbid, no more let honorable Science and Knowledge loose
her reputation, because some indiscreete Fools, have set her in the last,
least, and lowest place.

5 God himself is a God of knowledge, and next to God, men are the Professors
and Students of knowledge, for even the Angels by the church, are informed in
the secrets of our Redemption. A man without knowledge, has no God but
himself, no heaven but this world, and in this (through ignorance, of the
world to come) they crave a large improuement of their evil days, feeling no
other love, or hatred, or fear, or care, or sorrow, or wounds, or conscience;
For, as men first sin, and do not care, by a long and inueterate custom,
they sin, and do not know. From hence men fall into a Reprobate mind,
having no good thing in them, like Beasts they are guided by appetite, like
him that had a thousand Cooks, and a thousand Faulconers. Reason, which should
rule, is made of the Lady the Hand-maide, and so the issue of their minds is
like Ismael, a bastard, and a Bondage-generation; from which sildom comes any
good. Religion, the Daughter of God and the Church, and the first borne in
Paradise; yea, in Heaven, is clapped up into some stinking Dungeon, thorough
which, passes the sincke of all our beastly pleasures, and that which should
have the highest, and the most honorable room in our house of clay (too base
for such a Ghest) is thrust behind the Stables of great Horses, the Mewes of
Hawks, the Porters lodge, yea the Scullery of the most servile Offices, and
where she most loves to be (like the Haebrew servant) she is boared thorough
the ear, and has many wrongs and brands of disgrace; still a Servant, that
should be a Commander. Their rule to believe is their sense, except they see
(with Thomas) they will never believe, and yet all the senses being filled,
they are not overcome, so easy is it to show the reasons of Divinity, and so
hard to persuade. In error, many (like our late Apostataes) are first
persuaded, and then instructed, but in Religion and Faith, after so much as
sense it self cries hoe, yet instruction can work no persuasion, as though
some Ephialtes ouerlay their breasts.

6 From hence also it comes, that Adams sin is laid upon God, because he
suffered and permitted it, therefore he decreed and acted it: and whatsoever
other evil is committed in the world, he must be made the Author thereof: so
strangely rangeth ignorance and want of Knowledge, being not able to discern
betwixt permission and action, betwixt the action, and the evil, that like a
Bird in a net, the more it strives, the faster it is hampered, and the higher
goes the sin. Then Fortune or good luck is made their Goddess, attributing
whatsoever they have, either to chance, or to themselves; with the wicked in
the Prophet, they Sacrifice to their net, or else to their Arms, to their
Horses, to their experience, to their wit: but if success fail, and the issue
answer not the expectation, then they curse themselves, or open their mouth
against Heaven, or accuse Fortune, or peradventure lay load upon the Devil, and
well they may, for they ride him to Hell, as a Thief in a Cart to the gallows.
The Prophet says, Esaias 8, 21.
He which is afflicted, shall run hither and thither, and when he is angry, he
shall curse his Gods, and the Kings. They give over praying in such cases,
Propter hoc malum (says Tully) or arem deos, at hij renuntiarunt or ationibus
meis. For this evil I would pray to the Gods, but they have renounced al my
Prayers. That admired Tacitus has this blasphemy. Numquam maiores caedes Pop.
Romans etc. The people of Rome never endured more slaughter, whereby it was
proved, that the Gods are not so watchful for our health and safeguard, as
they be for our punnishment and revenge. That wise Liuy also speaking of a
doleful ye are; says, that for Plagues, Famines, and sedition, never the like
befell them, and if (said he) foreign enemies had not been wanting, Vix
open deorum omnium sustentata foret Resp. scarce all the Gods could have
supported our estate or common wealth. It is hard, yea almost impossible, for
men without the knowledge of God, to stand in affliction if it be not sudden,
but lingering. Wicked men are worst in long sorrows, Judge. 15. Dan. 10, 8
Revel. 1, 17
and best in sudden: good men be worst in sudden, (as Manaoh, Daniel, and
Saint John) and best in long miseries, and continued calamities. Titus another
Demy-God among the Heathen, when he saw that he must dye in his youth, (after
he had bin Emperor but two years) he cried out against the heavens for their
small regard of his life. Wicked and ignorant men (if they have any spirits)
are like Tigers, who hearing a Drum, bite and tear off their own flesh; so
these in great terrors and evils, are at their wits end. When their
Conscience byteth them, then they seek out false remedies, more hurtful then
assured perils; Namely, the company of good fellows, and Musical
merrimentes, as though sin were sent to afflict them, to help the Tavern,
Alchouse or Minstrell: but so also they bewray their folly and want of skill,
for their last recourse is unto GOD, when they have tried all other means, and
then they neither speed well, nor do well, because they do it late, too late,
beginning at the wrong end, all is out of course, and lost; yea, with their own
wives they commit fornication, and poison themselves with their own meat.
There is not one Virtue or grace of God, which they cannot Nicke-name, nor a
fault so foul, which they will not blaunch over with some defense; and if at
any time it drop into them to hear a Sermon, it is for the phrase, or some
sinister respect, goodness being a stranger, and scornefulnesse an ordinary
companion with them. They have learned nothing of God, but to swear by him,
and that rashly, falsely, and presumptuously; for to reprove them (never so
gently) for the same, is to take a Kid from a Bear, and a Lamb from a Lion,
and a Wolf by the ears. They have no care for their souls, no more then for
Beggars by the Highway, whom they neither desire to hear, to remember, to
relieve. They love none but themselves, and care not upon whom they tread,
nor whom they disgrace, to be a foundation to their rising. I would they
loved themselves in the Nature of true love, for such love is like the Mothers
love to her Child, a love to preserve, but their love is like the hungry man's
love to his meat, a love to consume. To conclude, from hence it comes, that
they never think of death with patience and fear it more then hell, because
they are not so thoroughly persuaded of hell, as they be of death, and in one
word, I may describe them by the Psalm, The ways of GOD they have not known,
and there is no fear of God before their eyes.

7 Thus, and this have I spoken of knowledge, as it is a virtue Morrall, and
Theological; now it is varied in my Text, by these words, And take heed to thy
Herds, which afterward are also divided into Hay, Corn, Cattle, and
servants, that every one of these may be preserved in Use, Office, Life. So our
Flocks and Herds are our Families, our Cattle, our charges Pastoral, and
Magisteriall, kingdoms to Kings, Monarchies to Emperors, Counties to
Sheriffs, offices to Officers, every Servant and maid have their Flocks,
their Herds. He that works by the day, or that is hired for a year, or is
apprentice till a Iubilee, whether he follow the Flocks and Ewes with young,
as David did, or the Plowe and Oxen as Elisha did, or the wars as Ioab and
Abner did, or attend on their Master as the Centurions servant did, or on
their Lady and Mistress, as the Maids of Esther did, or Fish in the Sea, as the
sons of Zebedee, or walk on Messages on the Land, as the Servant of Abraham;
and to conclude, whether they be set over all as Baliffes and Stewards, or over
the Hay, or over the Corn, or over the Cattle, or over the Men and
Maid-seruants, they have their Flocks, and Herds, and charges, which they must
know, and take heed unto, for service is no inheritance, and badges of Lords
and great men, are neither to maintain us, or defend us in ill. These are the
things that make a man, that make him perfect, in as perfect manner as may
be, if they be found in the way of righteousness, such servants shall divide
the inheritance among brethren, and men of this quality, shall stand before
Princes.

8 There is nothing more commendable in a man, then oftentimes to visit, view
and review their possessions, take special consideration of their meanest
vtensiles, so shall they see how they are kept and preserved, which of them
must be altered, which nourished, which continued, which removed, which
stands in the stable, and which is fallen into the ditch. Our Cattle are not
free from our care on the Sabbath day. Luke 14.
Which of you (says our Savior) shall have an Ox, or an Ass, fall into the
ditch on the Sabbath day, and shall not help him out. And which of you does not
loose his Ox or his Ass to water on the Sabbath day. By which we see our
blessed Savior give allowance to this labor, arising both out of necessity
and mercy, which two only cases, give dispensation to civil and base services
on the Sabbath day, which works else were unlawful and insufferable in true
Divinity. Yea, in the Law we are bound, not only to regard our own cattle,
but our Neighbors, yea, our enemies, and to bring home his Ox or Ass that
goes astray, Exodus 23, 4
to restore the pledge, to restore that we find to the true owner, (if we can
come to the knowledge of him.) Such care has almighty God of every man's
particular, as that they which follow not this order, corrupt his ordinance,
alter his providence, change the Divine property of those things they lose
negligently, or retain unjustly, and shall pay most deerly for usurpation of
that, which God in trial (not in right) has given into their hands. Again,
if we often look not to our estates (I mean such as are householders) how can
we know what to give according to our proportion, or what store to keep,
after our allowance? we may give that we cannot spare, and must go buy else
where, which is folly, we may keep that we cannot spend, and that is misery and
wretchedness; our Granaries shall be empty or fustie, without our knowledge,
our wardrobes void of store of Household, our Armouries without weapons, our
Sellers without drink or wine, which il beseems a Householder, a Man, much
less a Christian, to whom God has given state and living, and a family, 1.
Tim. 5, 8
for He (says S. Paul) that provides not things honest before hand for his
own Family, is worse then an Infidel.

9 The charge of this life, is food, raiment, and friends; care first to
provide these, then to use them. Weee read that Joseph was ordained and
honored of Almighty GOD, Genesis 41.
with the second dignity in the kingdom of Egypt, (after he was drawn out of
prison) for the provision of Corn and Victual; yea, for this his Father and
Brethren gave reverence unto him. Lo, an excellent dignity of hous-keeping,
and providence for to feed them whom the Lord has sent into the World, among
whom are his Church, that must not want when the Lions lack and suffer hunger.
Every Family has its children, in whose name, blood, and estate, it
consists; their enlargement and continuance stands upon the wise
administration of Household affairs, as well to keep that which is already
gained, as to gain that which is desired. Saint Paul would not have a Bishop
or Deacon to be chosen, but by this Touchstone of experience, how they had
ordered and guided their Housholdes; for no man can ever serve or rule well the
Church of God, that has not well behaved himself in the Domestical and
oeconomical life. The wise Cato would have the Householder, Prouidere familiae
instituta, cibos and medicinam, to provide first for the manners, secondly, for
the maintenance; and lastly, for the Medicine of their Families in the time of
sickness. What is meat and large allowance of fare and diet to our servants,
without good and Divine manners? What are Divine and good manners, 1. Tim. 3. 4.
without maintenance? What are both of them without health? And what is it to
live in such a family, where neither God is feared, nor the labors of good
servants regarded in time of sickness? Surely, let no man trust that Master
that forgets seven, or but one years service, for one months sickness.
A vile Nature or Prodigality, or worse, is the cause hereof. Be studious
therefore of your families good, and with Salomons Mother, Seek Wool and
Flax, and labor cheerfully with the hands. Pro. 31, 13
Be like a Merchants ship, to bring food from far. Rise early while it is
Night, give your portion to the Household, and the ordinary to the Maids. Put
the hand to the Wheel, and your Arms to the poor and needy. Consider
Fields, and Carpets, and fine Linen, and Garments, and buy them, so shall
honor be your clothing, and ^ou shall rejoice in your latter days. But yet
remember in all your labors, that Almighty God be not forgotten, for it is in
vain says David, Psalm 127. 2.
to rise early, and eat the bread of carfulness, going late to bed, except
the Lord give rest to his beloved. You may with Elisha Plow in the field, and
follow the Oxen, but if Eliahs Mantle be cast upon you, you must forsake the
Plough, and follow the Prophets. Our sermons are like his Mantle, and they call
you to heaven, as that did Elisha, to be a Prophet. Matthew may sit in his
Publicans Office, but if our Savior call him away, He must arise and follow
him. Al Trades of life are but Handmaids to Religion, therefore vain are they
which forsake the Mistresses, (which is Godliness) her Table and Parlour,
which is the Temple, for the Maidens webs, and Worke-houses of less value and
estimation.

10 How shall they be able to look almighty God in the face, which either
feeling wealth coming upon them, or else in an ouercarefull desire, to be
rich, and accounted laborious, forsake the Churches and Altars of the Lord,
sildome visiting the holy Communion, as a day-feast; sildome coming to the
Church, as a Market, wherein there is nothing gotten; and as sildome mumble
up their private Prayers, without Devotion, Understanding, or Diligence; Oh,
I say, what account shall they give unto the Lord, for this drousie and
Lethargical negligence in their souls cases. Al their care is for the shoo,
none for the foot; all for the Hat and Feather, none for the head; all for the
Badge on the sleeue, none for the Wages in the purse; all for the body, that
body and soul are both lost. It is a comely thing to see a ship rigged, and
with spread sails floating on the Waters, observing also, how one is at the
Stern, another at the top, and every man in his place, (the winds moving
withal) so it will continue in order and sail surely; but if either Pilot or
Steersman be wanting, or other Mariner, the Winds will soon rend the sails,
and the Ship split against the rocks: even so, it is a goodly thing, and a
royal, to see a Man sailing to heaven, having under, him the earthly Waters,
(though inconstant) above him the winds of heaven: if he want not in him,
Reason, understanding, Religion, and Grace, which are the Mariners that row and
waft our souls to the eternal kingdom. It is good therefore to lay hold on
this, and not to forget that, For what shall it advantage a man, to win the
whole world, and loose his own soul.

11. Now, I return again to the careful Householder, who must look to every
part of his possession, as it is in my text, Hay, grain, Catle and Servants;
yea, although he wear the Crown. It was an excellent saying of Alphonsus, a
King of Spain: Principis inane nomen nisi habet in aerario, the name of a king
or Prince is an idle thing, if he have not a Treasury to maintain it. The
Crown is maintained by diligence, by the Plow, and the Commonwealth
flourishes under the same. I will not, nor may I meddle with Princes; but I
say, that the name of a Householder is an idle thing without a storehouse more
or less, according to the proportion of the family more or less. The kingdom
of heaven is likened to such a storehouse, out of which the Lords Family is
replenished with things new and old. Luke 12.
The Lord has his Apple Trees, Cant. 2, 5.
and Orchards, and Sellers, as he tells his Church; to teach us, that store
is no sore, but sorrow comes by the default thereof. When God himself made
the world, he made man last of all, having first provided all other things for
him: as the world roofed with the Heavens, and floored with the green Grassie
earth, stored with all fruits, incessantly and successively growing one after
other. The Stars being his lights, the Creatures of all sorts being
Servants and Tributaries to him, the Angels of heaven his assured friends,
waiting on his safety, and every bird singing melody to his prosperity; so did
the great householder provide for man even before he was made; so has he
continued his store working hitherto, And seed time, and harvest, cold and
heat, Genesis 8, 22
Winter and summer, day and night, has not ceased, but shall remain as long as
the earth shall endure. So must wise Householders provide aforehand, things
honest; even before marriage, Meat and houses, and clothing, and before
children, as the mother does the swaddling clothes. That out of the herds he
may with Abraham fetch a Lamb or a Kid, or an Ox: out of the Pastry with
Sara, fetch the Meal for the bread of strangers. It is not good to want store
and provision at hand, the Venison is best in the Park, and the Cattle in our
own, and not in others men's herds. When Isaac would have Venison, because it
ran wild, Esau was long in taking it, and so Jacob came in the mean time with
the tame Kid (a thing in store, and at hand) and got away the blessing. Even
so, when necessaries are then to be sought, when they should be used, it
preuenteth both the thanks, and the benefit, and store brings both: for
Jacobs Venison (though not true) had both the blessing, and the thanks. Store
at hand, is like friends at hand, whereof Solomon says, A friend at hand, is
better then a Brother a great way off. Alex. ab Alex.
The ancient Egiptians were wo^t to hang or paint at their doors a Vulturs
Wing, in token of their Gentry. The Romans, the Spears, Shields, Swords, and
warlike weapons, which their Antecessors had gotten by their prowess: and
these things (though at the doors) yet no man durst remove or make away. Thus
did they for their Honor, let us do as much for our houses and Families, and
let not there be among us any that keeps not his parents Lands, goods,
Arms, Cattle, and Virtue, that as we are known by their names, so we may be
by their Lands, Honors, Prowess, Frugality, and all other works of Faith,
Hope, and Charity.

12. Thus have I briefly spoken of the Household care to get and keep. Now of
the last part of the Householder, or housekeeping, which is his mercy in
spending, and liberality in giving forth. That which was first called his
charge, Flock and Herds, he now calls his Family and Maidens, which must be
fed and clothed. Whereby, is first to be noted, that all the care we have
spoken of, is to give, to bestow, to spend, to distribute, and feed others. He
which is the Servant of riches, does keep, and get them like a Servant, but
he which is the Lord and Master of them, does give and dispose them like a
Master; nothing proves a man so much the owner of his wealth, as the use and
bestowing of it; nothing shows him so much a base servant of wealth and
riches, as the hoording up, and keeping it close from the sight of the world.
Now, the servant does keep them, as Servants do their Masters goods; and he
which is a Servant of riches, is not a Servant of Jesus Christ. Beware of this
wretched getting of goods to keep them, and not to spend them: God, Nature,
Men, Beasts, and all good creatures, confute and deny this. GOD, for he which
is infinite in wealth, gives all in this world; He eats not of our Flocks
or folds, Psalm. 50, 13
or of Beasts that run wild on the hills, he therefore commands the earth to
feed man, Psa. 145, 15
For he opens his hand, and fills al living things with his blessing, Act.
20 35.
he says, It is a more blessed thing to give, then to receive. He charge
the rich in this world to be ready to distribute. 2 Timothy 6, 17
He threatens that the rust of the Gold and Silver laid up, James 5, 3.
shall consume and torment the souls of them that hoarde. Luke 12, 15
He tells that no man's life stands in the things it possesses: Micah 6, 8.
He shows thee o man what is good; Namely, to do Justice, and love Mercy.
And to conclude, Him he styled a Fool, which having plenty of Corn, Luke 12,
20
more then his Barnes could hold, would rather build greater Barnes (to keep
it) then give away the superfluous surplusage to the poor and needy, o Fool,
this night they will fetch away thy soul from thee, then whose shall all these
goods, and Bags, and Obligations be? Surely, If you say your Childrens; what
comfort is it to a Father in hell to remember the intolerable Torments he
there indureth, for getting and keeping that wealth unjustly, without showing
pity to other, which now his Sons and Daughters revel in with all earthly
pleasures. I tell you such earthly pleasures, have a bitter end; but such
Torments have no end: For although they ask but a drop of water, Ideo rogans
dives non exauditur in tormentis quia rogantem pauparem non exaudiuit in
terris. Aug.
yet they are not heard, because they have not heard them that begged, or
would have borrowed of them in need.

13 Nature also is an enemy to this wretchedness, to this Covetousness, she
loves to multiply, and to increase, if she have Milk in her breasts, she
knows that (like Riches it will rot) therefore with it she feeds other. The
trees that are laden with fruit, bear them but till they are ripe, and then if
they be not taken off, they let them fall. How glad are the fields when they
are covered Laetis segetibus, with smiling Grain, and yet they hasten to the
harvest (as the Pigion to her breeding) that being rid of one crop, may be
Plowed for another. The sheep wearied with his fleece, inuiteth by a panting
necessity, the Shepherd and Shearer to take it off. The seed would be sown,
the Gardens would be gathered, the Sea would be Fished, the Heavens keep not
their influence, but send it down among us. Why then should men get goods to
keep them, and yet Riches endure not always, nor the Crown from generation to
generation. Are they not the sons of Nature? Why degenerate they? What Tigers
Milk have they sucked? What Cockatrice has hatched them, who corrupts all
that she touches? Let Nature teach them (if they will not learn of such a
Mother) who as Boethius says, De consul. lib. 2.
Dat cuique quod conuenit, and ne inter eunt, laborat, gives to every thing,
convenient, and labors that nothing perish: but these let their money
perish, their woods rot, the moths eat their garments, which might be given
away, and the Dogs and Swine, that good meat which would maintain the
children. The walls have their Gold laid upon dumb pictures, and Heathen men's
shape are well clothed by them, and set forth in counterfaites, but nothing
comes from them, for the general good, but (as it were) by force of Arms.

14 Men also, I mean the general and Universal inclination of mankind, is
against the keeping of goods in private without some use. Pet. Rauisi.
They keep (says one) for fear of want, and yet they want the use of that
they keep. Behold a just judgment of God, vt semper indigeat, qui semper
timet indigentiam, They always want, which are always in fear of want. The two
Persian Princes had two Titles given them by their people, to signify their
good and ill. Lonicerus.
Cyrus they called Patrem, a Father, because he gave them riches, and laid
up, but for their necessaries; and Darius, they called Negotiator, a Merchant,
whose study is to gain, or not to lay out. Valor. lib. 3
Valerius. Auaritia indagatrix lucrorum aiudissima vorago, ne que habendo
fructu foelix, sed cupiditate quaerendi, miserrima. Covetousness, the searcher
out of gain, is a most greedy gulf or swallower, in keeping it is not happy,
but in seeking, it is most miserable.

Tully says, Tuscul.
Illi morbo qui permanet in venis, and inhaeret in visceribus, nec inueteratus
euelli potest, nomen est auaritia, That disease is called Avarice, which
runs in the secret veins, and cleaves to the inward bowels, which if it
be inueterate, can never be pulled forth. Pythagoras. Covetous men which have
riches, and do not use them, are like unto Orphans and Wards in their Nonage,
which also have houses and Lands, but cannot dispose them. Seneca says,
Inopiae pauca desunt, In. Prou.
auaritiae omnia. Poverty wants some things, but Covetousness wants all
things, and therefore the rich man that has goods and does not use them, does
never any thing well, except in dying. So he. Unto all these, I may add the
note of Innocentius. De cond. huma.
For Covetousness, Balaams Ass hurt his Masters foot, and reproved his
rider. For Covetousness, the people of Israel stoned Achan in the valley of
Achor, after he was found guilty of the Golden garment. By Covetous Ahab, was
Nabaoth put to death for the Vineyard. Gehazi got the leprosy thorough
Covetousness, when he abused Naaman in the Prophets name. Judas for
Covetousness, sold his Master and hanged himself. Ananias and Saphira belyed
their Charity, and keeping back their portion (for they had sold their Land
and kept their sin) were stricken dead by the Lord. Believe it, the merciful
man never dyed ill death, the Covetous and parsimonious never happy death.
Therefore away with this monster, which all men cry out against, and they which
love it most, are ashamed to confess it. Men are wont to desire wealth,
pleasures, and Honors: of Wealth comes evil things; of Pleasure, filthy
things; of Honor vain things. For riches breed Covetousness and Avarice;
Pleasures bring forth Gluttony and wantonness; Honor, norisheth Pride, and
Vainglory, and I tell you if you receive not the witness of men, the
witness of God is greater.

15 Beasts and all creatures hate this parsimony, it is the royalty of the Lion
to eat but once of his prey, the residue he leaves to other, and comes not
again to it. The Elephantes are for that cause dispraised, because they hide
their teeth fallen off, that no man, or other creature should find them. The
Lizzarde, that knowing her urine to congeale into a precious stone, covers it
in the sand, that it might not be discerned. Of what brood are these wicked
men, who^ no example of God, or Nature, or Men, or Beast can move? They are
surely some Satyrs, or strange Ethiopian brood, or peradventure sent by some
of the earthly spirits, of whom the Coniurers say, They keep the Treasures in
the earth, that no man may use them. Such spirits are these, that is;
Deuilles, but in other shapes, that only keep goods from them, that would use
them better: let the world sink or swim, they get none from them, and if God
were money they would lock him up, that none else might enjoy him. But they
that have this worlds good, and see their Brother perish, how dwells the love
of God in them? that is, there dwells no love of God in them, and so out of
God his love I leave them.

16 But let me not be understood, that I speak against all keeping and
storing up of money, and other things, as though it were unlawful to possess
any more provision of meat, then for a meal; of Money, then for a day; of
Garments then one, for one body, and so of the residue. God forbid, for so in
time of necessity man should be unprovided of help when he should use it. God
has ever in store. There is no question of Corn and Cattle, but of Jewels,
and money, and such like. Solomon in my text, bids to look to the he Goats,
that they may be a price of the field. Money must be provided against
sickness, suit, enemies of our country, and for all other necessities. Jacob
had money, which he sent by his sons into Egypt for Corn, the first and
second time. Abraham had Money, wherewith all he bought the field of Emor. The
Church had her store, Acts 2. and 5. and therefore let no man think it against
conscience, to be always provided against wants: wherein the rule of Socrates
was good (if it could be followed) that a man's Treasure should neither be
bigger nor lesser then his necessity. But because that cannot be known, it is
good our store be more plentiful, so our charity be never the less. When
Iphicrates pitched his Tents in a little open field, and then began to
trench and wall them, his General asked why he did so, and what he feared? To
whom he answered, such a question became not a commander, Plutarch.
Ah undans cautela non nocet, we can never be enough secured against future
perilles. King Alexander seeing one of his Soldiers going to sharpen his Dart
when all other were going to fight, cashiered him, and cast him out of the
Army; saying, Inutilis acie, qui pararet arma tunc cum ijs vtendum. Plutarch.
He was unworthy of his army, who went then to provide Arms, when he was to
use them. Even like the foolish Virgins, which neither took Oil sufficient,
and when they had spent their store, gave themselves to sleep, till it was too
late to provide.

17 Let us therefore keep our honest store: for thereby did Abigail mollify
the angry and displeased heart of David, when he came against her husband
Nabal: and if the present she brought him, had not been present and at hand,
it had not failed, but they all had perrished before so much could have been
provided. Our Cofers must not be like the sealed bags, which Alexius left at
Ancona, when he had compounded the wars with the King of Almanes. For the
Emperor Comnenus his Master, who being to leave Hostages of money with the
Citizens, Nicetas.
he by his Masters direction, secretly conveyed away the Money, and left
with them the empty, yet sealed trunkes and Boxes, bidding them keep them
safe, until they were by the Emperor required. But this deceit being
discovered, fared ill with the Emperor; even so, poverty will not be long
hid, and then shame or sorrow will follow, until ruin, or else some strange
and woeful laborious recovery of our estate. And so I will conclude, that
seeing the Lord makes both rich and poor, Prou. 22, 2
let us with care and Conscience, conserve a Storehouse of well-gotten wealth,
as we do relieve the well-deseruing poor, for both shall meet before the Lord
together.

Now follows a conclusion of all, which stands in the amplifyed
distribution of the charge, who they be that must be looked unto, who
entertained and maintained, who to be provided for, and so an end. Our Flocks
and Heardes, Family and Maidens, are many in the figure, for I will allegorize
them, as well as handle them literally.

18 And in the first place, the subject of our Wisdom, Government, Wealth,
and Mercy, seems to be our Country, the common parent of us all, which
though it bear us as the horse does the Rider, and as the oxen draws the
Waine-man in his Cart, yet must it be directed and defended by us. In it we
have all our shares and inheritances; of it, we receive our lives and breath,
and therefore for it we ought to apply our care and power. If we forget
Jerusalem (say the Jews in Babylon) then let my right hand forget her cunning.
Psalm. 137.
Jerusalem was their country, Babylon their place of exile and banishment.
Therefore sweet is the name of our Country, and better is the smoke thereof,
then the fire of another, and the dust thereof, then the stones of a strange
nation. Nehemiah also, Neh. 1, 4.
when he heard that his Countries repair was hindered, how did he leave his
place before the King, and laid aside his Courtly garments, put on
sackcloth, and lived in Prayer and Fasting. Saint Austen in his old age,
writing of his Country, which then began to be spoiled by the Arrian and
Circumcellian soldiers, and Vandals; Aug. ad Nectar.
says, Serio iam, ac frigescentibus me^bris, feruet animus desiderio patriae,
now in my old age and coldness of all my limbs; yet my heart burns for the
desire of my Country. But we are all pressed, and ready to fight for our
Country, and to grace it with the effusion of our blood; true it is, and no
true English heart can do otherwise. But what avails it to fight for our
Country against strangers, while we betray it to the Lord? What if we be
ready to go against Turk and Pope, with the Arms of flesh and blood? while we
have disarmed our selves of Prayer, Faith, Hope, Honesty, Temperaunce,
Humility, and will not so much as put on the head-peece of Salvation? But in
steed thereof, Blasphemy and Swearing, Drunkenness and Voluptuousness,
Stealing and Deceiving, till the Land mourn, and be no more able to bear
us. My heart bleedeth to fore-thinke and see the ruin and desolation of so
many fair Houses, goodly Towns, green Meddowes, and Corne-fields, for the
sin and wickedness of them that possess them. God has mo ways to destroy
us then by one, then by the strangers sword, against which only we are
provided (by the care and providence of our Governors.) He can bring a fire
from Heaven, as he did on Sodom, Isaiah 37.
or he can sweep away head and tail by the Pestilence, like unto the Army of
Senacharih, whereof (it consisting of almost two hundred thousand men) they
died all in one night, Iero. lib, 4. com.
except ten men. And Constantinople, Anno 760. was so dispeopled by a
Pestilence, that the Emperor Copronymus, was feign to fetch men from other
Countries to inhabit the houses, least they should fall down. Before the
Danes coming into England, there were above forty thousand Churches, Ranulphus
Polychr.
and in seven battles there were perrished (well-nie) five hundred thousand
persons, and above twenty thousand Parishes and Churches decayed. I omit to
speak of Famines and other means of our destruction, and I beseech you all, to
love their Country, and let not their posterity be dispossessed by their
crying sins, for the Prophet says, A fruitfnl Land is made barren for the
sins of them that dwell therein.

19 Your Wives and Husbands are also your flock, these must be taken heed
unto, for the married are like the Palms, they are Males and Females, so they
must be planted one beside another; yea, the Boughs of the male must be
sometimes wreathed and put upon the Female, or else it will not prosper, but
mourn and pine away. So it is betwixt Man and wife, there must be more then
sight of each other, for they are bone of each others bones, and Flesh of each
others flesh. Flesh cut asunder, loses the vital powers and so dies, but
united, grows together again, and so lives. No Man, but he which is wise
knows, what heed to take or respect to bear to his Wife; For Christ does
thereby decipher his love to his Church. So ought a Man to love his Wife as
Christ loved his Church, Ephe. 5, 25
who gave himself for it. Every one that is married has given away himself.
Sweet are the bands of Wedlock, yet they are bands and must restrain us:
Bonum est coniugium tamen a iugo tractum: Ambr.
Marriage is good, yet is named from the yoke, according to that, Be not
unequally yoked with Infidels. They which are yoaked have no power but to draw,
those which are married, have no liberty but to love and look to one another.
When Darius had lost his Kingdoms, and Credit, and Honor, and Liberty, he
wept not for all that: but when he heard tell that his Wife was dead, then he
wept bitterly. So near and dear are the minds of them that be virtuously
married, that they cannot part without a thousand sorrows. They are to each
other a true Glass, as is the face, so is it in the Glass; as is the Man's and
Husbands, so should be the honest Wives; as is the loving Wives, so should
be the tender Husbands. To conclude, As the vine on the house top, Psalm.
128, 3
so is the Wife; The vine as it is of excellent use, so it is wonderful weak,
and except the Gardener support it, it will lie on the Earth and bear nothing.
The wife must also be tendered and supported, or else she cannot yield the Wine
of comfort to make thee have a glad heart. In every Man's charge there are
faults to be espied, no Man casts away his flock for one sickness? No, if
he have a thousand Sheep, and nine hundred fall foul, yet lets the sick
go, and keeps the residue. Wives have their faults and frailty, and men are
not clear: Vnicuique dedit vitium natura creato. We are all blameable one way
or other, therefore spare one another, forbear one another, and let nothing
break of love: but that which dissolueth Matrimony, that is whoredom, and the
God of all love shall marry you both to Jesus Christ.

20 I proceed: Our Parents are the flock and charge of us that are Children,
and Children are the charge of Parents. For we are borne weaker and more
feeble then all Creatures, and had we not some body to receive us when we come
into the world, woe were it with us, we might make a short and woeful stay or
Tragedy, To be borne, to weep, to dye. Neither our Parents or their
Antecessours, have any thing which they transfuse not into their Children,
their honor, fame, goods, or stains, for their children they have them, and
in despite of reluctance, they will descend upon them. But let them nourish
and cherish their Children, and not their sins, and let them wisely take away
the rotten from the sound; I mean their childrens vices from their persons, or
else vice will overcome Parents and Children. Some make their Children Ludentes
Simias, Mowing Apes. Digging Pigges.
other Fodientes sues, That is, Either they bring them up to nothing but to
play, as many of the rich, or else they train them to nothing but to delue and
dig the earth, as many of the poor. Alas poor Children, better unborn,
because the richer have their pleasures deforming them, and the poorer their
labors depressing them, one of them having no sense of Heaven, the other, no
understanding but of Earth, and both of them without God to be their Father,
and the Church to be their Mother.

21 Our Parents are our charge that are their Children, we ought therefore to
take heed unto them: Genesis 27, 43
and for their sakes to fly no labor. At Rebeccaes command, Jacob (that was
never from his mothers wing) fled to Padan-Aran, and what miseries did he
there endure for twenty whole years, the Lord God has related. If we have
any glory and praise, let us give it to our Parents. When Antigonus had won
a victory, yet he would attribute it to his Father. Amphionius and Anapius, two
Brethren, when they had saved themselves from the City Catanea, which was all
on fire, and remembered that their old Father was yet within, they took
hands, and forced thorough the flames, and with difficulty (yet with safty)
brought away their poor old Father. Oh, Happy Father of such Sons! Oh, Happy
Sons, to be such Men! though you be dead, yet will all good Childeren
remember you while the world lasts. Be good to your Parents, you young Men
and Maidens, for as you serve them, shall you be served again; if courteously,
your Children will do the like; if disobediently, yours will also pay the score
double and treble upon you.

22 The Servants are also the charge and flock of the Master, and the Master
of the Servants, each must be careful, the Servant of diligence, toward his
Master, and the Master, To take heed to the herds of his Servants. Servants
are wild, because they have been wantonly bredde, therefore they love no
discipline. But let your love to do them good appear unto them, and then they
will be more honest, and more tractable. Great things have been done by
Servants. Genesis 24.
By a Servant, Abraham provided a Wife for his Son Isaac. By a Servant, and
that a little Maide-Seruant, 2. Reg. 5, 3
Naaman was brought from his Country to Judea, to the Prophet, and there cured
of his Leprosy, both of body and mind. By a Servant was Darius brought to be
a King, Iustine.
and the kindness of a Master to his Servant, did save his life, when all the
Tirian Servants did cut their masters throats. Therefore do good to your
servants, give them instruction, and all good service will follow. Deal not
with them as Vintners do with their Vessels, which draw them till they be
empty, and then turn them out of doors. So many work out their Servants
strength, and then turn them out to beg. Servants, are so set on drunkenness
and liberty, that no wages can win them from that notorious Vice, what will be
the end hereof. If Lords, and Gentlemen, and Masters, alter not the Copy of
this licentious grant, I see not how our poor envied Nation can stand long,
without more Enemies then ever the old Saxons had, or the late Netherlanders.
In sum of all, break of Prodigality, and neither you that be Masters, put
more on your shoes and Garters, then many good Men on their whole bodies, and
let not your delicate mouths, buy your appetites pleasure to dear: neither
suffer the poor to drink more in one hour, then they get in a day. You all
sit with Rulers, follow the wise man's counsel, Pro, 23, 2.
Put thy knife to thy throat, if thou be a Man given to thy appetite.

Lastly, although Solomon names none in this Text, But the family and the
Maidens: yet he excludes not the stranger, for in the family on the Sabbath
day he is commanded to rest, and he which receives him, is not to let him
depart on that day, as it is Exo. 20, 5. And although it be not in the estate of
every man to entertain, yet is it a duty to guide and direct such as are
distressed to Houses of hospitality. And indeed in ancient time, men were
only received to house, and brought with them their own victuals, as you may
see in the story of Jacobs Children in Egypt, Genesis 42. 43
and the Leuite and his wife in the City of Iemini. Iud. 19, 16, and 20.
Surely to be Hospitable is a part of Charity, and one of the greatest;
wherefore the Scripture says; Heb. 13, 12
Let brotherly love continue, and be not forgetful to lodge strangers, for
thereby some have entertained Angels in the likeness of men, Genesis 18, 19
alluding to Abraham and Lot, to whom the Angels came before the destruction of
Sodom. What is more horrible and discomfortable to men, then to be without
harbor and House; Genesis 21, 19
and therefore did Agar take it so grievously as she mourned in desperation,
until the Angel showed her a Fountain where again she filled her bottle.
They which inhabit the deserts follow the footsteps of wild Asses unto the
Water-Springes, which without them they should never find; and therefore love
and make much of them. How much more should we love to bring one another to the
places of our refreshing, and not shut up our doors against the Stranger, as
Paradise was against Adam: so as it should be as equal or ready for
Strangers to dye there, as to dine there. The Priests and Scribes which put
our Savior to death, could Buy with the Money of Judas a place or field to
bury Strangers, but let us not provide their Graves, rather their Tables,
whether they be sick or sound.

When David had lost his Wives, and all his goods, by making much of a
Stranger, he came to find and recover all again. Even so, we cannot loose by
courtesy and humanity to strangers, For we are all Strangers in this world. And
if the first Christians had not received the Preachers of their faith (that
were strangers unto them) into their houses, Luke 10.
their peace which was the peace of Christ had not light or rested upon them.
Rahab for lodging strangers had her life saved, and as many as she would
receive into her Family. We read of the ancient inhabitants of Bretinum in
Romandiola, that they did contend for the entertainment of strangers, and for
that cause they erected a Pillar in their Market place, into which every one of
the Citizens drove and fastened a distinct ring, and that every stranger that
came to that Town fastened his Horse to one of those rings, into whose House
he was to be received; Leaud. descr. Italiae.
which thing was so observed, that incontinently with all alacrity he was
entertained and lodged, and the Citizens took it for a great favor. Cran.
lib. 4.
The barbarous Vandals had so much humanity in the^ toward strangers, that
they confiscated all his goods, and gave liberty to set his House on fire,
that had expelled or inciuilly handled a stranger. I could be infinite, but I
must conclude. Job says; The Stranger did not lodge in the street, Job. 31,
32.
I opened my doors, unto him that went by the way. Genesis 2, 6
Abimelech has his commendation for lodging Abraham a stranger. So has
Iethro for Moses. Exodus 2.
Obadia that hid so many Prophets, and nourished them, even four hundred. In
Abdiam
Saint Hierom says of him, that for his mercy he received the gist of
Prophecy, and was buried in Sebaste, that is Samaria, in the Grave wherein
Elisha was after buried, and S. John Baptist. The widow of Sarepta, a heathen
woman, the Sunamite, Martha, and Lazarus, Zacheus, Simo^ the tanner. Gatus,
Onesiphorus, and other had never been spoken of but for their Hospitality, and
receiving of strangers. Theresore let not the good Householder forsake
strangers, for the Lord loves them, and goes with them: and if they be
received in the name of Christ, whether they be good or ill, he will pay their
reckoning. Learn therefore (says Saint Austen) learn (o Christian) without
difference and respect of persons, to offer entertainment, least he whom thou
shuttest out of doors be thy Lord and Savior. For he says; I have been a
stranger and ye have not lodged me. I tell you, that he that labors for
Christ, and he that refreshes him that labors, shall be both rewarded
before Jesus Christ. To whom be all present and eternal glory.

FINIS.
PAge 41. line 1. read he walloweth, P. 46. read Apharantes, P. 65 read
Mycerninus, P. 86. li. 5. read Pulcheria, P. 87. li. 20. read infortunio, P.
88. l. 1. dele not. P. 90. li. 12. Villegisus, so in the margent, 118. li. 15.
read King, 132. li. 12. read dry. 145. line 2. read auidissima.


