THE POWER OF PREACHING OR, THE POWERFVLL Effects of the WORD truly Preached,
and rightly applied, as it was delivered in one or more SERMONS.

By JOHN TRASKE, Preacher of Gods Word sometimes at Axmister in Deuon:
afterward at the Fleet in London: and now at Tillingham in Dengie hundred in
ESSEX.

I said, I will not make mention of him, nor speak any more in his Name: But
his word was in my heart, as a burning fire shut up in my bones, and I was
weary with forbearing, and I could not stay: For I heard the defaming of many.
etc. Report say they, and we will report it: all my familiars watched for my
halting, Ier. 20.9.10. LONDON: Printed by T.S. for Nathaniel Butter, 1623.

To the Beneuolent READER.
REader, I call thee presupposing thou will read. And I add beneuolent, to
difference a holy Reader, from a profane derider. I would be loath to
prostitute such Pearls to swine. Public and powerful Preaching is the
preualent means to prepare men for reading: and till that has made way,
reading is no more available, then to the Eunuch, without Philips guide to the
true sense. Such Readers I call upon to read this tractate, that they may see
the effects of Preaching, not only in the general separation which it makes
between Pagans and Christians: but in that it deuides between Idolaters and
true worshippers; and between such as have the form, and such as have also the
power of godliness: yea, between such as have the power only in Seeking; and
such as Walk familiarly with God; and again, between Walkers, in respect of
the babish; or stronger estate; yea, of the Father-hood that is Christ Jesus.
And between these again and themselves; between the spirit and flesh; the
seed of God, and of man; the right and contrary part; the new man and the old;
the inward and outward man; the law of the mind, and of the members; Christ in
us, and Adam on us; the regenerate, and unregenerate part; yea, which is most
of all, between the soul and spirit: If in these any light be yielded, let
God have all the praise: and I wish thee this benefit, that it may discover
thine election, and make it sure unto thee; either by proving thee to be at
least a seeker of Gods favor, a labourer for reconciliation with God; one I
mean in the throbs and throws of the new birth in that first, general, or
universal Repentance that makes way to remission, and prepares for admission,
Mar. 1.4. Act. 2.37.38 Act. 26.18.
into the inheritance by Faith in Christ Jesus. If thou be so wounded, thou
may learn hence where to be healed. If thou be healed, and at liberty, it
will warm, comfort, cleanse, quicken, yea, renew thy strength. If thou know
all this already, I shall have thy assent, if more, I expect thy best aid, and
humbly, and as heartily desire thee to perfect so weak beginnings. It was at
first prepared only for one Congregation; if it become profitable to more, it
is that I desire. And above all things, let us now pray that the Gospel so
plentifully Preached, may have these powerful effects in these frozen, and
benumbed times. That Repentance may be distinctly Preached, and Faith in Christ
plainly unfolded. Now is the time to be industrious, especially, for us of the
Ministry; to gather those whom Satan has scattered: and to comfort sad
hearts, and confirm weak hands against approaching trials. Oh let us redouble
our pains in Preaching, Catechizing, and especially to put up fervent prayers,
with strong cries and tears, to him that is able to cause our peace to
flourish, Christ's Kingdom to spread abroad; Antichrists to decay, and come to
naught; to disadvantage Satan; that so Gods people may be established to stand
fast, fight valiantly, and be more then Conquerours in the evil day. And for
me, the least of all Gods Ministers; I desire your Prayers, that I may make
full proof of my Ministry, in redeeming the time I have lost by Satan's
wiles. And so I rest for this time and remain

An unfeigned well-willer, to all that desire sincerity from the heart: JOHN
TRASKE.

Powers of the Word Preached.
Considered either 1 Generally, as 1 Spreading. 2 Drawing. 3 Searching. 4
Dividing. 5 Prevailing.
2 More particularly, and that either,
1 Common to Elect, and Reprobate
as 1 Conuincing. 2 Terrifying. 3 Humbling. 4 Restraining. 5 Reforming. 6
Astonishing. 7 Delighting.
2 Peculiar to 1 Reprobate which are 1 Insencible, as 1 Hardening. 2 Destroying.
2 Sencible 1 Binding. 2 Tormenting.

2 Elect, in 1 Converting 1 Opening. 2 Pricking. 3 Bruising. 4 Turning.
2 Consuming, as 1 Healing. 2 Loosing. 3 Heating. 4 Comforting. 5 Killing. 6
Quickening. 7 Renewing.



The power of Preaching, OR THE POWERFVLL Effects of the WORD truly Preached
and rightly applied, as it was delivered in one or more SERMONS.
LVKE 4.32. For his word was with power.


IN this Chapter observe the preparation to Christ's Ministry; the execution
thereof; and the confirmation of the truth taught, by Miracles done,
wheresoever he became.

The preparation was by a fierce and violent temptation with which he was
assaulted, as it may appear to such as read the Chapter to the 14 verse: the
execution of his Ministry may be seen from thence to the 33. and the miracles
he did in the remainder of this Chapter, to the end thereof.

These words of the Evangelist which I have read, do concern the execution of
his glorious Ministry; in which consider:

1. The Country where he began to preach, Galile, his own Country where he
had least esteem, Verse 14.24.

2. Next, the places in that Country, the two chief Towns, Nazareth and
Capernaum, verse. 16.31.

3. Also in those Cities, what place he made choice of, not private houses, as
Conuenticlers, nor the streets, as fanaticall persons are accustomed, but the
chief place of concourse, to those excellent ends, the Synagogues, Verse 16.28.

4. Add hereunto, the Time when: even that set time which the Law enjoined, on
which the people usually met, on the Sabbath days, he most usually preached,
Verse 16.31.

5. Besides these, we have the manner of his Preaching: He stood up for to
read, and having received the Book, and read what he would, he closed it,
delivered it to the Minister, and sat down and Preached, Verse 16.17.20.

6. Moreover, the matter of his Sermon was an explication of the Prophecy of
Isaiah, with an application to the present times, Verse 18.21.

7. Lastly, the effects that followed upon his Preaching, to take them in the
same order (the Evangelist lays them down) are these and such like:

1. Divulgation. There went a fame of him throughout all the region round
about, Verse 14.

2. Glorification. He was glorified of all, Verse 15.

3. Attention. The eyes of all were fastened upon him, Verse 20.

4. Approbation. All bare him witness that his words were gracious, Verse 22.

5. Admiration. They all wondered, at his so gracious words, Verse 22.

6. Indignation. There were of the chief of them filled with wrath, and rose
up and thrust him out of the City, and bringing him to the brow of the hill
whereon the City was built, they would have cast him down headlong, but that
passing through the midst of them, he went his way, Verse 28.29.30.

7. Stupefaction. They were astonished at his doctrine.

The reason of all these is contained in the words which I have chosen for my
Text;

For his Word was with power.

As if the Evangelist should say in more words: you may think it strange that
Preaching should produce such effects; but if you consider the cause, you may
be easily satisfied: Seeing so great was the difference between his Preaching
and others of that time, that whereas they moved nothing at all, got no fame,
wan no glory to their Ministry, procured neither approbation, admiration, nor
so much as attention to the Word by their Preaching: seeing their Preaching was
cold, without any life, as if one told a dream: He became famous, glorious,
and most admirable; he spoke with authority, and his Preaching was so lively,
and became so effectual to all, in one kind or other, that he vexed the very
souls of wicked men that heard him; and astonished all that attended his
Ministry.

For his Word was with power.

In these words there may be observed 1. The Connection. 2. The Proposition.


The Connection in the Causall (For,) which shows it to be the reason which
the Evangelist gives of the manifold effects which Christ's Preaching produced:

The Proposition it self is affirmative, in which may be considered, 1. The
Subject: His Word. 2. The Predicate: was with power.


To set upon the Connection or the Causall, and to consider these words with
their relation to the former part of the Chapter: this Doctrine will thence
arise.

Where the word is powerfully Preached, it is effectual in one kind or other,
to such as do hear it. or, The word powerfully Preached, is effectual to the
hearers in one kind or other. This truth needs no other footing then this of
our Evangelist: He tells us that the true cause of the spreading of Christ's
fame, and the high esteem he procured in the hearts of some hearers, as also
of the wrath and rage of others was this, he Preached with authority: His word
was with power. So we may see also when the Lord Jesus had ended that Sermon on
the Mount, the people were astonished at his Doctrine, Mat. 7.28.29.
for his word was with power, and not as the Scribes.

This may be seen in the Preaching of all the Prophets, and Apostles; to
instance in a few of them: Eliah, Iam. 5.17.
a man subject to the like passions as we are, what powerful effects attended
his Preaching? Witness his prevailing so far to the conviction of his
hearers, 1 King. 19.40.
as that they obeyed his word in the slaughter of all the Prophets of Baal.

2 King.
And Elizeus or Elisha became as it were guide of Kingdoms, by the power of
this Word, Ion. 3.
as his History shows: yea, Jonas himself prevailed with great Nineveh, so
far as to bring the King, his Nobles, and all the City to true repentance.

That Voice of a Crier in the Wilderness, Mat. 3.
drew all to his Baptism; yea, convicted Soldiers, Luke 3.
Publicans, and People, in great multitudes.

The Apostle Peter drew three thousand to the Church at one Sermon; and five
thousand at another; Acts 1.41. and 4.3.
and at another Sermon of his, Acts 5.21.35.
the Senate were cut at the heart, by the power of his Word.

And Paul subdued whole Regions to the Faith, Acts 13. and 14, etc.
by his powerful Preaching; and convinced Gainsayers of all sorts, to the
enraging of some against his person.

Romans 1.16.
it must lose its denomination, and cease to be a word of power: 1 Cor. 1.18.
whereas it is the power of God, to the salvation of the believers, and the
condemnation of unbelievers.

return in vain, and void of the chief end for which it was sent. Whereas we
know, that as the rain comes down, and the snow from Heaven, and returns
not thither, but waters the earth, and makes it bring forth and bud; that it
may give seed to the Sower, and bread to the Eater: so says the Lord, shall my
Word be, Isai. 55.10.11.
that goes forth out of my mouth, it shall not return unto me void; but it
shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing
whereunto I sent it. And the holy Apostle Paul, tells us plainly in the person
of all holy Ministers: 2 Cor. 2.15.16.
We are unto God a sweet savor in Christ, in them that are saved, and in them
that perish: to the one we are the savor of death unto death; and to the
other, the savor of life unto life.

therefore Christ's Ministry must be far more powerfu l, 2 These 2.8.9.
and produce more manifest effects where it is exercised.

Jeremy, that powerful Prophet, where God says to him: See, Ier. 1.10.
I have set thee over the Nations, and over the Kingdoms, to root out, and to
pull down, and to destroy, and throw down, to build, and to plant.



power in Preaching?

Isa. 59.1.
Is Gods hand shortened? or his power weakened? Is not Jesus Christ the same
yesterday, Heb. 13.^.
to day, and for ever? Has he not promised to be with his Servants in
preaching to the end of the World? Mat. 28.20.
and that with the assistance of all power in Heaven and in Earth? Is not the
Holy Ghost the power of God, Luke 1.35.
in Christ's Ministers at this day? Does not the Evangelist John record a
promise that is lasting, Ioh. 14.12.
where it is written; Whosoever believes on Christ Jesus, the works that
Christ did, shall such a believer do: yea, greater works then those he did
in the days of his flesh? Is there not as much need of like power in the
preaching of the Word now, as there was then? yea, and more, seeing we have no
miracles to confirm the Word? Have we not Devils, and damned Atheists to
oppose, and contemn the Word at this day? Are there not such of whom it may be
said, as of Elimas the Sorcerer; That they are full of all subtilty, Act. 13.10.
and all mischief, children of the Devil, enemies of all righteousness,
which cease not to pervert the right ways of God?

Are not Ministers at this day as Fathers to beget? Mothers to trauaile-with,
and bring forth? Nurses to nourish? Watchmen to warn? Soldiers to fight for?
and Stewards to give every man his portion of meat in due season? Yea, is not
one Minister sometimes a Father, a Mother, a Nurse, a Watchman, a Soldier, and
a Steward at one and the same instant; and does not all this require great
power?

Are there not blind men at this day that want sight? lame that want strength?
Lepers that need clensing? sick that want health? strayers that must be sought
out? such as are fallen, to be raised up? dumb, deaf, and dead men, to be
made to speak, hear, and come out of their graves? And do not such works
require great power? If it were but to make a man that is dumb, deaf, and
blind, to understand, it were a matter of great difficulty, and requires great
power; but to raise up a dead man, that has long slept the sleep of death,
will any cold dreamer awake such a sleeper? No verily: It must be such whose
Ministry is attended with power.

And that there is required wonderful power at this day, consider further,
that we have not only dead men to raise, blind men to make to see, wounded
to heal, sick to recover, imprisoned to set free, strayers to seek out,
lambs to tender, sheep to feed, babes to whom we give milk, and stronger
to whom strong meat is belonging: but we have Sorcerers to withstand, Bears
and Lions to combat with; Philistines to whom we must go, sons of Anake to
conquer: yea, moreover we may have Ahabs to speak unto: Nebuchadnezzars to
resist: Hamans to contend with: Herod's to reprove. We may have Pharaohs to
march after us: Zedekiahs to disgrace us publicly: Sanballats to oppose, and
mock us: Iudasses to betray us: Demasses to forsake us: Halting people to
comber us: Alexanders to withstand our words: Corahs to raise forces against
us: Scribes and Pharisees to entrap us: High Priests to scorn us: Pilates to
condemn us: Multitudes to slander us, and the truth we teach: And if it should
so come to pass, as it has befallen our Wicliffe. Husse. Luther.
brethren, is not here still a work of great power? should we shrink in such
straights? Add hereunto that the Word is the same for ever: yea, the words of
God are as nails, Eccles. 12.11.
which being well driven, do hold with power; as goades to provoke and stir
up: Hosea 6.5.
axes to hew and square; as fire to burn and torment: Ier. 23.29.
as an hammer to break the rocks; as arrows that wound; a sword that
diuides: Psalm. 45.5.
yea, a sharp sword with two edges, Heb. 4.12.
to divide between the soul and the spirit, the joints and the marrow: And so
the Word is at this day, quick and powerful.

So that you now see that objection answered: namely, it is affirmed; That
Preaching is always powerful, whether we respect Gods power, unchangeable:
Christ's promise, of the assistance of all power in heaven and in earth; the
powerful work of the Ministry, in respect of their charge, of the power of
the word it self, that cannot be abated: yea, that by how much the elder the
world waxes, and the riper in sin, and by how much the more all miracles are
granted to be now ceased, by so much the more power must of necessity appear,
2 Cor. 12.
seeing Gods power is manifest in the greatest weakness: And where sin most
abounds, Gods grace in powerful Preaching, abounds much more in such as are
called.



1. Either Generally: 2. Or Particularly.


If we consider them Generally, they may be these, or such like:

1 Spreading.
1. First, a growing or spreading power: as may appear by some similitudes to
which it is compared, as that of Ezechiel, Ezech. 17.^2.23.
where he expresses it by a tender twig, cut off from the high Cedar, and
planted on an high and eminent mountain, which brings forth boughs, and
bears fruit, and becomes a goodly Cedar, that under it may dwell all foul of
every wing, even in the shadow of it. Mat. 13.30 31.
Or that where the Lord Jesus compares it to a grain of Mustard-seede, which
is the least of all seeds, and yet being sown, grows up, and becomes a
tree. Act. 19.10.
And it is expressly said of the Word, that it grew powerfully in the Apostles
days: Verse 14.
So in this Chapter, the same of Christ's Preaching was spread abroad,
throughout all the Region round about. Col. 1.6.
And the Apostle Paul tells us, that it was in his time spread over all the
world, and so you have the growing, increasing, or spreading power of the word.

Secondly, 2 Drawing.
the word powerfully Preached has a drawing power. And it may be well said of
powerful Preachers, they draw more after them with their tongues, then
Hercules could drive before him with his club: It will draw all men to it, we
may see it, in the power and efficacy of John Baptists word: Mat. 3.5.7.
who knew nothing, but the Doctrine, and Baptism of Repentance: Yet all the
Regions flocked after him, and came to his Preaching. And when his Disciples
told him that all men came to Christ, as they had formerly to him: he
answers, that a man can receive nothing except it be given him from above:
Ioh. 3.26.
As if he should have said: Christ has this power of drawing men after him,
Ioh. 12.32.
from above: and says further, that the power of Christ in that thing must
increase, and his power decrease: and adds yet further, that therein is his
joy fulfilled. Verse 42.
And in this Chapter is this confirmed by that, when Christ went into a desert
place, all the people were drawn thither also: yea, his word was so powerful,
that it drew them by multitudes, Ioh. 6.14 22.24.25.
over Sea, unto him: so that they would have made him a King, for the word has
a drawing power.

3 Searching.
Thirdly, the Word powerfully preached, has a searching power: it can enter
into the discerning of the inward parts. Heb. 4.12.13.
It discerns the secret thoughts, and intents of the heart; All things are
open and naked to the eyes of it. 1 Cor. 14.25.
It finds out men's purposes, lays open their most secret intents, yea,
reueales the very depths of Satan: It can go into heaven, and show us what
treasures are therein store, it can dig into hell, and discover the torments,
prepared for impenitent and rebellious persons; and so you have the searching
power.

Fourthly, 4 Dividing
it has a dividing power: by which it seuers one thing from another. It
pierces even to the dividing asunder of the soul, Heb. 4.12.
and the spirit, and the joints, and the marrow. See this also where the Lord
says in this regard: I am not come to send peace but a sword. Mat. 10.34 35.
I am come to divide between the Father, and the Son, the Daughter, and the
Mother: the Daughter in law, and the Mother in law. As it is expressed in so
many words, by another Evangelist thus. Suppose ye that I am come to send
peace on the earth. I tell you nay, but rather division: Luke 12.35
for from henceforth there shall be five, in one house, divided, three against
two, and two against three. The Father shall be divided against the Son, and
the Son against the Father, the Mother against the Daughter, and the Daughter
against the Mother, the Mother in law, against her Daughter in law, and the
Daughter in law against her Mother in law. Yea, this word deuides between
clean and unclean; holy and profane; such as swear, and such as fear an
oath; between righteousness, and unrighteousness; light, and darkness:
true worship and Idolatry; between Christ and Antichrist. So that the word
has a dividing power.

To these may be added, the prevailing power of the word, 5 Prevailing.
in that it bears down all opposition. It will root out, and throw down;
destroy and consume: it will build, and plant. It will cast out foul spirits,
and convict Coniurers, and make them bring forth their Books of curious arts,
and burn them even to the value of many thousand pieces of silver. Act.
19.19.20.
So mightily will it grow, and prevail where it is truly taught.

perceive that it searches their hearts, and lays open their secret
practices, or does it set them at ods, and make a separation between the godly,
and ungodly; the righteous, and the wicked; the religious, and profane? and
does it prevail mightily, in the restraining of the rebellious, and reforming
the disorderly? Do thou find all these, or any of these? then may thou
conclude with comfort, that Gods power does attend thy preaching: and such
people as see these effects, may say that God is present in such Preachers, of
a truth.

makes a separation where it comes; prevailing mightily in the conuicting of
some, the converting of others, the comforting of the godly, the discovery of
the hypocrite, and profane person. They cry down such Preachers, and set
themselves against such Preaching with all their power: but this will appear
more plainly, when we come to the particular powers of the Word.

and more in these things? break forth into the praises of God, and return
due thanks to his Majesty, for his great mercy, in affording such a Ministry,
as has so powerful effects: Such a Ministry is undoubtedly of God. For
Christ's Word is with power.

To come more particularly to show the powers of the Word; we may consider it,
as it is common both to the Elect and reprobate, and as it may be peculiar to
either of them.

The common powers which work both in the Elect, and reprobate, are these:

1 Conuincing.
First, a conuincing power; when men are not only made to see a difference
between truth and error: but also convicted in their consciences, that truth
is truth, and error is error. This power in preaching, has footing on a direct
promise, to all such as preach by the holy Spirit. Ioh. 16.8.
They shall convince the World of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment.
Acts 18.28
So Apollos a man mighty in the holy Scriptures, did powerfully prevail to the
conviction of the gaine-saying Jews; and that publicly showing them that
Jesus was Christ. So it is written; 1 Cor. 14.24.
That if all Prophecy, that is, speak the Word plainly with power: If an
unlearned man, or an unbeliever be present, he is convinced by such powerful
preaching.

Secondly, powerful preaching, 2 Terrifying.
has a terrifying power. As when Herod heard only of the birth of Christ, he
was terrified, Mat. 2.1.2.
and all Jerusalem with him. Acts 24.25
And wicked Foelix hearing a powerful Preacher only reason in his presence of
righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come; he trembled. And to such
has God respect, Isai 66.1.
especially as tremble at his Word: so that the word powerfully preached,
works trembling in both Elect, and reprobate. Hab. 3.16.
For so Habacuck says; I heard, and my belly trembled, my lips quiuered at
the voice, and yet he was an holy Prophet: and Moses himself at the
promulgation of the Law, Heb. 11.21.
was constrained to say; I exceedingly fear, and quake.

3 Humbling.
Thirdly, the Word powerfully preached, has an humbling power, both in elect
and reprobate: as we perceive in that place before alleged, for the
conuicting power, that such unlearned and unbelieving as hear such preaching,
fall down on their faces, and worship God, and acknowledge that God is present
in such Preachers of a truth. And such power was in Christ's preaching in days
of his flesh, Mat. 8.29. Mat. 1.24.
that it humbled many, even Devils, and wicked persons, as well as others: that
they came running, and kneeling down, Mar. 10.17.18.
yea, falling down and confessing, that he was the Son of God, and a good
man. 1 King. 21.24.
Ahab also humbled himself for a little season: And Cain was humbled by the
power of this word, though Ahab too little, Genesis 4.14.
and Caine overmuch.

Fourthly, 4 Restrayning.
the word powerfully Preached, has a restrayning power. It keeps the
reprobate as the elect from breaking out into foul enormities, and does
restrain them from gross sins, as in the presence of Moses, Exo. 32.1.2.3
the people were restrained from Idolatry: which in his absence, they
committed with an high hand. And we read of a King of Judah, even Ioash, 2
Chro. 24.2.
whole heart was not right, yet did he that which was right in Gods fight, all
the days of Iehoiada the Priest. And experience does teach us, that where the
word is most zealously pressed, and powerfully urged, such places are far
more free from open impieties, then other places where it is not so.

5 Reforming. Ioh. 6.66.
Furthermore, the word has a reforming power; in both elect, and reprobates. As
may appear in those believers, that went back from Christ: and especially of
Herod, that wicked man, of whom we read, that he feared John the Baptist, Mar.
6.20.
knowing that he was a just, and an holy man, and observed him, and when he
heard, he did many things, and heard him gladly.

6 Astonishing.
Add to these, that the word has an astonishing power: by which it stupifies,
and does amaze, as well the reprobate, as the elect: as we see in Simon Magus,
Act. 13.8.
of whom we read that he believed, and when he was baptized, continued with
Philip, and wondered. And we read also of the Preaching of Christ, that the
hearers were astonished at his doctrine, Mark. 2.21 22.
for he taught as one that had power, and not as the Scribes.

Also the word powerfully Preached, is delightful, 7 Delighting.
as well to the wicked, as the godly: that it is delightful to the godly, is
without question, it is the very joy and rejoicing of their hearts: Ier. 15.16.
Psalm. 19.10. Ezech. 33.32.
sweeter to them then honey, and the hony-combe; but to the very wicked,
Ezechiel tells us, that such whose hearts do still go after their
covetousness, yet his word was as pleasant to them as a lovely song, of one
that has a pleasant voice, and can play well on an instrument. Mar. 6.20.
And of Herod we read that he heard John gladly: Mat. 13.10.21.
Also we see it in that Parable of the stony ground; the application whereof is
to reprobate hearers, that yet receive the word with joy.



And first of the powers of the word Preached in the reprobate hearer, and they
are either sencible, Insencible
or insencible:

The insencible powers of the word Preached, in reprobates, is: 1 Hardening
that hardening power of the word, whereby their hearts are hardened, and their
very consciences seared, 1 Timothy 4.2.
as with an hot Iron: that whereas they had at first hearing, some sense, they
become by often conviction, altogether senseless: Of this power, Isa. 6.9.10.
God speaks to Isaiah, whose mission seems to be chiefly to that end, as it
appears where we read it written, that God says unto him, go tell this
people, hear ye indeed, but understand not: and see ye indeed, but perceive
not? Make the heart of this people fat; and make their ears heavy, and shut
their eyes. This the holy Apostle Paul applies to the unbelieving Jews, where
he says; Well spoke the holy Ghost, Act. 28.25:26.27.
by Esayas the Prophet, unto our Fathers, saying, Go unto this people and say;
hearing you shall hear, and shall not understand; and seeing, you shall see;
and shall not perceive: For the heart of this people is waxed gross. Ephesians. 4.19.
And the same Paul tells us of some that are past feeling.

2 Destroying.
Another power of the word, which is also insencible, may be that destroying
power: whereby the wicked are not only more and more hardened, but have all
the faculties of the soul perverted, and by degrees destroyed. 2 Cor. 2.16
And that the word has such a destroying power, appears where it is called,
the savor of death unto death. Ier. 1.10.
And Ieremies mission gave him power to destroy and throw down, as well as to
build and plant. And the Apostle Paul tells the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 10.8 and
13.10.
or the elect at Corinth, that he used his power toward them to edification,
and not to destruction: so that the word Preached, has a destroying power.

The sencible powers of the word, Sencible.
in the very reprobate are either that tormenting power, or else that binding
power.

And that such a scorching or tormenting, 1 Scorching.
or cutting power of the word, is sencibly apprehended by reprobates, we may
perceive in Ahab, who in that respect, 1 King. 18.17. and 21.20. and 22.8.
called Eliah the troubler of Israel, and hated Micaiah, another powerful
Preacher, for that he vexed or tormented him, never Preaching good unto him,
but evil. And in Foelix, who was so vexed by Paul's reasoning, Act. 24.25.
that he sent him away And the Jews who being convicted, Act. 7.54.57.
were cut at the heart by the Preaching of Steven, and gnashed upon him with
their teeth: and stopping their ears, ran upon him, as they did on his
Master, as has been showed out of this Chapter: Verse 28.29.
And therefore it is compared to fire which scorcheth men with great heat, and
causes them to discover themselves by blasphemies. Reu. 16.8.9.


2 Binding.
Another sencible power of the Word, is that binding power, by which wicked
reprobates do see themselves bound hand and foot, Mat. 22.13.
and cast out of the Church, and Gods protection; that is, do perceive that
they are severed from the godly, and shut out of the inheritance of the Saints
in light: and do also perceive that they have no power any more to move a
foot toward that way, or an hand to that excellent work. And this is done by
the power of the holy spirit in Ioh. 20.23.
the word Preached.

2 These. 2.8.
yea, become not only benumbed, that they even fall asleep ordinarily at the
Preaching of the same; but also (to such as understand) become apparently more
ignorant and sottish, more perverse, and peevish: yea, are even consumed as it
were to nothing by the Preaching thereof; that whereas they have seemed to be
pleased with a Sermon, and have done some things gladly, and sorborne other
things which the word forbids: yea, been much humbled with a kind of
trembling, and astonishment at the conviction of their consciences, now they
are not stirred at all, nor delighted, nor yet at all do admire it, but count
it as a common thing, and by how much the more powerful it is, by so much
less do they regard it: yea, by so much more neglect it, and contemn it. Nor
yet may we wonder that they are filled with wrath, and rage at the Preachers
of it: seeing they do plainly see themselves sencibly bound, as it were hand
and foot, and cast out amongst dogs, and swine: and also continually
scorched, and vexed by the heat, and feruency of such powerful preaching. No
wonder then if they cry down such Preaching, and get to themselves heaps of
teachers, 2 Timothy 4.3.4.
that if one prick, another may please: You have seen clearly, such are the
powers of the word truly taught, that it tormenteth, binds, hardneth; yea,
destroys and consumes the very reprobates: and there is no other effect to
be looked for in any such, but these, to be trembled at in the naming of them.

Come we now to the powers of the word Preached, in the very Elect, those that
are peculiar to them in a special manner; and let us take them either as they
are manifested in their conversion, or confirmation.

And first in their converting: Converting power.
and they are either that opening, pricking, brusing, or that turning power of
the word: and first of that opening power.

First, 1 Opening.
the word has an opening power, whereby it does not only open the eyes of the
Elect, as it may of the reprobate, Numb. 24.16.
as Balaams eyes were opened: but in a more clear manner, Revel. 3.18.
are they made to see the mysteries of godliness, then any reprobate, and to
this end their hearts are opened with Lidia, Act. 16.14.
that they not only understand, but affect what they understand: and in this
sense it may be called the key of David, Reu. 3.7.
that opens, and no man shuts: that is, that so opens that it can never
be shut or closed any more; Mat. 13.11.
and this is proper to the Elect.

2 Pricking.
Secondly, the word Preached, has a pricking power: by which it does not only
somewhat trouble, but thoroughly wound the very heart of Gods people, Act. 1.37.
as were those Conuerts to whom Peter Preached, they were pricked in their
hearts: therefore is it in this respect, compared even to sharp arrows, Psalm.
45.5.
as has been showed; it pierces into the very souls of poor sinners, and
makes them sencible of their transgression, Heb. 4.12.
and this is also proper to the Elect.

Thirdly, 3 Bruising.
the Word powerfully preached, has the power of bruising, yea, of breaking to
pieces the very Elect, as Jeremiah tells us, Ier. 23.29.
where he compares it to an hammer, that breaks rocks. So it breaks their
hard and stony hearts, and makes them not only seem nothing in their own
eyes, but also makes them the more capable of the new work of regeneration,
Ezech. 11.19.
as Ezechiel speaks, where God says by him; I will take out your stony
hearts, and give you hearts of flesh.

This is that renting of the heart, which God requires: Joel 2.13.
and that broken heart, that he will not despise. Psalm. 51.17


Lastly, the Word preached, 1 Turning.
has also a turning power, by which it changes men's minds, and also alters
their affections. So it was said of John the Baptist, that he should go
before Christ, Luke 1.17.
in the Spirit, and power of Elias, to turn the hearts of the Fathers to the
Children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just. Psalm. 19.7.1
So we read, that it is one property of the Doctrine of God, to convert the
soul. And this power, the holy Apostle Paul speaks of to the Thessalonians,
where he says; 1 These. 1.5.9.
Our Gospel came not unto you in word only, but also in power: in that it
turned them from Idols to serve the living and true God. And this was the end
of his sending, Acts 26.18
not only to open men's eyes, but to turn them from darkness to light, from
the power of Satan to God: And so you have the opening, pricking, bruising,
and turning power of the Word, which appertain to the converting of the Elect,
and so may be said to be proper to them only.

way, and a vehement care of drawing near to God, and being reconciled to his
Majesty? by these thou may be able to conclude with comfort, that thou art
in the true way to eternal life, and without doubt ordained to everlasting
happiness. And that thou may be yet further assured, we will proceed to
the power of the Word, in confirming such as are thus turned to God.

Confirming power.
The same Word that thus conuerteth, does also confirm the converted; and that
by these powerful effects which follow.

1 Healing.
First, the Word as it wounds, so it heals; it has an healing power, Psalm.
107.20.
as the Psalmist witnesses, where we read of such as are spiritually sick
with the conscience of sin; God sent his Word, and healed them. And Christ
proclaims it in this Chapter, that his Word has an healing power; where
applying the Prophecy of Esayas to himself, he says; Ver. 18.23.
Isa 61.6.
He is sent to heal the broken in heart: which the Prophet calls bind up. So
that the Word powerfully preached, is that good Samaritan, Luke 10.^ 30.
which binds up the wounds of that sin-wounded Traveler; and the only Balm
of Gilead, that healing medicine, whereby health is restored to the sick soul.

Reu. 12.2.
If any be then wounded by the Word, let not that drive them from it, but
rather draw them to it; if ever they will have health, here, and no where else
may they expect it; and it may be an argument of the truth of election, if the
Word have healed, as well as wounded thee: or if at least thou seek health at
the Word preached.

2 Loosing.
Secondly, the Word has also the power of losing, or setting free, such as are
turned to God; that whereas before they have lived in thraldom and bondage,
now are they partakers of the glorious liberty of the sons of God: Luke
13.12.16.
yea, never did Christ's word more manifestly free that daughter of Abraham,
(whom Satan had bound eighteen years, that she could not lift up her self)
from that devilish bond; then such as are Gods, are free, and set at liberty
by the word preached, to run the ways of Gods Commandments. Isa 61.1.
We may see it in that Prophecy of Esayas, which our Savior applies to this
end, Verse 18.
in this Chapter; where we read, that he is sent to preach deliverance to the
captives, and to set at liberty such as are bruised: yea, to preach the year
of Iubilee, Verse 19.
or the acceptable year of the Lord. So is this power promised to all
faithful Preachers, in these words; Mat. 16.19 and 18.18.
Whatsoever you loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven: And whosoeuers sins
you remit, Ioh. 20.23.
they are remitted. Th s our Lord also at another time affirmed, where he
says; If you continue in my Word, then are you my Disciples indeed: Ioh
8.31.32.
and you shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.

Ioh. 8.33.34.
and in bondage thereunto, led captive by the Devil at his own will, and by
the virtue and powerful efficacy of the Word, are now losed, and set at
liberty, not only to stand upright, but to walk, and to run the ways of Gods
Commandments. Try thy self then, 2 Cor. 3.17.
art thou such a free man? Where the Spirit is, there is this liberty, says
the Apostle Paul. Art thou then set at liberty? by what public Sermon, or
Sermons? or by what private application of the promises to thy soul? when, or
since what time have thou perceived the striking off of thy chains, the
opening of the prison door, and iron gate of thy sins, that thou might be
admitted to the fellowship of the Saints? The Word powerfully preached, does
heal, as well as wound; and loose the Elect, as bind the reprobate. And so
much also for the power of loosing, which is also proper to Gods chosen people.

Thirdly, 3 Heating.
the word powerfully Preached does warm, yea, heat the cold hearts of poor
humbled sinners, and in this sense it is compared to fire, as David speaks of
it, Psalm. 39.3.
where he says, His heart was hot within him, and while he was musing how to
be silent (in the presence of the wicked) the fire burned. Ier. ^0.9.
And Jeremy resolving also upon silence, tells us that this word was in his
heart as a burning fire, shut up in his bones: insomuch that he was weary with
forbearing, and could not stay: And the Disciples that had Christ's company in
their way to Emaus, say of his conference: Did not our hearts burn within us
while he talked with us by the way? Luke 24.32.
and this is that which the spirit finds absent in that Church of Laodicea.
Revel. 3.15.19
Where it wishes that they were either hot or cold: and commands them to be
zealous, that is, to be hot and fervent.

Ephesians. 2.1.
We are cold all by nature, as being dead in sins and trespasses: and so
benumbed with cold, and even frozen in the dirt of wickedness, if this word
have thawed us, and so also warmed our hearts, and does still heat us, that we
can feelingly say, we are heated; yea, our hearts burn within us, in prayer,
holy conference, and in the Preaching of the word: and that the heat of it is
so great, that it even wastes us in the love of God, zeal for his glory, and
the love of Gods Church, and of all men; yea, so great is this heat, that the
many waters of discouragements, Cant. 8.6.7
nor floods of opposition; yea, our own rash resolutions cannot quench it. but
it flasheth out now and then, and will not be extinguished: this is a notable
confirmation of the excellency of our estate, and that we are undoubtedly Gods
Elect and chosen ones, seeing this is a power peculiar and properly belonging
unto them.

Fourthly, 4 Comforting.
the word powerfully Preached, has a comforting power, in Gods Elect. It is
their comforter in all their troubles: this is that which wipeth all tears
from their eyes: and by which they are dandled upon the knees of Gods love.
Isai. 66.11.12. Psalm. 19.8.
So we read, that the Statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart;
yea, this word to Jeremy, Ier. 15.16. Psalm. 119.14.^0
was his only joy. It was David's comfort in affliction: yea, he rejoiced as
much in Gods word, as in all manner of riches: It was sweeter to his mouth then
honey, and the honycombe.



Besides these, the powerful word does also discover its power in Gods Elect
by killing them; 5 Killing.
yea, striking them under the fifth rib of their sins. The word will strike
the man of sin through the forehead, as David smote Goliath with a stone from
his sling: yea, it will make sin fall groueling to the earth, and cut off the
very head of it. It will cut it at the heart, and nail it to the very Cross
of Christ: Gal. 5.24.
as it is written; They that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the
affections and lusts. Col. 3.3.4.
It mortifies such as are Gods Elect in that manner, that they can say, They
are dead, Gal. 2.19.20
and, I live no more. They that were dead in sin, are dead to sin by the
power of this word where it is effectually Preached to the Elect.

and crucified our flesh with the affections and lusts? 1 Ioh. 3.8.
has it destroyed the strong holds of sin, and all the works of the Devil
in us? has it bound the strong man and cast him out? and does it daily, and
every time we hear, Luke 11.
mortify the deeds of the flesh, our earthly members? Col. 3.4.
by this we may also conclude, that it is profitable to us; and that we are
Gods Elect, by this power which is peculiar to Gods people.

6 Quickening.
Add to these, that quickening power of the word Preached, whereby it does
revive, and put not only heat, Ioh. 5.24.25.
but life into such as hear it. Of this speaks the Lord of life, where he
says; Isai. 55.3.
The dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and such as hear shall
live. And the Prophet Esayas, Hear, and your souls shall live. And how were
the Ephesians quickened? Ephesians. 2.1. and 1.13.
who before were dead in trespasses and sins: but by the Preaching of the
Gospel, this powerful word?

The just shall live by faith; is a Mystery of Mysteries, a dark and obscure
riddle: and therefore it may much confirm, and add to the comfort of Gods
people, when they can truly say, that they now live; it is by the faith of the
Son of God, who loved them, and gave himself for them. Art thou now
quickened? since when have thou felt this reviving? Thou were once dead* If thou
be now alive, thou may be bold to conclude, that thou art ordained to
life; seeing thou have the beginnings of it already; and so much also for the
power of quickening.

7 Renewing
Last of all, the Word has a renewing power: It does not only heal, loose,
revive, heat, and comfort the souls of the Elect, but they are renewed by it;
their health, freedom, life, heat, and comforts, are increased daily more and
more, they go on from strength to strength, Psalm. ^4.7.
and are daily renewed in the image of their minds: they renew their strength,
Isa 40.31.
as the Eagles; they are daily edified, 2 Cor. 13.10.
and built up in their most holy faith. And this is done by their purging, Jude
verse 20
through the washing of water by the Word, and by the wholesome clothing, 1
Pet. ^.^.
and feeding, the word affoords. What shall I more say? the time would fail
me, to speak of all the powers of the word.



you are in danger to feel its power, to your destruction and condemnation: It
will be either the savor of life, or of death, to all that hear it. Labor
then to let it have its effect, in the saving of your souls: suffer the words
of exhortation, though they prick, and wound, and kill, and work sorrow in
your souls; yet they will heal, and revive, and glad the hearts of all that
submit thereunto: yea, this is that means which God has left, as the chief
means, for the saving of such as are ordained to life, the word shall be
powerful to convert, and establish, and build them all up in their most holy
Faith; yea, to present them blameless before the presence of Gods glory with
exceeding joy.

Beware then of contending against it: It is hard kicking against the pricks,
dangerous stumbling at this stone, fearful falling on this rock; Men may
rage at, and persecute such powerful Preachers, Reu. 11.5^
but the word in their mouths, is like fire, Ier. 5.14.
to consume all that dare touch them for hurt. Now therefore contemn it not,
lest your hearts be hardened, and your consciences seared, by the power
thereof; lest you be more and more tormented by it, and at length bound hand
and foot, and delivered over to Satan: yea, cast into utter darkness, there
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

I desire to use that power I have received to your conversion, and
edification, and not to destruction. Let the Word then prick you, that it may
promote you; let it lance you, that it may loose you; let it kill you, that it
may quicken you; let it bruise you, that it may bind you up; let it terrify
you, that it may turn you from all impiety; let it work sencibly upon you for
your saving, that it work not insencibly for your damning. Which GOD grant,
and for which I will bow my knees, unto that most powerful God, that he will
grant you according to the riches of his grace, the power of turning from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to himself, that you may
receive the forgiveness of sins, and inheritance amongst them that are
sanctified, by faith in Christ Jesus; and that all such as are already
translated from death to life, and from the power of darkness, into the
Kingdom of Christ Jesus, may be daily built up, and be more and more renewed,
in the image of their minds, and become more conformable to Christ their
glory: and that even for Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

Let us now return thanks to our God, and pray for a blessing upon what we
have heard, etc.

FINIS.

