ALBIONS TRIVMPH.

PERSONATED IN A Mask at Court.

By the Kings Majesty and his Lords.

The Sunday after Twelfe Night. 1631.



LONDON, Printed by Aug: Mathewes for Robert Allet at the Black Bear in Paul's
Churchyard. 1631.

ALBIONS TRIVMPH.
THe King and Queens Majesty having signified their pleasure to have a new
Mask this New year, Master Inigo Jones and I were employed in the Invention
And we agreed the subject of it should be a Triumph in ALBIPOLIS the chief
City of ALBION. The Triumpher, ALBANACTVS, And ALBA this Islands Goddess. Names
not improper, either for the Place, or for the Persons: ALBION being (as it
once was) taken for England; ALBANACTVS, for the King, Quasi in Albania natus:
Borne in Scotland. And ALBA, for the Queen whose native Beauties have a great
affinity with all Purity and Whiteness. The Kings devoting himself to this
Goddess, is but the seeking of that happy Union which was preordeyned by the
greatest of the Gods. JOVE therefore sends down MERCVRY to ALBA, to acquaint
her that he had decreed a Triumph, which (a far of) she might behold:
Concealing his further Counsels, until ALBANACTVS were subdued to Love and
Chastity, by CUPID and DIANA, who descend, and having conquered the Conqueror,
They show him the Queen. The King, yields, And presents himself a Suppliant,
to the Goddess ALBA. She embraces him, And makes him Copartner of her Deity.

The Description of the SCENE.
The first thing that presented it self to the eye, was the Ornament that went
about the Scene: in the midst of which, was placed a great Arms of the
Kings, with Angels holding an Imperial Crown, from which hung a Drapery, of
crimson Velvet, fringed with gold, tackt in several knotts, that on each-side,
with many folds, was wound about a Pillaster; in the freeze, were festones of
several fruits in their natural colors, on which, in gracious postures lay
Children sleeping; at each end was a double shield, with a Gorgons head, and at
the foot of the pillasters, on each side, stood two Women, the one young, in a
watchet Robe looking upwards, and on her head, a pair of Compasses of gold,
the points standing toward Heaven: the other more ancient, and of a venerable
aspect, apparreled in tawney, looking downwards; in the one hand a long ruler,
and in the other, a great pair of iron Compasses, one point whereof, stood on
the ground, and the other touched part of the ruler. Above their heads, were
fixed, compertiments of a new composition, and in that over the first, was
written Theorica, and over the second Practica, showing that by these two, all
works of Architecture, and Ingining have their perfection. The Curtain being
suddenly drawn up, the first Scene appeared, which represented a Roman
Atrium, with high Collombs of white Marble, and ornaments of Architecture of a
composed manner of great proiecture, enricht with carving, and between every
return of these Collombs, stood Statues of gold on round pedestalls, and
beyond these, were other pieces of Architecture of a Palace royal.

Over all was a serene sky, out of which a cloud began to break forth, and
as it descended, a person was discovered, sitting in it, which by his Petasus
and Caduceus, was known to be Mercury, the messenger of Jove.

The first Song.
Behold! I come not from above,
To hyde, or hunt out wanton Love,
Or do what Man can do:
But to spread all my nimble wings,
And like a God, do Godlike things
Grateful, and Gracious too.
Observe! But see ye be not nyce,
Prepare to give, and take advice,
As Wisemen ought to do:
Lest when your subtle wits have done,
Your Notes, like Motes, thought in the Sun
Prove far beneath us too.
Admyre! but censure not their Powers,
That sink not with Times sandy hours,
As mortal Creatures do.
And since the Shaft that is adrest,
At Heaven may hurt the Shooters breast,
Be pleas'a and please us too.
Orpheus, Amphion, Arion and three old Poets and Musicians more, rayled by his
Charming Rod, reply from Earth. The first Chorus.
Happy, thrice happy is that hour
Wherein a God descends,
Either in person, or in power
And Man's poor state befriends.
MERCVRY descend to Earth, and attended by Orpheus, and the rest walks up, and
drawing near the person of the Goddess ALBA, to a soft sweet Music that
piayes hehind him. In voce Recitativa, he declares the substance of his
Commission. The second Song.
Olimpian JOVE to the bright ALBA sends
No vulgar God to bear his dear Commends.
And with pure eyes, and a paternall hand,
This Universe having surveyed, and span'd,
In Counc^ll with himself, he has decreed,
From fair ALBIPOLIS shall soon proceed
A Triumph: Mighty, as the Man designed
To wear those Bays; Heroicke, as his mind;
Just, as his actions; Glorious, as his Reign.
And like his Virtues, Infinite in Treyne.
The Immort all Swannes, contending for his Name,
Shall bear it singing, to the House of Fame.
And though at distance yet High JOVE is plea'd
Your laboring eyes shall with his sight be eased,
This from a God, unto a Goddess sent,
A God Relates, that could use Complement:
But when such States, negotiate by such means
We speak in Acts, and scorn words trifling Scenes.
Having delivered his Embassage MERCVRY gently retiring, Orpheus and his
Poetic Quire Inspired with Divination sing. The second Chorus.
Ye Powers Divine make room, prepare a Seat
On the Northside, for ALBANACT the Great,
Earth is not fruitless: nor your nombers full,
There Is One to come will make some Stars look dull.
Arrived at the Scene again and meaning to reascend, MERCVRY finding some
impediment by the way of question adresses himself to the Company. The third
Song.
MERCVRY. What mak's me so vnnimbly rise,
That did descend so fleet?
There is no vp-hill in the skies;
Clouds stay not feathered feet.

CHORUS. Thy wings are singed: and thou can fly
But slowly now, swift MERCVRY.

MERCVRY. Some Lady here, is sure too blame
That from Loves starry skies,
Has shot some Beam, or sent some flame,
Like Lghtning, from her Eyes.

CHORUS. Tax not the Stars, with what the Sun,
Too near aproch't (insens't) has done.

MERCVRY. I Will roll me in Auroras Dew,
Or lie in Tethis bed;
Or from cool Iris beg a few,
Pure Opale shewrs new shed.

CHORUS. Nor Dew, nor shewers, nor sea can slake
Thy quenchlesse heat, but Lethes lake.



When MERCVRY is Re-assum'd into Heaven in Pomp. Here the Scene is changed
into the Forum of the City of Albipolis, and Albanactus triumphing, attended
like a Roman Emperor is seen a far off to pass in pomp.

The Scene is turned into an Amphitheater, with people sitting in it, a
Patritian and a Plebeian come forth, etc.

Enter Platonicus and Publius. Pub. Though I have earned it with the sweat of
my brows in January, yet I am glad I saw it, for there never was such a sight
seen.


Pla. What sight Publius?

Pub. The Triumph.

Pla. Whose Triumph?

Pub. The Triumph of ALBANACTVS.

Pla. Did thou see it?

Pub See it, yes, and feel it too. Every one there (I can assure you) went not
upon his own feet.


Pla. No, I think, some rid.

Pub. They did so, for some rid me. Some trod on my toes. Some cried, some
kept it in; for my part, I confessed all, for fear I should have been p^est to
death.


Pla. Though thy body was pincht, thine eyes were feasted.


Pub. Were not yours so too?

Pla. Yes.

Pub. Where stood you?

Pla. I stood not,

Pub. You had the better friends sir, I pray where sat you?


Pla. In my studdy.

Pub. Is not your studdy backward? with a shop-light in it, where one can see
nothing but the sky?


Pla. I confess it, what of that?

Pub. Why then you saw no Triumph.

Pla. But I did, and a true one, thine was but a show.

Pub. If what I saw was but a show, what you saw was but a shadow, or at the
most a Vision. For it seems your body kept home, though your spirit walked.


Pla. It did so. And traveled to better purpose then most men do, that go,
and see, and say, but know nothing.


Pub. To confute that Heresy of yours, I have gone, and seen, and know, but I
will say nothing.


Pla. That Is impossible; The meat thou have lately fed upon, is so windy, out
it must, thou will burst else.


Pub. Faith sir, I am very full indeed.

Pla. Purge then, and tell thy Doctor all.

Pub. ALBANACTVS CAESAR from his sumptuous Palace, through the high-streets of
ALBIPOLIS rid Triumphing, on a Chariot, made --


Pla. Of wood, perhaps guilt, perhaps gold. But I will save you all those
charges, if you will go on to the Persons, and let the Pagents alone.


Pub. Sir I saw him not as he was borne, naked, but since you affect such
brevity, I saw the King and a great deal more, and so I turned my back, and
went away.


Pla. Nay good Publius, now thou art too brief.

Pub. When you begin to tell your dreams, I Will not iogge you, till you wake
of your self.


Pla. Nay prithee be not angry.

Pub. I am not angry, but a little short-winded upon occasion. Yet to give you
some satisfaction because you have done me wrong. Before CAESAR Marched Captive
Kings, with their hands bound. And Ladies, with their Arms acrosse, furious
wild Beasts, great Giants, and little Dwarfes with Lictors, and Pictors, and a
number of Prie^ts that were as you would have them, In their shirts. These with
certain Princes that were behind him: made up a Triumph too great to come out
of any mortal man's mouth.


Pla. That Is most certain.

Pub. I mean in words. But as you hunt me you would hunt a Hare off her legs.


Pla. I confess thou have made more haste, then good speed: But for a
supplement to thy lame Story, Know, I have seen this brave ALBANACIVS CAESAR,
seen him with the eyes of understanding, vew'd all his Actions; looked into
his Mind: which I find armed with so many moral virtues that he daily
Conquers a world of Vices, which are wild Beasts indeed.

For example Ambition, is a Lion; Cruelty, a Bear; Avarice, a Wolf. Yet He
subdues them all. To be short, no Vice is so small, to escape him: Nor so great,
but he overcomes it: And in that fashion he Triumphs overall the Kings, and
Queens that went before him. All his Passions, are his true Subjects: And
Knowledge, Judgment, Merit, Bounty and the like, are fit Comma ders, for such a
General, Th^se Triumph with him, And these are the Princes you saw about him.
And this Publius, is more then you can find in the street.


Pub. I grant it, But yet grant me one Request dear
Platonicus?

Pla. What Is that?

Pub. Go but with me to the Amphitheater.

Pla. To Gaze.

Pub. Yes.

Pla. Why beforehand I know there will be Gladiators, Saltators, and sights to
please the People. Were not thou better stay here, and see CAESAR present
himself to this fair Goddess, seeking sweet rest, after all his labors.


Pub. I should sleep at such a sight.

Pla. Then after a Play, thou art all for a Pryze.

Pub. All together, and so (I hope) are you

Pla. At this time, I am. For I will go with thee, if it be but to teach thee
to Read in thy own Book. Outsides, have Insides, Shells, have Kernells in
them. And under every Fable, nay (almost) under every thing, lies a Morrall.

Publius stumbles at a s^o^e, and stoops to take it up. What art thou doing
Publius.


Pub. Lifting up the stone I stumbled at.

Pla. To what end?

Pub. To see what lies under it.

Pla. What should lie under a stone, but a Worm, or a
Hoglouse.

Pub. If there lie not a Moral under it, then have you taught me false
Doctrine.


Pla. Such thanks have they that teach such Sch^llers. Come away Fool, they
begin to throng to the Theater.


Such kind of pastimes as Victorious Emperors were wont to present as
Spectacles to the People, are h^^^e produced for Anti-Maskes upon the s^age.

The Anti-Maskes enter.
First, Fools 6 Secondly, Saltaters or Tumblers. 7 Thirdly, Pugili or
Buffeters 3 Fourthly, Satyrslike Dauncers 2 Fifthly, One Giant, and Pigmies 5
Sixthly, Gladiators or Fencers 4 Seventhly, Mimioks or Morescoes 7
This Interlude being past, CUPID emulating the glory of an Invict Conqueror,
descends; Invokes DIANA: And invites her to set upon these yet unconquered
Conquerers. She appears in her Chariot, and he in a Cloud. The Description of
the Maskers and the Place.
The Scene is changed into a pleasant Grove of straight Trees, which rising by
degrees to a high place, opens it self to discover the aspect of a stately
Temple; All which, was sacred to JOVE; In this grove, satt the Emperor
ALBANACTVS, attended by fourteen Consuls, who stood about him, not set in
ranks, but in several gracious postures, attending his commands: his habit,
like a Roman Emperor in a Curase of yellow Satin embrodered with silver, his
gorget clincant, cut round, and on his breast an Angels head imbost of gold,
the Labells of the sleeves, and short Bases of watchet embrodered with the
same, the under sleeves, and long stockings of white, on his head a Burgonet
richly enchast with silver, turned up before in a serowle, with an artificial
wreath of Laurel, out of which, sprang rays like a piked Crown, the habit
of the Consuls were after the same manner, excepting the rays of gold, issuing
from his Laurel wreath.

The Dialogue between CUPID and DIANA.
CUPID. Sit not secure, nor think in ease
Still vndispleas'd, your selves to please:
Diana, Chaste Diana stoop,
And help to wound this war like troop.

DIANA. Wants Love a Bow, or shaft of mine?
This suit will make my Crescent shine.

CUPID. Love is grown wise, and means to bring
To his smart Bow, a double string.
Behold our Mark? taks't thou not pride
In such a Glory to devide?

DIANA. I do, I do, since I am sure,
When we two join, our flames are pure.

CUPID and DIANA. As pure, and Clear, as ALBAS skin,
As her fair Fame, or thoughts within:
Pure as my self; nay pure like Thee,
Now Love is that which Love should be.

They come upon the Scene, and the Cloud and Chariot go up. The Chorus below
sing.
Bow bearing Gods, shoot, shoot, and hit,
And make our CAESAR greater yet:
Yet leave him with us, Let him shine
Still here; And make him all Devine
Cupid and Diana shoot at the Maskers, and ALBANACTVS yiedling to the Gods,
mooves down the steps in a stately pace to Music made by the Chorus of
Sacrificers, that sing as the Maskers descend. The fourth Song.
Ye Worthies of this I Will,
That led by your brave Chief,
In an Heroic style,
Have over done Belief:
Subdued by ALBAS eyes
Come down, Loves Sacrifice!
It is no shame to yield,
Where it is in vein to strive:
The Gods would quit the field,
Should they these wars revive
Or Conquered, by her Eyes,
Come down Loves Sacrifice.
Straight Cedar, that have stood,
The shock of many a wind:
The top of this Tall wood,
By a high hand designed
Subdued by ALBAS Eyes,
Come down Loves Sacrifice!
When the Maskers are all come down the steps, the High Priests and
Sacrificers, treading a grave Measure walk up toward the Queen singing. The
fifth Song.
Great ALBA though each Grande here,
At this High Court of thine,
Like a true Liege Man does appear,
And offers at thy Shryne:
It is no Conquest for thine Eyes,
When petty Princes fall,
That are some single Beauties pryse,
Or a lone Virtues Thrall:
Here comes the Trophe of thy praise,
The Monarch of these Isles,
The Mirror of thy Cheerful Rays,
And Glory of thy Smyles:
The Virtues and the Graces all,
Must meet in one, when such Stars full.
The KING and the Maskers dance the main Mask.
Afterward taking his seat by the Queen. The Scene is varied into a Landscipt,
in which was a prospect of the Kings Palace of Whitehall, and part of the
City of London, seen a far off, and presently the whole heaven opened, and
in a bright cloud were seen sitting five persons, representing Innocence,
Justice, Religion, affection to the Country, and Concord, being all Companions
of Peace, and thus attired. Innocence, a woman in a pure white robe, with a
garland of flowers on her head: Justice, a woman in a yallow garment richly
adorned, her mantle white, and on her head golden rays, in her right hand a
sword, and in the midst thereof an Imperial Crown: Religion, a woman in a
short Surplusse of lavvne full gathered about the neck, and under it a garment
of watchet, with a short vale of silver and about her head, beams of gold like
the Sun, and in her left hand, she held a book open: Affection to the
Country, a young man in a Coat armor of yallow, with a purple Mantle, his
buskins adorned, his plumed Helm of silver, and in his hand a Garland of long
grass: Concord, a man in a sky colored Robe, and a yallow Mantle; on his
head a Garland of wheat, and in his hand a bunch of arrows tied together with
a white band, these moving toward the earth sing together as follows.
Praising their Piety, and wishing they may perpetuate themselves by a Royal
Posterity, Present them with several Gifts.

The sixth Song sung by the five DEITIES.
Bles't Pair whose prayers like Incence rise,
Opening, and pulling down the Skies
Take your Reward! Just as ye met,
So hand in hand live many a Day,
And may your Virtuous minds beget
Issue that never shall decay,
And so be fruitful every way.
May Plenty Proteus like appear,
Varying your Pleasures every year:
We five come freely to impart,
Such favors as we can afforde: Concord. Affection to ^he Country. Inocence.
Justice. Religion.

One gives hisa Hand, the next hisb Heart,
The third herc Robe, the fourth herd Sword,
The fifth full many ae Suppliant Word.
And to fulfill your future Bliss,
Sweet Peace salutes you with a Kiss.
Then from the upper part of the heaven, was seen to follow this: Another more
beautiful cloud, in which alone triumphant sat Peace, a woman in a carnation
Robe richly adorned, a vale of silver, and on it a Garland of Olive, and in her
hand a branch of Palm, Proclaiming her large Benefits, And the Worlds
Ingratitude. Peace Sings alone the seventh Song.
Frighted by Day; And in the Night diseased,
I fled to Heaven, and left the World displeased.
F^nd Men that strive more for a Province there,
Then looking upward to possess a Sphere.
Yet vanquished and Victorious, both at last,
Their weary Limbs, on my soft Bed would cast.

The Five in the lower Cloud confessing her great Bounty, Answer. The Five.
Two 2 Lions, and Lambs together lie,
When Lovly Peace stands smiling by

Two 2 Temples and Towns by thy stayed hand,
First learn to Rise, And then to Stand.

All 5 It Is not the Laurel Tree that brings,
Anointing Oil for sacred Kings:
Those Princes see the happiest Days,
Whose Olive Branches stand for Bays.

When the five persons which first descended were come to the earth, the cloud
that bare them, was in an instant turned into a richly adorned Throne. And out
of the four corners of the Scene proceed 4. Gods, Neptune, Plutus, Bellona,
and Cebele, complaining of ease and Plenty The eighth Song.
Arms are laid by: Early and late,
The Traveler goes safe to Bed:
Men eat and Drink in Massy Plate,
And are with Deinties daily fed.
Why should this I Will above the rest,
Be made (great Gods) the Halcions nest?
The 5. Deities thus resolve them Imperious Peace her self Descends

The four Gods. Then here our search, and wonder ends,
We Will steal away

Peace. Earths Rulers, stay!

The four Gods. Does soft Peace call?

Peace. Yes: and will straight employ ye All.

The four Gods How, and wherein?

The 5. in the lower Cloud. Give ear, your Charge does now begin.

Peace gives them their Charge. N^ptune to Sea, And let no Sail,
Meet ALBIONS Fleet, But make it veil.
Bellona Arm, That Foes may see,
Their Lillies kept by Lions be.
Their fruitful fields (Cebele) make
Pay Centupl^ for all they take.
And let Both Indies (Pluto) meet,
And lay their wealth at ALBAS feet.

The four God; reply When Peace commands such pleasing things,
From Love and Time we will steal their wings.

For a Conclusion, the Gods, Poets, and Priests join, and sing a Valediction
to Hymen's Twin the MARY-CHARLES. The last general Chorus.
Laden with Wealth and Honor may,
These Gods return to crown this Day,
And MARY-CHARLES whose minds within,
And Bodies make but Hymen's Twin,
Long live they so, And Breast, to Breast,
May Angels sing them to their Rest.
Those that will praise the structure and changes of the Scene. The sweetness
and variety of the Music. Or the Beauty of the Figures, and Paces, I think
may do it with cause enough.

But for the Invention and writing of the Mask, I was as loath to be brought
upon the Stage as an vnhansom Man is to see himself in a great Glass. But my
Excuse, and Glory is, The King commanded, and I obeyed.

AVRELIAN TOVNSHEND.

The Maskers Names.
The KING
1 E. Holland 2 E. Newport 3 Lo. Doncaster 4 L. Donluce 5 L. Wharton 6 L. Paget
7 L. Bruce 8 Sr. Rob. Stanley 9 Mr. Goringe. 10 Sr Will: Brook 11 Sr. John
Mainard 12 Mr. Dimmock 13 Mr. Abercromy 14 Mr. Murrey
FINIS.

