THE ATHEIST'S TRAGEDY: OR The honest Man's Revenge. As in diverse places it
has often been Acted.

WRITTEN By Cyril Tourneur.

AT LONDON, Printed for John Stepneth, and Richard Redmer, and are besold at
their Shops at the West end of Paul's. 1611.

The names and qualities of the Actors.
Montferrers, a Baron. Belforest, a Baron. D'amville, brother to Montferrers.
Leuidulcia, Lady to Belforest. Castabella, Daughter to Belforest. Charlemont,
son to Montferrers. Rousard, elder Son to D'amville. Sebastian, younger
Son to D'amville. Languebeau Sauffe, a Puritan; Chaplain to Belforest.
Borachio, D'amvilles instrument. Cataplasma, a maker of Periwigges and Attires.
Soquette, a seeming Gentlewoman to Cataplasma. Fresco, Servant to Cataplasma.
Other servants. Seri^ant in war. Soldiers. Watchmen. Officers. Judges.
THE ATHEIST'S Tragedy.
Actus primi Scena prima.
Enter D'amuille, Borachio, attended. D'amuille. I Saw my Nephew Charlemont,
but now
Part from his Father. Tell him I desire
To speak with him.
Exit Servant. Borachio, thou art read
In Nature and her large Philosophy.
Obseru'st thou not the very self same course
Of revolution both in Man and Beast?

Bor. The same. For birth, growth, state, decay and death:
Only, a Man's beholding to his Nature
For th'better composition of the two.

D'am. But where that favor of his Nature, is
Not full and free; you fee a man becomes
A fool, as little-knowing as a beast.

Bor. That shows there is nothing in a Man, above
His nature; if there were, consid'ring it is
His beings excellency, it would not yield
To Natures weakness.

D'am. Then if Death casts up
Our total sum of joy and happiness;
Let me have all my senses feasted in
Th'abundant fullness of delight at once,
And with a sweet insensible increase
Of pleasing surfeit melt into my dust.

Bor. That revolution is too short me thinks.
If this life comprehends our happiness,
How foolish to desire to dye so soon?
And if our time runs home unto the length
Of Nature, how improuident it were
To spend our substance on a minutes pleasure,
And after live an age in misery?

D'am. So thou conclud'st that pleasure only flows
Upon the stream of riches.

Bor. Wealth is Lord
Of all felicity.

D'am. It Is Oracle.
For what is a man that is honest without wealth?

Bor. Both miserable and contemptible.

D'am. He Is worse Borachio. For if Charity
Be an essential part of Honesty,
And should be practiced first upon our selves;
Which must be granted; then your honest man
That Is poor, is most dishonest, for he is
Uncharitable to the Man, whom he
Should most respect. But what does this touch me,
That seem to have enough? Thanks industry.
It Is true. Had not my Body spredde it self
Into posterity; perhaps I should
Desire no more increase of substance, then
Would hold proportion with mine own dimentions.
Yet even in that sufficiency of state,
A man has reason to provide and add.
For what is he has such a present eye,
And so prepared a strength; that can foresee,
And fortify his substance and himself,
Against those accidents, the least whereof
May rob him of an ages husbandry?
And for my children; they are as near to me,
As branches to the tree whereon they grow;
And may as numerously be multiplied.
As they increase, so should my providence;
For from my substance they receive the sap,
Whereby they live and flowrish.

Bor. Sir enough,
I understand the mark whereat you aim.

Enter Charlemont. D'am. Silence. Ware interrupted. Charlemont!

Char. Good morrow Uncle.

D'am. Noble Charlemont;
Good morrow. Is not this the honored day
You purposed to set forward to the war?

Char. My inclination did intend it so.

D'am. And not your resolution?

Char. Yes my Lord;
Had not my Father contradicted it.

D'am. O noble war! Thou first original
Of all man's honor. How deiectedly,
The baser Spirit of our present time
Has cast it self below the ancient worth
Of our forefathers! From whose noble deeds
Ignobly we derive our pedigrees.

Charl. Sir, tax not me for his unwillingness.
By the command of his authority,
My disposition's forced against it self.

D'am. Nephew, you are the honor of our blood.
The troop of Gentry, whose inferior worth
Should second your example, are become
Your Leaders: and the scorn of their discourse,
Turns smiling back upon your backewardnesse.

Charl. You need not urge my spirit by disgrace
It Is free enough. My Father hinders it.
To curb me, he denies me maintenance
To put me in the habit of my ranque.
Unbind me from that strong necessity,
And call me Coward if I stay behind.

D'am. For want of means? Borachio! Where Is the gold?
I Would disinherite my posterity
To purchase honor. It Is an interest
I prize above the principal of wealth.
I Am glad I had the occasion to make known
How readily my substance shall unlock
It self to serve you. Here Is a thousand Crowns.

Charl. My worthy uncle; in exchange for this,
I leave my bond. So I am doubly bound;
By that for the repayment of this gold,
And by this gold to satisfy your love.

D'am. Sir; it is a witness (only) of my love;
And love does always satisfy it self.
Now to your Father; labor his consent.
My importunity shall second yours.
We will obtain it.

Charl. If entreaty fail,
The force of reputation shall prevail.
Exit.
D'am. Go call my Sons, that they may take their leaves
Of noble Charlemont. Now my Borachio!

Bor. The substance of our former argument
Was wealth.

D'am. The question how to compass it.

Bor. Young Charlemont is going to the war.

Dam. O, thou begin'st to take me.

Bor. Mark me then.
Me thinks, the pregnant wit of Man, might make
The happy absence of this Charlemont,
A subject for commodious providence.
He has a wealthy Father; ready even
To drop into his grave. And no man's power
When Charlemont is gone, can interpose
'Twixt you and him.

D'am. Thou Have apprehended; both
My meaning and my love. Now let thy trust,
For undertaking and for secrecy,
Hold measure with thy amplitude of wit;
And thy reward shall parallel thy worth.

Bor. My resolution has already bound
Me to your service.

D'am. And my heart to thee.
Enter Rousard and Sebastian. Here are my Sons. --
There Is my eternity. My life in them;
And their succession shall for ever live.
And in my reason dwells the providence,
To add to life as much of happiness.
Let all men lose, so I increase my gain,
I have no feeling of another pain.

Exeunt. Enter old Montferrers and Charlemont. Mont. I prithee let this current
of my tears,
Divert thy inclination from the war.
For of my children thou are only left,
To promise a succession to my house.
And all the honor thou can get by arms,
Will give but vain addition to thy name;
Since from thy ancestors thou do derive
A dignity sufficient; and as great
As thou have substance to maintain and bear.
I prithee stay at home.

Charl. My noble Father.
The weakest sigh you breath, has power to turn
My strongest purpose; and your softest tear
To melt my resolution to as soft
Obedience. But my affection to the war,
Is as heriditary as my blood,
To every life of all my ancestry.
Your predecessors were your presidents;
And you are my example. Shall I serve
For nothing but a vain Parenthesis,
I'th'honour'd story of your Family?
Or hang but like an empty Scutcheon,
Between the trophee's of my predecessors.
And the rich Arms of my posterity?
There Is not a Frenchman of good blood and youth'
But either out of spirit or example,
Is turned a Soldier. Only Charlemont
Must be reputed that same heartlesse thing,
That Cowards will be bold to play upon.

Enter D'amville, Rousard and Sebastian. D'am. Good morrow my Lord.

Mont. Morrow good brother.

Charl. Good morrow Uncle.

D'am. Morrow knide Nephew.
What? ha'you washed your eyes wi'teares this morning?
Come: by my soul his purpose does deserve
Your free consent. Your tenderness disswades him.
What to the Father of a Gentleman,
Should be more tender then the maintenance
And the increase of honor to his house?
My Lord; here are my Boys. I should be proud
That either this were able, or that inclined
To be my Nephews brave competitor.

Mont. Your importunities have overcome.
Pray God my forced grant prove not ominous.

D'am. We have obtained it. -- Ominous? in what?
It cannot be in anything but death.
And I am of a confident belief,
That even the time, place, manner of our deaths,
Do follow Fate with that necessity;
That makes us sure to dye. And in a thing
Ordained so certainly unalterable,
What can the use of providence prevail?

Belforest, Leuidulcia, Castabella, attended. Bell. Morrow my Lord Montferrers,
Lord D'amville.
Good morrow Gentlemen. Cousen Charlemont!
Kindly good morrow. Troth I was afeard
I should ha come too late, to tell you that
I wish your undertakings a success
That may deserve the measure of their worth.

Char. My Lord; my duty would not let me go,
Without receiving your commandments.

Bell. Accomplements are more for ornament,
Then use. We should employ no time in them,
But what our serious business will admit.

Mont. Your favor had by his duty been prevented,
If we had not withheld him in the way.

D'am. He was o'comming to present his service.
But now no more. The Cook inuites to breakfast.
Wilt please your Lordship enter. -- Noble Lady.

Manent Charlemont and Castabella. Charl. My noble Mistress! this accomplement
Is like an elegant and moving speech,
Composed of many sweet perswasiue points,
Which second one onother, with a fluent
Increase, and confirmation of their force,
Reserving still the best until the last,
To crown the strong impulsion of the rest
With a full conquest of the hearers sense:
Because the impression of the last we speak
Does always longest and most constantly
Possess the entertainment of remembrance.
So all that now salute my taking leave,
Have added numerously to the love,
Wherewith I did receive their courtesy.
But you (dear Mistress) being the last and best
That speaks my farewell; like the imperious cloze
Of a most sweet Oration, wholly have
Possessed my liking, and shall ever live
Within the soul of my true memory.
So (Mistress) with this kiss I take my leave.

Casta. My worthy Servant! you mistake the intent
Of kissing. It Was not meant to separate
A pair of Lovers; but to be the seal
Of Love; importing by the joining of
Our mutual and incorporated breathes,
That we should breath but one contracted life.
Or stay at home, or let me go with you.

Charl. My Castabella! for my self to stay,
Or you to go, would either tax my youth
With a dishonorable weakness, or
Your loving purpose with immodestie.
Enter Languebeau Snuff. And for the satisfaction of your love,
Here comes a man whose knowledge I have made
A witness to the contract of our vows,
Which my return by marriage shall confirm.

Lang. I salute you both with the spirit of copulation, (...) already informed
of your matrimonial purposes, and will (...) testimony to the integrity.


Casta. O the sad trouble of my fearful soul!
My faithful servant! did you never hear,
That when a certain great man went to th'warre,
The lovely face of heaven was masqu'd with sorrow,
The sighing winds did move the breast of earth,
The heavy clouds hung down their mourning heads,
And wept sad showers the day that he went hence,
As if that day presaged some ill success,
That fatallie should kill his happiness;
And so it came to pass. Me thinks my eyes
(Sweet Heaven forbid) are like those weeping clouds,
And as their showers presaged so do my tears,
Some sad event will follow my sad fears.

Charl. Fie, superstitious? is it bad to kiss?

Casta. May all my fears hurt me no more then this.

Lang. Fie, fie, fie, these carnal kisses do stir up the Concupisences of
the flesh.


Enter Belforest and Leuidulcia. Leuid. O! here is your daughter under her
servants lips.

Charl. Madame, there is no cause you should mistrust
The kiss I gave, it was but a parting one.

Leuid. A lusty blood! Now by the lip of Love
Were I to choose, your joining one for me.

Bell. Your Father stays to bring you on the way.
Farewell. The great commander of the war
Prosper the course you undertake. Farewell.

Charl. My Lord! I humbl^ take my leave -- Madame!
I kiss your hand. -- And your sweet lip. -- Farewell.
Manent Charlemont and Languebean. Her power to speak is perished in her
tears.
Something within me would persuade my stay,
But Reputation will not yield unto 't.
Dear Sir, you are the man whose honest trust
My confidence has chosen for my friend.
I fear my absence will discomfort her.
You have the power and opportunity
To moderate her passion. Let her grief
Receive that friendship from you; and your Love
Shall not repent it self of courtesy.

Lang. Sir, I want words and protestation to insinuate into your credit; but in
plainness and truth, I will quallifie her grief with the spirit of consolation.


Charl. Sir, I will take your friendship up at use.
And fear not that your profit shall be small;
Your interest shall exceed your principal.
Exit Charl.
Enter D'amville and Borachio. D'am. Mounsieur Languebeau! Happily encountered.
The honesty of your conversation, makes me request more interest in your
familiarity.


Lang. If your Lordship will be pleased to salute me without ceremony, I shall
be willing to exchange my service for your favor; but this worshipping kind
of entertainment, is a superstitious vanity; in plainness and truth I love it
not.


D'am. I embrace your disposition; and desire to give you as liberal assurance
of my love, as my Lord Belforest your deserved favorer.


Lan. His Lordship is pleased with my plainness and truth of conversation.


D'am. It cannot displease him. In the behavior of his noble daughter
Castabella; a man may read her worth and your instruction.


Lang. That Gentlewoman is most sweetly modest, fair, honest, handsome, wise,
well-borne, and rich.


D'am. You have given me her picture in small.


Lang. She Is like your Dyamond; a temptation in every man's eye, yet not
yielding to any light impression her self.


D'am. The praise is hers; but the comparison your own.


Gives him the Ring. Lan. You shall forgive me that, Sir.


D'am. I will not doeso much at your request as forgive you it. I will only
give you it Sir. By -- You will make me swear.


Lan. O! by no means. Prophanemot your lips with the foulness of that
sin. I will rather take it. To save your oath, you shall lose your Ring. --
Verily my Lord; my praise came short of her worth. She exceedes a Jewel. This
is but only for ornament; She both for ornament and use.


D'am. Yet unprofitably kept without use. She deserves a worthy Husband, Sir.
I have often wished a match between my elder Son and her. The marriage would
join the houses of Belforest and Damville into a noble alliance.


Lan. And the unity of Families is a work of love and charity.


D'am. And that work an employment well becoming the goodness of your
disposition.


Lan. If your Lordship please to impose it upon me; I will carry it without
any second end, the surest way to satisfy your wish.


D'am. Most joyfully accepted. -- Rousard! Here are Letters to my Lord
Belforest touching my desire to that purpose.


Enter Rousard sickely. Rousard! I send you a suitor to Castabella. To this
Gentleman's discretion I commit the managing of your suite His good success
shall be most thankful to your trust. Follow his instructions, he will be
your leader.


Lan. In plainness and truth.


Rous. My leader? does your Lordship think me too weak to give the onset my
self.


Lan. I will only assist your proceedings.


Rous. To say true, so I think you had need, for a sick man can hardly get a
woman's good will without help.


Lan. Charlemont! thy gratuitie and my promises were both but words; and both
like words shall vanish into air. -- For thy poor empty hand I must be mute:

This gives me feeling of a better suite.

Exeunt Languebeau and Rousard. D'am. Borachio! did precisely note this man?

Bor. His own profession would report him pure.

D'am. And seems to know if any benefit,
Arises of religion after death;
Yet but compare's profession with his life;
They so directly contradict themselves,
As if the end of his instructions were
But to divert the world from sin, that he
More easily might ingrosse it to himself.
By that I am confirmed an Atheist.
Well! Charlemont is gone. And here thou see,
His absence the foundation of my plot.

Bor. He is the man whom Castabella loves.

D'am. That was the reason I propounded him
Employment fixed upon a foreign place,
To draw his inclination out o'th'way.

Bor. T'has left the passage of our practice free.

D'am This Castabella is a wealthy heir,
And by her marriage with my elder Son;
My house is honored, and my state increased.
This work alone deserves my industry:
But if it prosper, thou shall see my brain
Make this but an induction to a point
So full of profitable policy;
That it would make the soul of honesty
Ambitious to turn villain.

Bor. I bespeake
Employment in it. I Will be an instrument
To grace performance with dexterity.

D'am. Thou shall. No man shall rob thee of the honor.
Go presently and buy a crimson Scarf,
Like Charlemonts. Prepare thee a disguise,
I'th'habite of a Soldier, hurt and lame;
And then be ready at the wedding feast,
Where thou shall have employment in a work
Will please thy disposition.

Bor. As I vowed;
Your instrument shall make your project proud.

D'am. This marriage will bring wealth. If that succeed,
I will increase it though my Brother bleed.

Exeunt. Enter Castabella avoiding the impor^^^itie of Rousard. Casta. Nay good
Sir; in troth if you knew how little it pleases me, you would forbear it.


Rous. I will not leave thee, till thou have entertained me for thy servant.


Casta. My servant? You are sick you say. You would tax me of indiscretion
to entertain one that is not able to do me service.


Rous. The service of a Gentlewoman consists most in chamber work, and sick
men are fittest for the chamber. I pr^^thee give me a favor.


Casta. Me thinks you have a very sweet favor of you own.


Rous. I lack but your black eye.


Casta. If you go to buffets among the Boys, they will give you one.


Rous. Nay if you grow bitter, I Will dispraise your black eye. The gray eie'd
Morning makes the fairest day.


Casta. Now that you dissemble not, I could be willing to give you a favor.
What favor would you have?


Rous. Any toy: any light thing.


Casta. Fie. Will you be so uncivil to ask a light thing at a Gentlewomans
hand?


Rous. Wilt give me a bracelet o'thy hair then?


Casta. Do you want hair Sir?


Rous. No faith I Will want no hair, so long as I can have it for money.


Casta. What would you do with my hair then?


Rous. Wear it for thy sake sweet heart.


Casta. Do you think I love to have my hair worn off?


Rous. Come you are so witty now, and so sensible.


Kisses her. Casta. Tush. I would I wanted one of my senses now.


Rous. Bitter again? What Is that? Smelling?


Casta No, no, no. Why now you are satisfied I hope. I have given you a favor.


Rous. What favor? a kiss? I prithee give me another.


Casta. Show me that I gave you then.


Rous. How should I show it?


Casta. You are unworthy of a favor if you will not bestow the keeping of it
one minute.


Rous. Well in plain terms, do love me? That Is the purpose of my coming.


Casta. Love you? Yes Very well.


Rous. Give me thy hand upon it.


Casta. Nay, you mistake me. If I love you very well, I must not love you now.
For now your are not very well, you are sick.


Rous. This Equivocation is for the jest now.


Casta. I speak't as it is now in fashion, in earnest. But I shall not be in
quiet for you I perceive, till I have given you a favor. Do you love me?


Rous. With all my heart.


Casta. Then with all my heart, I Will give you a Jewel to hang in your ear, --
Hark ye -- I can never love you.

Exit.
Rous. Call you this a Jewel to hang in mine ear? It Is no light favor, for
I Will be sworn it comes somewhat heavily to me. Well. I will not leave her for
all this. Me thinks it animates a man to stand to it, when a woman desires to
be rid of him at the first sight.

Exit.
Enter Belforest and Languebeau Snuff. Bell. I entertain the offer of this
match;
With purpose to confirm it presently.
I have already moved it to my daughter;
Her soft excuses sauour'd at the first
(Me thought) but of a modest innocence
Of blood; whose vnmoou'd stream was never drawn
Into the current of affection. But when I
Replied with more familiar arguments,
Thinking to make her apprehension bold;
Her modest blush fell to a pale dislike,
And she refused it with such confidence,
As if she had been prompted by a love
Inclining firmly to some other man,
And in that obstinacy she remains.

Lan. Verily that disobedience does not become a Child. It proceeds from an
unsanctified liberty. You will be accessarie to your own dishonor if you
suffer it.


Bell. Your honest wisdom has advised me well.
Once more I Will move her by perswasiue means.
If she resist; all mildness set apart,
I will make use of my authority.

Lan. And instantly, least fearing your constraint; her contrary affection
teach her some devise that may prevent you.


Bell. To cut off every opportunity,
Procrastination may assist her with;
This instant night she shall be married.

Lan. Best.

Enter Castabella. Casta. Please it your Lordship, my mother attends
In The Gallerie, and desires your conference.
Exit Belforest. This means I used to bring me to your ear.
Time cuts off circumstance; I must be brief.
To your integrity did Charlemont
Commit the contract of his love and mine.
Which now so strong a hand seeks to divide:
That if your grave advise assist me not,
I shall be forced to violate my faith.

Lan. Since Charlemont's absence, I have waighed his love with the spirit of
consideration; and in sincerity I find it to be frivolous and vain.
Withdraw your respect; his affection deserves it not.


Casta. Good sir; I know your heart cannot profane
The holiness you make profession of;
With such a vicious purpose, as to break
The vow, your own consent did help to make.

Lan. Can he deserve your love, who in neglect of your delightful
conversation; and in obstinate contempt of all your prayers and tears; absents
himself so far from your sweet fellowship, and with a purpose so contracted to
that absence, that you see he purchases your separation with the hazard of his
blood and life; fearing to want pretense to part your companies? -- It Is rather
hate that does division move; Love still desires the presence of his Love. --
Verily, he is not of the Family of Love.


Casta. O do not wrong him. It Is a generous mind
That led his disposition to the war:
For gentle love and noble courage are
So near allied; that one begets another:
Or, Love is Sister, and Courage is the Brother.
Could I affect him better then before,
His Soldiers heart would make me love him more.

Lan. But Castabella. --

Enter Leuidulcia. Leu. Tush, you mistake the way into a woman,
The passage lies not through her reason, but her blood.
Exit Languebeau, Castabella about to follow. Nay, stay! How would thou call
the child,
That being raised with cost and tenderness,
To full ability of body and means;
Denies relief unto the parents, who
Bestowed that bringing up?

Casta. Unnatural.

Leu. Then Castabella is unnatural.
Nature the loving mother of us all,
Brought forth a woman for her own relief;
By generation to revive her age.
Which now thou have ability and means
Presented; most unkindly do deny.

Casta. Believe me Mother; I do love a man.

Leu. Preferr'st the affection of an absent Love,
Before the sweet possession of a man;
The barren mind before the fruitful body;
Where our creation has no reference
To man; but in his body: being made
Only for generation; which (unless
Our children can be gotten by conceit)
Must from the body come. If Reason were
Our counselor, we would neglect the work
Of generation, for the prodigal
Expense it draws us too of that which is
The wealth of life. Wise Nature (therefore) has
Reserved for an inducement to our sense,
Our greatest pleasure in that greatest work.
Which being offered thee; thy ignorance
Refuses, for th'imaginarie joy
Of an unsatisfied affection, to
An absent man. Whose blood once spent i'th'warre;
Then he will come home, sick, lame and impotent;
And wed thee to a torment; like the pain
Of Tantalus, continuing thy desire,
With fruitless presentation of the thing
It loves; still moved, and still unsatisfied.

Enter Belforest, Da'mville, Rousard, Sebastian, Languebeau, etc. Bell. Now
Leuidulcia! Have thou yet prepared
My Daughters love to entertain this Man?
Her husband here?

Leu. I Am but her mother i'law;
Yet if she were my very flesh and blood,
I could advise no better for good.

Rous. Sweet wife! Thy joyful husband thus salutes Thy cheek.


Casta. My husband? O! I am betrayed. --
Dear friend of Charlemont! your purity
Professes a divine contempt o'th'world;
O be not bribed by that you so neglect,
In being the worlds hated instrument,
To bring a just neglect upon your self! --
Kneel from one to another. Dear Father! let me but examine my
Affection. -- Sir, your prudent judgment can
Persuade your son that it is improuident
To marry one whose disposition, he
Did never observe. -- Good sir, I may be of
A nature so unpleasing to your mind;
Perhaps you will curse the fatal hour wherein
You rashly married me.

D'am. My Lord Belforest!
I would not have her forced against her choice.

Bell. Passion of me thou peevish girl. I charge
Thee by my blessing, and the authority
I have to claim the obedience; marry him.

Casta. Now Charlemont! O my presaging tears!
This sad event has followed my sad fears.

Seba. A rape, a rape, a rape!


Bell. How now?


D'am. What Is that?


Seba. Why what is it but a Rape to force a wench to marry, since it forces her
to lie with him she would not?


Lan. Verily, his Tongue is an unsanctified member.


Seba. Verily, your gravity becomes your perished soul, as hoary mouldinesse
does rotten fruit.


Bell. Cousen, you are both uncivil and profane.


D'am. Thou disobedient villain; get thee out of my sight. Now by my Soul I Will
plague thee for this rudeness.


Bell. Come; set forward to the Church.


Exeunt. Manet Sebastian. Seba. And verify the Proverb. The nearer the
Church; the further from God. -- Poor wench. For thy sake, may his ability
die in his appetite; that thou be not troubled with him thou love not. May
his appetite move thy desire to another man: so he shall help to make
himself Cuckold. And let that man be one that he pays wages too: so thou
shall profit by him thou hate. Let the Chambers be matted, the hinges oiled,
the curtain rings silenced, and the chambermaid hold her peace at his own
request, that he may sleep the quietlier. And in that sleep let him be
soundly cuckolded. And when he knows it, and seeks to sue a divorce; let him
have no other satisfaction then this: He lay by and slept: the Law will take
no hold of her, because he winked at it.

Exit.
Actus secundi Scena prima.
Music. A banquet. In the night. Enter D'amville, Belforest, Leuidulcia,
Rousard, Castabella, Languebeau Snuff, at one door. At the other door,
Cataplasma and Soquette, vsher'd by Fresco. Leuidulcia. Mistress Cataplasma! I
expected you an hour since.


Cata. Certain Ladies at my house (Madame) detained me; otherwise I had
attended your Ladyship sooner.


Leu. We are beholding to you for you company. My Lord; I pray you bid these
Gentlewomen welcome: they are my invited friends.


D'am. Gentlewomen, you are welcome, pray sit down.


Leu. Frisco! by my Lord D'amville's leave I prith^^ go into the Buttry. Thou
shall find some of my men there; if they bid thee not welcome, they are very
Loggerheads.


^res. If your Logger heads will not, your Hoggesheads shall Madame, if I get
into the Buttry.

Exit.
D'am. That fellows disposition to mirth should be our present example. Let Us
be grave and meditate, when our affairs require our seriousnes. It Is out of
season to be heavily disposed.


Len. We should be all wound up into the key of Mirth.


D'am. The Music there.


Bell. Where Is my Lord Montferrers? Tell him here is a room attends him.


Enter Montferrers. Mont. Heaven give your marriage that I am deprived of, joy.


D'am. My Lord Belforest! Castabella's health. D'amville drinks. Set ope' the
Sellar doors, and let this health go freely round the house. -- Another to
your Son, my Lord; To noble Charl. mont. He is a Soldier. Let the
Instruments of wary congratulate his memory. --


Drums and Trumpets. Enter a Servant. Ser. My Lord, here is one i'th'habite of a
Soldier says he is newly returned from Ostend, and has some business of
import to speak.


D'am. Ostend! let him come in. My soul fore-tels he brings the news will
make our Music full. My brothers joy would do it: and here comes he will
raise it.


Enter Borachio disguised. Mont. O my spirit, it does dissuade my tongue to
question him, as if it knew his answer would displease.


D'am. Soldier! what news? we heard a rumor of a blow you gave the enemy.


Bor It Is very true my Lord.


Bell. Can thou relate it.


Bor. Yes.


D'am. I Prithee do.


Bor. The enemy, defeated of a fair
Advantage by a flattring stratagem;
Plants all the Artillery against the Town.
Whose thunder and lightning made our bulwarks shake;
And threatened in that terrible report,
The storm wherewith they meant to second it.
The Assault was general. But for the place
That promised most advantage to beforc'd;
The pride of all their Army was drawn forth,
And equally divided into Front,
And Rere. They marched. And coming to a stand,
Ready to pass our Channel at an ebb,
W^aduis'd it for our safest course, to draw
Our ^^uices up and mak't impassable.
Our Governor opposed; and suffered'em
To charge us home even to the Ramp^ers foot.
But when their front was forcing up our breach,
At push o'pike, then did his policy
Let go the sluices, and trip'd up the heels
Of the whole body of their troop, that stood
Within the violent current of the stream.
Their front beleaguered twixt the water and
The Town; seeing the flood was grown too deep,
To promise them a safe retreat; exposed
The force of all their spirits, (like the last
Expiring gasp of a strong hearted man)
Upon the hazard of one charge; but were
Oppressed and fell. The rest that could not swim,
Were only drowned; but those that thought to escape
By swimming, were by murderers that flankerd,
The level of the flood both drow'nd and slain.

D'am. Now by my soul (Soldier) a brave service.

Mont. O what became of my dear Charlemont?

Bor. Walking next day upon the fatal shore,
Among the slaughtered bodies of their men,
Which the full-stomack'd Sea had cast upon
The sands, it was m'vnhappy chance to light
Upon a face, whose favor when it lived
My astonished mind informed me I had seen.
He lay in's Armor; as if that had been
His Coffine, and the weeping Sea (like one;
Whose milder temper does lament the death
Of him whom in his rage he slew) runs up
The Shore; embraces him; kisses his cheek,
Goes back again and forces up the Sands
To bury him; and every time it parts,
Sheds tears upon him; till at last (as if
It could no longer endure to see the man
Whom it had slain, yet loath to leave him;) with
A kind of vnresolu'd unwilling pace,
Winding her waves one in another, like
A man that foldes his arms, or wrings his hands
For grief; ebbed from the body and descends:
As if it would sink down into the earth,
And hide it self for shame of such a deed.

D'am. And Soldier; who was this?

Mont. O Charlemont!

Bor. Your fear has told you that whereof my grief
Was loath to be the messenger.

Casta. O God.

Exit Castabella.
D'am. Charlemont drowned? Why how could that be? since it was the adverse
party that received the overthrow.


Bor. His forward spirit pressed into the front;
And being engaged within the enemy,
When they retreated through the rising stream;
In The violent confusion of the throng
Was ouerborne and perished in the flood.
And here is the sad remembrance of his life, -- The Scarf.
Which for his sake I will for ever wear.

Mont. Torment me not with witnesses of that,
Which I desire, not to believe; yet must.

D'am. Thou art a Scrichowle; and do come i'night
To be the cursed messenger of death.
Away. Depart my house; or (by my soul)
You Will find me a more fatal enemy,
Then ever was Ostend. Be gone. Dispatch.

Bor. Sir it was my love.

D'am. Your love to vex my heart with that I hate?
Hark, do you hear? you, knave? --
O thou art a most delicate sweet eloquent villaine^

Bor. Was It not well counterfaited?

D'am. Rarely. -- Be gone. I will not here reply.

Bor. Why then farewell. I will not trouble you.
Exit.
D'am. So. The foundation's laid. Now by degrees,
The work will rise and soon be perfected.
O this uncertain state of mortal man!

Bell. What then? it is th'ineuitable fate
Of all things underneath the Moon.

D'am. It Is true.
Brother for healths sake overcome your grief.

Mont. I cannot sir. I am incapable
Of comfort. My turn will be next. I feel
My self not well.

D'am. You yield too much to grief.

Lang. All men are mortal. The hour of death is uncertain. Age makes
sickness the more dangerous. And grief is subject to distraction. You know
not how soon you may be deprived of the benefit of sense. In my understanding
(therefore) you shall do well if you be sick to set your state in present
order. Make your Will.


D'am. I have my wish. -- Lights for my Borther.


Mont. I Will withdraw a while;
And crave the honest counsel of this man.

Bell. With all my heart. I pray attend him sir.
Exeunt Montferrers and Snuff. This next room please your Lordship.

D'am. Where you will.

Exeunt Belforest and D'amville. Leuid. My Daughter's gone. Come Son.
Mistress Cataplasma, come; we will up into her chamber. I Would feign see how she
entertaines the expectation of her husbands bedfellowship.


Rou. 'Faith howsoever she entertaines it; I shall hardly please her;
therefore let her rest.


Le^id. Nay, please her hardly and you please her best.

Exeunt. Enter 3. Servants drank, drawing in Fresco. 1 Ser. Boy! fill some
drink Boy.


Fresco. Enough good Sir; not a drop more by this light.


2. Not by this light? Why then put out the candles and we will drink in the
dark and t'wut old Boy.


Fres. No^ no, no, no, no.


3. Why then take thy liquour. A health Fresco.


Kneel. Fres. Your health will make me sick sir.


1. Then it will bring you o'your knees I hope sir.


Fres. May I not stand and pledge it sir?


2. I hope you will do as we do.


Fres. Nay then indeed I must not stand, for you cannot.


3. Well said old boy.


Fres. Old boy, you will make me a young child anon: for if I continue this, I
shall scarce be able to go alone.


1. My body is as weak as water, Fresco.


Fres. Good reason sir, the beer has sent all the malt up into your brain,
and left nothing but the water in your body.


Enter D'amville and Borachio closely observing their drunkenness. D'am.
Borachio! see those fellows?


Bor. Yes my Lord.


D'am. Their drunkenness that seems ridiculous,
Shall be a serious instrument, to bring
Our sober purposes to their success.

Bor. I am prepared for the execution, sir.


D'am. Cast off this habit, and about it straight.


Bor. Let them drink healthes, and drown their brains in the flood; I Will
promise them they shall be pledged in blood.

Exit.
1. You ha'left a damnable snuff here.


2. Do you take that in snuff Sir?


1. You are a damnable rogue then. --


together by the ears. D'am. Fortune I honor thee. My plot still rises,
According to the model of mine own desires. -- Lights for my Brother. -- What
ha'you drunk your selves mad you knaves.


1. My Lord the Iackes abused me.


D'am. I think they are the Iackes indeed that have abused thee, Do hear?
that fellow is a proud knave. He has abused thee. As thou go over the
fields by and by, in lighting my brother home, I Will tell thee what'sha't do.
Knock him over the pate with thy torch, I Will bear the out in it.


2. I will sindge the goose by this torch.

Exit.
D'am. Do hear; fellow. See thou that proud knave, I have given him a
lesson for his sauciness. H'as wronged thee. I Will tell thee what'sha't do: As
we go over the fields by and by, clap him suddenly over the coxe-combe with
thy torch, I Will bear thee out in it.


2. I will make him understand as much.

Exit.
Enter Languebeau Snuff. D'am. Now Mounsieur Snuff! What has my brother done?


Lan. Made his Will; and by that Will made you his heir; with this prouiso,
that as occasion shall hereafter move him; he may revoke or alter it when he
pleases.


D'am. Yes. Let him if he can. -- I Will make it sure from his reuoking.

Aside.
Enter Montferrers and Belforest, attended with lights. Mont. Brother now good
night.


D'am. The sky is dark, we will bring you over the fields.
Who can but strike, wants wisdom to maintain:
He that strikes safe and sure, has heart and brain.

Exeunt. Enter Castabella alone. Casta. O Love! thou chaste affection of the
Soul,
Without th'adultrate mixture of the blood;
That virtue which to goodness adds good:
The min^on of heavens heart. Heaven! is it my fate
For loving that thou love to get thy hate?
Or was my Charlemont thy chosen Love?
And therefore have received him to thy self?
Then I confess thy anger's not unjust.
I was thy rival Yet to be diuorc'd
From love, has been a punishment enough.
(Sweet heaven) without being married unto hate,
Had thou been pleased: O double misery!
Yet since thy pleasure has inflicted it,
I^ not my heart, my duty shall submit.

Enter Leuidulcia, Rousard, Cateplasma, Soquerte, and Fresco with a lantho ^ne.
Leu. Mistress Cataplasma, good night. I pray when your Man has brought you
home, let him return and light me to my house.


Cata. He shall instantly wait on your Ladyship.


Leu. Good Mistress Cataplasma; for my servants are all drunk; I cannot be
beholding to'em for their attendance. Exeunt Cataplasma, Soquette, and Fresco.
O here is your Bride.


Rous. And melancholique too, me thinks.


Leu. How can she choose? your sickness will
Distaste the expected sweetness of the night.
That makes her heavy.

Rou. That should make her light.

Leu. Look you to that.

Casta. What sweetness speak you of?
The sweetness of the night consists in rest.

Rou. With that sweetness thou shall be surely blessed,
Unless my groaning wake thee. Do not moan.

Leu. Sh'ad rather you would wake, and make her groan.

Rou. Nay'troth sweet heart, I will not trouble thee.
Thou shall not lose thy maidenhead too night.

Casta. O might that weakness ever be in force;
I never would desire to sue divorce!

Rou. Wilt go to bed.

Casta. I will attend you, Sir.

Rou. Mother, good night.

Leu. Pleasure be your bedfellow.
Exeunt Rousard and Castabella. Why sure their Generation was asleep,
When she begot those Dormice; that she made
Them up so weakly and imperfectly.
One wants desire; the the other ability.
When my affection even with their cold bloods
(As snow rubbed through an active hand, does make
The flesh to burn) by agitation is
Inflamed. I could unbrace, and entertain
The air to cool it.

Enter Sebastian. Seba. That but mitigates
The heat; rather embrace and entertain
A younger brother; he can quench the fire.

Leu. Can you so, sir? now I beshrew your ear.
Why bold Sebastian, how dare you approach
So near the presence of your displeased Father.

Seba. Under the protection of his present absence.

Leu. Belike you knew he was abroad then.

Seba. Yes.
Let me encounter you so; I Will persuade
Your means to reconcile me to his love.

Leu. Is that the way? I understand you not.
But for your reconcilement, meet m'at home;
I Will satisfy your suite

Seba. Within this half hour?
Exit Sebastian.
Leu. Or within this whole hour. When you will. -- A lusty blood! has both the
presence and the spirit of a man. I like the freedom of his behavior. -- Ho
-- Sebastian! Gone? -- Has set my blood o'boyling i'my veins And now (like
water poured upon the ground, that mixes it self with every moisture it
meets) I could claspe with any man. Enter Fresco with a Lant^orne. O Fresco!
Art thou come? If the other fail, then thou art entertaind.

Lust is a Spirit, which whosoe'er does raise;
The next man that encounters boldly, lays.

Exeunt. Enter Borachio warily and hastily over the Stage, with a s^one in
^yther hand. Bor. Such stones men use to raise a house upon;
But with these stones I go to ruin one.

Descends. Enter two Servants drunk fighting with their torches, D'amville,
Montferrers, Belforest, and Languebeau Snuff. Bell. Passion of me you drunken
knaves: you will put the lights out.


D'am. No my Lord; they are but in jest.


1. Mine Is out.


D'am. Then light it at his head, that is light enough. -- Foregod, they are out.
You drunken Rascals back and light'em.


Bell. It Is exceeding dark.


Exeunt Servants. D'am. No matter. I am acquainted with the way. Your hand.
Let Us easily walk. I Will lead you till they come.


Mont. My soul's oppressed with griefe^ T'lies heavy at my heart, O my departed
Son! ere long I shall be with (...)


D'amville thr^sts him down into the gra^^^^ pit. D'am. Marry God forbid.


Mont. O, o, o.


D'am. Now all the host of heaven forbid. Knaves, Rogues.


Bell. Pray God he be not hurt! here is fallen into the gravel pit.


D'am. Brother! dear Brother! Rascals, villains, knaves. Enter the Servants
with lights. Eternal darkness damn you; come away. Go round about into the
gravel pit, and help my Brother up. Why what a strange unlucky night (...)
this? Is It not my Lord? I think that Dog that ho^l'd the news of grief,
that fatal Scrichowle vsherd on this mischiefs.


Enter with the murdered body. Lan. Mischeife indeed my Lord. Your Brother's
dead.


Bell. He Is dead.


Ser. He Is dead.


D'am. Dead be your tongues. Drop out mine eye-bals, and let envious Fortune
play at tennis with them. Have I lived to this? Malicious Nature! had thou
borne me blind; thou had yet been something favorable to me. No breath? No
motion? 'prithee tell me heaven! have shut thine eye to wink at murder; or
have put this sable garment on, to mourn at's death? Not one poor spark in
the whole spacious sky, of all that endless number would vouchsafe to shine?
You vize-royes to the King of nature! whose constellations govern mortal
births; where is that fatal Planet ruled at his Natiu^tie? That might
ha'pleas'd to light him out, as well into the world; unless it be ashamed
T^haue been the instrument of such a good man's cursed dest^nie. --


(...). Passions transports you. Recollect your self.
(...) him not. Whether our deaths be good
Or bad; it is not death but life that tryes;
He lived well, (therefore) questionless, well dies.

D'am. I. It Is an easy thing for him that has no pain to talk of patience.
Do you think that Nature has no feeling?


Belf. Feeling? Yes. But has she purposed any thing for nothing? What good
receives this body by your grief? Whether is it more unnatural not to grieve
for him you cannot help with it; or hurt your self with grieuing and yet
grieve in vain?


D'am. Indeed had he been taken from me like a piece o'dead flesh, I should
neither have felt it, nor grieved for it. But come hither, 'pray look here.
Behold the lively tincture of his blood! Neither the Dropsy nor the Iaundies
in it. But the true freshness of a sanguine red; for all the fogge of this
black murdrous night has mixed with it. For any thing I know, he might have
lived till doomesday, and have done more good then either you or I. O Brother ^
He was a man of such a native goodness; as if Regeneration had been given him
in his mothers womb. So harmeles, that rather then have trod upon a worm, he
would have shunned the way. So dearly pitiful, that e're the poor could ask
his charity with dry eyes, he gaue' em relief wi'teares -- with tears -- yes
faith with tears.


Belf. Take up the Corpse. For wisedom's sake let reason fortify this
weakness.


D'am. Why what would you have me do? Foolish Nature will have her course in
spite o'wisedome. But I have even done. All these words were but a great
wind, and now this shower of tears has laid it, I am calm again. You may
set forward when you will. I Will follow you, like one that must and would not.


Lang. Our opposition will but trouble him.


Belf. The grief that melts to tears, by it self is spent, Passion resisted,
grows more violent.


Exeunt. Manet D'amville. Borachio ascends. D'am. Here Is a sweet Comedy.
T'begins with O dolentis, and concludes with ha, ha, he.


Bor. Ha, ha, he.


D'am. O my echo! I could stand reuerberating this sweet musical air of
joy, till I had perished my sound lungs with violent laughter. Lovely
Night-Rauen! thou have seaz'd a carcass.


Bor. Put him out on's pain. I lay so fitly underneath the bancke from whence
he fell; that ever his faltring tongue could utter double Oo; I knocked out's
brains with this fai^e Rubie. And had another stone just of this form and
bigness ready: that I laid in the broken skull vpo'the ground for's pillow;
against the which they thought he fell and perished.


D'am. Upon this ground I Will build my Manour-house;
And this shall be the chiefest corner stone.

Bor. T'has crowned the most judicious murder, that
The brain of man was ever delivered of.

D'am. I. Mark the plot. Not any circumstance
That stood within the reach of the design,
Of persons, dispositions, matter, time or place,
But by this brain of mine, was made
An Isntrumental help; yet nothing from
Th'induction to the accomplishment seemed forced,
Or done o'purpose, but by accident.

Bor. First, my report that Charlemont was dead,
Though false; yet covered with a masque of truth.

D'am. I, and delivered in as fit a time.
When all our minds so wholly were possessed
With one affair, that no man would suspect
A thought imploi'd for any second end.

Bor. Then the Precisian to be ready, when
Your brother spoke of death, to move his Will.

D'am. His business called him thither; and it fell
Within his office; unrequested to it.
From him it came religiously; and saved
Our project from suspicion: which if I
Had moved had been endangered.

Bor. Then your healths.
Though seeming but the ordinary rites,
And ceremonies due to fest^uals: --

D'am. Yet used by me to make the servants drunk.
An instrument the plot could not have missed.
It Was easy to set drunkards by the ears:
They Had nothing but their torches to fight with;
And when those lights were out;

Bor. Then darkness did
Protect the execution of the work,
Both from prevention and discovery.

D'am. Here was a murder bravely carried, through
The eye of observation, vnobseru'd.

Bor. And those that saw the passage of it, made
The Instruments yet knew not what they did.

D'am. That power of rule Philosophers ascribe
To him they call the supreme of the Stars;
Making their influences governors
Of Sublunarie Creatures; when their selves
Are senseless of their operations.
Thunder and Lightning. What! Do start at thunder? Credit my belief, it is a
mere effect of nature. An exhalation hot and dry, inuolu'd within a watrie
vapor in the middle religion of the air. Whose coldness congealing that
thick moisture to a cloud: the angry exhalation shut within a prison of
contrary quality, strives to be free; and with the violent eruption through
the grossness of that cloud; makes this noise we hear.


Bor. It Is a fearful noise.


D'am. It Is a brave noise. And me thinks graces our accomplishid project, as
a peale of Ordnance does a triumph. It speaks encouragement. Now Nature shows
thee how it sauour'd our performance; to forbear this noise when we set
forth, because it should not terrify my brothers going home; which would have
dashed our purpose: To forbear this lightning in our passage, least it should
ha'warn'd him of the pitfall. Then propitious Nature winck'd at our proceedings;
now it does express, how that forbearance favored our success.


Bor. You have confirmed me. For it follows well;
That Nature (since her self decay does hate)
Should favor those that strengthen their estate.

D'am. Our next endeavor is; since on the false report that Charlemont is
dead, depends the fabrique of the work; to credit that with all the
countenance we can.


Bor. Faith Sir, even let his own inheritance, whereof you have dispossessed him,
countenance the act. Spare so much out of that, to give him a solempnitie of
funeral. It Will quit the cost; and make your apprehension of his death appear
more confident and true.


D'am. I Will take thy counsel. Now farewell black night;
Thou beauteous Mistress of a murderer:
To honor thee, that have accomplished all;
I Will wear thy colors at his funeral.

Exeunt. Enter Leuidulcia into her chamber manned by Fresco. Leu. Thou Art welcome
into my chamber; Fresco. Prithee shut the door. -- Nay thou mistakest me. Come
in and shut it.


Fres. It Is somewhat late Madame.


Leu. No matter. I have somewhat to say to thee. What? is not thy mistress
toward a husband yet?


Fres. Faith Madame, she has suitors. But they will not suite her me thinks.
They will not come off lustily it seems.


Leu. They will not come on lustily, thou would say.


Fres. I mean (Madame) they are not rich enough.


Leu. But I ( Fresco) they are not bold enough. Thy Mistress is of a lively
attractiue blood Fr^ sco. And in troth she is of my mind for that. A poor
spirit is poorer then a poor purse. Give me a fellow that brings not only
temptation with him, but has the actiuitie of wit, and audacitie of spirit to
apply every word and gesture of a woman's speech and behavior to his own
desire; and make her believe she is the suitor her self. Never give back till
he has made her yield to 'it.


Fres. Indeed among our equals Madame; but otherwise we shall be put horribly
out o'countenance.


Leu. Thou art deceived, Fresco. Ladies are as cou^teous as Yeomens wiue^, and
me thinks they should be more gentle. Hot diet and soft ease makes em (like
wax always kept warm) more easy to take impression. -- Prithee untie my
shoe. -- What? art thou shamefaced too? Go roundly to work man. My leg is
not goutie: it will endure the feeling I warrant thee Come hither Fresco; thine
ear. -- S'daintie; I mistook the place. I missed thine ear and hit thy lip.


Fres. Your Lad^ship has made me blush.


Leu. That shows thou art full o'lustie bloud^ and thou know not how to use
it. Let me see thy hand. Thou should not be shamefaced by thy hand, Fresco.
Here Is a brawny flesh and a hairy skin: both signs of an able body. I do
not like these flegmaticke, smooth-skinn'd, soft-flesh'd fellows. They are
like candied Suckets, when they begin to perish; which I would always empty
my Closet off, and giue'em my chambermaid. -- I have some skill in Palmestry:
by this line that stands directly against me; thou should be near a good
fortune. Fresco, if thou had the grace to entertain it.


Fres. O what is that Madame? I pray!


Leu. No less then the love of a fair Lady, if thou do not lose her with
faint-heartednesse.


Fres. A Lady, Madame? alas a Lady is a great thing, I cannot compass her.


Leu. No? Why? I am a Lady, Am I so great I cannot be compassed? Claspe my wast
and try.


Fres. I could find i'my heart Madame.


Sebastian knockes within. Leu. Vds body; my Husband! Faint-hearted fool! I
think thou were begotten between the North Pole, and the congealed passage.
Now like an ambitious Coward that betrays himself with fearful delay: you
must suffer for the treason you never committed. Go hide thy self behind
yound'arras, instantly. Fresco hides himselfe^ Enter Sebastian. Sebastian! What
do you here so late?


Seba. Nothing yet; but I hope I shall. --


Kisses her. Leu. You Are very bold.


Seba. And you very valiant; for you met me at full Cariere.


Leu. You come to ha'me move your fathers reconciliation. I Will write a word or
two in your behalf.


Seba A word or two, Madame? that you do for me, will not be contained in
less then the compass of two sheets. But in plain terms, shall we take
the opportunity of priuatenesse?


Leu. What to do?


Seba. To dance the beginning of the world after the English manner.


Leu. Why not after the French or Italian?


Seba. Fie. They dance it preposterously; backward.


Leu. Are you so active to dance?


Seba. I can shake my heels.


Leu. You Are well made for it.


Seba. Measure me from top to toe; you shall not find me differ much from the
true standard of proportion.


Belforest knockes within. Leu. I think I am accursed. Sebastian! There Is one
at the door has beaten opportunity away from us. In brief, I love thee. And
it shall not be long before I give thee a testimony of it. To save thee now
from suspicion; do no more but draw thy Rapier; chase thy self; and when he
comes in, rush by without taking notice of him. Only seem to be angry, and
let me alone for the rest.


Enter Belforest. Seba. Now by the hand of M^rcurie.

Exit Sebastian.
Bell. What Is the matter wife?


Leu. Ooh, Ooh, Husband!


Bell. Prithee what ail'st thou woman?


Leu. O feel my pulse. It beats I warrant you. Be patient a little sweet
Husband; tarry but till my breath come to me again, and I Will satisfy you.


Bell. What a^les Sebastian, he looks so distractedly?


Leu. The poor Gentleman's almost out on's wits I think. You remember the
displeasure his Father took against him about the liberty of speech he used
even now when your daughter went to be married.


Bell. Yes, what of that?


Leu. T'has crazed him sure: he met a poor man in the street even now. Vpou
what quarrel I know not: but he pursued him so violently, that if my house
had not been his rescue; he had surely ki^d him.


Bell. What a strange desperate young man is that!


Leu. Nay husband, he grew so in rage when he saw the man was conveyed from
him, that he was ready even to have drawn his naked weapon upon me. And had
not your knocking at the door prevented him; surely h'ad done something to me.


Bell. Where Is the man?


Leu. Alas here. I warrant you the poor fearful soul is scarce come to
himself again yet. -- If the fool have any wit he will apprehend me. --
Do you hear sir^ You may be bold to come forth; the Fury that haunted you is
gone.


Fresco peepes fearfully forth from behind the Arras. Fres. Are you sure he
is gone?


Bell. He Is gone; he is gone, I warrant thee.


Fres. I would I were gone too. Has shook me almost into a dead palsy.


Bell. How fell the difference between you?


Fres. I would I were out at the back door.


Bell. Thou Art safe enough. Prithee tell's the falling out.


Fres. Yes sir, when I have recovered my spirits. My memory is almost frighted
from me. -- Oh so, so, so. -- Why Sir, as I came along the street Sir; --
this same Gentleman came stumbling after me, and trod of my hecle, -- I cried
O. Do you cry sirrah? says he. Let me see your heel; if it be not hurt,
I Will make you cry for something. So he claps my head between his legs, and
pulles off my shoe. I having shifted no sockes in a sea' night, the Gentleman
cried foh; and said my feet were base and cowardly feet, they stuncke for
fear. Then he knocked my shoe about my pate, and I cried O, once more. In
the mean time comes a shag. hair'd dog by, and rubbes against his shinnes.
The Gentleman took the dog in shagge-haire to be some Watchman in a rugge
gown; and swore he would hang me up at the next door with my lantern in
my hand, that passengers might see their way as they went without rubbing
against Gentlemen's shinnes. So, for want of a Cord. he took his own garters
off; and as he was going to make a nooze, I watched my time and ran away. And
as I ran (indeed) I bid him hang himself in his own gatters. So he in
choler, puisued me hither as you see.


Bell. Why this savors of distraction.


Leu. Of mere distraction.


Fres. How soever it savors, I am sure it smells like a lie.


Bell Thou may go forth at the back door (honest fellow) the way is private
and safe.


Fres. So it had need, for your fore-doore (here) is both common and dangerous.


Exit Belforest. Leu. Good night honest Fresco.


Fres. Good night Madame; if you get me kissing o'Ladies again. --

Exit Fresco.
Leu. This false out handsomely.
But yet the matter does not well succeed;
Till I have brought it to the very deed.
Exit.
Enter Charlemont in Arms, a Musquetier, and a Serieant. Charl. Serieant! what
hour of the night is it.

Ser. About one.

Charl. I would you would relieve me; for I am
So heavy, that I shall ha'much ado;
To stand out my perdu.

Thunder and Lightning. Ser. I Will even but walk
The round (sir) and then presently return.

Soul. For God's sake Serieant relieve me, above five hours together in so
foul a stormy night as this?


Ser. Why t'isa music Soldier. Heaven and earth are now in consort, when the
Thunder and the Canon play one to another.

Exit Serieant.
Charl. I know not why I should be thus inclined to sleep, I feel my
disposition pressed with a necessity of heaviness. Soldier! if thou have any
better eyes, I prithee wake me when the Serieant comes.


Soul. Sir, it is so dark and stormy that I shall scarce either see or hear
him ever he comes upon me.


Charl. I cannot ^orce my self to wake. --


Sleeps. Enter the ghost of Montferrers. Mont. Return to France; for thy old
Father's dead;
And thou by murder, disinherited.
Attend with patience the success of things;
But leave revenge unto the King of kings.
Exit.
Charlemont arts and wakes. Charl. O my affrighted soul! what fearful dream
Was this that waked me? Dreams are but the raised
Impressions of premeditated things,
By serious apprehension left upon
Our minds, or else th'imaginary shapes
Of objects proper to the complexion, or
The dispositions of our bodies. These
Can neither of them be the cause, why I
Should dream thus; for my mind has not been moved
With any one conception of a thought
To such a purpose; nor my nature wont
To trouble me with fantasies of terror.
It must be something that my Genius would
Inform me of. Now gracious heaven forbid!
O! let my Spirit be deprived of all
Foresight and knowledge, ere it understand
That vision acted; or divine that act
To come. Why should I think so? Left I not
My worthy Father in the kind regard
Of a most loving Uncle? Soldier! sawst
No apparition of a man?

Soul. You dream Sir; I saw nothing.


Charl. Tush. These idle dreams
Are fabulous. Our boiling fantasies
Like troubled waters falsify the shapes
Of things retained in them; and make' em seem
Confounded, when they are distinguished, So
My actions daily conversant with war;
(The argument of blood and death) had left
(Perhaps) th'imaginary presence of
Some bloody accident upon my mind:
Which mixed confusedly with other thoughts,
(Whereof th'remembrance of my Father, might
Be one) presented all together, seem
Incorporate; as if his body were
The owner of that blood, the subject of
That death; when he is at Paris, and that blood
Shed here. It may be thus. I would not leave
The war, for reputatio'ns sake, upon
An idle apprehension; a vain dream.

Enter the Ghost. Soul. Stand. Stand, I say. No? Why then have at thee. Sir, if
you will not stand, I Will make you fall? Nor stand, nor fall? Nay then the
Diuel's damme has broke her husbands head: for sure it is a Spirit, I shot it
through, and yet it will not fall.

Exit.
The Ghost approaches Charlemont. He fearfully auoids it. Char. O pardon me!
my doubtful heart was slow
To credit that which I did fear to know.

Exeunt. Actus terti^ Scena prima.
Enter the Funeral of Montferrers. D'amville. SEt down the Body. Pay earth
what she lent.
But she shall bear a living monument,
To let succeeding ages truly know.
That she is satisfied, what he did owe:
Both principal and use; because his worth
Was better at his death then at his birth.

A dead march. Enter the Funeral of Charlemont as a Soldier. D'am. And with
his Body, place that memory
Of noble Charlemont his worthy Son.
And give their Graves the rites that do belong
To Soldiers. They were Soldiers both. The Father
Held open war with Sin; the Son with blood:
This in a war more gallant^ that more good.

The first volley. D'am. There place their Arms; and here their Epitaphe^.
And may these Lines survive the last of graves.
The Epitaph of Montferrers.
HEre lie the Ashes of that earth and fire;
whose heat and fruit, ded feed and warm the poor ^
And they (as if they would in sighs expire,
and into tears dissolve) his death deplore.
He did that good freel^^ for goodness sake,
fnforc'd: for gen'rousnesse he held so dear,
That he feared none but him that did him make,
and yet he served him more for love then fear.
So's life provided, that though he did dye
Asod^une death; yet dyed not suddenly.
The Epitaph of Charlement.
HIs Body lies interred within this would;
Who dyed a young man, yet departed old.
And in all strength of youth that Man can have,
Was ready still to drop into his grave.
For aged in virtue with a youthful eye,
He welcomed it being still prepared to dye;
And living so, though young deprived of breath,
He did not suffer an untimely death.
But we may say of his brave blessed decease ^
He dyed in war; and yet he dyed in peace.

The second volley. D'am. O might that fire revive the ashes of
This Phoenix! yet the wonder would not be
So great as he was good; and wondered at
For that. His lives example was so true
A practique of Religion's Theorie;
That her Divinity seemed rather the
Description then th'instruction of his life.
And of his goodness, was his virtuous Son
A worthy imitatour. So that on
These two Herculean pillars, where their arms
Are placed; there may be writ, Non vltra. For
Beyond their lives as well for youth as age;
Nor young nor old, in merit or in name;
Shall ever exceed their virtues or their fame.

The third volley. It Is done. Thus fair accomplements, make foul
Deeds gracious. Charlemont! come now when t'wut.
I Have buried under these two marble stones.
Thy living hopes; And thy dead fathers bones.
Exeunt. Enter Castabella mourning to the monument of Charlemont. Casta. O thou
that know me justly Charl^monts.
Though in the forced possession of another;
Since from thine own free spirit we receive it,
That our affections cannot be compelled,
Though' our actions may; be not displeased, if on
The altar of his Tomb, I sacrifice
My tears. They are the jewels of my love
Dissolved ^ to grief: and fall upon
His blasted Spring; as April dew, upon
A sweet young blossom shak'd before the time.

Enter Charlemont with a Servant. Charl. Go see my Truncks disposed of, I Will
but walk
A turn or two in the Church and follow you.
Exit Servant. O! here is the fatal monument of my
Dead Father first presented to mine eye.
What Is here? in memory of Charlemont?
Some false relation has abused belief.
I am deluded. But I thank thee Heaven.
For ever let me be deluded thus.
My Castabella mourning over my Hearse?
Sweet Castab^lla rise, I am not dead.

Casta. O heaven defend me.

Falls in a swoune. Charl. I Beshrew my rash
And inconsid'rate passion. -- Castabella!
That could not think -- my Castabella! -- that
My sudden presence might affright her sense. --
I prithee (my affection) pardon me.
She rises. Reduce thy understanding to thine eye.
Within this habit which thy misinformed
Conceit takes only for a shape; live both
The soul and body of thy Charlemont.

Casta. I feel a substance, warm, and soft, and moist,
Subject to the capacity of sense.

Charl. Which Spirits are not; for their effence is
Above the nature and the order of
Those Elements whereof our senses are
Created. Touch my lip. Why turnst thou from me?

Cast. Grief above g^iefes. That which should woe relieve,
Wished and obtained, gives greater cause to grieve.

Charl. Can Castabella think it cause of grief
That the relation of my death proves false?

Casta. The presence of the person we affect,
(Being hopeless to enjoy him) makes our grief
More passionate then if we saw him not.

Charl. Why not enjoy? has absence changed thee?

Casta. Yes.
From maid to wife.

Charl. Art married?

Casta. O I am.

Charl. Married had not my mother been a woman,
I should protest against the chastity
Of all thy sex. How can the Merchant, or
The Mariner absent whole years (from wives
Exper^enc'd in the satisfaction of
Desire) promise themselves to find their sheets
Unspotted with adultery, at their
Return? when you that never had the sense
Of actual temptation; could not stay
A few short months.

Cast. O do but hear me speak.

Charl. But thou were wise; and did consider that
A Soldier might be maimed, and so (perhaps)
Lose his ability to please thee.

Casta. No. That weakness pleases me in him I have.

Char. What? married to a man unable too?
O strange incontinence! Why? was thy blood
Increased to such a pleurisy of lust,
That of necessity, there must a vein
Be opened; though by one that had no skill
To do it?

Casta. Sir, I beseech you hear me.

Charl. Speak.

Casta. Heaven knows I am vnguiltie of this act.

Charl. Why? were thou forced to do it?

Casta. Heaven knows I was.

Charl. What villain did it?

Casta. Your Uncle 'D'amville.
And he that dispossessed my love of you;
Has disinherited you of possession.

Charl. Disinherited? wherein have I deserved
To be deprived of my dear Fathers love?

Casta. Both of his love and him. His soul's at rest.
But here your injured patience may behold
The signs of his lamented memory.
Charlemont finds his Fathers Monument. H'as found it. When I took him for a
Ghoast,
I could endure the torment of my fear;
More easily then I can his sorrows hear.
Exit.
Charl. Of all men's griefs must mine be singular?
Without example? Here I met my grave.
And all men's woes are buried in their graves
But mine. In mine my miseries are borne.
I pr'ithee sorrow leave a little room,
In my confounded and tormented mind;
For understanding to deliberate
The cause or author of this accident. --
A close advantage of my absence made,
To dispossess me both of land and wife:
And all the profit does arise to him,
By whom my absence was first moved and urged.
These circumstances (Uncle) tell me, you
Are the suspected author of those wrongs.
Whereof the lightest, is more heavy then
The strongest patience can endure to bear.
Exit.
Enter D'amville, Sebastian, and Languebeau. D'am. Now Sir! your business?

Seba. My Annuitie.

D'am. Not a deniere.

Seba. How would you ha'me live?

D'am. Why turn Crier. Cannot you turn Crier?

Seba. Yes.

D'am. Then do so, y'haue a good voice for it.
You Are excellent at crying of a Rape.

Seba. Sir, I confess in particular respect to your self, I was somewhat
forgetful. General honesty possessed me.


D'am. Go, thou art the base corruption of my blood; And like a Tetter growes't
unto my flesh.


Seba. Inflict any punishment upon me. The severity shall not discourage me,
if it be not shameful; so you will but put money i'my purse. The want of money
makes a free spirit more mad then the possession does an Usurer.


D'am. Not a farthing.


Seba. Would you ha'me turn purse-taker? It Is the next way to do it. For want
is like the Racque; it draws a man to endanger himself to the gallows rather
then endure it.


Enter Charlemont, D'amville countersaites to take him for a ghoast. D'am. What
art thou? Stay. Assist my troubled sense. My apprehension will distract me.
Stay.


Languebeau Snuff auoides him fearfully. Seba. What art thou? speak.


Charl. The spirit of Charlemont.


D'am. O stay! compose me. I dissolve.


Lang. No. It Is profane. Spirits are invisible. It Is the fiend in the likeness
of Charlemont. I will have no conversation with Satan.


Exit Snuff. Seba. The Spirit of Charlemont? I Will try that.
Strike, and the blow returned. Before God thou say true, thou art all Spirit.

D'am. Go call the Officers.
Exit D'amville.
Charl. Thou Art a villain; and the Son of a villain.

Seba. You lie.

Fight. Sebastian is down. Char. Have at thee.
Enter the Ghost of Montferrers. Revenge to thee I Will dedicate this work.

Mont. Hold Charlemont!
Let him revenge my murder, and thy wrongs,
To whom the lustice of Revenge belongs.
Exit.
Char. You torture me between the passion of my blood, and the religion of my
soul,


Sebastian rises. Seba. A good honest fellow.


Enter D'amville with Officers. D'am. What? wounded? apprehend him. Sir; is
this your salutation for the courtesy I did you when we parted last? You
ha'forgot I lent you a thousand Crowns. First, let him answer for this riot.
When the Law is satisfied for that; an an action for his debt shall clap him up
again. I took you for a Spirit; and I Will conjure you before I ha'done.


Charl. No. I Will turn Coniurer. Devil! within this Circle, in the midst of all
thy force and malice I conjure thee do thy worst.


D'am. Away with him.


Exeunt Officers with Charlemont. Seba. Sir, I have got a scratch or two here
for your sake. I hope you will give me money to pay the Surgeon.


D'am. Borachio! fetch me a thousand Crowns. I am content to countenance the
freedom of your spirit when it is worthily employed. A Gods name give behavior
the full scope of generous liberty; but let it not disperse and spend it self
in courses of unbounded license. Here, pay for your hurts.

Exit. D'amville.
Seba. I thank you sir. -- Generous liberty. -- that is to say, freely to
bestow my habilities to honest purposes. Me thinks I should not follow that
instruction now; if having the means to do an honest office for an honest
fellow, I should neglect it. Charlemont lies in prison for a thousand Crowns.
And here I have a thousand Crowns. Honesty tells meet'were well done to
release Charlemont. But discretion says I had much a do to come by this; and
when this shall be gone I know not where to singer any more: especially if I
employ it to this use, which is like to endanger me into my Fathers perpetual
displeasure. And then I may go hang my self, or be forced to do that, will
make another save me the labor. No matter. Charlemont! Thou gave me my
life and that is somewhat of a purer earth then gold as fine as it is. It Is no
courtesy I do thee but thankfulness. I owe thee it and I Will pay it. He
sought bravely, but the Officers dragged him villanously. Arrant knaves! for
using him so discourtcously; may the sins of the poor people be so few, that
you shall not be able to spare so much out o'your gettings, as will pay for the
hyre of a lame starved hackney to ride to an execution. But go a foot to the
gallows, and be hanged. May elder brothers turn good husbands, and younger
brothers get good wives; that there be no need of debt-bookes, nor use of
Serieants. May there be all peace but in the war, and all charity but in the
Devil; so that prisons may be turned to Hospitals, though the Officers live
oath benevolence. If this curse might come to pass, the world would say,
Blessed be he that curses.

Exit.
Enter Charlemont in prison. Charl. I grant the Heaven. Thy goodness does
command
Our punishments: but yet no further then
The measure of our sins. How should they else
Be just? Or how should that good purpose of
Thy Justice take effect, by bounding men
Within the confines of humanity,
When our afflictions do exceed our crimes?
Then they do rather teach the barbarous world
Examples that extend her cruelties
Beyond their own dimentions; and instruct
Our actions to be more, more barbarous.
O my afflicted soul! How torment swells
Thy apprehension with profane conceit,
Against the sacred justice of my God?
Our own constructions are the authors of
Our misery. We never measure our
Conditions but with Men above us in
Estate. So while our Spirits labor to
Be higher then our fortunes they are more base.
Since all those attributes which make men seem
Superior to us; are Man's Subjects; and
Were made to serve him. The repining Man
Is of a servile spirit to deiect
The value of himself below their estimation.

Enter Sebastian with the Keeper. Seba. Here. Take my sword. -- How now my
wild Swag'rer? you are tame enough now; are you not? The penury of a prison is
like a soft consumption. It Will humble the pride of your mortality; and arm
your soul in complete patience to endure the weight of affliction without
feeling it. What? Have no music in thee? Thou Have trebles and bases enough.
Treble injury; and base usage. But trebles and bases make poor music without
means. Thou want Means; Do? what? Do droope? art dejected?


Charl. No Sir. I have a heart above the reach
Of thy most violent maliciousness.
A fortitude in scorn of thy contempt;
(Since Fate is pleased to have me suffer it)
That can bear more then thou have power t'inflict.
I was a Baron That thy Father has
Deprived me off. In stead of that, I am
Created King. I Have lost a Signiorie,
That was confined within a piece of earth;
A Wart upon the body of the world.
But now I am an Emperor of a world.
This little world of Man. My passions are
My Subjects; and I can command them laugh;
Whilst thou do tickle'em to death with misery.

Seba. It Is bravely spoken; and I love thee for it. Thou lie here for a
thousand crowns. Here are a thousand to redeem thee. Not for the ransom of my
life thou gave me. That I value not at one crown. It Is none of my deed.
Thank my Father for it. It Is his goodness. Yet he looks not for thanks. For
he does it under hand; out of a reserved disposition to do thee good without
ostentation. -- Out of great heart you will refus't now; will you?


Charl. No. Since I must submit my self to Fate; I never will neglect the
offer of one benefit; but entertain them as her favors; and th'inductions to
some end of better fortune. As whose instrument; I thank thy courtesy.


Seba. Well, come along.


Exeunt. Enter D'amville and Castabella. D'am: Daughter you do not well to
urge me. I
Ha'done no more then Justice. Charlemont
Shall die and rot in prison; and it is just.

Casta. O Father! Mercy is an attribute
As high as Justice; an essential part
Of his unbounded goodness, whose divine
Impression, form, and image man should bear.
And (me thinks) Man should love to imitate
His Mercy; since the only countenance
Of Justice, were destruction; if the sweet
And loving favor of his mercy did
Not mediate between it and our weakness.

D'am. Forbear. You will displease me. He shall rot.

Casta. Dear Sir! Since by your greatness, you
Are nearer heaven in place; be nearer it
In goodness. Rich men should transcend the poor,
As clouds the earth; raised by the comfort of
The Sun, to water dry and barren grounds.
If neither the impression in your soul
Of goodness; nor the duty of your place,
As goodness substitute; can move you: then
Let nature, which in Savages, in beasts,
Can stir to pity, tell you that he is
Your kinsman; --

D'am. You expose your honesty
To strange construction: Why should you so urge
Release for Charlemont? Come you profess
More nearenesse to him then your modesty
Can answer. You have tempted my suspicion.
I tell thee he shall starve, and dye, and rot.

Enter Charlemont and Sebastian. Charl. Uncle, I thank you.

D'am. Much good do it you. -- Who did release him?

Seba. I.

Exit Castabella. D'am. You are a villain.

Seba. You Are my Father.
Exit Sebastian.
D'am. I must temporize. --
Nephew^ had not his open freedom made
My disposition known; I would ha'borne
The course and inclination of my love
According to the ^otion of the Sun,
Inuisibly inioyed and understood.

Charl. That shows your good works are directed to
No other end then goodness. I was rash,
I must confess. But --

D'am. I will excuse you.
To lose a Father, and (as you may think)
Be disinherited (it must be granted)
Are motives to impatience. But for death,
Who can avoid it? And for his estate,
In the uncertainty of both your lives,
It Was done discreetly^ to conferre't upon
A known Successor; being the next in blood.
And one (dear Nephew) whom in time to come,
You shall have cause to thank. I will not be
Your dispossessour, but your Guardian.
I will supply your Fathers vacant place,
To guide your green improuidence of youth;
And make you ripe for your inheritance.

Charl. Sir, I embrance your ge^'rous promises.

Enter Rousard sick, and Castabella. Rousa. Embracing? I behold the object that
Mine eye affects. Dear Cousin Charlemont.

D'am. My elder Son! He meets you happily.
For with the hand of our whole family
We enterchange th'indenture of our Loves.

Charl. And I accept it. Yet not joyfully
Because you are sick.

D'am. Sir; His affection's sound,
Though he be sick in body.

Rousa. Sick indeed.
A general weakness did surprise my health
The very day I married Castabella.
As if my sickness were a punishment,
That did arrest me for some injury
I then committed. Credit me (my Love)
I pity thy ill fortune to be matched
With such a weak unpleasing bedfellow.

Casta. Believe me Sir; it never troubles me.
I am as much respectlesse to enjoy
Such pleasure as ignorant what it is.

Charl. Thy Sexes wonder. Unhappy Charlemont.

D'am. Come, let us to supper. There we will confirm
The eternal bond of our concluded love.

Exeunt. Actus quarti Scena prima.
Enter Cataplasma and Soquette with Needle-worke. Cataplasma. COme Soquette;
your work! let us examine your work. What Is here? a Medlar with a Plum-tree
growing hard by it; The leaves of the Plum-tree falling off; the gum issuing
out of the perished joints; and the branches some of 'em dead, and some rotten;
and yet but a young Plum-tree. In good sooth, very pretty.


Soqu. The Plum-tree (forsooth) grows so near the Medlar, that the Medlar
suckes and draws all the sap from it; and the natural strength of the ground,
so that it cannot prosper.


Cata. How conceipted you are! But here thou have made a Tree to bear no fruit.
Why's that?


Soqu. There grows a Sauin-tree next it forsooth.


Cata. Forsooth you are a little too witty in that.


Enter Sebastian. Seba. But this Honisuckle winds about this white-thorne very
prettily and lovingly; sweet Mistress Cataplasma.


Cata. Monsieur Sebastian! in good sooth very uprightly welcome this evening.


Seba. What? moralizing upon this Gentlewomans needleworke? let us see.


Cata. No Sir. Only examining whether it be done to the true nature and life
of the thing?


Seba. Here y'haue set a Medlar with a Batchelers-button of one side; and a
Snaile of th'tother. The Batchelers-button should have held his head up more
pertly toward the Medlar; the Snaile o'th'tother side, should ha'beene wrought
with an artificial laziness, doubling his tail, and putting out his horn
but half the length. And then the Medlar falling (as it were) from the lazy
Snaile, and enclining toward the pert Batchelers-button; their branches
spreading and winding one within another as if they did embrace. But here is a
moral. A poppring Peare-tree growing upon the bank of a River; seeming
continually to look downwards into the water, as if it were enamored of it;
and ever as the fruit ripens, lets it fall for love (as it were) into her lap.
Which the wanton Stream, like a Strumpet, no sooner receives, but she carries
it away, and bestows it upon some other creature she maintains: still seeming
to play and dally under the Poppring, so long, that it has almost washed away
the earth from the root; and now the poor Tree stands as if it were ready to
fall and perish by that whereon it spent all the substance it had.


Cata. Moral for you that love those wanton running waters.


Seba. But is not my Lady Leuidulcia come yet?


Cata. Her purpose promised us her company ere this. Lirie! your Lute and your
Book.


Seba. Well said. A lesson of th'Lute to entertain the time with till she
comes.


Cata. Sol, fa, mi, la. -- Mi, mi mi. -- Precious! Do not see mi between
the two Crochets? Strike me full there. -- So -- forward. -- This is a sweet
strain, and thou finger'st it beastly. Mi is a laerg there; and the prick that
stands before mi, a long; always half your note. -- Now -- Run your
division pleasingly with those quauers. Observe all your graces in the touch. --
Here Is a sweet cloze -- strike it full, it sets off your music delicately.


Enter Languebeau Snuff and Leuidulcia. Lang. Purity be in this House.


Cata. It Is now entered; and welcome with your good Ladyship.


Seba. Cease that music. Here Is a sweeter instrument.


Leuid. Restrain your liberty. See you not Snuff?


Seba. What does the Stinkard here? put Snuff out. He Is offensive.


Leuid. No. The credit of his company defends my being abroad from the eye of
Suspicion.


Cata. Will It please your Ladyship go up into the Closet? There are those
Falls and Tyres I told you of.


Leuid. Monsieur Snuff, I shall request your patience. My stay will not be
long.


-- Exit cum Sebast. Lang. My duty Madame. -- Falls and Tyres? I begin to
suspect what Falls and Tyres you mean. My Lady and Sebastian the Fall and the
Tire, and I the Shadow. I perceive the purity of my conversation is used but
for a property to cover the uncleanness of their purposes. The very
contemplation of the thing, makes the spirit of the flesh begin to wriggle in
my blood. And here my desire has met with an object already. This Gentlewoman
(me thinks) should be swayed with the motion; living in a house where moving
example is so common. Temptation has prevailed over me; and I will attempt to
make it overcome her. -- Mistress Cataplasma! My Lady (it seems) has some
business that requires her stay. The fairness of the evening inuites me into
the air; will it please you give this Gentlewoman leave to leave her work,
and walk a turn or two with me for honest recreation?


Cata. With all my heart Sir. Go Soqu^ite; give ear to his instructions; you
may get understanding by his company I can tell you.


Lang. In the way of holiness; Mistress Cataplasma.


Cata. Good Monsieur Snuff! -- I will attend your return.


Lang. Your hand Gentlewomen. --
The flesh is humble till the Spirit move it;
But when it is raised it will command above it.

Exeunt. Enter D'amville, Charlemont, and Borachio. D'am. Your sadness and the
sickness of my Son,
Have made our company and conference
Less free and pleasing then I purposed it.

Char. Sir; for the present I am much unfit
For conversation or society.
With pardon I will rudely take my leave.

D'am. Good night; dear Nephew. --
Exit Charlemont. See thou that same man?

Bora. Your meaning Sir?

D'am. That fellows life Borachio.
Like a superfluous Letter in the Law,
Endangers our assurance.

Bora. Scrape him out.

D'am. Wut do it?

Bora. Give me your purpose I will do it.

D'am. Sad melancholy has drawn Charlemont,
With meditation on his Fathers death,
Into the solitary walk behind the Church.

Bora. The Churchyard? This the fittest place for death,
Perhaps he is praying. Then he is fit to die.
We Will send him charitably to his grave.

D'am. No matter how thou take him. First take this. --
Pistol. Thou know the place. Observe his passages;
And with the most advantage make a stand;
That favored by the darkness of the night,
His breast may fall upon thee at so near
A distance, that he shall not shun the blow.
The deed once done, thou mai'st retire with safety.
The place is unfrequented; and his death
Will be imputed to the attempt of thieves.

Bora. Be careless. Let your mind be free and clear.
This Pistol shall discharge you of your fear.
-- Exit.
D'am. But let me call my proiects to account,
For what effect and end I have engaged
My self in all this blood? To leave a state
To the succession of my proper blood.
But how shall that succession be continued?
Not in my elder Sonne^ I fear, Disease
And weakness have disabled him for issue.
For th'tother; his loose humor will endure
No bond of marriage. And I doubt his life;
His spirit is so boldly dangerous.
O pity that the profitable end,
Of such a prosperous murder should be lost!
Nature forbid. I hope I have a body,
That will not suffer me to loose my labor,
For want of issue, yet. But then't must be
A Bastard. -- Tush; they only father bastards,
That father other men's begettings. Daughter!
Be it mine own; let it come whence it will.
I am resolved. Daughter!

-- Enter Servant. Seru. My Lord.

D'am. I prithee call my Daughter.

-- Enter Casta. Casta. Your pleasure Sir.

D'am. Is thy Husband i'bed?

Casta. Yes my Lord.

D'am. The euening's fair. I prithee walk a turn or two.

Casta. Come Iaspar.

D'am. No.

Weel' walk but to the corner of the Church;
And I have something to speak privately.
Casta. No matter, Stay.

-- Exit Servant. D'am. This falls out happily.

-- Exeunt. Enter Charlemont, Borachio dogging himin the Churchyard. The Clock
strikes twelve. Charl. Twelve.


Bora. It Is a good hour, it will strike one anon.


Charl. How fit a place for contemplation is this dead of night, among the
dwellings of the dead. -- This grave. -- Perhaps th'inhabitant was in his
life time the possessour of his own desires. Yet in the amidst of all his
greatness and his wealth; he was less rich and less contented, then in this
poor piece of earth, lower and lesser then a Cottage. For here he neither
wants nor cares. Now that his body favors of corruption; He enioyes a sweeter
rest then ever he did amongst the sweetest pleasures of this life. For here,
there is nothing troubles him. -- And there. -- In that grave lies another. He
(perhaps) was in his life as full of misery as this of happiness. And here is
an end of both. Now both their states are equal. O that Man, with so much
labor should aspire to wordly height; when in the humble earth, the world's
condition's at the best! Or scorn inferior men; since to be lower then a
worm, is to be higher then a King!


Bora. Then fall and rise.


-- Discharges. -- Gives false fire. Charl. What villains hand was that? save
thee or thou shall perish.


They fight. Bora. Zownes vnsau'd I think.


-- Fall. Charl. What? Have I killed him? whatsoever thou be I would thy
hand had prosper'd. For I was unfit to live, and well prepared to die. What
shall I do? accuse my self. Submit me to the law, and that will quickly end
this violent increase of misery. But it is a murder to be accessarie to mine
own death. I will not. I will take this opportunity to escape. It may be
Heaven reserues me to some better end.

Exit Charlemont.
Enter Snuff and Soquette into the Churchyard. Soqu. Nay good Sir; I dare not.
In good sooth I come of a generation both by Father and Mother, that were all
as fruitful as Costard-mongers wives.


Snu. Tush then, a Timpanie is the greatest danger can be feared. Their
fruitfulness turns but to a certain kind of flegmatique windy disease.


Soqu. I must put my understanding to your trust Sir. I would be loath to be
deceived.


Snu. No, conceive; thou shall not. Yet thou shall profit by my instruction
too. My body is not every day drawn dry wench.


Soqu. Yet me thinks Sir, your want of use should rather make your body like
a Well, the lesser it is drawn, the sooner it grows dry.


Snu. Thou shall try that instantly.


Soqu. But we want place and opportunity.


Snu. We have both. This is the back side of the House which the superstitious
call Saint Winifrea', Church; and is verily a convenient unfrequented place. --
Where under the close Curtains of the night;


Soqu. You purpose in the dark to make me light. Pulles out a sheet, a hair,
and a beard. But what have you there?


Snu. This disguise is for security sake wench. There Is a talk thou know,
that the Ghoast of old Mon ferrers walks. In this Church he was buried. Now if
any stranger fall upon us before our business be ended; in this disguise I
shall be taken for that Ghoast; and never be called to examination I warrant
thee. Thus we shall escape both prevention and discovery. How do I look in
this habit wench?


Saq. So like a Ghost that notwithstanding I have some foreknowledge of you, you
make my hair stand almost an end.


Snu. I will try how I can kiss in this beard. -- O fie, fie, fie. I will put
it off; and then kiss; and then put it on. I can do the rest without kissing.


Enter Charlemont doubtfully with his sword drawn, is upon them before they
are aware. They run out diverse ways, and leave the disguise. Charl. What have
we here? a Sheet? a hair? a beard? What end was this disguise intended for?
No matter what. I Will not expostulate the purpose of a friendly accident.
Perhaps it may accommodate my escape. -- I fear I am pursued. For more
assurance, I Will hide me here in the Charnell house; this conuccation-house of
dead men's sculles. -- To get into the Charnell house, he takes hold of a
Death's head; it slips and staggers him. Death's head! deceiu'st my hold? Such
is the trust to all mortalitic. --


Hides himself in the Charnell house. Enter D'amville and Castabella. Casta.
My Lord! The night grows late. Your Lordship spoke of something you desired to
move in private.


D'am. Yes. Now I Will speak it. Th'argument is love. The smallest ornament of
thy sweet form (that abstract of all pleasure) can command the senses into
passion; and thy entire perfection is my object; yet I love thee with the
freedom of my reason. I can give thee reason for my love.


Casta. Love me; my Lord? I do believe it, for I am the wife of him you love.


D'am. It Is true. By my persuasion thou were forced to marry one, unable to
perform the office of a Husband. I was author of the wrong. My conscience
suffers vnder't; and I would disburthen it by satisfaction.


Casta. How?


D'am. I will supply that pleasure to thee which he cannot.


Casta. Are y'a devil or a man?


D'am. A man; and such a man, as can return thy entertainment with as
prodigal a body, as the covetous desire of woman ever was delighted with. So,
that besides the full performance of thy empty Husbands duty; thou shall have
the joy of children to continue the succession of thy blood. For the appetite
that steals her pleasure; draws the forces of the body to an united strength;
and puts 'em altogether into action; never fails of procreation. All the
purposes of Man aim but at one of these two ends; pleasure or profit: And in
this one sweet conjunction of our loves. they both will meet. Would it not
grieve thee, that a Stranger to thy blood, should lay the first foundation of
his house upon the ruins of thy family?


Casta. Now Heaven defend me! May my memory be utterly extinguished; and the
heir of him that was my Fathers enemy, raise his eternal monument upon our
ruins; ere the greatest pleasure or the greatest profit, ever tempt me to
continue it by incest.


D'am. Incest? Tush. These distances affinity observes; are articles of
bondage cast upon our freedoms by our own subiections. Nature allows a
general liberty of generation to all creatures else. Shall Man to whose
command and use all creatures were made subject be less free then they?


Casta. O God! is thy unlimited and infinite omnipotence less free because
thou do no ill? or if you argue merely out of Nature; do you not
degenerate from that; and are you not unworthy the prerogative of Natures
Maister-piece, when basely you prescribe your self authority and law from
their examples whom you should command? I could confute you; but the horror of
the argument confounds my understanding. -- Sir, I know, you do but try me in
your Sons behalf; suspecting that my strength and youth of blood cannot
contain themselves with impotence. -- Believe me (Sir) I never wronged him. If
it be your lust; O quench it on their prostituted flesh, whose trade of sin
can please desire with more delight, and less offense. -- The poison of your
breath; euaporated from so foul a soul; infects the air more then the dampes
that rise from bodies but half rotten in their graves.


D'am. Kiss me, I warrant thee my breath is sweet. These dead men's bones lie
here of purpose to inuit us to supply the number of the living. Come; we will
get young bones and do it. I will enjoy thee. No? Nay then inuoke your great
supposed protector; I will do it.


Casta. Supposed protector? Are y'an Athiest? Then, I know my prayers and
tears are spent in vain. O patient Heaven! Why do thou not express thy
wrath in thunderbolts; to tear the frame of man in pieces? How can earth
endure the burden of this wickedness without an earthquake? Or the angry face
of Heaven be not enflamed with lighning.


D'am. Conjure up the Devil and his Dam; Cry to the graves; the dead can
hear thee; invoke their help.


Casta. O would this grave might open, and my body were bound to the dead
carcass of a man for ever, e're it entertain the lust of this detested
villain.


D'am. Tereas-like, thus I will force my passage to --


Charl. The Devil.


Charlemont (...) the disguise and frights D'amville away. Now Lady! with the
hand of Charlemont, I thus redeem you from the arm of lust. -- My Castabella!

Casta. My dear Charlemont!


Charl. For all my wrongs I thank thee gracious Heaven; thou have made me
satisfaction; to reserve me for this blessed purpose. Now sweet Death, I Will bid
thee welcome. Come. I Will guard thee home; and then I Will cast my self into the
arms of apprehension, that the law may make this worthy work, the crown of
all my actions being the best and last.


Casta. The last? The law? Now Heaven forbid! what ha'you done?


Charl. Why, I have killed a man; not murdered him, my Castabella; He would
ha'murder'd me.


Casta. Then Charlemont; the hand of Heaven directed thy defense.

That wicked Athiest, I suspect his plot.

Charl. My life he seeks. I would he had it since he has deprived me of those
blessings that should make me love it; Come; I Will give it him.


Casta. You shall not. I will first expose my self to certain danger, then for
my defense destroy the man that saved me from destruction.


Charl. Thou can not satisfy me better, then to be the instrument of my
release from misery.


Casta. Then work it by escape. Leave me to this protection that still guards
the innocent; Or I will be a partner in your destiny.


Charl. My soul is heavy. Come; lie down to rest;
These are the pillowes whereon men sleep best.

They lie down with either of them a Death's head for a pillow. Enter Snuff
seeking Soquette. Snu. Soquette! Soquette! Soquette! O art thou there? --
He mistakes the body of Borachio for Soquette.
Verily thou lie in a fine premiditate readiness for the purpose. Come kiss
me sweet Soquette. -- Now purity defend me from the sin of Sodom. -- This is
a creature of the ma^culine gender. -- Verily the Man is blasted. -- Yea? cold
and stiff? -- Murder, murder, murder.

Exit.
Enter D'amville distractedly; starts at the sight of a Death's head. D'am. Why
do thou stare upon me? Thou art not the scull of him I murdered. What have
thou to do to vex my conscience? Sure thou were the head of a most dogged
V^urer, thou art so uncharitable. And that Bawd the sky, there; she could shut
the windows and the doors of this great chamber of the world; and draw the
curtains of the clouds between those lights and me about this bed of earth,
when that same Stumpet Murder and my self committed sin together. Then she
could leave us ^ the dark, till the close deed was done: But now, that I begin
to feel the loathsome horror of my sin; and (like a Leacher emptied of his
lust) desire to bury my face under my eyebrows, and would steal from my
shame unseen; she meets me in the face with all her light corrupted eyes, to
challenge payment of me. -- O behold. Yonder Is the Gh^ast of old Mon^ferrers
in a long white sheet, climbing yo^d lofty mountain to complain to Heaven
of me. -- Montferrers! 'pox of fearfulness. TO is nothing but a fa^re white
cloud. Why? was I borne a coward? He lies that says so. Yet the countenance
of a bloudlesse worm might have the courage now to turn my blood to water. The
trembling motion of an Aspen leaf, would make me like the shadow of that leaf
he shaking vnder't. I could now commit a murder', were it but to drink the
fresh warm blood of him I murdered; to supply the want and weakness o'mine
own; it is grown so cold and f^egmaticke.


Lang. Murder, murder, murder.


-- Within. D'am. Mountains o'erwhelme me, the Ghoast of old Montferrers
haunts me.


Lang. Murder, murder, murder.


D'am. O were my body circumuolu'd within that cloud; that when the thunder
tears his passage open, it might scatter me to nothing in the air!


Enter Languebeau Snuff with the Watch. Lang. Here you shali find the
murdered body.


D'am. Black Beelzebub, and all his hell hounds come to apprehend me?


Lang. No my good Lord. We come to apprehend the murderer. The Ghoast (great
Pluto) was a fool; unfit to be employed in any serious business for the state
of hell. Why? could not he have suffered me to raise the mountain of my sins
with one as damnable as all the rest; and then have tumbled me to ruin? But
apprehend me even between the purpose and the act? before it was committed?


Watch. Is this the murderer? He speaks suspitiously.


Lang. No verily. This is my Lord D'amville. And his distraction (I think)
grows out of his grief for the loss of a faithful servant. For surely I
take him to be Borachio that is slain.


D'am. Haah! Borachio slain? Thou look like Snuff, do not.


Lang. Yes in sincerity my Lord.


D'am. Hark thee? -- Saw thou not a Ghoast?


Lang. A Ghoast? where my Lord? -- I smell a Fox.


D'am. Here in the Churchyard.


Lang. Tush, tush; their walking spirits are mere imaginary fables. There Is
no such thing in rerum natura. Here is a man slain. And with the Spirit of
confideration, I rather think him to be the murderer got into that disguise,
then any such phantastique toy.


Da'm. My brains begin to put themselves in order. I apprehend thee now. --
It Is even so. -- Borachio! I will search the Center but I Will find the murderer.


Watch. Here, here, here. --


D'am. Stay. A sleep? so soundly? and so sweetly upon Deaths Heads? and in a
place so full of fear and horror? Sure there is some other happiness within
the freedom of the conscience, then my knowledge ever attained too. -- Ho, ho,
ho!


Charl. You Are welcome Uncle. Had you sooner come,
You had been sooner welcome. I Am the Man,
You seek. You shall not need examine me.

D'am. My Nephew! and my Daughter! O my dear
Lamented blood! what Fate has cast you thus
Unhappily upon this accident?

Charl. You know Sir, she is as clear as Chastity.

D'am. As her own chastity. The time; the place;
All circumstances argue that vncleare.

Casta. Sir, I confess it; and repentantly
Will undergo the self same punishment,
That Justice shall inflict on Charlemont.

D'am. Unjustly she betrays her innocence.

Watch. But Sir, she is taken with you; and she must
To prison with you.

D'am. There Is no remedy.
Yet were it not my Sons bed she abused;
My land should fly but both should be excused.

Exeunt. Enter Belforest and a Servant. Belfo. Is not my wife come in yet?

Seru. No my Lord.

Belfo. Me thinks she is very affectedly inclined,
To young Sebastian's company o'late.
But jealousy is such a torment, that
I am afraid to entertain it. Yet
The more I shun by circumstance to mee^e
Directly with it; the more ground I find
To circumuent my apprehension. First,
I know she has a perpetual appetite;
Which being so often encountered with a man
Of such a bold luxurious freedom, as
Sebastian is; and of so promising
A body: her own blood, corrupted, will
Betray her to temptation. --

Enter Frisco closely. Fris. 'Precious! I was sent by his Lady to see if her
Lord were in bed; I should have done't slily without discovery; and now I am
blurted upon 'em before I was aware.

Exit.
Belfo. Know not you the Gentlewoman my wise brought home?


Seru. By sight my Lord. Her man was here but now.


Belfo. Her man? I pr'ithee run and call him quickly. -- This villain. I
suspect him ever since I found him hid behind the Tapestry. -- Frisco! thou art
welcome Frisco. -- Leave us. Do hear Frisco! is not my wife at thy
Mistresses?


Frisco. I know not my Lord.


Belfo. I prithee tell me Frisco; we are private; tell me. Is not thy Mistress
a good wench?


Fris. How means your Lordship that? A wench of the trade.


Belf. Yes faith Frisco; even a wench of the trade.


Fris. O no my Lord. Those falling diseases cause baldness; and my Mistress
recouers the loss of hair, for she is a Periwig-maker.


Belfo. And nothing else?


Frisc. Sels Falls and Tyres, and Bodies for Ladies; or so.


Belfo. So Sir: and she helps my Lady to falls and bodies now and then; does
she not?


Frise. At her Ladyships pleasure; my Lord.


Belfo. Her pleasure; you Rogue? you are the Pandar to her pleasure you Varlet,
are you not? you know the conueyances between Sebastian and my wife. Tell me
the truth; or by this hand I Will nail thy bosom to the earth. Stir not you
Dog; but quickly tell the truth.


Frisco. O Yes!


-- Speak like a Crier. Belfo. Is not thy Mistress a Bawd to my wife?


Frisco. O yes!


Belfo. And acquainted with her tricks, and her plots, and her devises.


Frisco. O yes! If any man, 'Court, City or Country, has found my Lady
Leuidulcia in bed, but my Lord Beforest, it is Sebastian.


Belfo. What do thou proclaim it? Do thou cry it thou villain?


Frisco. Can you laugh it my Lord? I thought you meant to proclaim your self
Cuckold.


Enter the Watch. Belfo. The Watch? Met with my wish. I must request
the assistance of your offices. Frisco runs away. -- God's Death; stay that
villain; pursue him.


-- Exeunt. Enter Snuff importuning Soquette. Sequ. Nay, if you get me any
more into the Churchyard.


Snu. Why Soquette? I never got thee there yet.


Soqu. Got me there? No. Not with child.


Snu. I promised thee I would not; and I was as good as my word.


Soqu. Yet your word was better then than your deed. But, steal up into the
little matted chamber of the left hand.


Snu. I prithee let it be the right hand; thou left'st me before and I did not
like that.


Soqu. 'Precious quickly; So soon as my Mistress shall be in bed I Will come to
you.


-- Exit Snuff. Enter Sebastian, Leuidulcia and Cataplasma. Cata. I wonder
Frisco stays so long.


Seba. Mistreffe Soquette, a word with you. --


Whisper. Leui. If he brings word my Husband is i'bed; I will adventure one
nights liberty to lie abroad. -- My strange affection to this Man! -- It Is like
that natural sympathy which even among the senseless creatures of the earth,
commands a mutual inclination and consent: For though it seems to be the free
effect of mine own voluntary love; yet I can neither restrain it, nor give
reason for it. But now it is done; and in your power it lies to save my honor;
or dishonor me.


Cata. Enjoy your pleasure (Madame) without fear. I never will betray the
trust you have committed to me. And you wrong your self, to let consideration
of the sin; molest your conscience. Mc thinks it is unjust, that a reproach
should be inflicted on a woman for offending but with one; when it is a light
offense in Husbands to commit with many.


Leut. So it seems to me. -- Why how now Sebastian? making love to that
Gentlewoman? How many mistresses have you ^'^aith?


Seba. In faith; none. For I think none of 'em are faithful, but otherwise as
many as clean Shirts. The love of a woman is like a Mushrom; it grows in one
night, and will serve somewhat pleasingly, next morning to breakfast: but
afterward waxes fulsome and unwholesome.


Cata. Nay by Saint Wi^^fred; a woman's love lasts as long as Winter fruit.


Seba. It Is true. Till new come in. By my experience no longer.


-- Enter Frisco running. Frisco. Some body's doing has undone us; and we are
like pay dearly for it.


Sebast. Pay deane? for what?


Frisco. Will It not be a chargeable reckoning, think you; when here are half
a dozen fellows coming to callvs to account, with every man a several bill
in his hand, that we are not able to discharge.


-- Knock at the door. Cata. Passion of me. What bouncing's that? Madame!
withdraw your self.


Leuid. Sebastian if you love me, save my honor.


-- Exeunt. Seba. What violence is this? What seek you? Zownes! you shall not
pass.


Enter Belforest and the Watch. Belfo. Pursue the Strumpet. Villain give me
way; or I will make my passage through thy blood.


Seba. My blood will make it slipperie my Lord. It Were better you would take
another way. You may hap^ fall else.


They fight. Both slain. Sebastian falls first. Seba. I have it in faith.


-- Dies. While Belforest is staggering, enter Leuidulcia. Leuid. O God! my
Husband! my Sebastian! Husband! Neither can spoke; yet both report my shame. Is
this the saving of my Honor? when their blood runs out in rivers; and my
lust the fountain whence it flows? Dear Husband ^ let not thy departed
spirit be displeased; if with adult rate lips I kiss thy cheek. Here I
behold the hatefulness of lust; which brings me kneeling to embrace him dead;
whose body living I did loathe to touch. Now I can weep. But what can tears
do good; when I weep only water, they weep blood? But could I make an Ocean
with my tears; that on the ^^oud this broken vessel of my body, laden heavy
with light lust might suffer shipwreck, and so drown my shame: then weeping
were to purpose; but alas! The Sea wants water enough to wash away the
^oulenesse of my name. O^ in their wounds; I feel my honor wounded to the
death. Shall I out-liue my Honor? Must my life be made the worlds example?
Since it must; then thus in detestation of my deed; to make th'eexample move
more forceably to virtue; thus, I feale it with a death as full of horror as
my life of sin.


-- Stabs herself. Enter the Watch with Cataplasma, Frisco, Snuff, and
Soquette. Watch. Hold Madame! Lord what a strange night is this.


Snuff. May not Snuff be suffered to go out of himself?


Watch. Nor you; nor any. All must go with us.
O with what virtue lust should be withstood!
Since it is a fire quenched seldom without blood.

-- Exeunt. Actus quinti Scena prima.
Music. A Clozet discovered. A Servant sleeping with lights and money before
him. Enter D'amville. D'amville. What sleep'st thou?

Seru. No my Lord. Nor sleep; nor wake.
But in a slumber troublesome to both.

D'am. Whence comes this gold?


Seru. It Is part of the Reuenew;
Due to your Lordship since your brothers death.

D'am. To bed. Leau^ me my gold.


Seru. And me my rest.
Two things wherewith one man is seldom blessed.
-- Exit.
D'am. Cease that harsh music. We Are not pleased with it.
He (...) the gold. Here sounds a music whose melodious touch,
Like Angels voices rauishes the sense.
Behold thou ignorant Astronomer,
Whose wandering speculation seeks among
The planets for men's fortunes! with amazement,
Behold thine error and be planet struck.
These are the Stars whose operations make
The fortunes and the destinies of men.
Yond' lesser eyes of Heaven, (like Subjects ra^s'd
Into their lofty houses, when their Prince
Rides underneath the ambition of their loves)
Are mounted only to behold the face,
Of your more rich imperious eminence,
With vnpreuented sight. Unmask fair Queen;
Vnpurses the gold. Vouchsafe their expectations may enjoy,
The gracious favor they admite to see,
These are the Stars the Ministers of Fate;
And Man's high wisdom the superior power,
To which their forces are subordinate.

-- Sleeps. Enter the Ghoast of Montferrers. Mont. D'am^ille! With all thy
wisdom thou art a ^oole.
Not like those fools that we term innocents;
But a most wretched miserable fool.
Which instantly; to the confusion of
Thy proiects with despair thou shall behold.

-- Exit Ghoast. D'amville starts up. D'am. What foolish dream dares interrupt
my rest?
To my confusion? How can that be? Since
My purposes have hitherto been borne
With prosperous Judgment to secure success.
Which nothing (...) to dispossess me off,
But apprehended Charlem^^t. And him,
This brain has made the happy instrument
To free Suspicion, to annihilate
All interest and title of his own;
To seal up my assurance; and confirm
My absolute possession by the law.
Thus while the simple honest worshipper
Of a phantastique providence; groans under
The burden of neglected misery;
My real wisdom has raised up a State,
That shall eternize my posterity.
Enter (...) with the body of Sebastian. What Is that?

Seru. The body of your younger Son slain by the Lord Belforest.


D'am. Slain? you lie. -- Sebastian. Speak, Sebastian! H'as lost his hearing.
A Phisi^ian presently. Go call a Surgeon.


Rousa. Ooh.


-- Within. D'am. What groan was that? How does my elder Son? the sound came
from his chamber.


Serua. He went sick to bed my Lord.


Rousa. Ooh.


-- Within. D'am. The cries of Mandrakes never touched the ear, with more sad
horror then that voice does mine.


Enter a Seraunt running. Serua. Never you will see your Son alive. --


D'am. Nature forbid I ever should see him dead.
A Bed drawn^ forth with Rousard. Withdraw the Curtains. O how does my Son?

Serua. Me thinks, he is ready to give up the ghoast.


D'am. Destruction take thee and thy fatal tongue. Death, where is the Doctor?
-- A^^ not thou the fact of that prodigious apparition s^ar'd upon me in my
dream?


Serua. The Doctor's come my Lord.


-- Enter Doctor. D'am. Doctor! Behold two Patients, in whose (...) thy skill
may purchase an eternal fame. If thou have any reading in Hipocrates, Galen,
or A^ice^; if herbs, or drugges, or mineralles have any power to save; Now let
thy practice and their sovereign use, raise thee to wealth and honor.


Doctor. If any root of life remains within'em capable of Physic; feare'em
not, my Lord.


Rusa. Ooh.


D'am. His gasping sighs are like the falling noise of some great building
when the groundwork breaks. On these two pillars stood the stately frame,
and architecture of my lo^tie house. An Earthquake shakes'em. The foundation
shrinkes. Dear Nature! in whose honor I have raised a work of glory to
posterity; O bury not the pride of that great action, under the fall and
ruin of it self.


Doctor. My Lord. These bodies are deprived of all the radical ability of
Nature. The heat of life is utterly extinguished. Nothing remains within the
power of man that can restore them.


D'am. Take this gold; extract the Spirit of it, and inspire new life into
their bodies.


Docto. Nothing can my Lord.


D'am. You have not yet examined the true state and constitution of their bodies.
Sure, you have not. I Will reserve their waters till the morning. Questionless,
their vrines will inform you better.


Docto. Ha, ha, ha.


D'am. Do laugh thou villain! must my wisdom that has been the object of
men's admiration, now become the subject of thy laughter?


Rous. Ooh.


-- Dies. All. He Is dead.


D'am. O there expires the date of my posterity! Can Nature be so simple or
malicious to destroy the reputation of her proper memory? She cannot. Sure
there is some power above her that con^roules her force.


Doctor. A power above Nature? Doubt you that my Lord? Consider but whence Man
receives his body and his form. Not from corruption like some worms and
Flies; but only from the generation of a man. For Nature never did bring forth
a man without a Man; Nor could the first Man being but the passive Subject not
the active Mouer, be the maker of himself; So of necessity there must be a
Superior power to Nature.


D'am. Now to my self I am ridiculous. Nature thou art a Traitor to my soul.
Thou have abused my trust. I will complain to a superior Court, toright my
wrong I Will prove thee a forger of false assurances. In yond' Star chamber
thou shall answer it. Withdraw the bodies. O the sense of death begins to
trouble my distractedsoule.


-- Exeunt. Enter Judges and Officers. 1. Judge. Bring forth the malefactors to
the Bar.
Enter Cataplasma, Soquette and Frisco. Are you the Gentlewoman in whose house
The murders were committed?

Catap. Yes my Lord.

1. Iud. That worthy attribute of Gentry, which
Your habit draws from ignorant respect;
Your name deserves not: nor your self the name
Of woman. Since you are the poison that
Infects the honor of all womanhood.

Catap. My Lord; I am a Gentlewoman: yet I must confess my poverty compels my
life to a condition lower then my birth or breeding.


2. Judge. Tush we know your birth.

1. Judge. But under color to profess the Sale
Of Tyres and toys for Gentlewomens pride;
You draw a frequentation of men's wives
To your licentious house; and there abuse
Their Husbands. --

Frisco. Good my Lord her rent is great. The good Gentlewoman has no other
thing to live by but her lodgings: So, she is forced to let her fore-roomes out
to others, and her self contented to lie backwards.


2. Judge. So.


1. Judge. Here is no evidence accuses you,
For accessaries to the murder; yet
Since from the Spring of lust which you preserved;
And nourished; ran the effusion of that blood:
Your punishment shall come as near to death.
As life can bear it. Law cannot inflict
Too much severity upon the cause
Of such abhorred effects.

2. Judge. Receive your sentence.
Your goods (since they were gotten by that means,
Which brings diseases;) shall beturn'd to the use
Of Hospitalles. You carted through the Streets;
According to the common shame of Strumpets,
Your bodies whipped till with the loss of blood,
You faint under the hand of punishment.
Then that the necessary force of want,
May not provoke you to your former life;
You shall be set to painful labor; whose
Penurious gains shall only give you food
To hold up Nature; mortify your flesh;
And make you fit for a repentant end.

All. O good my Lord!

1. Iud. No more; away with 'em.

-- Exeunt. Enter Languebeau Snuff. 2. Judge. Now Monsieur Snuff! A man of
your profession, found in a place of such impiety?


Snuff. I grant you. The place is full of impuritie. So much the more need of
instruction and reformation. The purpose that carried me thither, was with the
Spirit of conversion to purify their uncleanness; and I hope your Lordship
will say, the law cannot takehold of me for that.


1. Judge. No Sir; it cannot: but yet give me leave
To tell you, that I hold your wary answer,
Rather premeditated for excuse;
Then spoken out of a religious purpose.
Where took you your degrees of Schollership?

Snuff. I am no Scholar my Lord. To speak the sincere truth, I am Snuff the
Tallow-Chandler.


2. Judge. How comes your habit to be altered thus?


Snuff. My Lord Belforest taking a delight in the cleanenesse of my
conversation; withdrew me from that unclean life, and put me in a garment fit
for his society and my present profession.


1. Judge. His Lordship did but paint a rotten post;
Or cover foulness fairly. Monsieur Snuff!
Back to your candle-making. You may give
The world more light with that, then either with
Instruction or the example of your life.

Snuff. Thus the Snuff is put out.

-- Exit Snuff.
Enter D'amville distractedly with the hearses of his two Sons borne after
him. D'am. Judgment; Judgment.


2. Iud. Judgment my Lord? in what?

D'am. Your Judgments must resolve me in a case. Bring in the bodies. Nay; I
will have it tried. This is the case my Lord. My providence, even in a moment; by
the only hurt of one, or two, or three, at most: and those put quickly out of
pain too, mark me; I had wisely raised a competent estate to my posterity.
And is there not more wisdom and more charity in that; then for your
Lordship, or your Father, or your Grandsire, to prolong the torment, and the
rack of rent from age to age, upon your poor penurious Tenants? yet (perhaps)
without a penny profit to your heir. Is It not more wise^ more charitable?
Speak.


1. Iud. He is distracted.

D'am. How? distracted? Then you ha'no Judgment. I can give you sense and
solid reason for the very least distinguishable syllable I speak. Since my
thrist was more judicious then your Grandsires; why, I would feign know why
your Lordship lives to make a second generation from your Father, and the your
Father; and the whole fry of my posterity extinguished in a moment. Not a
Brat left to succeed me. -- I would feign know that.


2. Judge. Grief for his children's death distempers him.

1. Judge. My Lord; we will resolve you of your question.
In the mean time vouchsafe your place with us.

D'am. I am contented, so you will resolve me.

-- Ascends. Enter Charlemont and Castabella. 2. Judge. Now Monsieur Charlemont.
You are accused
Of having murdered one Borachio, that
Was servant to my Lord D'amville. How can
You clear your self? guilty? or not guilty?

Charl. Guilty of killing him; but not of murder.
My Lords; I have no purpose to desire
Remission for my self. -- D'amville descends to Charl.

D'am. Uncivil Boy! Thou want humanity to smile at grief. Why do thou
cast a cheerful eye upon the object of my sorrow? my dead Sons?


1. Judge. O good my Lord! Let Charity forbear
To vex the spirit of a dying Man.
A cheerful eye upon the face of Death;
Is the true court'nance of a noble mind.
For honor's sake (my Lord) molest it not.

D'am. You Are all uncivil. O! is it not enough that he unjustly has conspired
with Fate, to cut off my posterity for him to be the heir to my possessions;
but he must pursue me with his presence; and in the ostentation of his joy,
laugh in my face, and glory in my grief?


Charl. D'amville! to show thee with what light respect,
I value Death and thy insulting pride;
Thus like a warlike Navy on the Sea,
Bound for the conquest of some wealthy land,
Passed through the stormic troubles of this life,
And now arrived upon the armed coast;
In expectation of the victory,
Whose honor lies beyond this exigent;
Through mortal danger with an active spirit,
Thus I aspire to undergo my death.

Leapes up the Scaffold. Castabella leapes after him. Casta. And thus I second
thy brave enterprise.
Be cheerful Charlemont. Our lives cut off,
In our young prime of years; are like green herbs,
Wherewith we strew the hearses of our friends.
For as their virtue gathered when they are green,
Before they wither or corrupt, is best;
So we in virtue are the best for Death,
While yet we have not lived to such an age,
That the increasing canker of our sins,
Has spread too far upon us. --

D'am. A Boon, my Lords. I beg a Boon.

1. Iud. What Is that my Lord?

D'am. His body when it is dead for an Anatomy.

2. Iud. For what my Lord?

D'am. Your understanding still come short o'mine.
I would find out by his Anatomy;
What thing there is in Nature more exact,
Then in the constitution of my self.
Me thinks, my parts, and my dimentions, are
As many, as large, as well composed as his;
And yet in me the resolution wants,
To die with that assurance as he does.
The cause of that, in his Anatomy
I would find out. --

1. Iud. Be patient and you shall.

D'am. I have bethought me of a better way. -- Nephew; we must confer. --
Sir; I am grown a wondrous Studient now o'late. My wit has reached beyond the
scope of Nature; yet for all my learning I am still to seek, from whence the
peace of conscience should proceed.


Charl. The peace of conscience rises in it self.


D'am. Whether it be thy Art or Nature, I admire thee Charlemont. Why; thou
have taught a woman to be valiant. I will beg thy life. -- My Lords! I beg
my Nephews life. -- I Will make thee my Physician. Thou shall read Philosophy
to me. I will find out th'efficient cause of a contented mind. But if I
cannot profit in it; then it is no more being my Physician, but infuse a little
poison in a potion when thou give me Physic; unawares to me. So I shall
steal into my grave without the understanding or the fear of death. And
that is the end I aim at. For the thought of death is a most fearful torment;
is it not?


2. Judge. Your Lordship interrupts the course of law.


1. Judge. Prepare to die.


Charl. My resolution's made.
But ere I die; before this honored bench;
With the free voice of a departing soul,
I here protest this Gentlewoman clear,
Of all offense the law condemns her for.

Casta. I have accused my self. The law wants power
To clear me. My dear Charlemont; with thee
I will partake of all thy punishments.

Charl. Uncle; for all the wealthy benefits;
My death aduances you, grant me but this.
Your mediation for the guiltless life
Of Castabella; whom your conscience knows
As justly clear as harmless innocence.

D'am. Freely. My Mediation for her life; and all my interest in the world to
boot, let her but in exchange possess me of the resolution that she dies
withal. -- The price of things is best known in their want. Had I her
courage; So I value it, the Indies should not buy't out of my hands.


Charl. Give me a glass of water.


D'am. Me, of wine. --
This argument of death congeales my blood.
Cold fear with apprehension of thy end,
Has frozen up the rivers of my veins. --
A glass of wine. I must drink wine to vvarme me, and dissolve the
obstruction, or an apoplexy will possess me. -- Why thou uncharitable Knave;
Do bring me blood to drink? The very glass looks pale and trembles at it.


Seru. It Is your hand my Lord.


D'am. Can blame me to be fearful; bearing still the presence of a
murderer about me?


Charl. Is this water?


Serua. Water Sir.


-- A glass of water. Charl. Come thou clear emblem of cool temperance.
Be thou my witness, that I use no art
To force my courage; nor have need of helps,
To raise my Spirits like those weaker men;
Who mix their blood with wine, and out of that
Adulterate conjunction do beget
A bastard valor. Native courage, thanks.
Thou lead'st me soberly to undertake
This great hard work of magnanimity.

D'am Brave Charlemont! at the reflection of thy courage my cold fearful blood
takes fire, and I begin to emulate thy death. -- Is that thy executioner? My
Lords; you wrong the honor of so high a blood, to let him suffer by so base a
hand.


Judges. He suffers by the form of law my Lord.


D'am. I will reform it. Down you shagge-hair'd Curre. The instrument that
strikes my Nephew's blood, shall be as noble as his blood. I Will be thy
executioner my self.


1. Iud. Restrain his fury. Good my Lord forbear.


D'am. I Will b^^cher out the passage of his soul,
That dares attempt to inter^^^^ the blow.

2. Iud. My Lord; the office will impresse a mark
Of scandal and dishonor on your name.

Charl. The office fits him; hinder not his hand.
But let him crown my resolution, with
An unexampled dignity of death.
Strike home. Thus I submit me.

-- Ready for execution. Costa. So do I.
In scorn of Death thus hand in hand we die.

D'am. I have the trick on it Nephew. You shall see how easily
I can put you out of pain. -- Ooh.

As he raises up the Axe, strikes out his own brains. Stagg^rs off the
Scaffold. Exec^. In lifting up the Axe
I think has knocked his brains out. --

D'am. What murderer was he that lifted up my hand against my head?


Judge. None but your self my Lord.


D'am. I thought he was a murderer that did it.


Judge. God forbid.


D'am. Forbid? You lie Judge. He commanded it. To tell thee that man's wisdom
is a fool. I came to thee for Judgment; and thou think thy self a wise
man. I outreach'd thy wit; and made thy Justice Murders instrument, in
Castabella's death and Charlemonts. To crown my Murder of Mon^ferrers with a
safe possession of his wealthy state. --


Charl. I claim the just advantage of his words.


Judge. Descend the Scaffold and attend the rest.


D'am. There was the strength of natural understanding. But Nature is a fool.
There is a power above her that has overthrown the pride of all my proiects
and posterity; (for whose suruiuing blood, I had erected a proud monument) and
struck 'em dead before me. For whose deaths, I called to thee for Judgment.
Thou did want discretion for the sentence. But yond' power that struck me,
knew the Judgment I deserved; and gave it. -- O! the lust of Death commits a
Rape upon me as I would ha'done on Castabella. --


-- Dies. Judge. Strange is his death and judgment. With the hands
Of Joy and Justice I thus set you free.
The power of that eternal providence,
Which overthrew his proiects in their pride;
Has made your griefs the instruments to raise
Your blessings to a greater height then ever.

Charl. Only to Heaven I attribute the work.
Whose gracious motives made me still forbear
To be mine own Revenger. Now I see,
That, Patience is the honest man's revenge.

Judge. In stead of Charlemont that but even now
Stood ready to be dispossessed of all;
I now salute you with more titles, both
Of wealth and dignity then you were borne too.
And you (sweer Madame) Lady of Belforest
You have that title by your Fathers death.

Casta. With all the titles due to me; increase
The wealth and honor of my Charlemont.
Lord of Montferrers; Lord D'amuille; Belforest.
And for a cloze to make up all the rest; --
Embrace The Lord of Castabella. Now at last
Enjoy the full possession of my love;
As clear and pure as my first chastity.

Charl. The crown of all my blessings! -- I will tempt
My Stars no longer; nor protract my time
Of marriage. When those Nuptial rites are done;
I will perform my kinsmens funeralles.

Judge. The Drums and Trumpets! Interchange the sounds
Of Death and Triumph; for these honored iiues,
Succeeding their deserved Tragedies.

Charl. Thus by the work of Heaven, the men that thought
To follow our dead bodies without tears,
Are dead themselves, and now we follow theirs.

-- Exeunt. FINIS.

