THE REWARD OF RELIGION.

Delivered in sundry Lectures upon the Book of Ruth, wherein the godly may
see their daily and outward trials, with the presence of God to assist them,
and his mercies to recompense them: Very profitable for this present time of
dearth, wherein many are most pitifully tormented with want; and also worthy
to be considered in this Golden age of the preaching of the word, when some
vomit up the loathsomnes thereof, and others fall away to damnable security.

L v c. 12.32. Fear not little flock, for it is your Fathers will to give you
a kingdom.

Cyprian in the end of the 6. Epist. lib. 4. Dearly beloved brethren, let this
be rooted in your hearts, let this be the preparation of our weapons, let this
be your Meditation day and night, to set before your eyes, and consider with
mind and senses, the punishments of the wicked, with the rewards and deserts
of the righteous: what penalty he threatens to them that deny him; and what
glory he promises to them which confess him.

Seen and allowed.

LONDON, Printed by John Windet, 1596.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, virtuous and Christian Lady, the Lady Margaret,
Barronnesse Dacres of the South, grace, mercy and peace, be multiplied, in
this life present and eternal felicity in the life to come.
RIght Honorable Lady: it is reported that the inhabitants of the mountain
Cassius by Seleucia, at the third watch of the night do behold the Globe of
the Sun: so that on the one side they see our accustomed darkness, covering
the face of the whole earth; on the other side the glistering beams of the
shining light, displaying the shadow of the nightly darkness. In my opinion
this hill does very fitly resemble the excellency of the word of God, and the
inhabitants thereof, the professors of Religion: for long since the Sun of
righteousness, the Son of God, departed from the sight of the world; and
declined like the Sun of the firmament; has left the universal Orb of the
whole earth in palpable darkness. Yet to us living in this world, the beams of
his brightness, the light of his spirit, the power of his person, and the
glory of his godhead, is most evidently manifested, by the Scriptures and
preaching of his holy word: so that there we behold infinite thousands walking
in darkness, and standing on the left hand of God ready for damnation: but
here we see a few persons, professors of Religion, like the men of Cassius,
living in the sight and presence of our Savior, (whom they behold shining in
the Scriptures) and standing on the right hand waiting for salvation. For this
cause, the voice of the eternal God sounds so often unto us in the
Scriptures, that we were under the prince of darkness, that we were darkened
in our cogitation, that it was night, but now the day star from on high has
visited us, and therefore we must cast away the deeds of darkness, and put on
the armor of light: and the Scriptures every where testify, that the Church
of God is in the top of the mountains, meaning that the dignity of our
calling, as far excels the fancies of the world, as the hills arise above
the valleys of the earth. This is the infallible word of life: and all the
writings of men, are but the Apes hereof*: from hence they heard of their
Golden ages, their fearful wonders, their strange inventions, and their
incredible fictions which they have broched concerning heaven and earth. When
Ptolomeus Philadelphus king of Egypt, builded his famous Library, and had
furnished it with all the writings of the heathen, he also by Ambassadors to
the high Priest in Judah, obtained the old Testament, and six men of every
Tribe, to Translate it out of Hebrewe into Greek: then Demetrius Phalerius,
one of the Scholars of Theophrastus, certified the King, that among all the
writings of their learned Philosophers, they only were Divine, and the
Caelestiall Oracles of the everlasting God. For their truth the secret nature
of every heart is forced to confess; for their substance, it is altogether
occupied on heavenly things; for their sincerity, it is established in the
promise of him, who never changes for their style, neither the principles of
Plato, the demonstrations of Aristotle the inventions of Hippocrates, the
sleights of Carneades, the exclamations of Cicero, or the conceits of Seneca,
were uttered in so plain eloquence or commendable phrases, as the Scriptures
of our salvation. Also if your Ho. consider the often changes of the laws of
godless Gentiles, you shall perceive that they have had as many Religions as
generations: but you shall find that we have now the Religion of Adam, the
faith of Enoch, the Arc of Noah, the sacrifice of Abraham, and all the true
worship of God, as the Church possessed it* many thousand years ago: and all
because the rule hereof, the heavenly word of God remains for ever. Lycurgus
the best lawmakers that ever was among the Gentiles, when he saw his laws to
be amended of the Spartanes, for very grief thereof famished himself at
Crissa. The laws which Papius and Julius gave to the Romans, were disanulled
by Seuerus the Emperor: all the world erreth, some one way, and some another,
mutually condemning each others superstition; only the Church of God, in
every age retained one God, one faith, one Baptism, and one substance of
Religion, because it follows one voice of the holy Ghost speaking in the
Scriptures. It were infinite to set down all the commodity we receive by this
heavenly writing By it our manners are mollified, our minds instructed, our
lives blessed, and we delivered from Atheism, Paganism and Papisme: Atheism
denies all things, Paganism corrupts all things, and Papisme confounds
all things, therefore by the word of God, we are freed from doubting the
truth, deceiving our own souls, and confounding Religion. And because this
requires some proof, I beseech your Ho. to bear with my tediousness, while
I manifest my mind so briefly as I may; omitting Atheism fitter for dogs
to believe, then men to profess, I will briefly declare, how the Gentiles,
(such as we were before the word wrought our calling,) have falsified the
whole Scripture and corrupted the tradition thereof, with the inventions of
their own Poets; and how the Papists are but confounders of Heathenisme,
heresy and Christianity. First to begin with the Gentiles, while reason and
nature enforced them to confess a God, (which is only and truly learned in
the scriptures,) they imagined a multitude of gods and goddesses; in the
Scripture we find the mention hereof, that every nation had a peculiar God.
The Zidonians and Sirians had Astaroth, or as some call him Astartes: the
Moabites had Chemosh: the Ammonites had Milcom or Moloch; the Babilonians Bell,
the Philistines Dagon, the Egyptians worshipped many beasts, but especially a
sheep: among other writers, we find that the Athenians, had Apollo and
Minerua; the Boetian Thebes, Bacchus and Hercules; Carthage had Juno; Cyprus
and Paphus, Venus; Rhodes, Apollo; Taenarus, Neptune; the Creetes, and
Ephesians, Diana; the Romans Mars, the Italians, Ianus, the Arabians
Diasares; The Germans Tibilenus, the men of Affrique Caelestus; and the
Moors have worshipped the governors of their Country. Thus they turned the
glory of the incorruptible God, into the similitude of corruptible creatures,
as birds, beasts, fishes and Serpents, and wandered without God while they
framed to themselves a multitude of gods: and the best they could invent,
were sinful and abominable wretches, such as exceeded all others in notorious
crimes, as I could easily show, if it were to my purpose: and moreover they
have forsaken not only the true God, but have blotted the names of their most
famous men, leaving the worthiest in hell, and lifting the worst into heaven.
For might not they as well made Socrates a God for his wisdom, whom Apollo
himself honored with this Oracle: Pantoon Androon Socrates sophotatos, of all
men Socrates was the wisest: Aristides excelled them all in justice,
Themistocles for war, Alexander in honor, Polycrates in felicity, and
Demosthenes in eloquence: Who was more grave then Cato, more valiant then
Scipio, more affable then Camillus, more excellent then Iul. Caesar, more happy
then Sylla, more wealthy then Crassus, or more religious then Numa Pompilius;
truly none among all their Devils, I would say gods, with whom all the
nations of the earth have committed fornication. In latter times the Romans
had only power to consecrate gods, as now the Pope and his Cardinals do
challenge the same to Canonize Saints. But would not the hearts of the godly
break in sunder, to consider that every City invented a new God, yea every
family had their household gods, committed Idolatry with birds of the
air, and beasts of the earth, men and women, Moon and Stars, Sun and
Angels, even to the Asses head, as commonly as the Serpent lives on the dust,
or as greedily as the Lion raueneth when he finds a pray. The study of
Astronomy verifieth this, for they have imagined signs from the Eagle to the
little bird, from the Lion to the little dog, from the Whale to the little
fish, and from reasonable creatures to unreasonable monsters: because they
would have some color for their impiety, they translated their Idols to be
signs in heaven. But now when the light of the word of life once shined in the
world, they perceived their own follies, renounced their old errors and
received the wholesome doctrine of the only true and eternal God: for as the
Lions run at the sight of a fire brand, as the Cockatrise flies when she
sauoureth the Weasill, and the clouds fly away when the Northeren wind
blows; so these subtilties of Satan being once discovered, thorough the
simplicity of the Scriptures, they fall again into the breast of the first
Author, and I would to God they were for ever buried in his bottomless kingdom.
Also that which we find in the word of God, concerning the creation, the
flood, the replenishing of the earth, the beginning or confusion of tongues,
the destruction of Sodom and Gomorhe, the delivery of the Isralites from
Egypt, the miracles of Moses and Aaron, the overthrow of the Cananites whom
they call Phoenicians, the building of Salomons Temple, the scattering of the
Tribes of Israel, the birth of Christ, the darkness at his death, and the
preaching of the Apostles: they have corrupted with fond additions, wilful
devises, intolerable blasphemies, ignorant relations, wicked substractions,
and accursed deprauations, which if I should follow, I might make a large
volume: only thus much I will be bold to say, that all the wisdom of the
Gentiles was nothing but the doctrine of Devils, and that all the world before
the coming of Christ, was without the true knowledge of God, the Jews only
excepted. The learned have noted these four as the general heads of ancient
impiety, the first is Barbarism, wherein men lived under no guide, preserved
no peace, followed no commendable kind of life, but every one did that which
pleased him, to the disgrace of mankind, refusing only that which was good,
and altogether embracing that which was accursed. Then one satisfied another
with bloody revenge, making no more account of the life of a man the^ the blood
of a beast; then they mingled themselves like brutish creatures in generation,
brother with sister, father with daughter, and mother with her son, then
their strength was their law, their desire was their counselor, their
affections pleaded, their will gave judgment, and their malice was the means
to execute their cruelty. The second head or fountain of falsehoode among the
Gentiles, is called Schythisme, because it was first practiced among the
Scythians a barbarous and cruel people, differing in nothing from the former,
save only because they had one governor or ruler, to whom they were subject,
being at his commandment, to execute right or wrong, to save or kill, keeping
peace with none, but many times setting the children to drink the blood of
their own parents, and the parents to eat the flesh of their own children.
The third kind of falsehoode which reigned among the Gentiles for want of the
word of God, is called Hellenisme, which consists in the worship of Idols,
this began among the Grecians, who are called in their own tongue Hellenes,
and therefore was the superstition called Hellenisme, this detestable canker so
prevailed, that not only the Grecians, Babilonians, Egyptians, Sirians,
Phaenicians, Phrygians, and many other nations were infected therewith, but
the Israelites the people of God, were poisoned therewith, which in the end
was their utter subversion, and this has reigned a long time in the Church of
Rome, and in all those kingdoms, where she could plant her chair, which all
the godly do perceive will be her everlasting destruction. But this Hellenisme
prevailed mightily, for the space of two thousand years, under which time
sprang up all the sects of the Philosophers: as the Pythagoreans, which taught
that men might not sacrifice to the gods, that the souls of men departed do go
into other men, and also into brute beasts, that whatsoever was above the
Moon was immortal^, with such like fantasies, and in the end this Phythagoras
would be called a God. Next unto him arose the Platonistes, who affirmed that
the world was created of the Angels and little gods, that of one God there
came many other gods, that all women ought to be common, and that no man
ought to have a wife peculiar to himself, in a well ordered commonwealth.
After these succeeded the Stoickes who affirmed this world to be God, that all
flesh shall perish, and that the souls departed from one into another. Then
also began the Epicures to grow like Serpents, borne only to destroy other,
they would have all things to end in pleasure, that there is no God or
providence, that none are blessed but in this present life. And thus your Ho.
may perceive how miserable were those days, when men ran headlong into so
great extreamities, that their profession of wisdom was the confession of
folly, and for all their light of lerning, they groped in a Cimmerian darkness,
being shadowed with ignorance like the Country Odessae in Greece, which by
reason of mighty hills thereto adjoining, never felt the beams of the Sun. The
fourth head or fountain of ungodliness is called Samaritanisme, of the
Samarians which mingled themselves with the profession of the Jews, and
received some part of the Bible; yet like the Anabaptists of our days,
without any difference or conscience, kept company with Jews and Gentiles. Of
these came many accursed sects, from whom sprang many detestable opinions, and
thus the world labored with damnable devises, while the Devil laughed at
their daily destruction; whereby this is evident, that Philosophy or Paganism
is the corruption of our Religion. But some peradventure will object unto me,
that they had very excellent and worthy men, who Crowned their Country and
kindred with endless memory. Mutius left his right hand on the Altar.
Empedocles willingly cast himself into the burning flames of the mountain.
Aetna one of the builders of Carthage, to avoid a second marriage, cast her
self into the burning grave. Regulus being freed from the Carthaginians,
chused rather to suffer death himself in most cruel torments, then to
discharge their prisoners at Rome. Menocaeus, seeing his City of the Thebes
besieged by the Grecians, which they threatened to destroy, except one of them
would give himself for all, did ascend to the wall of the City, and there
pearcing his body with a sword, fell down dead among his enemies, wherewith
they contented, departed. Alcestis the wife of Perilaus seeing (as she
supposed) the fiendes come for her husband, who lay sick, slew her self,
bidding them to take her shadow and spare her husbands life. To speak nothing
of Lucretia; Dyrachia, Aria, Cyane and many others, only let this suffice.
Eleates being asked of Dionisius the tyrant, what was better then Philosophy,
answered, death, whereupon he was commanded to be scourged to death, which
for the defense of his speech, and contempt of death he most patiently endured.
Yet Tertullian, a Christian father speaking of such like actions, has these
words, O lawful commendation because human, to whom neither wilful
presumption, nor desperate persuasion is imputed, to whom it is permitted to
die in contempt of death, and all manner of cruelty: to whom is given more
liberty to suffer for his country, kingdom or friends then for God. Who is
he that cannot with one eye epsy the meaning of this father? Improuing this
kind of death, as presumption or desperation which may never have any harbor
in the hearts of the faithful, what shall we then say of all these worthy
persons? Surely whatsoever is not of faith is sin, and without faith it is
impossible to please God. We must not regard what man does, but what God
commands, as the Emperor Constantine once said, it is not death but the
cause of death that deserves commendation; as Agesilaus the best Grecian
Prince that ever was was wont to say, The purest Adamant is not worn with
iron, nor wasted with fire, yet a little Goats blood will consume it: even so
if one man could suffer all the trials in the world, and abide many thousand
deaths by fire and torture, yet it shall no whit profit him, except the blood
of Jesus Christ loose the fetters of sin, and break the chains of the Devil;
now the mercies of God in Christ, are not communicated to any, but to such as
know them, and who can know them without the word of God? This is the fountain
of water of life, and all other are but poisoned puddles, stinking more
filthyly in the presence of God, then the Lake of Camarina in the nostrels of
men. They report that in Sycilia there are two springs, whereof one will make
a fruitful woman barren, the other, a barren woman fruitful: if this were so,
I think all the world would have recourse unto it. Yet in this word of God,
there is a greater commodity declared unto us, for here we learn the true
cause of barrenness; which being known, the disease is the more easily
removed here we learn the means whereby it is cured, as in Rebecca, Annah,
Elizabeth and others, which might as easily be practiced, as true Religion
unfeignedly professed. Moreover they tell us, that in Epirus at the foot of the
hill Tomarus, there is a holy Well, which of it self will kindle a Torch,
being put unto it, and quench it being brought burning thereto; grant this to
be true, and it will represent unto us the nature of this holy Well the word of
God, which with the water of our Baptism does fire our hearts by the holy
Ghost, but coming unto it burning in the heat of our own lust, quenches the
flame of our own concupiscence. Also we find in Varro, that there are two
streams in Boeotia, whereof if sheep drink, the one burns their color in
Russet, and the other makes them while again, if this be possible as al
things are possible to the creator of the world, what marvel though we are
regenerated, not (new colored) by the immortal seed of his heavenly word.
Which are his sheep, and the corruptions of our nature so washed in the same,
that our garments of righteousness are as white as snow in his presence.
Solinus tells that at the City Debris among the Garamantes, there is a
spring which at the rising of the sun congealeth to Ice, but at the setting
thereof resolves to water again, which is contrary to all the world beside
freezing with heat, and thawing with cold: yet we may make this use thereof,
that it is no wonder to see our heavenly Well to work these contraries, to be
the savor of life unto life, or else the savor of death unto death, that unto
some it is a two edged sword to give them mortal wounds, unto other, a broad
Target to defend them from danger, that it wrought so effectually in the days
of persecution, when it was oppressed in darkness, but now freezeth and
hardneth in these days of peace, when the sun of prosperity shines to all.
Surely as the Albeste stone once set on fire, can never be quenched, so if we
could but once burn in love unfeignedly with the Gospel, our profession should
not be so luke warm, nor our devotion so small in the cause of religion. And
thus I have been bold with your Ho. to prove my first assertion, wherein if I
have been too long, let me crave pardon, and I will promise greater brevity
in my second proposition, which is this, that Popery is a confusion of
Heathenisme, Heresy and Christianity. And that I may methodically proceed, I
will begin at their highest degree, and so in order lightly touch so many
things as may certify your Ho. of the truth of their Religion. Numa appointed
one to be a high Priest, at whose judgment all temporal and spiritual
things were administered, the same is retained in the Church of Rome, for the
Pope obtained of Phocas the Emperor and murderer of Mauritius, that the
Bishop of Rome might be the head of all Churches, to whose judgment all
the world in spiritual matters must be subject: by which in time it came to
this, that he corrupted the whole Church of Christ, that he got both swords
into his hand, and made himself a triple Crown, after the manner of the late
Roman Emperors, who had three Crowns at their inauguration; and as the triple
lightning was the ancient of Jupiter, so the triple Crown is the badge of the
Pope* thourough the honor or terror thereof, he threatens what thunderbolts
he pleases in the world. The Cabalists imagined two Keys, whereby Paradise
was opened and shut; from hence the Pope has in his banner the cross Keys,
telling us that he has power, to open and shut Paradise, for, and against who^
he pleases. Being thus exalted into the highest place, as it was reported, the
God Termines would not give place to jupiter standing both in the Capitol, no
more the Pope gives place to Christ although he stand in the midst of his
Church, and sit at the right hand of his Father in heaven. For this cause, as
the Emperors had their senate, so he has his Cardinals: as the Egyptians
bound the Priests of Isis or Apis to live in perpetual virginity; so he
forces the sacred shauelings of his unholy seat, with the vow of perpetual
chastity, and that he might help their weakness in this behalf, as Caligula
suffered the whoores of Rome in his days, so the Popes have granted the
tolleration of a Stews, builded by a Pope, Sixtus the fourth, which in short
time so prevailed, that the Pope received for Rents thereof forty thousand
Duccats by the year. And Paul the third had the names of forty and five
thousand Tennants belonging to that most filthy and damnable kind of life.
Furthermore he furnished, or rather poisoned the Church of Christ, with
Friars, Munkes, Nuns. The Friars and Munkes are the successors of the
Essaean, Dosithaean, Nasachaean and Cynicall heretics, which like these take
upon them the vows of wilful poverty, and perpetual chastity, placing
their Religion in abstinence from meats, in outward and hypocritical fasting,
affirming that they are the successors and followers of the Apostles, like the
heretics called by Augustine Apostoliques, defending that the Apostles lead
a single life, and had no wives, so these Romish heretics account Marriage
but filthiness, like the Marcionites, Tacians, Adamites, Platonists, and
Valesian heretics, and are not ashamed to make the holy Apostles of Christ
breakers of wedlock, and wilful departers from their own wives, contrary to
the writings of the Evangelists and Saint Paul. The Nuns or women-Munks are
the natural successors of the vestall Virgins instituted by Numa, and as these
were Dedicated to Vesta, Apollo; Juno, Argiua, Diana and Minerua, so are the
Romish Nunns to Marie the mother of Christ, and other holy women. Then also did
he begin to dress and adorn the Temples with Images, which he learned of the
Gentiles, as I have already declared, and herein he joined with the Gnostickes
and Basilidian heretics, who defended Images to be lawful for Christian
people; and as the Gentiles had their sacrifices for the dead, called Inferiae,
so he instituted prayers for the dead, least he should seem to want any thing,
which he should not have. Then also he took the Scriptures from the common
people, least they should epsy his lewdness, and as Lysis the Pythagorean
blamed one of his fellows for making known abroad their Masters precepts, so
he blames all those that shall open the mysteries of the Gospel to the
common people: and as the Magicians of Persia were wont to sing to their Idols
in a strange tongue, so the Pope commanded all things to be done in the Church
in an unknown language, wherein they also join with the Basilidian
heretics, who gave this as a principle, that their mysteries must be
concealed and revealed only to a few, being worse then the Pythagoreans, who
commanded but five years silence to their Disciples, but the Papists keep
men all their lives from reading, speaking and conferring on the Scriptures. By
this means he deceived the world with iugling like the heretics called
Mirabiliarii, and affirmed that faith comes by nature, like the Basilidians
and Gnostics; they taught that every one that would be saved must be annoyled
in their sickness; like the Heracleonite heretics; that it is lawful for
women to Baptize like the Marcionites; that children unbaptized are not under
the covenant, and that grace is given with the outward sign, like the Arrians
and Heracleonites; that children must be anointed with Oil in Baptism, like
the heretics Marcus and Marcosus; that Baptism washes away original
sins, and such actual as are committed before, like the Nouatians, and
Messalian heretics; that the Sacrament of the Supper of the Lord, after the
words of Consecration spoken, is the very body and blood of Christ, so the
heretics called Marcites, said, they made by coniuration, and for this cause
the Pepuzian heretics baked the blood of man with the bread ordained for this
supper; that wine must be mingled with water, as the Artotyrites said, they
must offer Cheese with the bread in the Sacrament; that good works merit
eternal life, like the Pelagians, Catharites, and Mahumetistes; that a man
since the fall of Adam has free will, and that God has* Predestined none,
like the Pelagians, that it is lawful for us to swear by creatures, as the
Virgin Marie, Saints and Angels, so do the Manichaeans and Mahumetistes; that
some sins be mortal and some venial, so does Mahomet affirm: with a
thousand like, most vain, wicked, wretched, blasphemous and damnable
assertions, which were most easy to be proved if there were any question of
it. By this your Ho. may perceive, that their Religion is but patched of many
condemned heresies, defended by unwritten traditions, and maintained by violent
and forcible dealing: like the Chamelaeon they have often changed and poisoned
the world, but the scriptures are as a Baye lease, to cure the contagion of
such mortal confusion; and thus in some sort I have performed my promise, in
delivering the vanity of the world which has refused the wisdom of the
eternal word of God. The end of this my speech is to show the wonderful and
incomparable treasure of the holy Scriptures; for as the Gold has the
brightest beams, being laid to the Copper: as the Adamante is of greatest
force, when the load stone is beside it, and the purest color has the best
hiewe, when the countersaite is compared with it; so the blessing of God in his
word, does most magnificently appear, when we behold before our eyes the
counterfaite colors of superstitious conceits, the crooked devises and cursed
opinions of the condemned Crew, which have refused the way of life declared
herein, and chused the path of damnation for the hire of their superstition.
The Scriptures are not only a Castle to keep us from heresy, but also a salve
or remedy, if we have been poisoned by falshoode. The sting of the Scorpion
is cured by applying the Achates stone, the grass Alimos preserves the
famished person from death, The Baare having eaten Mandragora saves his life
by the little Emmet, and the poison of the Chamelaeon is expelled by a Baye
leaf: even so the word of God, cures the heresies of Popery, which are
compared to the stinging of the Scorpions in the Scriptures, it is the fruit
of the tree of life, and whosoever eats and disgesteth in shall never die, it
is a preservative against all poison, and the leaves thereof shall cure the
nations. By this alone the Lord has wrought the calling of his children, the
confusion of his enemies, the comfort of his Saints, and the replenishing of
his kingdom. All the Kings of the earth have been in arms against it: yet
the ministers thereof, who never bore arms against them, by their only
preaching have won a glorious field. All Egypt could not resist Moses and
Aaron, because they came on the Lords message: no more shall all the world
overcome the preachers of peace, so long as they faithfully perform their
heavenly Embassage. Words have wrought more then weapons; the spirit has
pierced more then the Spear; the walls of Paper and the ordinance of Fathers
have battered down the stately kingdom of the whore of Babylon, learning
has done better service then Lances, Gowns have conquered more then Gunnes;
Books have done more good then Bullets; and the prayers of the faithful have
prevailed more then the Pikes of horsemen; the stone which the builders
refused, is become the head of the corner, this is the Lords doing, and it is
maruailous in our eyes, the blood of the dead Martyrs has given greater
wounds in this quarrel, then the swords of the living soldiers. But thus I
have too long troubled your Hon. with that which you knew before, and have
presumed on your favor for the acceptance of these my slender labors upon
one part of Scripture, the book of Ruth; which as the holy Ghost has
vouchsafed to call by the name of a woman, to the praise of the whole sex, and
everlasting commendation of her Religion: so am I emboldned to Dedicate it to
so Honorable a Lady, as your self, whom I know to be a Ruth by Religion,
though a Noble woman by birth. For many witnesses can testify this also if I
should be silent, and the ordinary exercises at Seuenoke, will sound your
name, because your presence and diligence at them, has stirred up many meaner
persons, comforted some godly people thereabout, and much every way
countenanced, and encouraged the preachers of the same. There are many causes
which might compel me, (though unwilling) to commit my labors to the Press,
yet willingly to present them to the world under the name of your Honor. For I
am assured of the acceptance of any small thing that shall be offered in the
name of Religion, much more of this which comprehends the recompense and
reward of our profession. Your Honor knows that better is it to see the
smoke of ones own Country, then the fire of another: so I trust my slender
studies, which are but as smoke, being compared with the burning coals of
others knowledge, such as daily you hear, shall be the better accepted,
because there I had my being, where your Honor has your dwelling. Also I am
hereunto moved, that I might have any occasion, to testify my bounden duty,
which I owe unto that Noble and worthy Gentleman, Sir Henry Leonard your
Son, of whom I have received especial encouragementes in the course of my
studies, and to whom I must remain a debtour to the end of my days, being no
ways able to recompense his wonted kindness, but only by this, daily to
pray for the life and prosperity, that he may be as the heir of your
Honor, so an ornament of the Noble house of the Dacres. And the God of all
peace bless your own person, with such blessings as you daily desire, that
you may still live to the comfort of the godly in this present life, to the
enlarging of your own Honor, to the rejoicing of your whole family, and to
the endless salvation of your own soul with Jesus Christ the Savior of all
them, which have unfeignedly embraced true religion. London this first of
October. 1596.

Your Honors to command in the Lord. Edward Topsell.

To all them that have unfeignedly embraced true Religion.
Dearly beloved in Christ, when I consider that comfortable Oracle of the
Apostle, when he says that godliness has the promises of this life and of
the life to come; it comes into my mind, that religion is none of the meanest
professions, that is labored for in the world: for the greatest rewards are
promised to the chiefest exploytes; and the worthiest enterprises are Crowned
with glorious benefits. Joseph for his wisdom was made the governor of
Egypt. Othniel for his service received Aisah the daughter of Caleb for his
wife. Iiphtah for his victory was made judge of Israel, and David for his
Music was made one of the Courtiers of Saul. In so much as it seems an
ordinary practice that every knowledge is rewarded with some courtesy:
whereby we are certified, that it is no marvel to hear and hope for so
excellent blessings as are promised to the Religious. For they are the house of
the Lord, and as he dwells with all majesty in heaven, so he reigns with
all Authority in the righteous; they are a chosen generation borne of God, a
Royal and holy priesthood, a holy nation, a peculiar people, the free men of
Christ, the inheritours of the earth, the judges of the world, the coheires of
Christ's kingdom, and the Citizens of heaven. If we look for their
Nobility, they are the Sons of God; if for their instruction, they are
taught of God; if for their tuition, the heavenly Angels are their servants; if
for their degrees they are kings and priests for the eternal God, if for their
calling they are Saints; if for their life it is heavenly; if for their wealth
it is the whole world; and finally their death is the birth day of all
felicity. For this cause David desired rather to be a doore-keeper in the
house of God, then a dweller in the stately tents of the wicked; as if the
meanest condition among the professors of Religion, were more excellent then
the chiefest estates among the worldlings, their Crosses excel the others
Crowns, their barrenesse the others fruitfulness, their humility the others
honor, their ignorance the others knowledge, their simplicity the others
wisdom, their weakness the others strength, and a little thing that the
righteous has, is better then the great possessions of the ungodly. When there
is famine they are satisfied, when there is war they are delivered, when there
is plague they are without danger, if fire fall from heaven it shall not burn
them, if the waters arise above the mountains, they are not drowned, if the
earth quake and rend asunder, yet they are not swallowed up, if the wild
beasts fall upon them they are not devoured, and if the Devil himself would
oppress them, yet he shall not overcome them. Then how glorious is our
calling? That live under the wings of God, that feed with the flock of
Christ, to whom are revealed the secret Counsels of the Lord, speaking unto
us by his Ministers, giving us the evidence of our salvation by his testament,
regenerating us by the immortal seed of his holy word, sealing us with the
spirit of promise, lifting us up from the dust of worldly misery, to the
thrones of heavenly Majesty. Salomons servants were happy that stood in his
presence and heard his wisdom. Daniel was happy when the Lions could not
destroy him, his fellows were happy when the fire could not consume them,
the Israelites were happy when the Egyptians were drowned, Job was happy when
his wealth was restored, and the Disciples were blessed when they heard Christ
preach. How many blessings belong to the religious? Satan that roaring Lion
cannot overcome them, the fire shall have no power on them, their enemies shall
never hurt them, the riches of the grace of God shall be powered upon them, and
the word of life is daily preached unto them. Consider therefore my beloved,
what is the hope of our profession whereunto we are called, the dignity of our
condition wherein we stand, and the reward of our Religion prepared for our
souls. Call to mind the examples of the Fathers, the promises of the Gospel,
the oath of the Lord himself, the price of our redemption, and the place of
our salvation: you shall find nothing wanting in Religion, that might increase
your blessedness. Therefore how happy are the ears that hear the things which
we hear, the eyes that see the things which we see, the hands that handle
the things which we touch, nay; the souls that are assured of the favor of
God. If all the world would go about to set down the felicity of the godly
and the dignity of the chosen, they could never atchieue it: no, not that
which they enjoy in this life, for their thoughts are heavenly, their hearts
the throne of the holy Ghost, their hands feel the Lord of glory, their
tongues talk of his praise, their feet stand in his Temple, their words are
acceptable before him, their Prayers like sweet savors of incense, their
worship like Evening sacrifices, their eyes behold his glory, their ears
hear his wisdom, and their names are written in the kingdom of heaven.
Would not any man become religious, that he might be rewarded with this
excellent honor? To eat his meat with the King of heaven, to wear the
Crown that never shall have end, to have the Angels his attenders, the
Saints his fellows, the heavens his dwelling place, the stars under his
feet, the everlasting light to walk in, the presence of God to delight? him,
and the pleasures of Paradise for the recompense of his Religion. For this
cause I have given this title unto these my slender labors upon this book of
Ruth, wherein (beloved in Christ) you shall find the matter to agree with the
title, and the hope of all the faithful concerning the end of their
profession, so profitably deciphered, as has comforted many troubled souls,
confirmed many wavering minds, confounded many obstinate Atheists, encouraged
many godly persons; and therefore I hope will offer the same favor unto you in
reading, ^as it has unto many other in preaching. Herein the holy Ghost (I
mean in the book of Ruth) has laid open whatsoever can be expected of them
that fear the Lord, here are afflictions to humble us, death to prevent us,
and examples to admonish us; here is the zeal of the godly, the virtue of an
effectual calling, the vizard of hypocrisy declared unto us; here is the
love of the faithful, the obedience to parents, and the benevolence of godly
persons commended unto us; here is the care of our parents, the gifts of the
spirit, and the holiness of the religious committed to the Church; here is the
office of Magistrates, the Prayers of our brethren, and the calling of the
Gentiles expressed, in the marriage of Ruth with Boaz, who was made a mother of
many Kings, but especially of the king of glory, the Son of God, the Savior
of the world, and the gatherer together of the heirs of grace. My desire
therefore is this, that you try it by perusing and reading this treatise, for
it is but superfluous labor for me, any farther to trouble you with the
Argument hereof, seeing the whole matter lies before your consideration. I
will pray for your success, and commend the end of my travails, (which is the
comfort and instruction of the members of Christ, to the fountain of mercy, by
whom the heavens water the earth, and the earth multiplieth with increase, and
the increase thereof preserves the world, that by the same power, your souls
may be edified, your faith may be stre^gthned, my labors may be blessed, that
his name may be glorified, his word may evermore be taught among us, that many
generations may embrace his Gospel, and the course thereof finished, our
Religion by the mercy of the Father, in the Son with the holy Ghost may be
rewarded with eternal salvation, to whom let us evermore give thanks because
he has vouchsafed us the dignity thereof, and walk worthy of our calling,
least our secure lives, our Idle faith, our vain hope, our cold profession,
and our common conversation with the ungodly, bring upon us everlasting
damnation.

Your Loving brother who desires your Prayers. Edward Topsell.

Guilielmi Attersollj, in Ruthae Explicationes carmen Encomiasticon.
EN Pietatis Honos: en sic in regna reponit,
Quosque tulit casus, abstulit ipse Deus.
En Rutha, en Naomi, per tot discriminarerum
In sanctum tendunt, regnaque sancta, solum.
Nec te ( Rutha) Moab distendit amore tuorum,
Nec colere ignotos barbara terra deos:
Gens inimica Deo, Legemque deumque sequuta,
Praemia quaesitis diuitiora tenes.
Quis te magne Bohaz tacitum sine laud relinquat?
Quid prohibet castis nomen inesse tuum?
Coniugio foelix, Rutham miseratus egentem:
Nomen ab insigni posteritate feres.
Vade liber, liber titulumque expande decorum,
Materia titulo conuenie^te suo.
Hic quoque zelus inest: quis enim celauerit ignem?
Eminet e proprio prodita flamma loco.
His simul exemplis, matres, viduaeque nepotes
Instruite, and natos (pignora chara) rudes.
Vtilitas duplex parts se sistit in omnes,
Vtilis iste liber: vtilis iste labor.
G. ATTERSOLL.
The same in effect in Englsh by the same Author:
LO here what guerdon godliness does get,
And how the Cross does come before the crown:
Lo widows twain before our eyes are set
Not raised alost, before they be cast down.
And thou O Ruth renouncing native town,
And Baal-peor God of Moab land,
Art set at rest, and blessed by Gods own hand.
The love of friends and Country ouerpeized,
With love of Sovereign Lord behold in sight:
The antique age and life of Patriarchs praised,
How liberal, frugall, chaste, pure, and upright.
But now this mould of earth is turned quite.
Alas that naught in perfect state should sit,
The world is changed, and we are changed in it.
Art thou a maid? Learn here of Ruth thy mate,
To choose whom God inspires with grace divine,
A widow thou? To pains, and labor late,
In each degree thy self with Ruth resign,
Or art a wife? To righteous Ruth incline.
If maid, or wife, or widow then thou be,
Thy self in Ruth, thou as in Glass shall see.
Go little Book, display thy golden title,
(And yet not little, though thou little be:)
Little for price, and yet in price not little,
Thine was the pain, the gain is ours I see:
(Although our gain, thou deemst no pain to thee)
If then O Reader little pain thou take,
Thou greatest gain with smallest pain shall make.
The hungry stomach feeds with full desire,
Whereby the vital spirits soon renew:
So if thine heart shall burn with heavenly fire,
Hereby great fruit shall to thy faith accrue.
Try ere thou trust, and then give sentence true,
If reading once, be pleasant to thy taste,
Next pleases more: yet sweetest comes at last.
William Attersoll.
In Laudem operis, S. Theologiae candidatis Ioannes Brace girdellus.
HIstoriae methodum Ruthae cupis, ordine ductam?
Haec tibi, Thesaea fila sequenda, cape.
Instar and impositae facis est, vbi Scrupulus extat,
Hic liber, ostendens eruta sensa tibi.
Hinc tibi doctrinae, seruatam sum medullam,
Multiplicis: opus hoc dogmata sancta tenet.
Instruit, vt rigidos casus patiendo repellas,
Instruit, vt dominus colligit, ornat, oues.
Et quaecunque tibi remanebit sors, locus, ordo,
Ad pietatis opus concitat iste liber.
Multa docent multi varijs ambagibus aucta:
Multa tamen liber hic, sub breuitate docet.
Plurima dant multi mendacia, plurimae, vana:
Hic nihil est, nisi quod Biblia sacra tenet.
Perge Dei (Topselle) diu sic pandere sacra.
Carpere vult frustra Zoilus istud opus.
RELIGIONIS Remuneratio per Eundem.
AVrea mellifluo tribuuntur praemia fructu,
Si tibi sanus inest relligionis amor.
Vnica perpetuum pictas durabit in aeuum,
Semper and Aetherco, lucet amanda, polo.
Caetera mortiferis, euanescunt subdita, telis:
Caetera postremum, sunt habitura diem.
Caetera cuncta, maris voluuntur fluctibus vna,
Caetera Laethais, mersa ferentur, aquis.
Caetera quid referunt aliud, quam vana, labores,
Et miseras, animo se laniente, cruces?
Maxima nobilium, pereunt monumenta, virorum,
Dura ruunt subito saxa remota loco:
Depereunt vires, sic deperit omne venustum,
Vita perit, regum pompa superba perit.
Diuitiae, rapidis agitantur casibus, omnes:
Denique nil, vasto permanet orb diu.
Lucida diuinus, transcendit sidera, cultus,
Post cineres, pietas viuere sola facit.
O quam te memorem, dea splendida? tu dea certe,
De caelo lapsam, voxsonat alma, deam.
Vox tua durabit dum caeli sidera durant,
Sola beata salus, caetera mundus habet.
Cum been nunc vegetans, modo post fortuna reflarit,
Quid valet? en pietas candida sola viget.
Cum nebulis positis Zephyrus spirauerit vltro,
Quid iuuat? en fastus tollit, amica, malos.
Cui micat in vultu, patientia pulchra, sereno,
Ciu sedet in nitido, fulgida front, fides.
Discipuli varijs, agitantur fluctibus, omnes
Christi: Christus adest, hinc mare triste silet.
Auxilium differt diuina potentia saepe,
Vt longo vigeat tempore, laeta salus.
Exilium, crux, mors, ferrum, flammaeque, famesque,
Dilectis domini, tendit in omne bonum.
Quos deus ipse tegit suffultos numine dextrae,
Vt sua, quae statuit, munera far, ferant.
Si non inuenias qua posses vrbe morari,
Si tibi sint nimia membra sepulta fame,
Carcere si rigido positus, vinclisque grauatus,
Si tibi sit medijs, anxia vita, malis,
Dat deus vt vincas, de puluere subleuat idem:
Ex humili, miseros erigit ille, lo co.
Dat deus orbatis, viduisque verentibus illi,
vt tandem capiant optima farra sibi.
Ille Israelem miserum per aequora duxit,
Hostibus immersis, abstulit ille iugum.
Ille sibi charum Dauidem elegit, and ipsum
Ex ouium caulis ad noua regna vehit.
Is Naomi reuocat, Rutham quoque dirigit ille,
Vt rectam quaerant, ad loca salua, viam.
Vnde aliena, sacro stabilitur faedere Christi,
Extitit atque sacris regibus alma parens.
Hoc deus est operatus opus, qui tempora solus
Mutat, and arbitrio sustinet omne suo.
Faults escaped in Printing.
GEntle readers, by reason of my charge being far from London, I could not
be present at the Printing hereof, whereby some faults escaped the Printing:
although they be more then I wished, yet they are fewer then I feared. Of your
gentleness Correct them thus. Page 3. line. 30.31.32. Read he names the
persons: where was it done? He quoteth the place: and when was it done? He
mentions the time. The residue being but small amend in this sort.

Faults. Page. Line. Correction. One 5 21 our Mestres 7 13 miseries gropes 16
31 Grapes desires 28 19 deferreth not 56 2 Eliah foresee 59 21 Elishah did
foresee. fall 66 13 fault 77 20 not private proud 80 1 duty 120 14 dulye 124
9 for fear Secondly 196 1^ Thirdly.

The Analisis or Resolution of the book of Ruth
The Book of Ruth contains the lively view of the Reward of Religion in
the familiae of Elimetech wherein must be considered their
affliction in famine which brings intolerable wrath and misery to the
fearful and pining death Utter decay and loss of worldly prosperity Selling
and forsaking their patrimonies

sojourning and wandering ins^aunge countries to forsake the people of the
Lord with the Temple and place of Sacrifice Lords Ministers and Word.
to remain with their enemies infidels Many years together To dye and be
buried among them.


deliverance by receaving Hospitality as houses for themselves for their
families
Lands Marriages
plenty Among strangers in the time of their pilgrimage. Among their own
friends at home the famine being ended.

Returning To their own country where they are joyfully received of their
friends to the praise of God in his word to their own comforts in the Lord
Readily restored by ye Magistrates to their liberty 1 to be present at the
Temple 2 to have Justice.
to their lands livings

With companies gained to the Lord for the increase of the Church by wholesome
doctrine sanctified and holy conversations
reviving of their own that he dead to stir up their names in their houses
on their insterit^^ice
to multiply their Fathers family for wordly honor the Reward of the
Religion.





THE REVVARD OF RELIGION.
Ruth. Cap. 1. ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 1. In the time that the Judges ruled,
there was a famine in the land: and a certain man of Bethleem Judah went for to
soiourne in the country of Moab, he and his wife, and his two sons.

2. And the name of the man was Elimelech, and the name of his wife Naomi, and
the names of his two sons Mahlon and Chilion, Ephrathites of the land of
Judah, and when they were come into the land of Moab, they continued there.

3. Then Elimelech the husband of Naomi died there, and she remained with her
two sons.

4. Which took them wives of the Moabites, the name of the one was Horpah, and
the name of the other Ruth: and they dwelled there about ten years.

5. And Mahlon and Chilion died also both twain, so the woman was left
destitute of her two sons, and of her husband.

6. Then she arose with her daughters in law, and returned from the country
of Moab: for she had heard say in the country of Moab, that the Lord had
visited his people, and given them bread.


ALthough the author of this book of Ruth has not expressed his name, yet
there is no doubt but it proceeds from the spirit of God, as well as the
books of the Judges, Kings, and Chronicles, which have not the names of their
authors described: but if it may be lawful to judge or give any sentence
thereof, it was either Samuel or some other godly prophet under the reign of
Saul, which is proved by the genealogies in the last chapter, where David is by
name mentioned, testifying unto us, that it was then written, when he was
chosen from his brethren and anointed king over Israel, and yet before his
reign, or else there had been added unto it, the title of a King, for the
aduauncing of the name of Ruth, who was his grande mother, upon whom this
history following depends, for the sumne and scope hereof is to show the
pedigree or ancestry the natural progenitors of Christ from Judah the fourth
son of Jacob, until the time that he began to challenge the princelye
seat, the royal scepter, and the right of government over the people of
Israel, which was at that time* when David was chosen from his fathers house,
and anointed king by Samuel. Again, in this history, there is delivered unto
us; the hope which the fathers had concerning the calling of the Gentiles, for
this marriage of Ruth into the kindred of Christ* who was a Gentile, and by
nature none of the people of God, did plainly foretell that the Gentiles
should be called in Christ, for as he took part of his humane nature of
them, so he showed us that he would give the same for them, that there might
be no difference in his body, between Jews and gentiles, but that the power
of his death, the graces of the spirit, and the knowledge of redemption might
redounde to all. Now the occasion of this history is delivered unto us in this
first Chapter, which is the soiourning of a certain Jew in the land of Moab,
(by reason there was a famine in the land of Judah,) with his familye, and the
return of them that lived, which were only Naomi his wife, and one other,
Ruth the Moabitesse the widdowe of his eldest son. This wandering or
soiourning is described with all the circumstuances thereof, in these first
six verses lately read: and generally contain in them, these two parts, the
first is their travail to the land of Moab, the second, those things that
happened unto them, after they came thither. The first part is expressed in
these two first verses, first by the occasion, which is declared by the time
and by the thing that moved them thereunto, in these words, In the time that
the Judges ruled there was a famine, etc. Secondly by the persons that
trauayled, who are described by the place from whence they were namely of
Bethlehem Judah, these were the parents and the children which are named in the
2. ver. The second part of these words, is in the four other verses
following, and it concerns either the parents or the children, the parents,
that one of them even Elimelech, the father of the familye dyed, there shor^y
after their arrival: the children, first that they married ver. 4: secondly,
that they likewise dyed ver. 5: Then remained only Naomi, with her two
daughters in law, and the time of her a bode in Moab, is set down to be ten
years ver. 4: secondly, the occasion of her departure because she heard say,
that God had visited his people, and given them bread, ver* 6: of these parts
let us speak in order, as the spirit shall give vttrance, and the time
permit. Genesis 1.1
In the days that the Judges ruled. Esaias 1.1
In these words the holy Ghost after his accustomed manner, Iere. 1.2.
for the more certaintye of the historye, Ephesians. 1.1.2
begins at the time as Moses begins his book of Genesis, from the first
creation of the world, Math. 2.1
so the prophets in the beginning of their books, Mar. 1.3.4
set down under what king or kings they prophesied, Luke 1.^.
so also in the new Testament we may see how three of the Evangelists begin
their Gospels from the preaching of John Baptist and the reign of king Herod.
The which order they undoubtedly learned of the old writers, the same spirit
guiding them, to one and the same truth, uses but one and the same manner of
speaking. For the almighty desiring to meet with the wrangling objections of
humane inventions, so tempereth the text of every scripture, as if question
were made who did such a thing? He names the persons where it was done? He
quoteth the place, and when it was done? He mentions the time. The cause
hereof is, that he might stay the waves of our sickle minds, upon the
pillar of truth, his everlasting word. But in this place he chiefly mentions
the time of the Judges, to show unto us, that when religion was corrupted, the
worship of God decayed, and idolatrye aduannced: Judge. 2.18 and 21, 25
when the Lord was forgotten of his own people, when his laws were no more
observed, but every man did that which seemed good in his own eyes, yea, when
there were almost as many Gods among them as they were men, then even then did
the Lord send this plague of famine among them For, Solomon says the blewnes
of the wound serves to purge the evil, Pro. 20.30
and the stripes within the bottom of the belly: as if he had said, as the
rypenes of a wound calls for a corasiue, so the fulness of sin cries for
vengeance: by this therefore we note, that the corruption of religion, 1. Ki.
14.16 and 16:2.3.4.
and neglect of the worship of God, is the cause of all his judgments that are
exercised in the world. For the idolatry of Jeroboam, and his sins, whereby
he induced Israel to sin: did the Lord threaten by Achia the prophet, to
scatter the people, so we may read of Bahascha king of Israel, 1 Kin. 18
35:37.
and so Solomon prayed at the dedication of the temple: when heaven shall be
shut and thou give no rain because they have sinned against thee etc. where
he comprehends the chief and capital worldly punishementes of sin, as
dearth and famine, sword and pestilence, blindness and ignorance, which are also
the rewards of sin, and the inseperable companions of all unrighteousness. And
what says the Lord by the Prophet? Cast from you all your sins wherewithal
you have transgressed, and make you a new heart, for why should you die oh you
house of Israel: as if he had said, either repent, or else be damned, for it
is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. And may not we
think that all these thunderings out of God his judgments among us, will
stir up some rain of punishments upon us. Are we not already put into the
wine press, to be bruised under the hand of fearful destruction? How many
plagues have come upon us within these few years? Where is become the
remembrance of the late enemies pretended invasion? The rumor whereof amazed
the hearts of our courageous champions, which spend all their days in pleasure:
Oh then they cried if they might be delivered, they would a lot some time of
their days to the service of the Lord? Where is the remembrance of the late
plague, which was scattered almost in every place of the land? Oh then we
cried unto the Lord in our distress, and he delivered us out of all our
miseries, Oh that men would therefore confess the Lord, and declare the
wonders he does for the children of men. But what are we now amended? Is the
ungodly person turned from his ungodliness, and not rather strengthened in his
iniquity? They which were ignorant are ignorant still, and many like Demas,
who seemed religious, have embraced this present world. As for the profane
both of poor and rich, they have made a league with death, and a covenant with
the grave, though a sword come thorough the land, yet (say they) it shall not
come at them. And therefore who can without waterye eyes and bleeding heart,
tell this present plague of dearth and famine which we now most justly endure,
Hos. 7.14.13.
and yet who knows how long it shall continue. Now, (as the prophet says)
we are gathered together and howl upon our beds for corn and for new wine,
that is, for the bellye and for the throat, but there is a greater leannes in
the soul. Now we bite the stone which the Lord has cast at us, but we look
not at the hand, which did send it, and who thinks it to be a punishment of
sin that now reigns among us? The papists say it is for one heresies, the
popish atheists say, that the world was best when the old religion was, for
then all things were cheap, like the idolatrous Jews, Ier. 44.19
which said unto Jeremy, that it was well with them when they burntincense and
made cakes to the host of heaven. 1. Kin. 18 17
The russians say to the preachers, as Achab said to Eliah, Are not you the
troublers of Israel, when it is themselves and there fathers houses, while they
have left the commandment of God and followed their pleasures, yea, almost
the whole Country is so vainly addicted, that among those multitudes of
preachers that are abroad, there is not one that saythfully follows his
vocation, but they are molested by the basest, and contemned by the best. So
that we may say as our savior says, we have piped unto you and you have not
daunced, 1. Kin. 18 15.17.
we have mourned, and you have not sorrowed, Psa. 127.5
yet wisdom is justified of her children, who are not ashamed to plead her
cause in the gates of the cities, before the face of her enemies, the Lord
increase the number of them.

We have long retained the name of Christians, that is, the anointed of the
Lord, and yet our lamps are empty, Mat. 25.3
and we defer our days in slumber, thinking our selves as good Christians as
the best, till we be utterly excluded from the bridechamber, Mat. 21.30.
we have promised the Lord oftentimes to work in his vineyarde, but yet who
has entered? Ioh. 15.2.
we are the vineyarde of the Lord, and he has dressed us: Ioh. 10.14. Ge. 31.34
what fruit have we brone unto him? we are the sheep of Christ and yet we
know not his voice: and as Rahel covered her fathers idols with sitting on
them, and with a lie, so we that are the greatest sinners, cover our
iniquities, with hipocrisy and dissembling. Such pollution of sabbaothes as
never was, yea, even in this time of dearth and famine, drinking and
drunkenness, Pro. 7.22.
dancing and riot, feasting and su^fetting, chambering and wantonness, swearing
and foreswearing, accompting gain to be godliness, and godliness to be the
burden of the world, with a thousand greater and more greueous calamities, as
if the bird could sing in the snare, or as the fatted ox that runs wilfully
to the slaughter. Then beloved let us look about us, euen^ now is the axe of
God his judgments laid to the root of every man's heart, Mat. 3.10
and he is accursed that fears it not, even now the Lord is knocking at the
door of our hearts, and if ever, let us open unto him, that the king of glory
may come in. Even these are the days wherein iniquity has gotten the upper
hand, and the love of many is waxen cold. Therefore as the Angel warned the
godly, so must we still come out from among them, my people, be not partakers
of their sins, least you bear a part of their plagues. Reu. 18.4
This is the harvest of the Lord, oh let us that be the Lords servants gather
out the wheat, least it be burned with the tares. There is a holy convocation
to the Lord, Number. 16.12.32
and the Lords ministers, found out the trumpet, if we appear not, the earth
will open her mouth, and revenge our rebellion and swallow us up alive. Hos.
6.1.2
Let us at the length say with the Jews, Come let us turn unto the Lord, for
he has spoiled us and he shall heal us, he has smitten us and he shall bind
us up: after two days he shall give us life, and the third day he shall raise
us up and we shall live before him: if with knowledge we follow him, to know
the Lord his rising is like the morning, and he shall come upon us like rain
in a drought, both the first and the latter rain upon the earth. Let not our
righteousness, be as the deaw before the sun rising, but put on the Lord
Jesus Christ and let none call upon him, but such as depart from iniquity.

Secondly, by this we gather that the Lord is as true in his judgments, as in
his mercyes, Deuteronomy. 28.23.24
for he threatened by Moses saying: if you forsake me and fall to worship
strange Gods (as now they did) then your heaven shall be as brass and your
earth as iron, and your rain like dust, til they were consumed from the face
of the earth. Of all these mistryes you may see in the book of Judges, Samuel,
and Kings to which I refer you at your leisure, as of Saul, David, Jeroboam,
Achab, Zidkia, and others as in this present place: where they are oppressed
ten years together, so that heaven and earth may pass but the word of the
Lord abides for ever.

For this cause the prophets add to their preaching of judgments: Dan. 6.9.
( Thus says the Lord) as if they had said it shall never be altered. Psalm.
12.^6
And if the laws of heathen men, such as the Medes and Persians, might not
alter, much less the word of the Lord which is like silver purified seven
times, should have any dross or changeable substance in it. We see the law
of nature stand inviolable for ever, and shall not the law of him which made
nature, be also immutable, when the fire cease to be hot, and the water to
be cold, then shall be exception taken against God his judgments, and not
before. The use of this doctrine is to cast down the presumption of notorious
sinners, who, to avoid the terrors of God his judgments, deceive their own
souls with this, that God is merciful. So that in their most singular
sins, they will fly to the mercyes of God, as if they were the very bond
of all iniquity, yea, and these kind of people persuade themselves to be as
good Christians as any in the world, because they can say the Lord is
merciful.

But hear me a little in one word I pray you, I am persuaded that I speak to
many these people this day. What hurt has the Lord done unto you, that you
rob him of his justice? Shall the Prophet be found a liar that says, The Lord
is just in all wa^es, and holy in all his works. Ps. 145.17
Or shall the Apostle speak untruth, that says: It is a just thing with God
to render affliction to them that afflict you, 2. The. 1.6
and release to you that are afflicted. Why shall we then spoil God of his
judgments, unless we will deprive our selves of our own salvation. But you
will say this serves for the wicked, as Atheists, Turks, Pagans, Infidels,
and such like, which shall have no part with Christ. I answer, what greater
wickedness can there be, than to deprive God of his justice? Would a mortal man
endure to be accounted without honesty, and shall the everlasting king abide
to be spoiled of his righteousness? Nay, the justice of God pertains to such
as you would be, holy persons, as well as to any. For what says the Prophet,
When the just man turns from his righteousness to do iniquity, Eze* 18.26
he shall die in it. And Peter says, that judgment must begin at the house of
God. And a father once said, God of his most dear justice has decreed the
sum of all discipline, both in exacting and in defending: 1. Pe. 4.17
as if he had said, there is no correction of the Lord, but it proceeds from
his justice, now the children of God are corrected, for he scourges every
child whom he receives. Heb. 12.6
And therefore the judgments of God must be thundered out as well for the
confirming of the faithful, as the confusion of Infidels. But others there are
that are so far past feeling of either mercies or judgments* that as soon
the deaf adder will hear the voice of the charmer, as they any impression of
terror for sin. Hence comes this custom of sinning, which every sabbath
commit their wonted iniquity, every hour vomit out their poison of
blasphemies, and every day violate the laws of charity, who through their
daily staring on the son of righteousness, are now become stark blind,
and with the continual noise of God his waters, are made so deaf, that they
can hear no goodness. Unto both these sorts of people, hearken what the
Lord says in his Gospel, But if that evil servant shall say in his heart,
Mat. 25.48.
the Lord deferreth his coming, and shall begin to finite his fellow
servants, and to eat and drink with the dronken. The Lord of that servant
shall come in a day that he looks not for, and in an hour that he knows
not, and shall separate him, and give him his part with unbelievers, there
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. This shall be the end of secure
christians, and contemptuous sinners, carnal Atheists, and despisers of
wholesome doctrine; which have no part but in this present life, with endless
and fearful damnation in the world to come. Thus much of the first part, the
circumstance of time, now let us go to the thing which is the second part, of
the occasion. There was a famine in the land. This was the chief cause which
moved these persons to travel, the avoiding of the pinching penury of
fearful death, by lingering till the end of this pining famine.

Of all the punishments of sin which happen in this life, the^e is none more
vehement than famine. Therefore the Lord by the Prophet, threatens to send his
arrows of famine to break the staff of bread. Eze. 5.16
Where he alludeth to a maine battle, signifying unto us, first as the arrow
is the fittest instrument to break the rank, so a famine is the sharpest
weapon to dismaye the courageous stomachs of rebellious sinners. For as the
arrowe is alwaie in sight, so a famine ever in sense, the arrowe hurts, but
not with a speedy death, a famine spoileth, yet with tedious misery: the
arrowe entered does procure more pain and greater wound at the pulling forth,
than the falling in: even so abundance of meat sooner dispatcheth a famished
person than lingering hunger. Therefore David put to his choice of three
plagues, famine, flying, and pestilence, chose the last as the most sodainest,
and therefore accompanied with less grief, 1. Sam. 24*14.15
for that disease by the rule of physic is most dangerous, which is the
longest in growing. Now we may read of many famines in the Scripture, one and
the first we read of, was in the days of Abraham, Ge. 12.10
another in the days of Izhak, his son. Seven years famine was in Egypt,
Genesis 26.1
where Joseph by the hand of God, succored the Church in his fathers family.
Ge. 41.30
And to omit that in David's time, and that in Ahabs time, with those in the
days of Iehoram and Zidkia, with many others. We read in the new Testament
of a universal famine, in the days of Claudius Caesar, 2. Sam. 21 1.
prophesied by Agabus, when the Church did most notably relieve one another. 1.
Kin. 18.2.
Unto the which we may add that at the destruction of Jerusalem, 2. King.
6.25.
about forty years after Christ. All which are most worthy spectacles of
humane misery, and worthy examples of God his judgments, to terrify all
them which say in their prosperity, Act. 18.28
they shall never be moved. There we may read of the pitiful death of many
thousands which starued in the streets, in the face of their dearest friends,
and yet were not able to relieve them. There we may see how men were driven
to eat dogs, cats, rats, mice, and horse flesh: but that which is most
miserable, the mothers to succor their stomachs and bodies, with the
slaughter and eating of their own children. What heart of Adamant would not
weep, yea, rather bleed at the sight hereof? And yet behold a greater
famine than all these. Is it possible? yea verily, a famine of the word of
God, when men shall go from one sea to another, Am. 8.11.
and from the North to the East, running to seek the word of God, and shall
not find it? In that day shall fall both the fair virgins and the young men,
which swear by the idols of Schomron, and say, As thy God lives, O Dan, and
as the God of the way of Beershebah lives, they shall fall; neither shall they
ever rise up again. Is not this greater than the famine of bread? There was
never famine so great, but if liberty were given, the famine was eased: but in
this they shall have liberty to run too and fro, and shall not be relieved.
There was never any famine wherewith men were so hunger-starued, but some
recovered, but in this, says the Lord, They that fall shall never rise
again. Oh that the open contemners of God his word, would drink but one
drop for a taste of these fearful judgments, I am persuaded that the heat
of greedy sin would be so cooled in them, that they should recover the
health of their souls, which will never be, till of open prophaners they
become public professors. But of all these famines there is but one cause,
which is the abuse of the creatures of God, for so the equity of justice
requires, that in the same thing wherein they sinned, they should be
punished. Like as the these was bound for that which he stole, to restore
four fold. Fullness of bread was one of the sins of Sodom, and they
understood not from whom they had it, because they were unmerciful to the
poor, and therefore abused it by unthankfulness.

And this is a worthy doctrine to be urged in our days, wherein our abuse is
greater than our want, and yet our want is such as has not been heard of
these many years. The covetous seller keeps in his corn, and draws upon
himself the curse of the poor, saying it is scantie, it is scantie, when his
garners are full: Is not this to tell that the Lord his hand is shortened,
when in deed it is lengthened? Is not this to say, thou openest thy hand and
fillest with thy blessing every living thing? Nay, you plainly accuse the
Lord of illiberalitie.

Oh detestable cruelty, who for to fat up their own posterityes, will
murder the bodies of many thousands of pouertie^ yea, this is more cruel
than murder in the sight of God. Why deal you not plainly, and say, the
Lord has given abundaunce, yet your price must be raised, so you should
speak truly, and excuse the liberality of the Lord in accusing your own
covetous desires. But oh vvretchednesse, you will not lay the fault upon the
guilty, you justify the covetous, whom the Lord abhors, and condemn the
innocent liberality of him, who gives to all freely, and casts none in the
teeth. Another sort there are more viler than thase, who of this great want,
which if the Lord suffer to endure, will turn to extreme famine, yet they
will spend more upon one to make him drunk, than upon one dozen of poor
folks, These are the tiplers, alesellers, and dronkards, the very caterpillars
of our country, who like the horse, leache are even sucking, and never
satisfied, and these only consume much that other should not be contented with
it. Of these both cities and countries are replenished, and the magistrates
suffer them with little or no punishment at all: but if the poor preachers
rebuke the folly, their safety is endangered by this ravenous brood, who are
not ashamed to give railing, yea and threatening speeches. And magistrates
servants are in greatest fault, who are not only partakers of this
unseasonable drinking, but also deal privately with their ma^sters, that those
which are complained, might escape unpunished. Thus are the poor vnrelieued,
the country unprovided, the people unanswered, the wicked unpunished, the
commonwealth unreformed, the godly vncomforted, and the judgments of God haled
down upon us, that we might be everlastingly confounded

There went a certain man. Now are we come to the persons that traueled, which
is the second part of this verse, which we showed you ended in the second
verse: they are first generally described in this verse: and after specially by
name in the next verses: They are of two sorts, first the parents Elimelech and
Naomi, secondly, the children Mahlon and Chilion, who are all described by the
place from whence they went, Bethlehem Judah: it is so called because there was
another Bethlehem, in the tribe of Zebulun: and this is that Bethlehem which in
Genesis is called Ephratha, and therefore these persons are in these two
verses, called Ephrathits, of the place, where afterward Christ was borne. Ios.
19.15
Then it is apparaunt by the book of Iosuah, Ge. 35.19
that the tribe of Judah had the fruitfullest posession, Math. 2.1
in all the land of Canaan, they were the greatest in number, Chap. 15.
the wysest in policy, the richest by inheritance: yet we see when the scourge
of God came, the famine invaded their country, and crope into the walls of
Bethlehem: and made the wealthiest among them to fly: yet this Elimelech,
which was as appears by his consanguinity of the princes of the whole tribe,
such is the vehemence of the Lords arrows, 1. Kin. 22 34.
when he shoots them abroad, that if king Achab were in his chariot, in the
midst of his host, yet one of them shall give him a mortal wound* The use of
this doctrine is, to teach us that if the Lord suffer his plague to continue,
he will strike down the chosen men in Israel, the chosen men in England: yea
the noblest among us, who think themselves in greatest security, can he
easily bring to greatest misery. Psa. 29:6.6.8
Therefore you whose heads the Lord has aduauncted over your brethren, look to
your calling, Psa, 149, 8
for the voice of the Lord shakes as well the ceders of Libauns, Psa. 113 7
as the little shrubs in the wilderness of Cades: Exo. 10.22.
it is as easy with him to bind the nobles in chains, and the princes in
linkes of iron, as to raise up the poor from the dunghill to the throne. Exodus
11.29.
Did not his darkness cover as well the court of Pharao as the country of
Egypt? 2. Kin. 25 10.
Was not the first borne of the king destroyed, as well as of the poor pesants
of the dwellings of Ham? Yea, when the Israelites were carried captive to
Babylon, their King had his children slain before his face, his own eyes put
out, and after lead in a chain, neither was he spared for his throne, nor you
for your dignity and wealth.

Oh that you would therefore be warned of your slipperie estate, that you
might avoid the heavy wrath of God, when without respect of persons he shall
judge both quick and dead. Let not the lots of your inheritance deceive you,
though their soil be as fruitful as this of Judah, and your possessions
never so great: he that in one night destroyed all the fruits of Egypt, can
also in one hour blast your corn with deawes, and consume your possession
with drought, for a fruitful land makes he barren, for the wickedness of them
that dwell therein.

Secondly, we note out of these words, when he took his wife and children
with him, an example of a religious father, and a loving husband: he might (if
he had consulted with flesh and blood) done like our husbands in these days,
which had rather in their wandering, shifte about for themselves, and leave
wife and children in a sea of troubles, to sink or swim to some doubtful
relief. But the godly in old time knew that their wives and children were as
themselves, and as they were careful to cherish their own bodies, so they
were mindful to nourish their own families. This the Lord at the first
marriage that ever was, commanded that for a man's wife he should forsake father
and mother and they two shall be one flesh, Genesis 2.24
as if he had said, parents must not hinder fellowship of wedlock, much less
pouertye or temporal wants: as the bark is joined to the tree and the flesh
to the bone, if one be without the other they both perish, so must husband and
wife live and love together, unless they will be the slaughter slaves of their
own destruction. We read of this practice in the scripture when Abraham by
reason of a famine went down into Egypt, he took Sara his wife with him:
Genesis 12.^1 8.
when I shak by reason of a famine went to Abimelech the king of Gerar, he took
Rebecea his wife with him. Genesis 26.1
How do we read of Jacob, how twice he sent into Egypt for all his family and
the third time he went down with all his household, Genesis cap. 42, 43.44.
his son Joseph fed him five years of famine: 1. Tim. 5.8.
yea the Apostle says, that he is worse then an infidel that provides not for
his own family, and Christ going from his disciples asked them if they had
wanted any thing, and they answered, nothing. Against this point of doctrine
there are many that offend, some that are married by their covetous parents,
who respect nothing but wealth, are so matched, as if a vine were planted in
the flowing of the sea, which prospers best when the water is lowest, even so
these are in sweetest fellowship when one is a thousand miles from the other.
Genesis 6.1.
Others there are which in their marryages, please nothing but their eyes;
which as old persons cannot see without spectacles, so they cannot find wives
without the spectacle of bewty, and these love as long as bewty eudureth, which
is till they be sick, for sickness is the cutthrote of beauty. Some take wives
and husbands, as fools find pearls, for as they cannot discern them pebles:
so these are ignorant of all kind of duty toward one another. From hence
proceeds all the adulteries which are daily committed, here arises the
fountain of strife, contention, debate, jealousy, and also the unhappy blows
which many give to their wives, hence it comes, that so many gentlemen and
others are seldom at home, but either beyond the sea in wars or in travail,
which in their unmarried estate wanted nothing but vviues, but now being married
want all things but vviues. Hence it comes, that they termed them by the
odious titles of crosses, plagues, troubles and also as I have heard some say
the causes of their undoing, vvheras they may as well accuse the eye of his
blindness, as their vviues of their own wilful misery: and to conclude, there
is not one breach of love or kindness between them, but it springs from these
corruptions, which then were sowed, when they intended their marriage. But oh
beloved, let not the godly be drawn away with the crooked conversation of
these contentious persons, but let the^ be armed with the forenamed examples
of godly unity that as their troubled days were eased in the joy of their
own love, so let our miseries be relieved which you suffer in wedlock, with
your comfortable agreement in christian society, Pro. 5.18.
for so says Solomon, Let thy fountain be blessed, and rejoice with the wise
of thy youth, and thus much of this second doctrine. Thirdly, by this we may
note that the godly are oppressed when the wicked have abundance: here we
see the Israelites which were the Church of God had a famine, but the
Moabits, to whom this man descended being a cursed generation, incestuous
gentiles, Psa. 37.35
had plenty and abundance, for else Elimelech would not have gone thither to
be relieved. Psalm. 17.14:
This may seem a strange thing that the godly should be oppressed with famine,
when worldlings and heathens shall wallow in their wealth: Of these David
speaks. I have seen the wicked strong and spreading himself like a bay
tree. And in another place, Psalm. 73.4.
They are enclosed in their own fat: And again he says, They have their
portion in this life, whose bellies thou fillest with thy hid treasure, their
children have enough, and leave the rest of their substance to their children.
And in another place, there are on bands in their death but they are lusty and
strong, they are not in trouble like other men: and a little after, these are
the wicked, Ver. 12
yet prosper they always and increase in riches. The very like you may hear in
Job, and in the prophet Jeremy. Job. 21.7
But of the rightous he says and often cries out of their afflictions, Ier.
12.1.
their sorrows and nakedness, their hunger and misery, all the day long are
they appointed as sheep to the slaughter, yea, our savior Christ pronounces
himself in his members, poor, hungry, Mat. 25.42.43
naked, harborles, thristy, and imprisoned, the foxes have holes and the birds
of the air have nests, but the son of man has not where to rest his head.
Mat. 8.20.
And the author of the epistle to the Hebrews, Heb. 11.37
says of the godly, Some are stoned, some cut asunder, some slain with the
sword, some wandering abroad in goats skins and sheep skins, destitute,
oppressed, evil entreated, of whom the world was not worthy, wandering in
deserts, in the mountains, in dens and caves of the earth. Judge now I
beseech you, between the outward estate of the godly and the wicked, are they
not contrary? That which of the world is condemned, is of the Lord commended;
yet I beseech you my brethren, be not terrified from godlynes, but rather
strengthened in your profession. Then will you say, tell us the cause of all
this inequality. Our savior answers it very well, You are not (says he) of
the world, if you were of the world, the world would love his own: and David
says, that their portion is only in this life, Ioh 15.19.
but Christ says, our reward shall be great in heaven: and again, you shall
weep and lament but the world shall rejoice, but your sorrow shall be turned
to joy, like a woman that reioyseth at the birth of her son, so as a woman in
travail has no ease till a son is come into the world, Ioh. 16 20
neither must we look for any rest till our souls are delivered out of the
womb of the body into the kingdom of heaven. Our savior compares us to the
fruitful vine, which does not only abide frost, snow, storm and heat, but
also at the gathering time is broken of that the gropes might be reached. The
gold must be tried in the furnace, the silver fined in the fire, Ioh. 15.12
the wheat purged in the floor, and before it be meat for man, is also
ground in the mil, so must we be proved in affliction fined in persecution, and
crushed to pieces, under the burden of our own miseries, that we may be made
prepared bread for the Lord his own spending.

Why then does the Lord make such large promises to his Church of plenty,
seeing it endures continual poverty? I answer, the Church of God must be
considered after two sorts, the first as it is cleansed in the blood of Christ,
and washed pure from all outward and notorious offenses, unto which estate
pertain all those outward promises of liberality in the scripture. The second
is the declined estate or corrupted condition of every one in the Church, even
unto the worlds end, unto this pertain all the punishments, persecutions and
ttibulations, which the godly endure: which the Lord sends upon them, that
he might by little and little scour us from our transgressions, and weary us
with the miseries of this life, that we might the more ernestly desire the
life to come, for the Lord does here scourge us that we should not be condemned
with the world. Examples of these are most plentiful in the old testament of
the Church of the Jews, and for as much as this perfection of the church being
once lost, is like broken glass, which can never be soldered again, so the
Church shall never attain those promises in this life, but they are all
referred to the life to come, where shall be no hunger, thirst, nakedness,
poverty, travail, famine, or sorrow, but all tears being wiped from the
eyes of the faithful, they shall then rest from their labors, and receive
many thousand times, for every afliction which they here endured, eternal
felicity in the presence of Christ, when all worldlings shall be burned with
unquenchable fire.

Fourthly, in that they went down to the wicked Moabits and there tarried, we
note that it is lawful for the godly in the time of necessity, to crave help
or relief of the very enemies of God, so they be not polluted with their
superstitions. For the proof hereof we have the former examples of Abraham in
Egypt, of Isahac in Gerar, of Moses in Midian, when he fled from Pharao, Genesis
12.7 and 26.1
of the spies of Israel which lodged in the house of Rahab. So did the Lord
command Joseph in a dream, Exo. 2.22.
to take Mary and Christ, and to go into Egypt, Ios. 2.1.
to save Christ from Herod. So did Christ ask water of the woman of Samaria
when he was weary, Mat. 2.13 John 4.7.
with infinite other testimonies which the godly may find in the scripture. But
the use of this point is, that although the Lord has permitted this liberty,
yet we must take heed of two things, first that we never receive any thing
with condition of religion, or doing the least thing against their own
knowledge, for idolaters desire nothing more then to win men's souls to the
devil. Secondly, we may not go unto such when we may be eased of the godly,
for it is free necessity that constrains, not necessary liberty that
permits: By this we learn what to judge of them which are daily at talk
and table with the wealthiest papists, Atheists, and carnal profane persons,
who care not for the loss of religion, so they may gain by their friendship
Esteeming more the feathers of a rich man, though ungodly, than the blood of a
poor godly christian: they use them too commonly for wealth and commodity,
not for need and necessity: these are seasoned in the leaven of
unrighteousness, baked in the oven of hypocrisy, and shall one day be burned in
the fire of everlasting destruction, for they which for gain love their
company in this life, shall be partakers of their rewards in the life to come.

Fifthly, by this we note, that the Lord does ever provide for his faithful
servant in all their miseries. We see here, Psa. 37.18 19.
these Jews satisfied with plenty in Moab, that were almost famished with
penury at home: therefore says David. The Lord knows the days of upright
men, Ge. 45.45
and their inheritance shall be perpetual; they shall not be confounded in
the perilous time and in the days of famine, 1. Kin. 18.13.
they shall have enough. Most notable is that speech of Joseph to his brethren;
telling them, that God sent him before to provide victuals for them in that
seven years famine. So he stirred up Obadiah which hid fifty prophets in one
cave, and fifty in another, 1. Kin. 17: 4.10
feeding them with bread and water, during the time of famine. He provided for
Eliah first by the ravens, 2. Kin. 8.1.
and after by the widow of Zarephtha multiplieng her oil and meal, for Eliah
her self, and her son. So he sent Elisa to warn the Shunamite woman of the
seven years famine, that she should fly for her self, and live where she
could. I might be infinite in this point, to declare the bountiful
liberality of the Lord, who ever provides one remedy or other, to satisfy
the continual prayers of them that fear him: for we may say as Paul says,
We are afflicted, yet we are not in distress, in poverty, yet not overcome
of poverty, we are persecuted, and yet not forsaken, 2. Cor. 4 8.9
cast down but we perish not. This is the merciful kindness of him who gives
food to the young ravens that call upon him, and makes his sun to rise and
shine both upon good and bad. Yea we our own selves have experience in our
own country, for we which were wont with our abundaunce to help other
nations about us, yet now in our want we are succored by them. How should the
poor in many places be relieved, if it were not for the corn which comes
ouer-sea: therefore as the seven plentiful years in Egypt, succored the
seven dear years: even so the Lord relieueth the misery of one time by the
multitude of another. Therefore my brethren, let us not say, the Lord has
forgotten, for although our desires be not satisfied, yet our bodies are not
famished; yea the Lord testifies that he is as unwilling to punish our
deserts, and utterly to deprive us of our maintenance, as we are to depart
from our pleasant pastime or dainty belly cheer. Poor Lazarus that was not
relieved with the rich man's crummes, yet was he comforted with the licking of
the dogs, so much does the Lord affect liberality and kindness, that he
commands brute beasts to execute his goodness upon his servants:

Now let us proceed to the second part of this scripture, and seeing we have
brought these strangers to their Inn ^t Moab: let us hear their
intertainment, and those things that happened unto them after they came
thither: for the parts we have in the beginning set down, which I trust you
remember, and therefore we will to the words.

And they continued there. This is as much to say, as they found entertainment
answerable to their expectation: they had liberty of residence granted, and
obtained a place for their dwelling in safety. Where we first note the
gentleness or humanity of these heathen Moabits. who had learned by nature this
point of courtesy, which is, friendlye to succor poor harbourlesse
strangers: and no doubt but he that watches the descending of sparrowes on
the ground, directed this journey to Moab, for the accomplishing of his own
counsel, and prepared the hearts of these people, with favor to relieve
them. For as before he guided the journey of Abraham's servant to the city of
Machor, where Rebecca was, and framed her answer according to his prayer, eue^
so he co^ducted these to Moab where Ruth was, Ge. 24.13
and tempered the hearts of the wicked to give these pilgrims a dwelling place
among them. By the which we are taught what friendship or love we owe to
strangers which are come among us, yea though we know not the purpose of their
hearts, yet we must do good unto them for the proportion of their bodies, that
is, because they are men. This is not a law written only in the book of God
but imprinted in the very nature of every one. We see these Moabits do it by
nature and yet they had no religion in them, we know how the king of Fgipt gave
commandment for Abraham, that none should hurt him or any of his possessions.
Read but the Acts of the Apostles, you shall see how barbarous nations received
the church with curtesy, and some upon their report believed the doctrine of
Christ. What shall we then say to this beastlike behavior of many among us,
who will hardly permit poor Christian strangers to harbor among us; if it
were not for that they are men, and the children of Adam like our selves, yet
because they call upon the name of Christ, being of the household of says,
let us do good unto them. But some will say, what shall we do unto them if
they will not join with us in our religion? I answer, Genesis 17 13.14
none must be of Abraham's familye but those which will be circumcised, that is,
none must dwell with thee, but such as will be of thy profession. Yet thou
may for humanity or curtesy receive a Turk or a pagan, a Jew or an
infidel, Ge. 31.54
papist or heretic, to talk or table for a night or a small time, so thou
keep they self from his pollutions. So did Jacob feast his idolotrous father
in law and kinsmen when they pursued him to the mount of Gilead, 2. King. 6 23.
with purpose to hurt him, and our savior Christ bids us to feed our
enemies and to give them drink if they thirste. So did Elischah, to the host
of Sirians, who being sent to take him, yet when he had taken them and lead
them to the city, he suffered the king to do them no hurt, but refreshed them
with meat and drink, and sent them away in safety. For our outward courteous
receuing of infidels is like coals of fire, to draw them in love with our
inward religion, we know how the Lord commanded the Jews to be good unto
strangers, because they were strangers in Egypt. We know how the Lord
commends the stranger Samaritan beyond the priest and the leuite, beccause he
succored the poor wounded Jew, which had fallen among thieves. Luke 10.30, 38
And truly we our selves may be strangers in other Countreies, therefore let
us do good unto them now that we may receive the like of them again, for this
is the law and the prophets. Then Elimelech: when they had escaped one danger,
they fell into another sorrow, when by the merciful kindness of the Lord they
were jointly come together into Moab, and there quietlye seated, escaped the
arrows of famine, by the hand of God, the father of the family, the nerest and
derest unto them, dies in plenty.

Where we note the very lot of all the godly, namely, that the end of one
sorrow is the beginning of another, like the drops of rain distilling from the
top of a house, when one is gone another follows, like a ship upon the sea,
being on the top of one wave, presently is cast down to the foot of another,
like the seed which being spread by the sower is hanted by the fowls, being
green and past their reach, Psa. 34.19
is endaungered by forste and snow, being passed the winter ^s hurt by beasts
in summer, being ripe is cut with the sickle, threshed with flaile, purged in
the floor, ground in the mill, baked in the oven, chewed in the teeth, and
consumed in the stomach. This made David say, Great are the troubles of the
righteous, but the Lord delivers out of all. Act. 14.22 Heb. 2.10
But be not discomforted oh my brethren, for thorough many afflictions must we
enter into the kingdom of heaven, and by affliction we are made like to the
son of God. But to the matter. We see here their sweet fellowship is
prevented by death, which in deed is the end of al worldly friendship. This is
a good lesson for all worldlings to remember, how the Lord disappointeth all
their purposes, and overthrows their counsels more vainer then vanity. The
merchant having obtained his bank, promises rest and security to himself;
the husbandman having gathered his fruits, never doubts but he shall spend
them, Mat. 17.4.
and provides for more; the Gentleman coming to his lands, thinks his
revenues and pleasant life, will endure always: like the apostles when Christ
was transfigured in the mount; presently they would build tabernacles of
residence; but as the cloud came betwixt them and heaven, and bereaved them of
their purpose: even so suddenly will death come and deprive you of your
profits, call the merchant from his bank, the husbandman from his farm, the
Gentleman from his lands, the noble man from his honor, the prince from his
kingdom, the Lady from her pleasures, as this Elimelech was suddenly from wife
and children.

Secondly, by these words we note the goodness of God toward both the dead man,
and also wife and children: for no doubt but they all desired, to be seiled
in some place or other; and here the Lord suffers the husband with wife and
family, to be quietly feared before their separation. He might have called him
away in his journey, as he was coming, and then oh how would it have grieved
hoth him and them: him, to leave a poor comfortles widow and children behind,
without dwelling or maintenance, for home again they could not return, by
reason of the famine, and to go forth on the journey without a guide, was like
as if a ship were set on the sea without a mariner. Therefore in suffering them
all to come safe to Moab, and there to live till they got favor and dwelling,
and also maintenance, was a singular favor of the Lord toward both; that
howsoever they were afflicted, yet they were not left destitute. And this
teaches us, Romans 2.7.
that in all our afflictions we receive especial blessings at the hands of God,
for this end that we should not be swallowed up of sorrow. There is no
sickness but it is either short and sharp, or else tedious and light, if it
be sudden and very extreme, the continuance of it is but short, if it
belong and tedious, it has some time of ease, some time of more quietness, so
that in all our miseries we may say with the godly, Psa. 124.3
If the Lord had not been on our side we had been swallowed quick: he tempereth
the sodainest showers with least continuande, and the longest winter has many
fair days. Be strong therefore my brethren and sisters, for sure the Lord will
stablishe your hearts, fear not all the dangers of the world: though as many
troubles compass us, as there were Sirians about Eliseah, yet lift up your
eyes, 2. King. 6.20.
there are many thousands more with us then are against us. He that suffers
none to be tempted above their power, will not lay more upon us then we are
able to bear: but as he wrestled with Jacob with one hand, he held him up with
the other, so though he afflict with one arm, he shall sustain with the
other.

Which took them wives Now we are come to the children, and the holy ghost
expresses the friendship which they received of the Moabits after the death of
the father, which is, their marriage with their daughters: Where first of all it
may be demanded in this place, (seeing the Lord forbideth all strange marriages,
whither these sons of Elimelech did not offend against this law: Deuteronomy. 7.3.4.
we know that the unmarried are at liberty, to mary whom they will only in the
Lord: now the Moabits were heathen people, and strangers from God his covenant,
and therefore these persons married not in the Lord. To which, I answer
briefly, that the Lord forbids marriages with infidells, for two causes,
first when we may lawfully and without danger join our selves to them that
are godly, 1. Kin. ^1.4.
and will presumptuously for worldly respects, run to the daughters of men:
secondly that we should refrain from all such marriages where we are like to
be drawn away from our profession, as we see in Solomon. But these sons of
Elimelech offended in none of these. Exo. 2.21.
For first they were now strangers and had no other choice, Math. 1.5
and secondly it appears by that which follows that they were both well
persuaded in religion. For as Moses married a Madianitish woman, and was
blameless, and Salman the son of Nahasson, the prince of the Jews, married
with Rahab, (which both were the parents of Boaz mentioned hereafter) and was
faultles, nay it was done by the permission of Iosuah, and therefore lawful;
even so these strange Jews moved with the same reasons, chused the like
marriages. But some will say, the Jews which had married strange wives, in the
captivity of Babylon, might have alleged this against Nehemiah, Nehe. 9 1, 2,
3.
that they were in captivity, and had no women to take but strangers. To the
which I answer, if they had so objected, they had spoken untruth, and so
would Nehemiah have replied, for there were Iewishe women captives as well as
men; and further I say, that this their marying of strange women, was the cause
of the destruction of many Jewish women, who being forsaken of their own
people, must of necessity be married to infidells, which could never return to
Jerusalem. Again, these sons of Elimelech by their marriage, gained greater
favor of the Moabits; but especially the hand of God was in it, that when
they both should be dead, Ruth might be married to Boaz, and be made a mother of
Christ.

First therefore we note out of this, that as these Moabits were kind to the
father in giving him residence, so they were loving to the sons in giving them
wives: a notable example of humane curtesy, given unto us by these heathens,
that we with the like favor should entertain strangers. But many covetous
parents in these days, which would be accounted Christians, are so far from
doing this unto strangers, that they will hardly do the like to their natural
Countriemen, rather imitating that ungodly Laban, Ge. 31.15.
who made marchaundise of his daughters, Iud. 1.13.
then godly Caleb in beestowing them on Othniell be he never so poor, if they
have deserved well of Church or common wealth, rather desiring to advance their
postiritie in the glory of the world, the^ to discharge their duetyes in the
presence of God. They will say they aim at this, the fear of the Lord, when
as if they had matched their children with Turks or infidells they would not
or could not be more profane then those, saving only these are outwardly
obedient to a Christian prince, that they might with more liberty follow
their licentious Atheism, when as peradventure the other would not so
dissemble: so that goods, and not goodness, the world and not the word,
earthly vanity, and not heavenly felicity our parents aim at. But what shall
we say to them that force their children not only to match against their
minds, but to marry with public papists and known recusants, only for
things of this life. Truly I answer, that it is against these that the
Lord speaks, when he says, Deuteronomy. 7.3
You shall not take their daughters to your sons, nor give your daughters to
their sons, but as they have married without the counsel of the Lord, in
murdering the fruits of their own bodies, even so they shall prosper without
the blessing of God, in confounding the souls of their own posterity: and as
the children of the Jews which were borne of strange women, were separated
from the new founded temple, even so these shall be excluded from the
everlasting Jerusalem.

And they tarryed there. This time of their abode in Moab, signifies the great
continuance of this misery. First for the Jews at home, who endured famine:
and secondly for these abroad, which lived among Infidels ten years
together. It is a fearful thing with us that we have but one years famine,
oh then we think that the Lord has forgotten to be merciful. But we have
heard alredie of famines of great continuance, that in Joseph's time was seven
years together, that in David's time was three years and a half, and this
misery lasted ten years together. Wherein many godly persons did patiently
endure it. How is it then that for this little dearth among us, there are so
great exclamations for corn and plenty, such horrible blasphemies against the
Lord himself, saying: Shall this endure alwaie? Was there ever any poor
people thus afflicted? Is this the fruit of the Gospel? Are these the favors
of God and his righteousness, in keeping his promise? with such like, too
horrible to be suffered as if the Lord were not able to relieve us; or else
were unjust in punishing our sins, how can that be, seeing he calls for
repentance and amendment, and then promises plentye and abundaunce. These
saints endured some three, some seven, and other ten years famine, and yet
we say, was there ever such a people thus afflicted like to us with one years
dearth?

They were driven to wander abroad in their enemies Country for many years
together; shall we then think it such a miserye to go two or three miles for
our corn? They adventured the loss of their lives, and we are afraid of the
lessening or diminishing of our goods. And shall we yet say, there was never
any people tormented like unto us? Yea, I add this, that even at this day
there are people in the world, which s^ant in all their lives do eat any
bread, but only the bark of trees, with some other unseasonable fish; others
live on the roots of the earth, some on the fruits of trees. And what shall I
say more our wickedness is greater then our want, our sore is smaller then
our sin, our transgressions have deserved to be punished with the scourge,
and yet we are scarce corrected with the rod, our complaints are greater
then our hu^te, and our murmuring exceeds our misery: therefore we have
greater cause to tremble at that which hangs over our heads, then to fear
or cry for this which we already suffer, for it is hardly the beginning of
sorrow.

So Mahlon and Chilson. Now when they were compassed about with the friends
of their vviues, which did promise security, then after a fevve years, spent
in safety, the Lord called them away after their father. Where we see our
former doctrine justified, that the end of one sorrovve was the beginning of
another. When they were most like to continue, then they gave over, as it were,
in the arms of their wives, and the sight of their aged mother, to whom no
doubt, this was the greatest grief of all other, that now being left
destitute both of husband and children, she should without comfort live with
the Moabites, and without joy return again unto her own Country, as a bird
robbed of her young ones. Yet seeing this is our worldly lot still to endure
misery, let us set both our shoulders under the burden, if it be too heavy,
let us flee to the finisher of our faith with zealous and earnest prayers,
desiring him either to ease or to remove his hand. But seeing we have spoken
of this before, this shall suffice at this time to serve for a remembrance.

Then she arose. When her friends were departed, and her self left
comfortles, yet the Lord remembered her, for even then came the rumor unto her,
that the famine was ceased in Iewry, that the Lord had visited the sickness of
his people, and restored the plenty of the earth again, and therefore it is
time for her to be hasting home again, for here the holy Ghost setting down
her return and the cause of the same, shows that it was even then when her
children were dead, for what should a godly woman live there, where were non
that could strengthen her in the ways of the Lord, but rather provoke her to
embrace infidelity; And again, even at that time when she was most
comfortless for the loss of her children came this rumor unto her of the
restoring of her Country, so that now Naomi, thou art here in Moab a
sorrowful pilgrim, go home to thy Country and be a joyful inhabitant:
indeed thy children are dead, but thou shall have greater comfort of thy
ancient acquaintaince. What know thou, but now the Lord has called thee to
consolation, whereas of late, thou might think, he had wrought thy
confusion:

By this we note, that the Lord deferreth to help till greatest necessity,
Genesis 22.10.11
even as he stayed the stroke of Abraham when he was at the very instant to
cut of little Isaks neck. So we read that when the king of Assiria had
invaded the kingdom of Ezechia, 2. Kin. 19 9.
won his cities* subdued his Country, conquered his people, and had not left
him two thousand horsemen, and being destitute of all help, then the Lord
raised up the king of Ethiop, who called the Assyrians from the siege of
Jerusalem. What shall I say of Lazarus raised from death? Of the deliverance
of Peter out of the hands of Herod, Ioh. 11.43
the day before he should have been martyred? Act. 12.7, 8.
Of the shipwreck wherein Paul was, and yet not one of them were lost. Act
27.44
And excellent is that of Christ, sleeping in the ship on a pillowe, Math. 8
25, 26
suffered his disciples to be so long tossed with the violence of the sea,
till they cried out, Lord save, we perish, and then he awaked, rebuked the
rage of the winds, and stilled the storms of the sea, and a peaceable calm
followed. This is that preservative against desperation, which must stay our
minds on the leisure of the Lord: we must not at the first look for our
desires, but as Abraham and Zacharia were old before they had any children: and
yet in the end the Lord promised and also performed, even so when we have
least hope, for obtaining of our desires, we most often receive them. For the
Lord desires our requests for the trial of our faith and patience, that like
as the wheat corn grows not, till it be dead, even so his works do not
answer our expectation, till they seem to us impossible: that as the most
precious pearls are farthest brought, 1. Cor. 15 36.
and longest in coming, when we have them we keep them more carefully: even
so his excellent mercies, being with difficulty obtained should be esteemed
more thankfully. Therefore be of good comfort, you that now sorrow, for you
shall be comforted, you that now hunger for you shall be satisfied, you that
now weep for you shall laugh; the Lord will shortly come, bear but a little
and he will wipe away all tears from your eyes, and then oh how happy shall
they be which have trusted in him.

That the Lord had visited. This is the last part of this scripture, being
the reason that moved her to return into her Country. O it is as if the holy
ghost had said. The Lord looked upon the afflicted estate of his people, and
supplied their want of food. Exo. 20.5 and 32.34
To visit, in the scriptures is taken two ways, first to punish, as when God
says in the second commandment, that he will visit the sin of the fathers
upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation: secondly it
signifies some times to pardon or to show mercy, as that of Zachary. Luke 2.68
The Lord has visited and redeemed his people, that is, Hos. 4.9
he has showed mercy in redeming his people. In this later sense it must be
taken in this place. Math. 25
Now the word properly signifies to go to see, and is referred to them that
are sick, which by a metaphor is applied to sin, for sin is the sickness of
the soul, and is very fitly applied to punishments sent of God, for when he
scourges he comes to see, as he said of Sodom: I will go down and see
whither it be altogether so, if not, that I may know; for he comes to see us
in our miseryes, as a physician to his patient, whom he has first or before
made sick with his potion or corasiue, and brings a wholesome or speedy
remedy with him. Where we note the miserable estate of men in the sickness of
sin, or under any of God his judgments, as dearth and famine, war or
pestelence; that even as sick persons are not able to help or comfort
themselves, or to take any pleasure in their wealth, though they possessed the
whole world: so if we be oppressed in the punishment of our iniquities, we can
not or may not rest in our selves but in the Lord our physician and watchman,
for if the Lord shut who can open, if he wound who can heal, if he curse who
can bless, he that has the bond or writing must discharge the debt, and the
Lord that stroke must bind us up again. Oh my dearly beloved brethren, now are
the childern come to the birth, and there is no strength to be delivered, for
this is the day of tribulation. Now are we in the ballaunce of the Lord either
to visit our offenses with his famine, Esa. 37.3
or to scourge our sins with the rod of dearth if either of both continue,
what end can we look for but the pining of our bodies, and the consuming of
our souls? Whither shall we go to escape the judgments of the Lord, we are
already clogged with his irons and fast bolted, if we strive to shake them of,
what do we else but rebel against the power of the highest? if they continue,
we are but miserable prisoners and can look for nothing but the fearful day
of execution. Let us turn to the Judge before that day, and send up our
prayers as our dearest friends unto his son, that he may visit us with the
forgiveness of our sins, that he may sue out our pardon, and be entreated
for our transgressions, that we may obtain the release of our present
misery, the removing of his judgments, the increase of the fruits of the
earth, that he would visit us, in giving our daily bread, to satisfy the
poor with his goodness, and give us all the bread of this life to banish our
dearth, and the bread of life to escape damnation. And thus much for this time.
Now let us give praise to God.

The end of the first Lecture.
The second Lecture.
Chapter 1. Verse 7. to the 15. 7. Wherefore she departed out of the place
where she was, and her two daughters in law with her, and they went on their
way, to return unto the land of Judah.

8. Then Naomi said unto her two daughters in law, Go, return each of you
unto her own mothers house: the Lord show favor unto you as you have done
with the dead, and with me.

9 The Lord grant that either of you may find rest in the house of her
husband: and when she had kissed them, they 'lift up their voice ad wept.

10 And they said unto her, surely we will return with thee unto thy people.

11 But Naomi said: turn again my daughters, for what cause will you go with
me? are there any more sons in my womb that they may be your husbands.

12 Turn again my daughters: go your way; for I am too old to have an husband:
if I should say I had hope, and if I had an husband this night, yea if I had
borne sons.

13 Would ye tarry for them, till they were of age? would you be deferred for
them from taking any husbands? nay my daughters, for it grieueth me much for
your sakes, that the hand of the Lord is gone out against me.

14 Then they lift up their voice and wept again, and Orpah kissed her mother
in law and departed, but Ruth abode with her still:


IN these words is expressed how Naomi departs out of Moab, to go into the
land of Iewrie. The words divide themselves into two parts: the first is the
journey, in this seventh verse* The second part, is the communication, in the
next seven verses. The journey is described by the persons, which were Naomi
and her two daughters in law.

The communication which they had by the way principally consists in the
persuasion of Naomi to her daughters, that they should return back again:
and first she speaks in the eight and ninth verses. Her speech contains
two parts, the first is the counsel she gives to them, in these words, Go
return. The second is her prayer for them, which is double, or consisting of
two parts. The first is general, in these words, The Lord show favor, to
the end of that verse. The second is special in the ninth verse, in these
words, The Lord grant you that you may find rest, etc. Which being spoken,
they lift up their voice and wept, being sorrowful for this news, and
therefore they answer in the tenth verse that they will return with her to
her people: In the next verse to the fourteenth, Naomi confirms her former
counsel by weighty arguments, which are expressed in her questions, and they
all are taken from their second marriages.

The first is in the eleauenth verse: that she had no mo sons, to be their
husbands, either already borne; or which hereafter might be borne, therefore
their labor would be but lost if they went with her; seeing she could provide
them no mo husbands. This is amplified in the eleventh and twelfth verse.

The second reason is in the thirteenth verse, that although she had now
children borne, yet it would be to long to stay for them till they were of
age: much more she having none borne: and least her daughters should think she
cared not for them, she adds in the thirteenth verse, that it grieved her
more for their sakes, that is, the love she bears to them, then for her own,
but it is the hand of God, and therefore she is contented. Lastly in the 14.
verse is declared the effect of this communication, what it wrought, for Orpah
departed as a woman overcome by these worldly persuasions, but Ruth abides
still with her. Of these let us briefly speak in order as they lie, by the
premission and assistaunce of the almighty.

And she arose. This journey of Naomi to her own people, as in the former
verse we heard was undertaken, when she heard, that the Jews were delivered
from their famine; so it is more commendable if we consider the objections,
lets and hindrances, that may be made against it. First the way was very long
between Moab and Bethlehem, which might terrify an old woman: but if any say
that it was no longer to return then it was to come down, I answer, when she
came thither she had her husband and children to bear her company, but now
she was to return alone and therefore the journey would be the more tedious.
Secondly, the consideration of her age might have hindered this travail, for
her withered body would be wearyed in the journey; and what knew she but that
she might die in the journey and that among strangers, who peradventure would
have no regard of her age, honor or honesty: again, no doubt, but she had
some wealth in Moab, which of nycessity she must be constrained to leave
behind her, and for ever to loose, with many other such greiuous thoughts
which might accomber her troubled breast. But notwithstanding all these she
proceeds on her intended journey, comitting her self to the preservation of
God in all places, who she knew would give her some comforts for the adversity
she had endured:

Where first of all we note the duty of all the godly, if with Naomi they are
far from the company of the faithful, or compelled to depart from them upon
the like occasion, as famine, poverty, persecution and such like, that when
occasion shall be given, they return with Naomi to the temple, to the people,
to the arc, to the gospel of the Lord. For as God said to Eliah, when he was
in mount Horeb, What do thou here Eliah? 1. Kin. 19.9.
even so he speaks to all persecuted pilgrims, and poor true Christians
which are at the gates and tables of carnal atheists, the enemies of Christ,
What do you here? there is corn and bread, in Israel again, the Church,
your brethren, have now received maintenance: Ioh. 2.22.
return to the place of sacrifice: they that worship must worship God at
Jerusalem: the mountains of Samaria are no place of God his worship, but at
Shilo is his tabernacle and his dwelling in Sion. This we may read practiced
of the ancient fathers long ago. When Moses had dwelt forty years in Madian,
then the Lord bid him return to his poor brethren again. David being in
great security with the king of Gath, Exo: 2.11.
yet the Lord would not suffer him there to dwell. 1. Sam. 27 9.
And as the Israelits might not dwell with the Egiptians, but must go into the
land of Canaan, so the Lords people must abide but where he appoints the^. 1,
king. 8,
And as the Shunamite woman, after the seven years famine returns to her
wonted dwelling, even so must not we linger with recusant papists, atheists,
swearers, blasphemers and open despisers of God his ministers and ministry.

Secondly we may note in this verse a godly example of holy obedience and
commendable friendship, for here the daughters in law are going with their
mother to the land of Iewry. Where, either for religion or love which they
bear to their mother in law they forsake both Country and friends to go with
her. Was it not sufficient for them to take strangers for their husbands; who
being dead, and they at liberty, but they must go from their own kindred, with
a mother in law: was it not well for them to abide with her so long as she
would abide with them, and was able to maintain them, but now when she had
forsaken her dwelling and wealth, must they accompany her in her poverty.
Surely it seems, that as Paul says to the Corinthians, he sought not theirs
but them, so these women desire rather the presence then the wealth of Naomi, O
excellent obedience and godly friendship, worthy to be registered with eternal
memory. They had not past ten years space to learn this point of religion
that it is true friendship to love at all times, Poro. 17.17.
whether it be in wealth or prosperity, in want or adversity. We have many old
professors in Christianity, which have not profited thus much in twenty,
thirty, or forty years profession. They say to their neighbors as Iorams
messenger said to Iehu, Is it peace? so they ask, 1. king. 19.17.
is it wealth? is it riches? is it honor? or is it favor of prince or
Gentleman that dwells near them. As if they should say, if thou be welthy,
thou shall have my friendship, but if thou be poor, then as Nabal answered
David's messenger, what is David? and what is the son of Ishai? so, what art
thou? I care not for thy company, get thee from my presence, I can abide on
such beggars. Is this the fruit of religion, condemned of the heathens,
abhorred of the brute beasts, hated of the wicked, and yet practiced of or
among Chirstians, surely I had rather be a friendly Moabite then a thousand
such carnal Isralits: Yea, the very civil honest men among us will rise in
judgment against us in this point, they will live without hypocrisy, we
dissemble in all vain glory, our friendship is like the company of the
dolphin, if it be fair weather she will never be from the ship, but if a
storm come, she withdraws her fellowship. Away with this most beastlike,
yea rather unnatural smiling upon prosperitye, but grim and strange
countenances upon the afflicted, either love at all times, Poro. 17.17.
which is Salomons friendship, or love at no time, which is Satan's amity.

Then said Naomi. The counsel that this godly Naomi gives unto her daughters,
is simply that they should reurne to their own parents, as if she should say
unto them, Be advised my daughters, some will think you very unnatural, that
you forsake your own mothers, to go with me your mother in law, and forsake
your own country to go unto a strange place: the journey is long and tedious,
you are tender and weak, better return before we be far gone: to be wise too
late, is to repent too sone, care not for me, the Lord will enable me to go as
well alone as with your company. Where we first of all note, a most godly
example of mother-like love and godly charity, for if Naomi had gone alone, it
could not choose but be far more dangerous then with company, and none could
receive any disaduauntage by her counsel beside her self, yet we see she
cares not for her own commodity so she might procure the welfare of her
daughters. She might have friendlye accepted their own proffers, and if any
danger had come, she might have said, she did not entreat them, it was their
own up seeking, yet she deals more plainly with them in telling them the
danger, and as before they desired more her company then her wealth, even so
now she loves their company well, but cou^selleth their safty better. This is
the duty of all that fear God, as the apostle says. Let every man seek
another and not their own good; this was so dear unto the Lord himself, that
he commanded by Moses, 1. Cor. 10.24.
that if their neighbors cattle went astray, they should bring them home
again. Does the Lord take care for oxen, and not much more for men? But oh
where is the careful keeping of this commandment; now every man says,
every one for himself and God for us all: but rather, Deuteronomy. 22.7.
how shall the Lord be for us, when we are not for one another? Now this wicked
world is full of deceitful bargains, now men's houses and lands are bought
over the heads of their young and vnthristie sons: now men's farms and leases
are forestalled by other, that they them selves cannot enjoy them: such buying,
and selling, cosoning and deceiving, borrowing and lending upon usury, taking
of fines, raising of rents, undoing of the poor, and thrusting the weakest to
the wall, as if charity were forgotten, and the precept of the Lord had never
been written, and finally as though all were our own which we can get in our
handling, many give counsel like lawyers for their fees, but few like Naomi,
for their conscience. They lick their own fingers, as the proverb goes, but
few will cast any salt on their neighbors meat, if they can get advantages of
their neighbors upon statuts they sue the extremity, Genesis 73.9
as if they were infidells. They will not say as Abraham to Lot; If thou take
the right hand, I will take the lefe: that is, my brother my neighbor take thou
the choice, I wish not thy wrong, ask counsel, and let there be no occasion of
strife between us: men will hardly give either coat or cloak in these days,
by suffering injury, they will rather take both, and although they think it
better to give alms then to take, yet they had rather take bribes and rewards
them to give. Oh my beloved, let us at the length be ruled by the counsel of
the Lord, Phil. 2.3. Le. 19.14
and esteem better of others then of our selves, help as many as we can, but
hinder none. Cursed are they that lay stumbling blocks before the blind, and
give evil counsel for their own advantage.

Secondly, by these words we may gather to whom widows belong, their husbands
being dead, namely, to their own mothers house: that is, to their parents: if
the parents of their husbands will not provide for them. Therefore is it that
the Lord commanded, Le. 22.13.
if the daughter of a priest were a widdowe, and returned to her fathers house,
having no children, she might eat of the peace offerings of the children of
Israel. 1. Tim. 5.16.
And Paul gives charge to the godly in his time, that if any of their kindred
were a widow, of their own costs they should provide for her, and not charge
the church. This is a profitable doctrine both for parents and children: for
parents that they be careful to bestow their children in godly marriages,
where they may be well provided for, neither must they then cast them of, but
if need be receive them to their own families again: for children, seeing
the Lord does thus commend their welfare, and cares for their widow head, as
well as their virginity, that they cast not themselves away upon every one they
can love, without the consent of their parents, whereby they impouerish their
friends, undo themselves, and bring a woeful curse upon their innocent
posterity. Thirdly and lastly, by this counsel of Naomi we gather, that if the
father be dead, we ow the same duty to our mother which is alive, for she
says, to her own mothers house. And Solomon says, it is foolishness or
wickedness to despise ones mother. The Lord curses him in the Law, that
despises or curses his mother as well as his father. Pro. 15.20
In the fifth commandment he commands to honor the mother equally, Deuteronomy.
27.16.
or as well as the father. Many think they may be more bold with their
mothers, because they are more tender over them, than with their fathers, but
the godly must know, that upon pain of Gods heavy curse, they must follovv
the counsel of their mothers with Jacob, Genesis 17.13
as well as the advice of their fathers with Esau. And the Lord does often
cloth the weaker vessel with more honor, that thereby we might learn to
continue our obedience to our parents.

The Lord show. In these words the general blessing or prayer is contained,
which Naomi makes for her two daughters, where she prays to God for his
favor upon the^ as they showed favor to her, and to their dead husbands, as if
she should say, I wish no more acceptable blessing upon you, than you have
done to others.

Where we briefly note, that our duties which we discharge to parents or
husbands, are as pledges before the Lord to do good unto us. This makes him
delight to pour his blessings upon us, when he sees we dutifully walk in
his presence, and it provoke those to whom we offer this obedience, to
pour out their prayers for us into the ears of the almighty: Even so the
neglect of our duties, the contempt of our parents, and the disobedience to our
superiors, procures both the curse of God and them, not only in this life,
but also in the life to come.

The Lord. These words are her special prayer for her daughters marryage, and
are thus in effect, I can pray for no greater worldly blessing upon you than
this, that either of you being young women, may find quiet and loving
husbands, and be made joyful mothers of many children.

Where we first of all note, that as parents are bound by the law of nature
to provide marryages for their children, so they are willed by the law of God,
to pray for their prosperous estate, both before and also after they be
married. And truly this never sinketh into the heads of carnal parents, who
are able to do more with their purses than with their prayers, who wish
extremities to their children, minding only a wealthy, and not a quiet life.
Oh how are we beholding to such ignorant parents, which only take care for us
that we might be lifted higher, when they provide not for us against the
stormy tempests of vnquite lives, and the dangerous downfals of worldly
confusion? Let them never think that their wishes are prayers, when they say,
I would God my son were married to such a man's daughter, or my daughter to such
a man's son. This is all they aim at, simple and bare wealthy marriages,
never minding or praying for God his blessing upon them.

Secondly, by this prayer of Naomi, we note the duty of all husbands toward
their wives, which is, that they should prepare rest for them: their minds
being troubled, they should pacify them with counsel: their bodies diseased,
they should comfort them with their love: their estate endangered, they should
deliver them with carfulness, and finally, they should love their wives as
their own souls.

The Prophet David compares a wife to a vine, Psa. 128.3.
which if it be not propped up with a stay by the hand of the gardener, what
will it do but wallow on the ground and remain fruitless? Even so the best
wives if they be not carefully maintained by the kindness of their husbands,
their sorrowful lives will increase their curse, yea, and destroy the fruit
of their own bodies.

The Apostle wishes husbands to love their wives, as Christ loved his Church,
Ephesians. 5.25.
which is not only mindful to deliver it out of present dangers, but also has
redeemed it from the curse of eternal damnation: so the husbands duties are to
provide for the temporal welfare of their wives bodies, and specially for the
everlasting salvation of their souls: that they twain which in this life,
have had corporal society, in the life to come might enjoy eternal felicity.
Now this condemmeth the carnal behavior of wretched husbands, who use their
wives as their servants and not as themselves, who deal with them as men do
with nuts, first they reach and travail for them, and having gotten them, they
take out the kernel but they tread the shell under their feet: so they having
gotten the wealth, the beauty, the health and young years of their wives,
despise their gray hairs, which are their greatest credit, as the shells
wherein the kernel was, giving the^ over in their weakest days, wherein they
want greatest comfort. Is this the rest you provide for your wives, to cause
them to wear their bodies with weary travails, to consume their minds with
daily grief, to procure their pains by bearing of children, and to lay the
greatest burdens upon the smallest beasts, for so some most wretchedly term
them. Oh look unto it, this measure will the Lord measure to you again, ye
unnatural husbands which follow your pleasures, and pastimes abroad, and
neglect your profits and sorrowful wives at home. To fly over the seas with
unnecessary iourneyes, to frequent the company of suspected women, to follow
the counsel of vain persons, spending their patrimonies, and bringing
themselves, their wives, and posterity to woeful misery. Is this to dwell with
your wives like men of knowledge? Is this to give honor unto the^ as the weaker
vessels? 1. Pet. 3.7
Is this to account them the heirs of the same grace? and finally, is this to
see their prayers be not interrupted? Nay rather, there are many thousand
husbands which never either could or would pray with their wives, that think
neither upon heaven nor hell, and have no knowledge of their duties toward God
or their neighbors, (much less to their wives) than brute beasts, carnal
infidels, profane atheists, the murderers of themselves and of their own
posterity. Oh fearful danger that hangs over your heads who^ neither the
laws of God can compel to learn their duties, or men instruct them to amend
their lives. But you my beloved, who are guiltles in this point are the blessed
of the Lord, and forsake not your carefulnes already begu^, that you loose not
your reward. Thirdly, by this prayer we observe the duties of wives or women in
families, namely, that they should be peaceable themselves, for if they seek
peace they must ensue peace, and if their joy consist in the quietness of the
family, they must be careful they break not the unity. If like Ismael, their
hands be against all, the hands of all will be against them, if they will be
the loving turtles, they must not be the chattering pies, if they be the
vines, their fruit must be grapes, and out of grapes comes wine, and wine
reioiceth the heart of man, so women must rejoice their husbands and families.
Some women will never be at rest til they bear rule, and will say their husbands
love them not, except for their sakes they will displace their servants, fall
out with their neighbors, envy their friends, and in all things follow their
minds: such men give not peace, to their wives, but swoords to slay themselves
with all. The harkening over much to women's counsel, old Adam and we his
posterity may for ever lament, yet godly men may hear their godly wives,
remembering always themselves to be the head and the choice to rest in them
either to like or dislike their counsel. And they answered. This is the
answer of these women to the counsel and blessing of their mother in law,
wherein they refuse to return, and promise to go with her to her own people, as
if they should say, we are rather bound unto thee, the^ to our own mothers,
and for thy sake whose godly conversation we know, are we drawn in love with
the whole people: so that in these words they testify their loving affection
to their mother, their desire to be with her among her people, and the cause
undoubtedly to be her godly and wise conversation with the^ in the land of Moab.
Where we note the duty of all the faithful, which is, so to walk that other by
their good example may be drawn to love the truth. For surely these women
liked well of the religion of Naomi, but much better of her conversation, as a
thing they better understood then the other. For this point, the* Apostle
warns that we walk in wisdom because of them that are without. Col. 4.5.
1. Pe. 1.12
And Peter says to the dispersed Jews of his time, that they must have a good
conversation among the gentiles, insomuch as their enemies might have no
occasion to speak against them. And our savior says, Let your light so shine
before men that they may see your good works, Luke 8.16
and glorify your father which is in heaven. For as the unbelieving husband
may be won by the godly behavior of the believing wife; so many infidells
and carnal persons, are sooner drawn to the Lord by the works which they see,
then by the words which they hear. Seeing, this is plain by the word of god,
where shall I begin to complain of this our unhappy age, wherein are but few
talkers of God his word, but much fewer walkers, when the Gospel of Christ is
made the cloak of wickedness? Oh how grievously is the Church of God rent in
sunder by daily disquietnes, insomuch as there is no peace among us. Can the
infidells and papists say of us, as old Emor said of Jacob and his family,
These men are me^ of peace, therefore let us be circumcised with them? What
peace is there left in the Church of God? Truly we are like unto a tree, Ge.
34.21
we agree all in the body of religion, but as the branches spread themselves an
hundred ways, so in our indifferentest points of religion there is little or
no unity. There is no care had of giving offenses unto the weak, there is no
conscience to stay the slander of the Gospel, Oh how grievous is it, that
many now a days will defend their dissimulation, by saying, Take heed to our
words, and not to our deeds: live as we say, and not as we do, making
Christianity like the profession of pharisees, which say and do not.
Esteeming of religion like the occupation of a Smith, Math. 23
wherein one is discharged by blowing, and another by beating: so these think,
if they can blow out any good words, and be able to cry, the Gospel, the
Gospel, the preachers, the preachers, and to say unto Christ, Luke 13 26, 27
Thou have prophesied in our streets, and we have eaten in thy presence, they
are right good christians. But the Lord shall say unto them, Depart from me ye
workers of iniquity, I know you not. Yet let us be warned by the examples of
the godly, the exhortations of the Scripture, 1. Cor. 1 30.
and the motions of God his spirit in our hearts, that seeing Christ is our
wisdom, let us walk in wisdom, or else we dwell not in Christ: seeing
Christ is our light, let us shine forth in holy conversation, and seeing the
world is our enemy, which daily lies in wait to discredit our profession, let
us adorn the Gospel we profess, Ioh. 13.36
either make the tree good, and the fruit good, or the tree evil and the
fruit evil, cast away this counterfeit holiness, which is double iniquity,
let us confess with the mouth unto salvation, believe in the heart to
justification, and practice in life unto sanctification, and let every one
that calls on the name of the Lord, depart from iniquity. Thus much for
the Daughters answer, Now to the mothers reply in the next verse.

But Naomi. In this verse and in the two next following, Naomi confirms her
counsel by forcible reasons, taken from their second marryages, and studying
more for their good than her own. The first reason is, that she has no mo
sons either borne or unborn, to be their husbands: for by the law one
brother being dead without issue, the next was to marry his wife, and to raise
up seed to his brother. They knew she had no mo children already borne, and
she proves that she is out of hope to have any mo, by her own age, she is
too old to marry and therefore to bear children, so that the force of this
reason is to persuade them to go back again, that they might marry at home,
for she knew not how to bestow them in her own Country. In the which words
thus taking a reason from their marriage, she notes the duetye of younger
widows and women, which is to marry and to bear mo children, and in her
self persuading them unto it, she notes the duty of godly parents, which
is to deal privately with them for their public commodity. For the apostle
Paul wills the self same thing, that the younger widows marry and bring
forth mo children, as the most acceptable condition for their fruitful days,
1. Tim. 5 14.
and a necessary duty for replenishing the Church. But these persons must not
so marry for wantonness, as if they minded nothing but procreation of children,
but they must join with it all Christian obedience to the advice of their
husbands: secondly they must be careful to bring up their children in the
fear and nurture of the Lord: thirdly, this must be the end of their marriage
and childbirth, that they may the more devoutly give themselves to the worship
of God, and by their children to increase the number of the faithful. For it
is better to be barren then to bring forth children to the devil, which they
do that mind nothing less then their careful education, and Christian
instruction; yea, it is more excellent to be a religous widow then a profane
married wife. But some will say that second marriages are not lawful at all,
because Paul wills that such widows should not be chosen into the number of
church servants: 1. Tim. 5.9.
and the holy ghost gives such commendation of Anna because she never
married, Luke 2.36
though she were left a widow very young: moreover, the counsel of Paul is
that if they be losed from husbands or wives, 1. Cor. 7 27
they should not seek to beioyned unto them. Unto all which I answer with the
same Paul, That a woman so soon as she is loosed from her husband, or so
soon as her husband is dead, Romans 7.2.
she is at liberty to marry with whom she will, only in the Lord. Anna is
commended more for her religion them her chastity, And Paul his counsel is to
them that could forbear in those days of persecution. But to come to Naomi,
she says she is to old to marry, therefore it seems, though second
marriages be good for young women, yet they are not lawful for the old. To
this I answer, her meaning is not that it is simply unlawful for her to
marry, but that it should not profit her in regard of child bearing: men desire
young and fruitful women, not old and barren, and her purpose is to persuade
her daughters, that she neither had, nor could have any more children for
them, therefore in the next verse she adds, If I hoped, or If I were this
night with an husband: But in my judgment, Non certu^
I see no reasonable cause why old women (especially) should marry, how soever
others may be contrary minded, my reasons are these: First, I read it not
practiced by any body in the scripture, I mean such old women as in their own
consciences are persuaded they are past child bearing. Secondly, they break
the greatest consideration in marriage: they undertake it for lust and not for
children, for marriage was not ordained for the lust of the mind, but the
necessity of the body, to withdraw it from sin, Now their withered bodies
cannot accomplish the desire of their carnal minds. Thirdly, it brings
great inconvenience with it: if they marry with a young man there is no
equality, as anon shall be proved, if with old men like themselves, what
comfort can they minister unto them. Lastly, such marriages are more for wealth
then woman or necessity. Yet this is but my poor judgment, if any doubt of
it let them examine my reasons, if they be weighty, let them receive them, if
light, amend them. If any say they marry for comfort, as they can say nothing
else, I demand why poor women have not this comfort as well as the rich, I see
seldom any poor widows married, but the wealthy so soon as either honesty or
modesty will suffer them: Again, comfort is no sufficient cause for marriage,
because it may be had without marriage, but children cannot. It is the duty
of married folks with their mutual love to comfort one another, but not a
cause that ought to constrain to marriage. The Eunuch wants comfort, yet who
thinks such a person fit for marriage: a continent person, which as Christ
says has made himself chaste for the kingdom of God, wants comfort, yet he
should sin greiuously if he married for comfort: let lawful things be joined
with expedient, and I think old women will never marry.

Yea if I had This is the second reason wherewith she persuadeth her daughters
to turn back again, namely, grant she had sons newborn, yet it were too
long for them to tarry till they were grown up and fit for marriage, yea, then
they would be past children, also they should lose the season of their youth,
and so should reap no harvest of their days: there would be no agreement in
years between them, when they should be as a withered stubbe, and the young
men as green olives. Where we note, that by the judgment of this godly Naomi,
there must be an agreement in years between the parties that shall be
married, for she says, would ve be deferred for them, from taking any
husbands? nay my daughters: by the which words she signifies that it would
be no fit marriage that one should be so old and the other so young. The Lord
created Adam and Heuah in one day, not only that marriage should not be
deferred too long, but also because their age should be alike, but if any be
the elder, let it be the man. In the planting or gardens, they get the
youngest impes, for the continuance and equality of the fruiete: they will not
dig up an old tree, and plant him in a orchard of tender impes, even so must
it be in marriage, for the matrimony of old men and young women, is like
Iosephes party colored coat, which caused jealousy in his brethren: for,
as, that was a sign of love in his father, so this is a token of fondnes in a
husband. But most unseemly is the marriage of young men and old women, which a
godly preacher in our days compared to the grafting of a young head upon an
old pair of shoulders: and I may compare it to the mixture of oil and
water, the which are quite against the nature of all medecines. And even the
brute beasts and the birds, as we read of the turtles, the hearts, and the
Elephants, condemn herein the folly of mankind, which from their youth choose
their mate, and being dead refuse another, fearing inequality of age and
nature. Both these kind of matches are neither begun in the Lord, continued in
nature, or satisfy the desire of both parties, but break out into impatient
jealousy or filthy adultery, thinking every day a year till the eldest
party be dead. Oh unseemly and unfriendly behavior toward those to whom
they have bound themselves to love and live together, being the only cause of
the breach of fidelity, cursed discord mutual envy, and everlasting misery.

Secondly by this we note, that it is the duty of parents in time to provide
for their children, if they be willing to it, Genesis 24.1.
some godly and fit marryage. So did Abraham for Isaac his son, so did Isaac
and Rebecca for Jacob their son, Exo. 2.21.
so did Iethro for his daughter Zipporah. The neglect of this duty in parents,
is the cause that so many children match contrary to their minds, even to
their own undoing. And then they cry out town and country, My son or my
daughter has married against my mind, when as themselves are in the only
fault: then they punish them by keeping away their portion: so, as before by
their negligence they sought their dishonestie, now by their wilfulness they
bring them to perpetual beggerie. I defend not the rash and headlong marryages
against parents consents, especially where godly parents are, and surely I
fear there are but few in England that ever married so, but they procured the
curse on themselves, and have often (though too late) repented their wilful
and ungodly marryage. But yet beloved; be warned, if you desire the discharge
of your own consciences, or the safeguard of your children, deal like parents
with them, and they will perform like children to you: the Lord punishes
your negligence with their disobedience: you sinned first, and they followed
your steps, forgive them their offense, and receive them to favor again, and
the Lord will likewise pardon your transgression, and bless your posterity
with more dutiful obedience to you.

But this, Now when she had persuaded her daughters to return, least they
should think she cares not for them, and was willing to be rid of their
company, as those that were troublesome and burdenous unto her, she adds
this clause in the end of this verse. Wherein she testifies her care for them,
and her patience to the Lord. Her care for them when she says, It grieueth me
much more for your sake than for mine own: the death of my husband and loss
of my children grieve me, but not so much as this, that now either I must
depart from you, or else with your company endanger your safety, I could
not but sorrow for the dead, yet I am more grieved for you poor destitute
widows: I have lost their company for a while, til I meet them again in God
his kingdom, but now we depart, I to the Lords people, and you to Infidels,
and we shall be separated for ever. Would God that I could so promise you
prosperity with me, that so you might receive the peace of your souls. Thus
and such like she utters in these words for her own excuse and their
comfort.

Where we are first given to understand, how hardly true friendship is
separated, yea though some parties are endangered thereby. Naomi would have her
daughters depart, they weep at it and she is sorrow full: insomuch as either
party strives who shall receive the worst. The mother counsels their good,
and the daughters promise hers: she would have them return, and live at rest
in the arms of some loving husbands, but they had rather travel than she
should go alone, And this tells us that true friendship is not to receive
good of other, but to do good unto other. Choose thy friend, that when he is
in heaviness thou may comfort him, when he is hungry thou may feed him,
when he is cast down, thou may raise him up: and finally, when he wants
make thou a supply. This is godly friendship, like Ionathans and David's. If
any choose friends for other respects, their friendship is carnal, and not
spiritual, momentanie, and not everlasting, like the standing pooles which
dry up in summer, not like the running streams which endure continually.

Secondly, by this we note that one misery comes not alone, for wars cause
death, dearth, envy, and robberyes, sickness brings pain to the parties, and
sorrow to their friends: even so death does not only bring sorrow for the
dead, but grief for the living, as Naomi says, it greiueth me much more for
your sakes. There is none that die but some shall want them, many friends
comfortles, many chrldren harbourles, many servants maisterles, and many
creditouers moneylesse by the death of men, I will say nothing, that the godly
may and ought to mourn for their friends that are dead, as Abraham for Sara,
1. The. 4 13.
Jacob for Rahel, the Iebusites for Saul, Mary and Martha for Lazarus: and the
Apostle wills us to mourn, but with this clause, not as men without hope.
Therefore the use of this doctrine is, with pacient and brotherly love to bear
with the weakness of the^ which seem in our conceits to weep more for their
husbands and wives, children and friends, than we think needful. It is their
weakness, and what know we, if the like burden were on our backs that we
should not be pressed down under it like them? Let us therefore consider with
our selves least we also be tempted, and help them with brotherly kindness,
not increse it with daily murmurings: that which is to day their sin, to
morrow may be our wickedness.

But the hand. In those words she gathers patience for the remedy of her own
grief, and shows howsoever she is afflicted, yet she is not ignorant, that
as the showers come from the clouds, so her afflictions from the Lord: his
hand that wrought her felicity, has also brought her to misery, her ease is
her patience, her weakness is her sorrow, her comfort, that God with whom is
mercy has wounded her heart.

The hand of the Lord is taken in the scriptures many ways, but generally it
signifies the means whereby he accomplisheth his counsel, and is referred
either to his mercy and favor; as when it is said, the hand of the Lord was
with John Baptist, Luke 1.66
or else to his judgments, punishment or chastisement, so the hand of the Lord
was against the Israelites when they had forsaken him and served Baalim. Iud.
2, 15
So when the Ark of God was in the house of Dagon the god or idol of the
Philistines, the Lord ouerthrewe their god, cut of his hands and head, and
smote the Priests with Emerods, then they confessed the hand of God to be sore
against them: 1. Sam. 5.7.
so in this place it is taken for his chastisement or correction upon Naomi.
Out of the which we note many profitable doctrines.

First, that all our afflictions come from the Lord, that he might chastise his
own and confound the ungodly. Read but the 34. and 36 Chapter of Job; most
excellently entreating of this matter, wherein is showed that neither the godly
escape, nor the wicked go scot-free. This is the confession of Moses, to
terrify the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 31 18
of Iosuah to keep them in obedience, and of David a man more exercised in
trouble then all the world beside. Ios. 24, 20
This must we account with ourselves in all our miseries, Psalm. 1 19 71
we are robbed by thieves, spoiled by murderers, stroke by brute beasts,
reproched by slaunderers, evil entreated by the world, hurt by our enemies,
sustain the loss of our goods, the danger of our health, and are oppressed
with sickness: surely in all these things say; The Lord gave, and the Lord
has taken away, even as it has pleased the Lord, so comes things to
pass. But men will say, we know it well enough already, and we confess it.
And do you know and confess, and will you not practice? A man being sick,
at the beginning never thinks on the Lord, but posteth to the Physician for
counsel, without craving the forgiveness of his sins, the cause of his
sickness: yet you say, God has sent it and laid upon us, as if the Lord
sends sickness to help the Physician to money; for with him you agree for
his pains and cunnning, but with the Lord you agree not for your own pains
which you endure. But you will say, we find ease by medicines, and our
sickness is a bated; I answer, so the Lord suffers witches and coniurers,
to tell them that come unto the^, the things they desire, yet you will not say,
they are guiltless. I speak nothing against the excellent and commendable
profession of Physic, but rather for the commendation of it, seeing God so
accepts it, as that thereby he seems to salve up the sins of many, doing
away their pains, and also to give them longer time of repentance. But this I
wish both in this and in all other miseries of mankind: that first we purge
our consciences from notorious crimes, and then the Lord will stay his hand
from striking our hearts from wavering, our goods from wasting, our bodies
from pining, and our souls from everlasting dying.

Secondly, by this we note, whence it comes, that the godly are so patient in
all their tribulations; even from this consideration, that the Lords hand
afflicts them. This is worthy to be noted, in the example of David, when
Shemei cursed him, 2. Sam. 16.10.11.12.13.
Abishai standing by, wishes David to punish him: but David answers him,
what have I to do with you ye sons of Zeruiah, he curses, because the
Lord has bidden him to curse me: as if he had said, I may punish the Lord as
well as Shemei. The very like did Job answer his wife, when she would have him
curse God and dye. Thou speak like a foolish woman, Job. 2.10.
what? shall we receive good at the hands of God and not evil: as if he had
said, we are bound to receive evil at the hand of God, as well as good: and
if we receive the one with blessing, let us not curse him for the other. This
was it that made the Apostles to rejoice that they were accounted worthy to
suffer for the name of Christ: and this must sincke into our ignorant and
rebellious hearts, Act. 4.3.
that we may learn at the first to humble our selves, least as we now suffer
for sin, so anon we be punished for impatiencie. The patient abiding of the
righteous, avails much in the sight of the Lord: men think they be
forgotten, if they be a little afflicted, and cry out like desperate persons,
Lord, Lord, but they never pray for patience, but all for deliverance. Oh how
excellent is this example of Naomi, which being in many miseries in a strange
country, having buried husbands and sons, being now to depart from her
acquaintance, to take a tedious journey into her own country, poor, weary
and desolate, yet all her words are these: The hand of the Lord is gone out
against me: as if she had said, he that gave them took them, and he that
took them, left me patience. Thus must we stay our minds on the work of the
Lord, as the Arc was stayed by the Priests in the midst of the river
Jordan, which made the waters to fly back, Ios. 3.16.17.
till all the children of Israel were passed through: even so the the floudes of
great troubles shall not overthrow us, if we stay our minds on the hand of the
Lord, and safely escape the dangerous destruction of worldly affliction.

Then they lift. Now comes the effect of this communication, wherein is
showed how sorrowfully these daughters took it, and yet diversely minded, for
Horpah notwithstanding her gentle proffers to her mother in law, her bitter
tears and pitiful lamenting, yet she takes her leave with a sweet kiss, and
returns back to her idolatrous friends. Naomi used no persuasions but worldly
reasons, taken from marriage, to persuade the^ both: she sees her sister
remain constant, and she that even now for the love of people and mother in
law would go as far as the farthest, now for the cogitation of a heathen
husband, forsakes both God, people, mother and sister. Who would have thought
that Horpah which bid her friends farewell, her country adieu, her kindred
forsake, and idolatry abhor, would thus cowardly (as I may term it) fly
back again in hope of a husband. But yet we see she does, and out of her
example we may note many things.

First, that the world and carnal reasons are fearful hindrances unto us in
Religion. We see this woman, how does she fall away from God, his people, all
the Church that she knew, her mother and sister? We know, how many being sent
for to the great Man's supper; which is the Lord, they excused their absence,
one for his farm, another for his oxen, another for his wife, Iam. 4.4.
as Horpah does for her husband: What shall I say? the love of the world is
the hatred of God: and John says, Ioh. 2.15.
Love not the world, nor the things of the world, for he that loves the
world, the love of the Father is not in him. And Christ says, Whosoever
comes to me and hates not father and mother, and wife and children, Luke
19.26.
is not worthy of me. Where are now our naturalles, that would be
professors, but their friends will not let them, they would be Christians, but
their wives will not agree to them, this year, they will be worldlings, and
the next year when they have overcome their business, if they have any
leisure they will hear the word preached; Oh dangerous delays of subtle
Satan, studying by the world, to draw men from God, they lie like
sluggardes; in winter it is too cold, in summer it is too hot to work, so
they in their youth, will be religious when they are old, being in age when
they be rich, being rich, they wax harder and harder, and so continue till
the day of their damnation.

Secondly, by this we may gather how far an hypocrite or an infidel may go
in Religion. Horpah forsakes her own people, for the love of God his people,
she weepeth and cries, when it is but mentioned unto her that she would
depart, she trauaileth on the way toward the country* of God his people;
and in this her journey, for a few worldly reasons, she turns back again,
though as it may seem with a bitter heart. Even so hypocrites may forsake the
world and their friends, join themselves to God and his people, travail and
profit in Religion toward the heavenly Jerusalem, be ready to weep with
them that weep, and lament with them that lament: and in any good action, set
his foot as far forth as the best: yet, some occasion given, either for
profit or pleasure; fear or danger, suddenly turns sail, and comes to
the world again. Mar. 4.17 18.
Even so says our Savior of the seed, that is sown in the 2. and 3.
ground, it takes root, it springs, Ioh. 6.66.
and grows up, but suddenly the heat of persecution arises, or offense
taken at the doctrine, which is taught them, or the cares of this life and
deceitfulness of riches choke them. By this we learn what to think of our
soft hearted Christians, many among us, that will diligently hear, and wring
out tears from their moistened brain, at the hearing of God his judgments
thundered and threatened by the Preacher: yet, being gone, will make no
conscience of oaths, carding, dicing, tabling, gaming for their neighbors
money, going abroad on the sabbath day to feasts, and being sharply reproved
for it, then farewell Religion and profession also.

Thirdely, by this we gather what exceeding kindness an heathen, an Atheist or
an infidel, may show to them that fear God: Horpah for the love of godly
Naomi, goes with her on the way, weepeth and kisseth at their departure, so
great love did she bear to her mother in law, that had it not been for one
thing, she had gone thorough with her to her own people; So we may see many
among us speak well of Religion, yet they will not go so far as Bethlehem
for it, that is, they will wish they had a preacher, yet they will hardly,
either on the Sabbath day or week day, stir one foot from their own
places, to hear a Sermon, so cold is their devotion: but if they give a poor
man a meal of meat, or lend him a little money at his need, or receive a
Preacher for a night, then he is the only man in the Country. But oh Lord,
open their eyes, that they may see their courtesy is but light, in regard of
their duty: if for their brethren they would die, it were but their duty,
how little is it then? that they give them meat. But they would know of us
what is the way to be saved; Mat. 19.22^
I answer, so would the young man in the Gospel, yet when Christ told him,
he would not do it, but went away sorrowing, even so these men may outwardly
and inwardly in some measure profess kindness and humility to be
instructed, but alas their profession is far from true feeling of Christian
religion.

Lastly, by this verse we note that as Horpah and her companions are carnally
minded, so Ruth and her fellows are spiritually minded, though one be
overthrown with worldly reasons, yet the other remains invincible in her
first pretended purpose. So that here is an image of a Congregation, where all
hear, and yet there is a difference of hearing in one and the same Company:
one part with profit, another with disprofite, one to their health, another
to their sickness, to some the savor of life unto life, to other, the savor
of death unto death. Yet blessed be God, that has no earth so barren, but it
brings forth some fruit, no people so rude, but there are some sanctified
persons among them, which will not be drawn away till death: no battle so
cruel, but some escape with life. If the Pharisees will not believe in Christ,
Act. 17.34.
yet the poor people that know not the law will receive him for the Messiah.
Among the mockers at Athens, Paul received some fruit of his labors, and the
Gospel was never preached in any country, but it gained some. This teaches
us to follow the example of Ruth and we shall have the reward of Ruth: stick
to the Lord, and to the faithful, with purpose of heart, let not the vain
glittering pleasure, of pleasant pastime or profit, draw us from the hope of
our everlasting blessedness. The time is but short we have to spend, the
labor easy if we willingly endure it, the profit everlasting if we continue
to the end. This is the victory that overcomes the world, 1. Ioh: 5.4
even our Faith: for to him that believes are all things possible: Let us
therefore hear the word with diligence, that our faith may be strengthened,
believe with assurance, that our souls may be justified, and stand fast in the
trial of this world, that body and soul may be crowned: for blessed are they
that endure to the end, And thus much of this conference or communication, and
the effect thereof. Now let us give thanks to God for that which has been
spoken.

The third Lecture.
Ruth. cap. 1. Verse. 15.16.17. 15. And Naomi said, behold, thy sister in law
is gone back to her people and to her gods, return thou after thy sister in
law.

16. And Ruth answered, entreat me not to leave thee, nor to depart from thee,
for whither thou go I will go, and where thou dwell I will dwell, thy
people shall be my people, and thy God my God.

17. Where thou dyest, will I dye, and there will I be buried, the Lord do so
unto me and more also, if ought but death depart thee and me.


IN these words the holy Ghost declares unto us, the conference had between
Naomi and Ruth; after the departure of Horpah, wherein Naomi cease not
thoroughly to try and examine the mind of Ruth, for what cause she would go
with her; the words contain in them 2. parts. The first is the persuasion of
Naomi in the 15. verse, to make Ruth to return by the example of her sister.
The second is the answer of Ruth, in the two next verses, consisting of two
parts: the first is the petition she makes to her mother, in these words,
Entreat me not to leave thee, etc.: which she amplifieth by the resolution of
her mind in the next words. First, that for her life she would dvvell with
her, and go with her, Secondly for her profession, her people and God should
be Naomies. Thirdly for her death, that she would die and be buried with her.
The last part of this aunsvvere of Ruth, is the confirmation of it by an oath,
in these words; the Lord do so unto me, and more also, if ought but death
depart thee and me.

Behold thy sister is returned; Now Naomi goes forward to deal with Ruth
alone, for the Castle may seem almost won, where one half of the soldiers
are overcome; the unity between these two sisters being broken, and Horpah
being departed, what was poor Ruth able to do alone, surely this was a
greater discouragement unto her then any she had yet, namely; that her sister
being departed, she should lay before her her sisters example to draw her
likewise to fall. And truly thus the Spirit of God deals most times, Mar*
10:13.
with those that labor to come unto him, setting some in the way like the
Disciples which forbadde young children to come unto Christ, and as the prease
of people, Mar. 3.4.5
kept the poor man diseased of the palsy from coming to our Savior: even so
many scandals, stumbling* blocks, lettes, interruptions and hindrances come
between the godly and Christ, as did between Naomi and Ruth.

But here we note, that the examples of our kindred, and especially of those
that seemed any thing in Religion, are dangerous arguments to draw us from
Christ. We see in this place Naomi takes not example of one ungodly sister to
draw away the other: which when our Savior forelawe, he gave this
commandment, that for his sake we must forsake both father and mother, Mat.
10.34, 35.
brother and sister, wife and children, or else we are not worthy of him. Luc.
9. 60,
And in another place, one desiring of him but a little space to bury his
father, he said unto him, let the dead bury their dead. This is a very
profitable doctrine for these days, wherein men are thus discouraged from
Religion, for fear of their friends, for now Satan stirs up one brother
against another, to hinder them from hearing the saving word of God, now they
cry out against us, Are you wiser then your forefathers? Has not all thy
friends before thee believed on this wife? And will thou be singular? And
surely beloved, we know it is the greatest argument, that popish atheists
have, their ancestors, fathers and mothers, their masters and mistresses,
have misliked this preaching, and these new doctrines, wherein many repose
their greatest felicity, and God send us (say they) to live no worse then
they did, and to die no more blessed then they. But would you so rather be
followers of your popish and ignorant predecessors, then of the doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles reueiled in his word: this is to build your selves
upon another foundation, which when the fire comes, will utterly consume it.
But they say, are all our predecessors damned which did as we do? to whom I
may well answer, How do you know that all your fathers were of your minds,
but we are not in God his place, to judge and araigne them: but say with the
Apostle, The time of this ignorance did not God regard, but now he
admonishes all men every where to repent: Because he has appointed a day to
judge the world in righteousness. Act. 17.30.31
So that if God seem not to regard it, why should we stand upon it. And
seeing now the trumpet of the Gospel is sounded by the Lords Ministers, let
us not with Marie lament over the graves of the dead: But leaving them at their
rest, trudge and travail to the mount of the Lord, that of him we may freely
receive that which many kings and prophets could never obtain. Mat. 17.6.
Though Moses went not into the land of Canaan, yet he saw it, so it may be the
Lord let our predecessors see the light of ye gospel, though they could not
enjoy it. But as Peter and John were with Christ when he was tra^sfigured and
saw his kingdom, yet could not enjoy the continual presence of his glory, but
being warned of Christ, told it to no man: so many godly in time of darkness
not only saw but embraced the truth, which it may be is forgotten of their
graceles posterity. Let the parents eat the sour grapes, shall the childrens
teeth be set an edge? if they made cakes to the host of heaven, shall we worship
the sun and the moon? what discredit is it to a blind father that has a son
well sighted? no more is it to idolaters, whose children are the appointed
heirs of the land of Canaan. Let us abide with him that has the words of
eternal life; Ioh. 6:68
and as the wealth of our parents is dear unto us, yet many thousand times
more dearer is the health of our souls.

Secondly by this we note, that to stick by our friends and to go with them
from the Lord, is to commit idolatry, for Naomi says, Thy sister is gone to
her people, and to her Gods: as if she had said, indeed for kindredssake she is
gone back, but it is unto idols and false Gods. Yea and more also, unto
deuilles, this is a worthy lesson for our naturals to learn, who will forsake
gospel, church, prayer and preaching, some for the love of their wives to keep
them company at home, when God calls for them in one congregation or other,
some their idolatrous friends which are notable recusants, yet because they
should think well of the^, they will falsify their faith to the Lord and be
unjust in his work, that they may please the^ with their present company: some
are hindered by their profit, some by unlawful gaming, and many by bare
idleness. Thus men make gods, some of their people, some of their wives, some of
their popish friends, some of their profit, some of their pleasures, and some
of their idleness, and few or none are to be found, that are both able and
willing to follow Christ when he calls the^, Luc. 19.^.6.
as little Zacheus did, but every one has some excuse to keep them from the
Lords supper, who shall never taste of his heavenly pleasures, seeing they mind
earthly things, making their glory their shame, their belly their God, let their
end be damnation. But oh my beloved, let us be warned by the danger: of others,
when Peter rebuked Christ and bid him favor himself, Mar. 8.23
Christ rebuked him and called him satan: eue^ so when our dearest friends
would have us be slack in preaching, and favor our bodies, come to the church
seldom and make no toil of it, agree with the most in religion, or rather in
worldlines, and so shall we have favor, aspire to the greatest promotions, for
there is greatest profit, and finally take pleasure in unlawful things, let us
say, come behind us satan. For it is not our friend, but our enemy satan, that
thus alureth us with the bait of pleasure, ease, and profit, that we might
hang on the hook of perpetual perdition. Then seeing we have espied his
policy, discovered his deceit, and tried the discommodityes that ensue his
obedience, let us innocent children once burned dread the fire, and as Jacob
said by his own sons Simeon and Leui, My soul come not into their habitation,
so let us say to our derest friends when their counsel and a good conscience
cannot stand together, better break the league of frenshippe between us, then
suffer the shipwark of a precious and peaceable conscience. The wisest Solomon
by harkening to his wives, disobeyed the Lord, and it cost him ten tribes of
his kingdom: if such green pieces be destroyed, what shall become of the
rotte and fear: 1. Kin. 11.2
therefore if angels from heaven must not be heard, much less devils from hell
drawing us away from following the truth by the mouth of our dearest and
nearest friends, though it were by your wives that lie in your bosoms.
Therefore let us take unto us the whole armor of God, that we may stand fast in
the day of battle: better never run, except we obtain the price, better never
to have known God or his Gospel, then now to fall away from him again.

But Ruth said, entreat me not: This is the first part of the answer of Ruth,
to the argument of her mother, and it is her petition with the reason of it:
wherein she protests that it is better unto her, not to be entreated to
depart, or once to have it motioned, or mentioned to go from her, for her
resolution is, that neither the troubles or travails of life could separate
her, neither the sorrows of death or desolation of the grave should deprive
her of Naomies company, for she says, Where thou dyest will I dye, and there
will I be buried. Out of which I observe these things. First, how the godly
behave themselves in all trials and temptations, namely, that the very
thoughts of departing from God and yelding to sin, are very gall and bitterness
unto them, insomuch as they say with Ruth, entreat me not to leave thee, that
is, never speak word to move me from hearing God his word, to overthrow my
faith, to turn me to disobedience, to perish my conscience, to hinder my
course, or to subvert my profession. A notable example hereof is in Elisha, who
was entreated by Eliah as here Ruth is by Naomi, First he bid him tarry at
Gilgal till he went to Bethel; 2. King. 2.2.3.4.5.6.
but Elisha said, as the Lord lives, and as thy soul lives, I will not
leave thee nor depart from thee: then they went to Bethel together, and bid him
tarry there, for the Lord sends him to Jericho: but Elisha answered, as the
Lord lives and as thy soul lives, I will not leave thee nor depart from
thee; then they went to Jericho, and Eliah bid him tarry there till he went to
Jericho, and Eliah bid him tarry there till he went to meet the Lord at
Jordan. Elisha answered as he did before: for Eliah foresee, that if he went
not with Eliah, he should have no benefit by his service, so if we abide not
the objections of our friends, the reporches of our enemies, the intisements of
the world, and the persuasions of our own fathers and mothers that are against
us in religion, we shall loose all that we have done before, yea though they
should say as Rabsakeh said to the men of Ezechia. The Lord has sent us to
speak unto you. But many will say, if profane worldlings should discourage us
in religion, and those yt are open contemners should persuade us from it, the^
we could abide it, but it goes nie us when our own wives or husbands, fathers
or mothers, brethren and sisters, companions and acquaintance, shall try us so
narowly. But mark dearly beloved, thou art not alone, Ruth was thus handled by
Naomi her dear mother in law, for whose sake she had departed from kindred and
country, yet she tries, molesteth, and vexes her; yet by the saving grace of
God his assisting spirit, in the end she acquiteth her self, like a woman of
strength in the Lords quarrel: for the Lord for our farther trial does not only
prove us in the lest, but in the greatest afflictions. The Israelits cared but
little for the philistines, had they not had giants among them, so the Lord will
bring crosses like armed men to dismay us, that our valor and courage may be
known, Job had first one herd taken away and then an other, in the end his
children crushed to death, and then he was strangely visited in his own body,
but having only one comfort in all the world left, his wife, she bid him curse
God and die. But some say, we would willingly be professors, but the preachers
themselves tell us how we must be mortified; 2, Cor.5.20
and they call us in their sermons wretches, and cursed creatures, these hard
words hinder us, if they spoke fair unto us and cried mercy, Mar. 8.23
mercy, we would with more diligence frequent their exercise. Mat. 15.23.24
I answer, if they speak in God his name whose ambassadors they are, cannot
you bear it for his sake: they are not common persons in that place, but
supply Christ's room: now Christ called his disciples a faithles generation, he
called Peter satan, and a poor woman he called dog, when she came unto him.
How did he deal with king Herod, and with the Pharisees, every man knows,
and and are you better then these? Paul called the Galathians folish, was it
not to make them wise, that thereby he might draw them to the truth, they had
forsaken? even so the ministers of Christ must handle this rough world, setting
it out by the titles, that by the name they may guess of the nature. If the
rich man promise peace to his soul in the multitude of his possessions, shall
not the Lord call him fool for his labor? Luke 12.20
if all the world follow the prince that reigns in the air, shall not we say
that they be without God, and so without salvation? Does not the Lord chasten
us in this world yt we should not be condemned in the world to come? Are not
servants contented to bear hard words at the hands of their masters, because
they receive wages of them? even so suffer God his ministers to speak the
worst they can of you, yet I assure you, there is no faithful preacher that
will speak, so basely of the notablest wicked person that is, but he speaks
and thinks a thousand times more basely of himself. Bear with them
therefore, you are children and infants in religion, not able to speak, they
speak for you to the Lord in as humble manner as may be: 1. Pet. 5.5.
knowing that the Lord resists the proud and gives grace to the humble and
meek: Luc. 16.18 19
the prodigal son by speaking most vilely of himself, purchased his fathers
favor: Even so these hard speeches of our selves, and other penitent sinners,
are as faithful messengers to reconcile us unto God. Secondly, by this we
note, how we must be enabled to encounter or resist the examples of others,
that are laid against us to draw us from God: even as Ruth does in this place.
Naomi tells her, Horpah is turned away, and therefore she must also. Ruth
answers, Where thou dwell I will dwell: as if she had said; if thou turn
back, I will turn back also, but I know thy constancy is such as thou will
never yield, therefore all the examples of my slippery sister, and fearful
falawaies in the world shall never move me: it is thy constancy that I look
upon and nothing else, which is as a safe ship for me to sail in through the
waves of my unsteadfast mind: so that by this you perceive, how she opposes
the stedfastnes of her mother, against the backsliding of her sister, depending
upon the surest hold, not upon a broken staff. Even so must we against the
examples of ungodly ruffians set the examples of sober minded. Match the world
and Christ together, what shall the world get, If it say, be ignorant, the
other says if the gospel be hid it is to them that be lost: if it say follow
the ways of thy own heart, the other says, for this thou shall come to
judgment: if the world say be covetous and enrich thy self by gaming, cosning,
carding, dising, buying, and selling, the other says, such shall not inherit
God his kingdom: if the world say, seek honor, the church says, it is
vanity: if it say, esteem best of thy self, the other says, think better of
another: if it wish thee prosperity, the church says, rather suffer adversity
with God his children, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. So the
flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh: if thou be
tempted to insidelity, remember Abraham that believed in hope; under hope, and
beyond hope: if to incontinency, remember Joseph the mirror of chastity: if to
impatiency, think upon Job, if to unjust dealing, remember Jacob: if to
idleness, think on the pismire: if to drunkenness, remember what David did with
the water of the well of Bethleem. This is usual in the scripture to exhort by
examples, Peter wishes godly women to look upon Sara her obedience, 1. Pet.
3. 6. Iam. 5. 10
James wills the poor in his days to take the prophets for an example of
patience. Paul exhorts the Corinthians to liberality, 2. Cor.8.23 4.
by the example of the Macedonians: even so on the contrary, threatenings are
denounced by the example of others, as we may often read in the Gospel. The
Lord says, the Queen of Sheba shall rise in judgment against the nation of
the Jews which came to hear the wisdom of Solomon, likewise he provoke
them by the example of the publicans and harlots, telling them, they shall be
preferred in the kingdom of God, Mat. 25. 1 12
and I think there is none so simple but they know they ought rather to
follow the wise than the foolish virgins. But some will say, now the world is
altogether corrupted, and the most part is the worst part, therefore they must
needs follow their manners and be defiled. To whom I answer, if thou were in a
little bark upon the greatest sea, and saw a thousand mighty waves about
thee, like huge mountains, would thou forsake thy little bark which is
alone, and leap into the midst among the waves, because they are many? so
thou should work thy own destruction: eue^ so, will thou forsake the
manners, life, and company of a few godly persons, with whom is safety, to
wallow in the millions of worldly men with whom is no peace, but is like the
raging sea yt cannot rest? shall not thou be tossed with them, I will not say
troubled, but everlastingly confounded? I grant we should live by precept and
not by example, but seeing we must needs see the Gospel, before we believe it,
let us look on the lives of the purest and fewest among us, and join our
selves to them, as Noah to his arc, that the water floods of everlasting
destruction ouerwhelme us not in eternal damnation.

Thy God. By these words it may seem that Ruth is not so well grounded in the
knowledge of God as she ought to be, in that she depends upon her mother, in
saying, thy God is my God, as if she had said: if thou worship the true God, so
will I, if thou be an idolater, so will I, if thou turn backward, so will I, if
thou go forward, so will I. But I take it far otherwise, that these words
proceed from a heart fully grounded upon the truth: as if she had said, I know
Naomi, thou will never worship any Gods but the true God, thou art constant in
that which thy self have taught me, I remain steadfast in that which I
learned of thee, and therefore I can never forsake thee. The which
interpretation is confirmed by the words that follow, Thy people my people:
who were Naomies people but the Jews which always worshipped the true God, so
that if Naomi could change her birth, parentage, people, and country, then also
in the mind of Ruth she could change her God, and as she was persuaded, she
knew her people, so she knew her God, and as she thought, she could not change
her people, so she conceived she would never alter her worship: so that these
words proceed of a steadfast persuasion in the knowledge of God, and an assured
hope of her mothers continuance. Dan. 3.29.
Even as when the king of Babel calls the almighty by the name of the God of
Shadrach, Dan. 6.26.
Meshach, and Abednego, was persuaded he was the true God, by ye miraculous
delivery of those his servants from the f^ry furnace. And as the king of Media
called him by the name of Daniels God, because he had delivered him from the
hungry lions: even so Ruth called the true God by the name of Naomies God,
because she was instructed by her. But some will say, is it not lawful for us to
depend von our fathers or elder friends in religion or to believe as the church
or as catholic men believe? I answer, if the question be made of the
necessary points to salvation, as the knowledge of the trinity, the work of
our redemption with such like, it is by no means lawful for us to depend upon
men, though they be the chiefest in knowledge, and the greatest in authority in all the world, if they teach it never so truly yet we must have recourse to the
word of God. 1. Cor. 4.16
For Paul wished the Corinthes that they should be followers of him as he was
of God, as if he had said, Act. 17.11
where I agree with God and his word, consent with me, where I disagree,
dissent from me. We know what commendation the Lord gives the Jews of Berea,
which sought the scriptures daily, whither those things were so or not, Gal.
2.11^
which were taught by Paul and Silas: we know how Paul withstood Peter to his
face, who was a pillar of the church and a more ancient Apostle then him self,
yet he was faulty: and to conclude, we must receive the Gospel as from God
the only author of it, not from man, least we make the preaching of the corsse
of none effect: it is far surer to send us to the fountains of the written
word of God, then to the brains of the best learned in the world. Therefore the
conclusion is, that we must not in the foundation of religion depend upon men
or angels, though we were never so truly taught by them, but must refer our
faith and the credit thereof, to the only written word of God, But some will
say? had Ruth this word of God, or did Naomi carry it with her into the land of
Moab. I answer that it is very likely they had, for the Jews at this day have
the old testament with them in all nations: secondly, if they had not, yet the
Lord by his spirit did persuade the heart of Ruth of the truth of those
things which Naomi had taught her, so did he persuade his church when there was
no word written, for the space of above two thousand, years: so does he at this
day keep his church among infidells, where is neither preaching, word nor
sacraments, yet not one of them is lost. But if any say, let us then forsake
the written word of God and attend to these revelations or private instructions
of the holy ghost, I answer, so the Jews when they came into the land of
Canaan, might have eat no meat till the Lord reigned down more manna upon
them: surely then they had all starued many thousand years ago: even so if we
look for such extraordinary illuminations, and forsake ye, present food of our
souls, God his written word preached among us, the other being ceased, we shall
justly be condemned as the murderers and slaughterslaues of our own
destruction, Let us therefore take heed to God, not to men, ground our faith
upon his word, not on humane, gifts attend to the voice of Christ speaking by
his ministers to the ears of ye body, not waiting for extraordinary
illuminatio^s: if we want this means, labor for it as a pearl worth all our
merchants substance, yea a treasure greater then all the world. But of lighter
points of religion, if we receive any thing of men who in one point have
diverse judgments, let us learn to examine the reasons of all, and being proved
by prayer and peace of conscience lean to the best: neither doubting to depend
upon men or the credit of the truth, but to the word. Where we note many
things, what great care ought parents, magistrates, ministers and prechers, to
have over their children people and subjects, for their instruction, seeing as
Ruth had truly learned of her mother in law that did she constantly defend,
namely the worship of the only one God, If Naomi had perverted her from on
heathenisme to another, it is very likly she would have abode by it but being
instructed in the truth, and sealed by the holy spirit of promise, she does
carefully maintain it, Ephesians: 1:13.
giving us thereby to understand how inestimable is the benefit of good
education, and first, training up in religion. And ought not this to be dear
unto us, that watch over the souls of our people and children, who by us
being rightly grounded in the foundation of christian religion, may happily
grow up, like to glorious olives for the church and commonwealth. We read
when Laban swore by his false gods, then Jacob swore by the fear of his father
Izaac; Genesis 31.53.
so excellent was the instruction given him of his father, that in the presence
of idolatrous Laban, for fear nor favor would he alter his religion: yea it
seemed to be fastened in his flesh, that having been twenty years among the
idolatrous Sirians, yet he had not changed the manner of his oath, the which he
learned of his father. Oh where are these Izaaks in our days, which teach their
children any religion? indeed men are too careful for their childrens temporal
wealth, they put them to schools and universities, to be students at the law,
and men of occupations, (which are good) but ask them why they do so, they
will answer, that they might have some thing to live by hereafter: never a
word I warrant you of the salvation of their souls, but for that, they will
hope in God they say: and thus they compass sea and land for trifles, but the
never fading health they least think upon. Genesis 24.42.
In times past servants prayed to the God of their masters, but in these days
if they should do so, they must pray either to pride, covetousness, or
ignorance: masters and servants can swear by the name of God liberally, but
pray sparingly, insomuch as if the life of God consisted in their prayers, they
would surely murder him, they so seldom call upon him. Oh that this hellish
behavior of masters and servants, could be reduced to the line of God his
word; but now they deal with their servants as the Egiptians did with the
Israelits, they look for their tasks and worldly business, but they never
exhort them to sacrrfice to the Lord: nay, they hinder them, and call them
idle persons, if there be any forwardnes of servants and children that
ways; truly now is like servant, like master; like maid like mistress,
like father like son, like mother like daughter, such is the seed such is
the harvest, they go from cradles to graves, and from graves to damnation,
their whole care is for pleasure and wealth, and therefore they have no part or
portion but in this present life. Yet let the children of Abraham do like
Abraham, teach their sons, Genesis 18.19
daughters and servants, the covenant of the Lord, that all their seed and
posterity may be blessed, both with the temporal and everlasting promise, for
godliness has the promise of this life and of the life to come. 1. Tim. 4.8.
Secondly by this we note, the fall of ungodly flatterers which will outwardly
for show or favor be godly with the good, and wicked with the profane, they will
in good company temper their speech like good men, they will trudge and travel
to sermons and godly exercises, because it pleases some gentleman or other,
and will say to the^, thy God my God, your preacher, my preacher, your
profession shall be my profession, whom you love I love, who^ you hate I abhor:
Of this sort are many ignorant persons, one misliketh our religion, because
some popish friend of his mislike it, some speaks against our government,
because one or other which gape for the church livings speaks against it:
and to say the truth, it is very lamentable to see, how all religion of many is
turned into man pleasing, but these tame beasts will one day come to the
slaughter as well as wild, when it shall be manifested, that the surest and
safest way in religion, is to depend on God and not men.

Where thou dyest. Having promised her life to be spent in her mothers
company, she proceeds to her death, showing unto her such perfect friendship
as neither the travails of life or sorrows of death, could ever abrogate, and
she adds, that even in that place where Naomi should be buried would Ruth be
enterred: for we know the ancient custom was to be buried with the fathers
or predecessors, whereof undoubtedly the cause was, the hope of the
resurrecton, that as they were buried so they should rise together, to be made
partakers of eternal woes, or everlasting joys. And by this we observe, the
love which we owe unto our fathers and friends must be of such continuance, yt
it reach unto the grave: not only to be here the inheritors of their lands, but
also being dead, to give our bodies to their sepulchers, and the measure of it
must be so perfect, that we must be the companions of life and death. And
truly such as is the love of children to their natural parents, such must be
the peoples to their spritual fathers in Christ. The Galathians to pleasure
Paul would have pulled out their own eyes, but men in these days are so far
from this liberality, toward the small number of preaching ministers, 1. Cor.
3.15 Gal. 4.14.15
that they will hardly give any penny toward their maintenance: they had
rather have their gold then the gospel of Christ, their paltry pigs then
preaching: They cry out chargeable, chargeable is the ministry, when they
themselves which should pay the tenths, yield not the twentieth of their
increase, such suing for their right, such triing of customs, such ouerbearing
the weak, and finally they would be religious, but ye ministers must be as
beggars among the^. Who sees not in many places where they cry out for
preachers, and promise largely in their behalf, yet when the Lord has sent
them, they almost stink in their presence. I speak plainly I confess, and yet
but the truth: and moreover, they are not only poorly provided for, but every
base person, pesant, and pot companion, are suffered to crow over the^ and cry
out against the^. Thus Chirst was before, and yet like us, contemned of the
brauest and reviled of the basest: the world I see is no changling, although
many hundred ages have passed since, yet the manners thereof remain, it agrees
in nothing save only to persecute Christ: and seeing we are sent forth as a
silly lambs among ten thousand wolu^s, and as men borne out of due time,
although our calling be despised, our labor unprofitable, and we made laughing
stocks, yet our pains will be rewarded, our offenses pardoned, we crowned, and
they everlastingly confounded. So let God. Last of all, that she might be no
more molested by her mother in law, she confirms the resolution of her mind
by an oath, in these words, So let God do unto me, and more also if ought but
death do separate thee and me: which is an usual manner of swearing in the
scripture, 1. Sam. 25.22.
as we read of David how he swore he would be revenged of the churlish
Nabal, for the discourteous message he returned him by his servants, and is used
by all the godly in the old Testament, and indeed it does most notably
describe the nature of an oath, for it is thus much in effect, I pray God
confound me if I speak not this with purpose of heart: out of the which we
note many things most profitable. First that in every oath we curse our own
souls, if we publishe not the truth, or perform not that which we promise: as
if every time we swear we should say, The Lord confound me body and
soul with satan and his angels, if this be not so. Oh that our
othe-mongers and common swearers in our days, would remember or understand
this, that whereas in their days they have sworn many milions of times, so
many curses and damnations, they have wished to themselves, the very
consideration whereof would make them as gulitie in their own consciences as
ever Cain was for killing a man, or Judas for betraying the Lord of glory: they
have with their arrows of blasphemy shot thorough and boared the Lord to the
very nearest place of his life, for every trifle. And truly as the common Inn
is known by his sign, and the black Moore by his skin, even so is an atheist
and carnal man by his oath. We shall talk with honest worldly men, Leuit 24.23
who at every word or sentence, will break forth into most horrible swearing
upon no occasion, if they be rebuked they wax much worse. We read of an
Egiptian Israelite that blasphemed, and was by God his own commandment
stoned to death. How if this law were put in practice among us? where would
the gallant companions, which will swear by all the colors of the moon, Number.
1.46
become? would not they cry out to the hills to cover them, and to the rocks
to fall upon them? was it not strange, that among six hundred thousand men
which were able to bear arms, with old men women and children almost
innumerable there should be found but one man that had blasphemed, or taken God
his dreadful name in vain and he must be stoned? But among us, if so many
chosen men were taken, my life for it, there shall not be found among every
hundred ten persons which are not common blasphemers. Oh Lord, how does thy
mercy stay the heavens from pouring down stones upon us; as they did upon
the Cananits. Iud: 10.1^
There is not now a child in the streets, if he be able to speak, but he
murmureth an oath, only excepted some few which have godly parents: there is
not a woman either maid or wife, some few excepted, which does not daily
increase their curse by their continual blasphemies: may we not now say? Lord
what is man that thou visitest him, or the son of man that thou so regardest
him. Truly the most follow the counsel of Jobs wife, they curse God and dye, a
godly martyr required to curse christ and he should live, answered, seventy
years have I served him and yet he never did me any hurt, why then should I
curse him. And I pray you what hurt has the Lord done unto you, that you thus
blaspheme his honor, curse your own souls, rebel against his laws and
swear many hundred times oftener then you eat or drink: surely the disease
of leprosy was contagious, and whosoever had it was excluded from the
congregation, how much more ought this poison of swearing and swearers, to be
cut of from the society of God and men? And surely now help O ye Gods of the
earth, I mean you magistrates and men of authority, this knot will never be
unloosed except you draw out your swords and strike it a sunder: though you
would give them all your posessions, and steal away their swearing as Rahel
stole her fathers idols, yet they will swear by false Gods still as Laban did;
that is, they must etiher die, or the wrath of God must be powered down upon us
for ever, for his curse shall never depart from the house of the swearer. Esaias.
9.3
And if you help not to cure this evil, the Lord shall curse both you and
them with everlasting plagues. He cries and says, whom shall I send? the
ministers have said they will go; yea, they have told Jacob his sin and Israel
his transgression, and England his swearing also, but they are come again with
Jeremy, unto you O princes, publish you the decree, that whosoever swears by
the name of God rashly, he should be cut off from the people, and his house
sowed with salt, never to be builded again. Secondly, by this we observe, that
it is not lawful to swear but only by the name of God, for Ruth says so, And
so let God do unto me, and more also She calls not heaven and earth to
record, or any other thing, save only he which is able to punish or else to
pardon, and knows the secrets of every man's heart. Whereby we are taught, that
it is sacrilege in God his sight to swear by our faith or troth, our honor
or honestye, bread or drink, or any thing else. Many think they avoid
swearing very cleanly, if they swear by any of these, not knowing that he
that swears by the gold, swears by the temple, and he that swears by the
temple, swears by him that sits thereon: even so he that swears by his
faith, swears by Christ (for faith is no faith without Christ) and he that
swears by the son, swears by the father and the holy Ghost. Therefore
dearly beloved, let us frame our tongs to honor, not to dishonor God, to
glorify, not to defame his name. For if he that touches his Saints, touches
the apple of his eye, what does he which thrusts at his name, which is
dearer unto him than heaven and earth? Surely the Lord will not hold him
guiltless, but as he has not pittyed the Lord in tearing him with oaths, no
more shall the Lord show any mercy to his soul from punishing it in hell.

Lastly, by these words of Ruth we observe, that an oath must be the last
thing we produce in the testimony of any truth. She denies her mother once,
and the second time, when her sister went away, but now the third time, after
solemn protestation made, she adds an oath, as the last refuge and end of
all controversy. Against this do all the former offend, which will not tarry
till the last, but even at the first rap out their oaths, as fast as a
brauling dog his barking, swearing through custom to truth and falsehood,
making no difference between weighty matters and idle toies, especially in
gaming, playing, hunting, chiding, and such like, they spit out their poison
against God himself, neither sparing the wounds, blood, heart, death, and nails
of the Lord, renting him worse being in heaven, than the Jews did upon the
cross. But let Ruth and her companions teach ten thousand of them, with what
reverence they must use the holy name of God: she had not bin past ten years
with a godly woman, but she had learned her religion, both of faith and
manners, for in this she utters both: but we have a great many both men and
women, which have had twenty and thirty a piece, not with one, but with a
whole church of godly persons, and yet they have got neither faith nor manners
from them, they can easily give them leave to practice religion, but themselves
wallowe in pleasure. But be not deceived, God is not mocked, when he begins
he will make an end, and consume your viperous tongues and beastly hearts, as
the fountain of this mischief in the fire of hell. We are as importunate on
you as the blind men of Jericho, the more we are rebuked, the more we cry unto
you, let not our country be cursed, our prince removed, our God blasphemed,
his Gospel translated from us, and our souls and bodies everlastingly plagued,
To God let us give praise

The fourt Lecture.
Ruth. 1. Verse. 18.19.20.21, 22. 18 When she saw that she was steadfastly
minded to go with her, she left speaking unto her.

19 So they went forth both until they came to Bethleem, and when they came to
Bethleem, it was noised of them thoroughout all the city, and they said, Is
not this Naomi?

20 And she answered, Call me not Naomi, but call me Mara, for the almighty
has given me much bitterness.

21 I went out full, and the Lord has caused me to return empty, Why call
you me Naomi seeing the Lord has humbled me, and the almighty has brought
nice unto adversity.

22 So Naomi returned, and Ruth the Moabitesse, etc.


Having heard ye conference between Naomi and Ruth, now the holy ghost
desc^^beth the issue of this journey, to the end of this chapter: wherein Naomi
cease to vex her daughter, or dissuade her to proceed in her purpose, but
willingly takes her with her, and both of them travail to Bethelehem, whither
they come in a most fit and acceptable time, neither hindered in their journey,
nor forgotten of their friends, but kindly received to their great comfort.

Those words contain in them two parts, the first their consent to travail
and journey unto Bethlehem, the second is their intertainment there. The first
part is expressed in the eighteen and ninteene verses: and has two members,
first Naomi rested satisfied with the answer of Ruth and vexed her no more,
verse eighteen, secondly their prosperous journey to the city Bethelehem verse
ninteene: In the end of this verse is set down the entertainment they found
there, which is this, the citizens came flocking to see her, calling and
welcomming her by name in these words, Is not this Naomi? unto the which
salutation she her self answers in the two next verses, first
acknowledging her name, but confessing her self unworthy of it, in these
words, Call me not Naomi, but call me Mara, secondly she adds the cause of
her speech, in these words, for the Lord has given me much bitterness: this
is amplified in the next verse by an allegory taken from a vessel. In these
words, I went out full: finally she sets down the use she makes of her
affliction, showing unto them, that she could not glory in all the vain
titles of the world, first because the Lord had humbled her, secondly because
he had brought her into adversity: in the last verse is set down the time when
these pilgrims came from Moab to Bethlehem, which was the beginning of barley
harvest.

When she saw. As Naomi in the beginning dealt very wisely, in the trial of
her daughters before they were too far gone, so in the end she deals very
godly with Ruth, in that she yeldeth to her answer and petition, giving over
to molest her with any more objections. This friendly and worthy meeknes, is
very commendable in all the godly, for without this they can never in charity
and compassion try and examine their brethren. When our savior Christ, had
dealt with the Cananitishe woman about the like cause, seeing that silence
would not answer her, nor denial satisfy her, Mat. 15 22
nor the opprobrious word of dog dismay her, then he yielded to her desire,
cured her daughter, and proclaimed her faith to be wonderful: By which we
gather that it is an ungodly thing, to try any in religion or in any good
motion beyond their strength, for it is no doubt but Naomi if she would, could
have multiplied mo obiectio^s against this enterprise of Ruth, but her mind was
to try her, not to trouble her, to confirm her, not to confound her, and to
show unto her what must be her resolution, if she go unto the Lords people,
she can hope for no earthly felicitye, she must never repent and turn back
again, she must bury both country and kindred in the grave of forgetfulness,
that the thoughts or desire of their fruition must never hinder the course of
her religion. Whereby all the godly are by Naomi admonished, to be careful
who^ they receive into their company, and how gentlye they must entreat them
when they find their fidelity: the ravens will not feed their own birds or
young ones so long as they be naked till their feathers come out, and they
know them to be their own, which iealousy of souls must teach us, that if
we see not the evident tokens of godlynes, we must not receive, yea our own
kinsmen into the secret of our hearts, to communicate unto them the sweet
fellowship we have with Christ, for many daily creep into the church to epsy
our liberty, but as John says, if any come unto you and bring not this
doctrine receive them not to house, 2. Ioh: 10
nor bid them good speed. But in this it is strange to see how far many
godly persons are deceived, which believe euerylight word of hipocriticall
persons, esteeming them good christians, giving the^ the right hand of
fellowship, and opening the treasures of the Lord to these mockers of spiritual
things, casting the childrens crummes to dogs, and their precious pearls
before these filthy swine, which tread both Christ and his gospel under the
feet of their hearts, and rent, revile, persecute and seek the destruction of
the truly religious, would God we were all Naomies in this point, to try
their spirits whether they be of God, seeing so many false spirits are gone
out into the world; for we must not commit our selves to every one that will
outwardly say as we believe, but first see the fruits and afterward judge of
the tree. We know how many in the Gospel our savior Christ refused, which
offered themselves unto him, 1. Ioh. 41 John 2, 24.
for none can come to him but those whom his father draws. And against this
especially do all the flattring Michaes and please-man preachers of England
offend, which as the prophet says, sow pillowes under the elbowes of the
people, that is, they give them rest in their singular sins, if they can say
Lord, Lord, they tell them they are good christians, if they come once a week
to the church, their devotion is sufficient, if they spend all their days in
ignorance and vanity, yet a few words at the later end will recover them. Oh,
how fearful and lamentable is the condition of such pastors and people,
where they are thus flattred in their sins and stroked in their iniquityes,
they hear the gospel, feed on the sacraments, dwell safely in the house of
God, and eat of the fat of the lands; that their judgment might be without
excuse, their damnation the greater, and themselves the prepared oxen for the
Lords slaughter house; they cry peace peace, mercy, mercy, speak of plenty not
penury, of feasting not famines, of pleasures not sufferings, of mirth not
mourning, of new wine not God his word; nay they bid the most covetous
cormorants, in croching usurers, prodigal russians, beastly drunkards, filthy
adulterers, cursed blasphemers, common swearers, dumb ministers, and profane
and carnal atheists, to hope for salvation, whereas the Apostle says, not one
of these shall inherit the kingdom of God. Is not this to cast childrens
bread to dogs, and to make the most holy Gospel a cloak, nay rather a patent
or charter to work all manner of licenciousnes? surely if Naomi would not
promise any thing to her dear daughter Ruth, but rather discourage her from
following the Lord in the trial of her faith, you are as far wide from any
hope of saving health, as heaven from the earth, or light from darkness:
therefore to conclude, as the gold is not known but by the touchstone, so is
not any Christian, till he be thoroughly tried in religion, and as the goldsmith
will not accept it (though it seem never so fair) till he have tried it, so
must not we loose the bands of sins till they be repented, or bind the
breaches of iniquity, till they be satisfied, nor account any a christian till
we have throroughly tried him. Other there are which will never be satisfied
in their brethren, every day troubling the^ with vain and unprofitable
questions, never giving the^ over, til they have wearied them with their
wranglings, seking to deface in the^ that little knowledge which they have* and
discourage them from the profession of christian religion. But most abominable
is ye dealing of many with their neighbors, both christian men and women, who
forsaking the cursed pastime of carnal companions, espiing the insufficiency
of dumb and unpreaching ministers, burning in love for the pure preaching of
God his word, and seeking that where it is to be found, absent themselves from
their assemblies now and then, they present the^ to the courts as wicked
recusants, Act. 24.26
where I warrant you, they find as much favor as Paul did before Felix thus we
are many times unjustly vexed for good co^scie^ces, turmoiled about for hearing
of sermons, almost as much as any papist for abhoring our religion: and this it
is that fears many, causes other to fall back before troubles come, and
dismaieth many weak souls when they see their poor brethren in this
peaceable time, under the government of so godly and gracious a prince, so
tormented as is incredible; the experience of this is too too common in every
corner of our country, where there is any diligent preacher or profitable
hearer. Let us therefore my brethren, with Naomi, cease to vex the godly minded
Ruths, both me^ and women: our damnation shall be the greater, if we draw and
drive men from God, the laws require it not, the magistrates like it not, our
profession forbids it, and accursed are those godles judges which pronounce
any sentence against these innocent persons. Therefore say with the prophet,
Come let us ascend to the mountain of the Lord, even to the hill of the God of
Jacob, for he shall teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths.

So they went forth. Now are these two good women both going, and also come to
Bethelem, and undoubtedly their tedious journey was eased by their mutual
conference: but what things happened to them by the way the scripture
mentions not, only their intertainment is here set down, how their coming
being noysed about the city, they came unto them and saluted their old
acquaintance Naomi by name. For this question, is not this Naomi? after the
manner of the Hebrews is a usual manner of affirmation, Genesis 18.14 17. Numb.
23.1: Iud. 6.31. 2. Sam. 3:8:
as we may see in these places of scripture. Where first of all we see the
wonderful mercy of God toward Naomi, which in so many years absent suffered
not her memory utterly to perish, but at her first arriving, did publish her
name, and comfort her sorrows. Thus God has many blessings in store for the
relieuing of his poor afflicted saints, and surely he is careful that the
candle of the righteous be not put out for ever. But as in one day (after many
years sorrow for Joseph and famine for bread, Jacob received tidings of the
welfarre of his son and provision for his family, Genesis 45:28. Psa. 30.6
even so the Lord compasses about the faithful with songs of deliverance,
that though heaviness endure for a night, yet joy comes in the morning. Let us
therefore with the loss, and laying down of our own lives confess the
goodness of the Lord, Dan. 4.33 37.
for as he drove the king of Babylon for seven years from the throne of
majesty, to the wilderness of wild beasts, so he called him aganie and restored
to him his scepter and seat, established his kingdom all the days of his
life. Therefore fear not, fear not my beloved, have we now famine? we shall
plenty again: Do we carry forth our seed weeping? We shall come again with
plentyfull sheaues. Have we sowed in tears? we shall reap in joy, Have we bin
strangers in other lands? we are come home with Naomi to the city of God his
people: and finally, those that fear the Lord shall be as mount Sion which
can never be moved: for as there is a time to mourn, so there is a time to
rejoice, Psa: 125.^
and as the wicked shall have measure for measure, so the godly shall receive
reward, for reward: Secondly by these words we observe the frui^te of
charity, or duty of neighbors and acquaintance: for as these cityzens of
Bethlehem came to see and to comfort Naomi, so must every one bear some part
of his brothers or sisters sorrow, in relieuing their troubled minds by their
presence and speeches. Luc. 1.39. Ioh: 11.33 Act: 9.39 Mar: 2: 4.40.
We read that Mary went to her cousin Elizabeth, being with child, that they
might commune and comfort themselves in the promises of the Lord. We read how
the Jews accompanied Mary and Martha weepping for Lazarus, and the same also
we read was done at the death of Dorcas. What shall I say of the four men which
brought the sick of the palsy unto Christ: and most excellent is the
fellowship of the saints in the primitive church, which are said to continue
and abide together with one accord in prayer and breaking of bread, so that
their spiritual comfort of praying, and temporal refreshing of corporal
food were private to any, but also for their comfort as a young child is
wrapped in his swaddling clothes, so was the infancy of Christ's church
maintained by the company of their faithful fellowship. Oh that we could love
and live thus together, in the bond of unity and christian concord, that as we
are members of one body, so we should not be so strange one to another, as if
the eye had never seen the foot, or the head never known the legs: such is
the scornefulnes of our age, wherein men are ashamed of Christ in his members,
if they be a little falen into decay, how hardly will they comfort them as these
Ephrathits do Naomi a poor widow now, though once a noble woman. They will
rather curse the^ with Shemei, than bless the^ with Tziba, but let the
faithful like feeling members of their brethrens affliction look upon the
Naomies in our days, some are poor and frendles, other sick and harborles,
some sorrowful, some hungry and many destitute, let us gather to us these
members of Christ, our company will more refresh them then our contribution,
our talk more then our alms, our feelling and fellow prayers more then the
distribution of our money, let us lay hold on that, and yet forget not this,
for as God has given both to us, so he looks we should give both to other.
Thirdly by this we observe, how the world is wont to comfort one another, for
these Bethlemits say unto her, Is not this Naomi, that is, they comfort her
with the consideration of her name, which in hebrewe signifies bewtifull or
pleasant, as if they had said unto her, Although thou art old, yet thou art
beautiful, for thou remainest Naomi still, thy name is a prophet unto thee, to
forewarn thee of thy welfare, and if thou be now like the stubble after the
crop, yet thou shall shortly be as the green herb or pleasant pla^t, comfort
thy self, Jacob always prevailed with God, because his name was always Israel:
the dove shall be chaste, because it is a dove: the eye shall be bright, because
it is the eye, and Naomi shall be blessed, because she is Naomi. Thus worldly
persons wish worldly things, and the best they desire most is outward
prosperity. Neither is this simply unlawful, for such as is the sore, such
must be the salve, and where the wound is, the medicine must be ministered: if
in the world they be oppressed, in the same they may not only wish, but pray
for release, yet always remember, that friends and parties must so desire and
request it, as may be most for the glory of God. Therefore this is our duty,
that in praying for earthly benefits, we aim at God his will, but in desiring
spiritua^ blessings, we must regard our saluations. And more also, we must not
so ravish the minds of the worldly afflicted, as if they had no other hope,
but this temporal welfare: but so promise the blessings of God as they may have
a spiritual signification, for worldly misery is abated but with everlasting
felicity.

And Naomi said. In these words Naomi answers to the comforts of her friends,
and tells the^ she rather deserves to be called Mara, then Naomi, that is
bitter then beautiful: Iam. 3.1
whereby she teaches us how vain are outward and worldly titles: for which
cause James wishes us not to be called many masters, knowing we shall receive
the greater damnation, as if he had said, worldly honor brings death but
desire or love of carnal comforts cause damnation. When the ark of God was
taken by the Philistines, and the sons of Heli both slain, 1. Sam. 4.21
the wife of Phinehas the son of Heli died after her travail, and named her
son Ichabod: which is by interpretation, where is the glory? although there a
man child was borne yet the woman forgate not her sorrow, because the ark of God was taken by the heathen, for if she were the daughter to the chiefest in
Israel, as she was and wife to the third, yet what glory had she of her place,
when her husband and was justly slain, and her people overcome, therefore she
called her son (no glory) for neither dignity of place, highness of birth,
fruitfulnes of children, or the dominion over a whole country may minister any
comfort to them whom the Lord has humbled. Rahel that bid Jacob give her
children or else she should die, at the birth of her second child died, and yet
had children, she supposed if she were made fruitful, Genesis 30.7.
and had many children she could not choose but live in felicity; but having the
first she called him Joseph because God would add more, yet at the second, she
called him Ben-oni which is the son of her sorrow, Genesis 35.18
because she died in travail, so that she which accounted bearing of children
her chefest joy, by that which she loved, came her greatest sorrow. Thus
Naomi, which was once as beautiful and pleasant in prosperity as any, yet now
in adversity who more bitter the^ she, yea the very remembrance of her name
increases her grief. Were she the daughter of a prince, yet now being a
beggar it is a greater discomfort unto her, then if she had been borne poor,
for man's nature is like a pleasant plant which prospers when it grows
higher and higher, but decaieth if it fall lower and lower: if Naomi had been a
Lady, yet having lost her husband children and wealth, the cogitation of her
wonted welfare, increases her disquietnes, even as Phine has his wife and
Rahel at the birth of their children. Why then do men thus highly esteem of
worldly vain glory? Cannot one measure of honor afford one mite of comfort to
a distressed person? Do not me^ because they are proper was proud, and because
they are learned, proud, ambitious, what then is the fruicte of worldly titles?
is pride the reward of proportion? loftynes of worship? scornefulnes of riches?
and ambition of learning? surely these things in the day of trouble can
minister no medicine to make ease if godlynes be not with them. What was Achan
the better for his gold, when he was stoned to death? Absalon for his beauty,
when he was hanged? Haman for his honor, when he was mounted upon his own
gallows? the sorcerers of Egypt for their knowledge, when darkness was over the
land? or Herop for the peoples voice whed they cried a God and not man, and the
worms fell upon him and consumed him? Trust not therefore in princes, much
less in the titles of princes, in the strength of an horse, much less in the
wealth of man: say not, I shall be the better because I am a gentleman, Ecci^.
17.18
a doctor, or a noble man, for when Solomon had considred all these things, he
said all is vanity and vexation of spirit.

For the almighty has. This is the reason wherefore she denies her name, or
rather changes it, showing that her first name had nothing in it which did
express the relation between her self and it, but her second name does most
significantly declare her bitter affliction. Where we first of all observe the
cause which moved the fathers to give such names to their children which to
signify or put them in mind of their duty or some other event. So God called
the first man Adam which is as much as man or earthly, because he was made of
the earth, Genesis 1.27. Genesis 3.20
or the red earth: so Adam called his wife Chauuath (which we call Heuah by
reason of the Hebrew letters) because she should be the mother of all living:
the like may be said of Noah, Seth, Abraham, Izaac, Israel, Samuel, John
Baptist and many others, who being named either by the Lord himself or by
other, were so called, to put them in mind of their duetyes, or to note the
thankefulnes of their parents. The which is also lawful for godly parents now
to imitate, in giving such names to their children, as may be notes to all the
world of their profession. But some cannot brook this liberty, accompting it
newnes and preciseness in them that use it, as though it were a deadly sin,
one jot to depart from the custom of the multitude. But this curiosity is
well confuted by the name of John Baptist: ancestors must not always be
followed, those which are new creatures in Jesus Christ, Luc. 1.59.60.
may also have new names. But in this the world bewraie their palpable
ignorance, for they like the old names which were very plain in their own
tongues, wherein they were given, but English names they cannot abide, belike
for very fear, least their names should be witnesses of condemnation against
their licentiousness. Again, they account it a glory proper to a few persons
to be called by the worldly surnames of some of their great ancestors, but
they will not bear these names of rejoicing, thanksgiving, repentance,
godlynes, mercy, constancy, and such like, they will as easily admit them, as
a deaf adder the voice of the charmer. But let the godly in this use christian
wisdom and ancient liberty, for that which was lawful in this point in the
first age, the Jews commonwealth, and the primitive church, with the practice
of all ages since, is also lawful for them, to give holy and significant names
to their children, for I would have all (if it were possible) to have no other
names but such as they understand: if they be called by the names of the
ancient fathers, kings, or prophets, which we read of in the Scriptures, it is
also needful that they understand the lives and the dispositions of those
persons, that as they have them for the evidence of their names, so they might
look upon them, as the examples of their faith and manners.

Secondly, by this we note, what God his children think of their suffering,
which Naomi sets out by this word Bitterness, for bitterness of all other
tastes does most dull the sense, and corrupt the stomach, so that they account
their afflictions as sharp to them as to any, and may as lawfully complain
of them unto the Lord. This I speak for instruction of them that are ignorant,
and the comfort of the afflicted. First for instruction, because some think
they are not truly religious, except they feel their miseries no more than a
stone, when they are afflicted, and this makes them so to waver and doubt of
themselves, that in their greatest plagues, they can hardly receive any
comfort, being always troubled with this, that if they were faithful they
should delight more in their tribulations: yet beloved, mark a little, Naomi
calls it in this place, bitterness, as if she had called the enemy to her
health, for when Peter would express the danger of Simon Magus, Act. 8.23
because he offered money for the gift of the holy ghost, he tells him he is
in the very gal of bitterness, by that metaphor or allegory declaring the
loathsomnes of sin to his soul, Psa. 31.10
as bitterness to the body. David says that his affliction was his death, as if
he had said, even as a man strives to be delivered in the pangs of death, so
he from his tribulation. Job that mirror of patience, did so delight in his
sufferings, that in one place he seems to accuse God himself, to add to his
transgressions, that is to make his sins seem greather then they were, Ioh.
16.18.19.
and how does he desire to plead with God about his affliction, and cursed the
day and hour of his death? Our savior would never have warned us that in the
world we should have sorrow and lamentation, had he not known that the smart
of our sufferings would thrust forth abundance of tears, through the
vehemence of the pains: and presently he adds a secret comparison between a
woman in trauail, and a christian in persecution, so that as the one has most
vehement sorrows and pitiful lamentations, so also may the other: infinite
testimonies might be brought for the proof of this, to teach us, that God his
children are made of flesh as well as of spirit, and the flesh is weak,
though the spirit be willing: therefore we may fear and cry under the
burden of our pains, that our afflictions are bitter unto us, and that the
hand of the Lord is grievous upon us. Again, for the comfort of the godly I
speak this, that if any have grievously complained of their sufferings, let
them impute it to the sharpnes of their pains, and the weakness of their
natures: we see this Naomi calls bitterness unto her, such as she would not
willinglye take except it were for the physic of her soul, and now almost
ten years space this grief has grown upon her, so that it may seem of all
others she was most grieved, for now she utters her mind as freshlye, as if
the potion were yet undigested in the stomach. Be comforted therefore my
sorrowful brethren and sisters, you see you are not alone in this misery, for
David, Job, Naomi, Annah, Nehemiah, and many other are as far indebted to the
Lord in this point, as ever was any: strive to suppress it by prayer, and
quench it by singing of psalms: neither let us judge but charitably of those
which in this case are troubled, be it for the loss of their children, the
death of their husbands, the decay of their wealth, or the lack and want of
their health. If they seem impatient and weaker then our selves, let us bear
part of their burdens upon our christian comforts, that they with us, and we
with the^, like seling members of the same infirmities, may sustain our
crosses by our mutual supplications, and obtain our deliverance by the blood
of Christ.

I went out full. In these words she amplifieth her former complaint by this
comparison of a full vessel and an empty, showing that as the fullest vessel
is the soundest, and the emptiest good for nothing, so it fares with her when
she looks upon her former life, when she went forth she had plenty, but
now she returns in want; then she was found, but now broken, then joyful,
but now sorrowful: why should she be called pleasant or beautiful, or by her
old name, seeing God has humbled her, whereas in times past he vpheld her in
prosperity, but now he has cast her down into adversity. Where we first of
all observe the nature of worldly prosperity, which to day is like a full
vessel, but to morrow like an emptye, now it is green, anon it is withered,
now it grows, anon it is cut down, now like Nabuchadnezzar sitting upon
his throane with his counselors and courtyers of estate about him, but anon
both Court and Country drive him to the company of wild beasts: for as a
little breach emptyeth the barrel* so a little trouble brings worldly
welfare to wallow in the mire. Therefore we read of none, either king or country
which had such a prosperous estate but it had one enemy or other to work his
woe: 1. king. 10 17
if we consider the reign of Solomon, where gold was innumerable and silver
as plentiful as stones, yet it wanted not his miseries, the people were
punished by paiments to their prince, the king was threatened which the loss
of ten parts of his kingdom, and God stirred Hadud the Edomite against him,
where ended their peace. and 11. cap 11.14
Where is then ye roialty of Solomon? was it not cast down in one day, his
riches consumed, his buildings burned, his children captiuated, his wisdom
turned to idolatry, his posperitie decayed and al his honor ouerturned. Oh
that worldlings would consider their sickle estate and be admonished of their
iminent dangers: the Lord puts them into his balance, and finding them to
light casts them out. Ier: 12.3
Jeremy says, they are but fatted sheep, kept for the day of slaughter, now
in the pasture and presently it the fire, they are but advanced to be cast
down again, as the vessel is filled to be emptied in due time, the ears
which are now full of corn in the field, anon shall ly without on the
dunghyll, Babylon the queen of the world which ruled as yet, was trodden down
and made a servant. Tyrus that crowned men with her wealth, was consumed by
war, for the Lord of hosts decrees all this, to stain the pride of glory,
and to bring to contempt all that be mighty upon the earth. Esaias. 23.9
Weep, weep O daughters of honor, the days will come when ye tender shall not be
regarded, for your wealth shall not al. ways endure, the crown abides not from
generation to generation, your houses shall be ouerturned, your names
forgotten, your children impouerished, your glory defaced your inheritance
changed, your welfare powered on the earth like water, and your worship shall
be never repaired. This have God his dearest children felt, and the greenest
trees have been scorched which the fire of God his wrath, for he is not
delighted in worldly bravery, but has buried great treasure in the sea which
shall never be found, to keep mankind kind from the end of his purpose: for
this is their honor, they get nothing but with much travail, and in one
hour, loose labor, life and wealth.

Secondly, that which in our text is, the Lord has humbled me, in the hebrew
is, The Lord has testified or witnessed against me, for by his judgments he
humbles us, as it ^ were producing witnesses to accuse us of ous iniquityes,
as we see in common judgments all things pass by evidence if they be ancient,
and by witness if it be late, so the Lord when he has a quarrel against us,
he first proves us guilty by witness of our sins, Deuteronomy. 31.5.26
and then punishes us for committing transgressions. For this cause Moses
commands the book of the law to be laid up in the side of the ark of the
covenant, for a witness against the people: Psa: 50:7
so the Lord speaks by David, Hear O my people, and I will speak, hear O
Israel, and I will testify unto thee, for I am thy God: and after this he
reports his witness against them, first yt their sacrifices were corrupted,
that their religion was all outward, Pro. 28.1
they spoke well but did ill. And thus God witnesses the sins of commonweales
by the changing of their prince, Esth: 7, 9 Esa. 22.19
the sins of public persons by casting them out of their office, the sins of
private persons, sometimes by inprisonment, sometimes by scourging or poverty
and sometimes by sickness, aluding to trials of judgment where the noble is
condemned for treason as well as the meaner person for stealing. And this my
beloved has the Lord testified against us, our peace has been threatened by
war, our prince by treason, our banqueting by famine, our excess by penury,
our pride by poverty, our peoples contempt of preaching by pestilence, and
still the Lord hides one sin from this witness that we might repent for all.
Then we must needs set down with our selves, that our actions are noted, our
profaning of saboths registered, our contempts against God his ministers
described, the times of our drunkenness, idleness and wantonness, numbered, our
own consciences examined, the witnesses produced, we arreigned, and now, even
now before God his judgment seat in danger to be everlastingly condemned, for
as Naomi says, the Lord emptieth us of his graces, and testifies against us:
who shall plead for us when the judge knows our guiltiness, surely, surely
there is no hope of pardon but to the penitent, and patience must be prayed
for, that our sufferings may be eased.

So she returned with Ruth the Moabitesse with her. This verse is the
conclusion of this first chapter, where is described the time of Naomies
return unto Bethlehem from the country of Moab, which was the beginning of
barley harvest, that the report she heard in Moab, (how God had visited his
people and given them bread) might at her first arrival be found true:
wherein is noted the blessing of God unto her that she came in the beginning of
harvest, the pleasantest and profitablest time of all the year. This barley
harvest was in the latter part of the first month, and the beginning of the
second among the Jews, which with us are called March and April, for the
warmnes of those contreyes is such, that their harvest is ripe much sooner then
in ours.

By the which also we note, that she had a prosperous success in her journey,
that even in those dangerous days, she came safely to Bethlehem: all those
doubts which in the beginning we showed you, might have hindered her journey,
she well ouerpassed, for no doubt in so rare a matter, if any let had been
offered, the holy ghost would not have omitted it. So that this teaches us
with Naomi, that as she was not hindered in her travail from Moab to God his
people, even so must not we be stayed from the profession of true religion. She
was an old woman, yet she would go so tedious a journey to the company of the
faithful, therefore let no man think that age excuses them from the true
worship of God, or sincere profession of religion. She had little company
to encourage her, only poor Ruth her daughter in law waited upon her,
therefore it must not hinder o^ discourage us that so few follow religion,
for Christ's flock is a little flock, like the first fruits of the harvest
field, which is but a handful to many cartloades. Naomi adventured her body
and forsook her goods, to come to the house of the Lord: Oh how cold are our
days, when men need neither of both, yea they will hardly go any farther for
knowledge the^ the vilest atheist in the world: and to conclude, many dangers
hung over her head, yet by the providence of God she escapes al, even so my
brethren admit no delays, inuente no excuses, receive no hindrances, imagine
no suspicions, and abstain from all stays which may let you from coming to
the mountain of the Lord, the company of the faithful, for blessed are the
people, whose God is Jehovah, and it is better to abide but one day in the
courts of the Lord, than a thousand years in the palaces of the wicked. Now
let us give praise to the Lord.

The end of the fourth Lecture.
The fifth Lecture.
Ruth. Chapter 2. verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. 1 Now Naomies husband had a
kinsman, a man of great wealth, of the family of Ei^melech, whose name was Boaz.

2 And when Ruth the Moabitish said unto her mother in law, Let me go, I
pray thee, into the field, to gather ears after him, in whose eyes I shall
find favor: and she said, Go my daughter.

3 And she went and came to gather in the field, after the reapers: and she
met with the possession of a field pertaining to Boaz, who was of the family
of El^melech.

4 And behold, when Boaz came from Rethleem, he said to the reapers, The Lord
be with you. And they said, The Lord bless thee.

5 And Boaz said to his servant which was appointed over the reapers* Whose is
this maid?

6 And the servant which was appointed over the reapers, answered and said,
This is the Moabitish maid, which came with Naomi from the country of Moab.

7 Which came and said, Let me gather, I pray you, among the sheaues, after
the reapers: and so she came, and stayed here from morning until now, only
she tarried a little while at her house.


IN the former Chapter we heard by our general division, that the occasion of
this history was therein contained: but now in these three Chapters following,
is declared the means whereby this marry age was accomplished, whereof the
first is described in this second Chapter, which is the acquaintance of Boaz
and Ruth, and the circumstances thereof, as shall appear in the special
treatise of every particular thing. The occasion of this acquaintance is the
gleaning of Ruth in the field of Boaz. These seven verses contain two parts,
the first and principal part is of Boaz, and the second of Ruth. The first
part is contained in the 1.4.5.6.7. ver. wherein Boaz is described, verse 1. to
be Naomies kinsman by her husband. Secondly, to be a man of great wealth, in
ye other verse is set down his diligence, which came to the field to visit his
workmen, and view the company. His actions after he came to the field, are,
first the salutation of the reapers, verse 4. and they do the like to him:
secondly, he asks his servant who Ruth was, verse 5. To which question the
servant answers, first telling his master that it was Ruth the Moabitesse,
the companion of Naomi, verse 6. secondly, he excuses her gathering, because
she asked leave, and tarryed there but only that morning, verse 7.

The second part, which respects Ruth, is contained, verses, 2.3. Wherein
first she asks leave of her mother to go and gather ears, where she should
find favor, and her mother grants, verse 2. Secondly, the place where she
gathers is described, which was the field or possession of Boaz, her husbands
kinsman. Of these parts let us briefly speak, as the spirit of God shall
give utterance, and the time permit.

Now Naomies husband. In this verse is contained the description of Boaz, upon
whom the whole history following depends. This Boaz was the son of
Salmon, who was son to Nahasson, 1. Chr. 2.10 Ios. 2.4.5. Math. 1.5. Heb.
11.31
the prince of the host of Judah: the mother of Boaz was Rachab the harlot
which received the spies of Israel into her house at Jericho) as we see in
Matthew, and is commended for her faith, by the author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews. So that every way we see this dignity commended unto us: if we
look for birth, his grandfather was the chief of the princely tribe of Judah:
if for authority, he was, says this scripture, of great power: Cap. 2.23
if for wealth, his inheritance must needs be great, who was derived of such
noble ancestors, and the reaping of his corn lasted to the end of all
harvest, and the chief of all, his religion is excellently commended unto us in
the text and history following. So that we have not to deal here with mean
and base personages, being all of a kindred, howsoever some are sooner come to
decay then other: but out of this we learn many profitable lessons.

First that seeing Boaz and Elimelech are said to be kinsmen as those which are
desceaded from the same predecessors or ancestry, we are admonished of the
frailty and vanity of worldly dignity, that howsoever parents provide for the
maintenance of posterity, yet the Lord must dispose the decay of their
children. Here we see poor Naomi has a wealthy and an honorable kinsman, yet
she a destitute and a desolate widdowe. Her husband and she were no mean
persons, but undoubtedly both descended of noble familyes: the years were but
few since the death of Iosuah, under whom the inheritance of every tribe, was
given by lot, and all the Jews and Israelits wealthy possessors, yet see this
godly Naomi, is feign to live of the gleanings of her daughter, which neither
her parents, nor her husband did ever think upon. Behold therefore as in a
glass, the perfect image of temporal felicyty, the father a king, the
children beggars, the father honorable, the son not worshipful, the
predecessors the chiefest in authority, but the successors the meanest in
calling: this made the fathers think, that the world was like the sea, here a
mighty wave, and there a great downfall, some thought it to be like ise, where
a man can never stand sure, but the one will be breaking, or he be slyding,
some like to trees, whereof the tallest are soonest ouerturned, but all agree
in this that worldly felicity is miserable vanity: For, our present wealth is
like a pleasant summer, which must needs come to an end, though all the world
should strive to the contrary: it was accounted to king David, Sam. 7.12.
for a special blessing of God unto him, and none other, that she should not
be without a son to sit on his seat, if his posterity would observe his
commandments: yet we see in Joseph and Mary the mother of Christ, being
both of his offspring, how they could not obtain in his own city, a chamber
to lie in, Luc. 2:7.
but were feign to lodge in a stable, so that this is not only to the wicked,
but to the dearest saints of God. Adam continued not still in paradise, but was
cast out that his felicity might be heavenly, and not earthly: even so the
posterity of the righteous are brought into poverty, that they set not their
minds upon temporal glory. Therefore the Lord does here correct us, with
pinching poverty, that there we should not with the world be condemned for
delighting in vanity. Then by this we learn humility in our wealth and
worship, honor and dignity: Set not up your homes so high, says David and
if riches increase set not your hearts upon them, Pas. 62, 10.
for the Lord resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble and meek.
We read of stately kings and Emperors which have been cast from throne to
the foot stool, of wealthy persons which in one hour have been utterly
undone, but of children whose parents were honorable, rich, many thousands
brought to perpetual slauerye. If you fear not your own estates, yet care
for your posterity, and make much of them whom now you see cast down, the
poor, the destitute, the despised, the miserable: for if Jonathan, in his
honor, make of David in his humility, when David comes to his kingdom, he
will advance his offspring to his own table: even so if you make much of them
that are poor, now, when you shall be humbled in your posterity, the Lord
shall provide for your issue by these that have been favored by you. The
wheel of the world runs round, sometime that which was lowest is highest,
and that which was highest is made low again. So be you assured, the Lord
aduanceth daily out of the dust, to set with princes, therefore make you
friends of the unrighteous Mammon, that when you shall have need, they may
receive you into their everlasting habitations. Distribute liberally, give
plentyfully, line peaceably, walk humbly, for the wealth of the world does
not always last, neither the crown from generation to generation.

Secondly, by this we gather, that the godly may safely enjoy great
possessions, and of the blessing of God be exceeding rich men: but some will
say, indeed they may be wealthy, but with the hazard of their souls, for
Christ says* How hardly shall they which have riches, Luc. 18.25
enter into the kingdom of God: it is easier for a cable to go thorough the
eye of a needle then for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven. Then
if the danger of it be so great, the poorest condition is the safest welfare.
I grant you, but Christ speaks of carnal wealthy, which make their goods
their God, as after he says, those that put their trust in their riches. Of
this sort the world was never fuller: as on the contrary, of the other there
was, never fewer, you shall have them in all places which speak against the
Gospel, because it is an enemy to their livings and offices, promotions and
honors, like Demetrius for Diana, a heathen devil: you shall have other that
will offer largely to the Gospel, like the young man that came to Christ, but
when it touches a little greater cost, then farewell religion. But this is the
fault of the men, not of their wealth, and yet I am persuaded that there are
many wealthy Abraham's, which will give of the tenthes of their possessions, to
the heavenly Melchisedech Jesus Christ, many Lots that will harbor the angels
of God and rather wish, violence to their own daughters, then to the
righteous: and finally, like to this Boaz in riches and religion, of whom we
daily pray the Lord increase the number.

Thirdly we see in this Boaz an excellent example of the reward of religion and
faith, for we have heard that he was the son of Rachab, which received the
spies of Iosuah, who afterward was married to Salmon the son of Nahasson, by
whom came this godly and wealthy Boaz. In this then we see true the saying of
the Apostle, that godliness has the promises of this life and of the life to
come: for in her self she was blessed with an honorable marriage, in her
posterity with a godly and a wealthy son. This my beloved is a notable
encouragement to religion, for Christ says that whosoever shall for him forsake
father or mother, Luc. 18.30
wife or children, shall receive many times so much in this world, but eternal
salvation in the life to come. This answers and stops the mouths of the
enemies which call the professors, bankeruptes, impouerished and decayed
persons, yea as base as beggars in this world, which by their religion undo
themselves and their posterity. But on the contrary, we affirm that religion
brings no discommodity, even in worldly things; the reason is, because it
teaches us to use our riches aright. If a man had mountains of money, and
knew not how to employ it, what profit could he receive thereby? even so surely,
without Christ and his Gospel, I mean the true knowledge thereof, there is no
lawful use of these worldly benefits, and except every one learn to apply them
by the word of God, he possesses his wealth, as a thief does the purse of a
true man, and in the presence of God is no better then a violent robber, which
takeeth away the money from the lawful possessors which have proved and learned
the way to use it: and as they have it without his knowledge, even so they
shall use it without his blessing. Therefore be not discouraged my dear
brethren, come forward in religion, it is the devil that tells you, you must
make bread of stones, that is, you must rely upon the world, and follow the
custom thereof: there is greater plenty and ^store in the garners of God his
word, then in all the cornefields of the world. He which could feed five
thousand people, Ioh, 6.13
with five barley loaves and two fishes, has he not enough for the maintenance
of thy family? He which fed the host of Israel almost forty years with
angels food, are not the heavens his for evermore: when almost all the world
was in a famine, did he not provide for his servant Eliah, first commanding
the ravens to bring him bread and meat morning and evening to the brook
Cherith, and that being dried up, sustained him with a widow and her son, 2.
King. 14.34
by a handful of meal and a little oil for a long season? Did not our gracious
father multiply the oil of a poor prophets widow into many vessels, 2. King:
5.12 34
which before could not fill one? And what shall I say more? I have never
seen the righteous forsaken, or their children left destitute.

And Ruth. After the holy Ghost had set down the description of Boaz, Ver. 2.3.
as the necessary occasion to understand that which follows, in the next
place he expresses this of Ruth. Wherein he shows us the carfulness of
Ruth, for her mother and her self being in a strange place, would not in
hunger harbor at home, but rather adventure her peril in an honest labor, by
going abroad to gleane in the fields, therefore to her mother she comes and
asks leave, which being granted, forth she goes, the providence of the
Lord directing her journey, she comes to the harvest field of Boaz her
kinsman.

Where first of all we gather, what manner of life they lead after they came
to Bethlehem, namely, a very poor, base, and despised estate, not half so
good to see to, as that which they lead and lived among the Moabites, insomuch
as one may now say unto me, you told us even now, the golden rewards and
precious commodity of true religion, which it brings to all them that
faithfully receive it but you see these two godly women, as armed examples
against your self, they lived wealthily in Moab, but poorly in Judah; with
the wicked they found gentle liberality, but with the godly they endure woeful
poverty. What cold intertainment do they find at Bethlehem, even in the
Church of God, for whose sake one forsook her country, the other her wealth,
and both of them their welfare? so that the profession of religion loses our
friends, denies our country, disquieteth our peace, ingendereth our trouble,
consumes our wealth, and deca^eth our substance. Is this the profit of your
profession, which promises mountains of security, and paieth multitude of
miseries? How shall we be encouraged to religion, when at the first entry we
shall pay so great an in-come, and depart from a fine worth all our substance?
To this I answer, that if the beginning be not so joyful as you or they
wished* yet the end answered their expectation. I grant, you shall first find a
little want, but in the end you shall possess a great gain. A man that has a
thousand pounds laid beside him, and lays it out upon a bargain, whereof
he shall receive no profit in many years, but the date expired, and the day
of receipt come, he receives his own, and many thousand pounds for his gain,
you will grant at the first he emptieth his coffers and bags, and leaves him
self bare and money less, yet you would account him a fool, if he would not
upon sure bands of so great advantage adventure his own, and give forth his
money: Even so it is in religion, it is a pearl for which we must sell both
living and lands, and yet it is worth both, and many thousand times more: if
thou feel not the profit at the first, tarry a while, thou have the promise
and band of the Lord of hoasts, he is able and willing to perform and pay
at the time appointed, and if thou can abide a little want of earthly
commodities, shortly thou shall see them rolling upon thee in excellent
abundance and exceeding quantityes. And this teaches us with what mind we
must embrace religion, not for any present commoditye, or temporal gain, but
with denial of our lives and riches, that they may serve us as ordinarye
expenses in our journey to everlasting salvation, the kingdom of heaven. For
they are much deceived, that receive the truth to increase their wealth, making
Christianity a gainefull trade, for although it has the promises, yet it has
not always the possession of things in this life, but as the right heirs are
many times put beside their inheritances, which are possessed by unlawful
owners, so the godly are the right heirs of the whole world, although the
wicked have driven them out of possession, for the which the Apostle said, that
godliness has the promises of this life, and also of the life to come.
Again, those promises that the meek shall possess the earth, and their seed
shall inherit the land, and especially that the very same which are the
elected heirs of grace, are also the appointed inherytours of this world. But
this my beloved must establishe our minds, that as the seed which is cast into
the ground; seems for a long season to be lost, yet in the end it grows for
the comfort of mankind and the great profit of the posessors, so although at
the first the fruit of religion is peradventure but sharp in worldly affairs,
yet if we wait like the husbandman until harvest, our consciences shall be
plentiful garners of heavenly corn, for the present comfort of our lives, and
the perpetual benefit of our souls. A man dresseth his vineyard all the year
long, and does nothing but empty his purse, and weary his body in the tillage
and pruning and digging thereof, yet there is but one vintage or time of
gathering grapes, even so we must willingly depart with our wealth, and
travail in diligence, for the preparing of our souls, to bear fruit to the
Lord: and the end will be most profitable, though ye beginning seem most
chargeable. The like may be said of the merchant, which cutteth the seas, of
the goldsmith, that melts his metal, and of every worldly trade which at the
first begin with charges, but at the last acquit the cost, and satisfy the
desire, and end with the increase of substance: which are but carnal and
outward things, to put us in mind of inward and spiritual significations, for
as in none of these we are discouraged by the costly entrance, so, more
accursed shall we be, if we forsake the well of the water of life, the running
fountain of everlasting health, to rake in the puddles of transitory riches,
for fear the one will give us too much ease, and for fear the other will
withdraw our wealth, which is like the Gergesits sin, which had rather possess
their herds of swine, then enjoy the presence, and preaching of Jesus Christ.
Come not to religion for hope of world lie abundance, for nether Abraham, or
the Israelites, or Rachab, or Ruth, or Zacheus, or Cornelius, or any of the
faithful had this intention. Genesis 12:1: Exo: 12.38 Ios: 6:29: Heb. 19.8 Act.
10.1
But the Lord for our farther strengthening, has given two blessings, that if
the temporal fail which are but conditional, yet the everlasting benefits
shall never deceive: for although the leaves fall, yet bodies of the trees
abide continually. Therefore let us stay our minds upon this double string,
which is grounded upon the credit of him that gives the promise, before whom
heaven and earth shall decay, and the sun shall loose her light, rather then he
frustrate the hope of the godly.

Secondly, here we note a most excellent example of obedience to parents, and
avoiding of idleness. Ruth was lately come to Bethlehem, where it is likely she
might long have tarried, before her mother would have entreated her to so base
a labor as gathering of barley, but seeing her self employed in nothing,
first she comes to her mother, and after asks leave, as one desirous of
some honest, though never so simple a calling. If she had departed, not
acquainting her with it, being to labor for their living, she might well be
excused: but this seems much, that she must come unto her, not to tell her
she would go to such a business, but to give her leave to gleane in the fields,
promising she would not go beyond her bounds, but only gather in that place,
where the owner thereof should grant her license* unto which when the mother
had granted, forth she goes to the field of Boaz. Where we see what effect
godliness works in the hearts of children, for Ruth offered her service, which
her mother entreated not, she abhorred no labor were is never so base, she was
not ashamed of her poverty, even in a strange country: and all this must be
imputed to her religion. For as Joseph for the fear of God, bore with the
wrath of his father, Genesis 37.10
when he told him his vision of the sun and the moon and the eleven stars
bowing unto him, so did Ruth with the poor estate of her mother in law, which
had nothing to live by: thus the Apostle teaches children to obey their
parents in all things, that is, Ephesians: 6:1
not only to be willing to perform their commandments, but also, to be
always contented with their estate, for this wretchedness of cursed children, is
worthy to be condemned, wherein those which have wealthy parents, will please
them, till they have gotten their riches, which are like the prodigal son in
the Gospel: other because their parents are poor, will think they are bound
unto them in nothing, because they have little or no wealth to leave behind
them: both these kinds of children are here condemned by the example of Ruth,
who did not only forsake her wealth to go with her mother, but also labor
with her hands to maintain her living, yea to her stepmother, which is more
commendable then if it were done to her natural parents. The use of this
doctrine is, to exhort and stir up parents, to be more careful to teach
their children the fear of the Lord, then to leave them mountains of riches
behind them, which if they will practice, would their countenances be so
sorrowful as often they are? would not their natural olives, I mean their
children, anoint their faces with the oil of cheerefulnes: if mothers either
would or could do as Naomi did for Ruth, teach their children the fear of the
Lord, their hearts should not be so heavy, for their ungracious life. But
since parents had no care to instruct their children, children had no fear to
disobey their parents. Will they in these days acquaint their fathers and
mothers with their iourneis and labors? or run not they headlong to their own
utter undoing? they choose them masters and services without fathers consent,
they marry and are married against parents good will: do they not take pleasure
for profit, and pastime for godliness? thinking themselves to be born for
wantonness, referring the care of their old age to their gray headed parents,
and never considering till beggary catch their bodies, and damnation their
souls. Surely, as the fruit is sower because it is not grafted, so their
manners are wicked, because they want religion: this lies then in the
ouerlouing parents, who make such dandlings of their babes, while they are
young, that they care not for their fathers when they be old. They consider
not, that lions are tamed when they are young, that trees are bowed when they
are twigges: And that Solomon says, Intruct a child when he is young, the way
of his life, Pro. 22.6
and when he is old he shall not depart from it. Their own ignorance is so
palpable, that their children learn nothing but folly: they themselves so
vain, that the other are wanton: they so obstinate, that their feed is
rebellious: and finally, a wild vine brings forth nothing but wild grapes,
and ignorant parents must have ungracious children. Therefore, seeing by nature
you would have obedient and wise children, Pro. 1.7 Psa:^ ^1:10
teach them the fear of the Lord, for that is the beginning of wisdom, and
if you would have your names in your posterity long to endure, the praise of it
continues for ever. Thirdly, here we may note an example of christian
honesty, one of the fruicts of religion; for she tells her mother, she would
go gather where she could get leave, as if the holy ghost had said, the
gleanings are for the poor, Leuit: 19.9 Deuteronomy. 15.7. 1. Cor. 9.7.
yet poor men must not take them, without the consent and favor of the
owners. The Lord every where exhorts to give to the poor, but he never bid
the poor take where they found, unknowing to the possessor: but they must as
Ruth here does, not take their right, the very gift of the Lord, without the
favor of man. This condemns the rashness of many, which think if they be
poor, that men are bound to give to them, and small matters they may take
freely, without the consent of him that possesses it: yet we see not only
religion, but also plain reason to gainsay it: for the least thing a man
has in his own, as well as the greatest, and one law condemns the taking of
a handful, and a bushel of corn, though the offense be not so great. But some
say, it was permitted by the Lord, that a man might take the ears of corn and
rub them in his hand and eat them, as the disciples did, without the consent
and trespass of the possessor: he might also take a bunch of grapes and eat
them, and likewise the fruit of the orchard, by the same law, and therefore we
may take without the consent of him that possesses it, I answer, if the
question be made of an apple, or an ear of corn, Deuteronomy: 23.24.25.
or a bunch of grapes, as then it was permitted, so I think there is none that
will now stand in it: but then you must remember by the same law, that no man
might put a sickle into the corn to reap down a handful, neither yet fill
any little measure with grapes or apples without the consent of the owner. But
now men will take great measures and quantities, and yet think not themselves
satisfied, and being winked at for once, yet will they proceed till they be
forbidden, and then will they uncharitably and ungodly report of such men as
will not suffer their goods to be spoiled by them.

Lastly, when her mother had granted, forth she goes, and comes to the
possession of Boaz her kinsman: where we may behold the hand of the Lord
favoring her diligence, and leading her to the appointed place, where among
all other she might be, as she was, most gently entreated: for she a silly
stranger, knowing none beside her mother, not acquainted with people or
country, was ignorant whether to go, but God which directs the goings of
all, ordered her footsteps to his possession, where first she should find
favor and feeding, that by this means the way for her marry age might be
prepared. Where we see an excellent example of the providence of God, looking
upon the poorest as well as the richest, and working all things in the world
from the highest to the lowest. He which directs the descending of the
sparowes upon the ground, Mat. 10, 34
does he not also consider the goinges of the poor? It is no dishonor to
him, (as some would have it, that they might more freely give themselves to
iniquity) to note every vile and loathsome thing in the world, or to look
upon the base as well as the best: surely if any thing be uncomely, it is to
the sinful, but to him which is always righteous are all things pure. What
parents do not love the basest parts of their childrens bodies, which were
borne of themselves? yet greater is the love of God unto us, than the love of a
mother to her own son; neither does he or can he but love the meanest work
of his creation as well as chiefest, and the silly fly as well as the stately
king. Oh how does this comfort us more than all the world beside, when we know
the king of glory beholds our nakedness and poverty, and gives his angels
charge over us, that not the poorest Lazarus may be lost, but our bodies
either eased with relief, or parted from life, our souls may ascend to the
bosom of Abraham. Even he which directed the servant of Abraham to the city
of Nachor, and brought Rebecca out to draw water, and moved her answer to his
prayer, her courtesy to satisfy his expectation, did also lead Ruth to the
fields of Boaz, and guides all the faithful to the end of their desires,
knowing the counsels of the heart, disposing the words of the mouth, feeding
the hungry with good things, and sending the rich away empty, conducting us
all for his mercies sake to walk in his paths of righteousness.

But behold. After these things set down by the holy Ghost concerning Ruth, he
returned to Boaz again, and this verse is the beginning of the second part of
that which respects him, in the which is declared his coming from Bethlehem,
his salutation to the reapers and their answer to him again.

By the which we gather the duty of all masters of familyes and great
persons in the world, which is, not only to be careful their business be
performed by other, but also that themselves as the eye witnesses of their
servants fidelity, should look over their labors. This we may see in Boaz,
he comes from the city to the harvest field: he had committed the care of
the reapers to a trusty servant: yet not contented therewith, in his own person
he comes to the work. And surely, this diligence of Lords and masters,
causes faithful laborers and servants: as the idleness and negligence of the
one causes the unfaithfulness and slacknes of the other, for whiles the
masters follow their worldly pleasures, 2. King. 5.16
the servants omit their careful business. Therefore we may read in the
building of the first and second temple, there were overseers of the work,
beside the ordinary laborers, and often times would king Solomon and
Nechemiah come in their own persons to view the works. The like may we read
of Elis^hahs host, 2. King: 4.1^.
which was abroad in the field with his reapers, when his little son fell
sick insomuch as this seems a point of necessity, that every one, whom the
Lord has made a master of possessions, although he labor not, yet must he
certify himself of his laborers diligence, with his own eye sight, which
condemns many inferior masters, of negligent slothfullnesse, and idle
negligence, in not regarding their worldly talents given them of God, but
referring the disposition to their stewards and servants, refuse in their own
persons to deal with God his benefits, as too base things for their
occupations, which is the cause that so many masters fall to be servants, and
so many servants ascend to be masters: their wealth is quickly consumed, and
these which would not be their own servants to keep themselves in labor and
wealth, come to be other men's slaves in drudgery or beggary, either in
themselves or their posterity, as the just judgment of God, for he that would
not use his talent had it taken from him: therefore seeing this ancient
nobility were employed in their own business, let not the new and soddaine up
start wealthy men among us, disdain at poor laboring persons, or think it
any disgrace to do as their fathers did, faithfully to labor in the meanest
vocation. Secondly, after Boaz came to the field, he saluteth the reapers and
says, The Lord be with you, and they answered. The Lord bless thee: where we
see the first thing he does, he prays for the laborers, in this his godly
salutation, for he wishes the presence of God to be with them, which is his
favor, for his presence signifies his favor and blessing, as absence
betokens his judgments and cursings. 1. King: 8:11.
This we may see in the dedication of the temple by Solomon, the glory of the
Lord so filled it, that ye priests were not able to sacrifise in it, and the
angel saluteth Mary the mother of Christ with the self same words, The Lord be
with thee: wherein he signified the wonderful favor of God unto her which
should be the mother of the Messiah. Luc. 1, 28.
And on the contrary, the absence of the Lord is the heavy wrath of his
majesty, as appears by that complaint of David, Will the Lord absent himself
for ever? or has he forgotten to be merciful? Psa: 77.7
and Paul says that the wicked are separated with everlasting destruction from
the glory and presence of God. By the which we learn how reuere^tly we must use
our salutations, least when we wish the favor of the Lord to be present with
others, his mercy through our unadvised prayer be absent from our selves: for
how lamentable is it, to hear in many places, with one breath prayers to be
powered out for other, and bitter blasphemies against the majesty of God, with
woeful curses to the death of their souls? Iam, 3, 11:
May we gather any comfort by these salutations, when men in derision passing
by other shall use the salutation of Boaz, other wishing they know not what, do
as well by their ignorant greetings pray for their own destruction, as their
neighbors prosperity? such precious balmes let them not come upon the heads
of the righteous, for this is as certain as the world shall have an end, that
all their supplications either at morning, noone, or evening, are but mere
customary speeches, proceeding of the usage and manner of men, not of the spirit
or religion of the faithful. Yet let it not grieve us to use this language of
Canaan, the phrase of the scripture, in our civil and godly comunication: and
though, all the world cry out, puritanisme, puritanisme, yet blessed is he that
is not offended at Christ. Let the Samarita^s worship in their mountains, but
we will worship at Jerusalem in spirit and in truth: and let us use, in
despite of the world, ye weighty words of God his spirit, that they may be
our own mother speech, we the children of the church, and the heirs of
salvation. But in this it is noted, to be the duty of all men to salute them
whom they meet, to pray for the success of laborers and workmen, For well we
must remember, that except the Lord do build the house, the builders build but
in vain, and except the Lord do give the victory, what though millions of
horses be prepared of ye battle? surely it is in vain to rise early and to go
late to bed and eat the bread of carefulnes, Psa. 12.7.1.
to labor hard, and compass the world by a thousand devises, except their own
prayers, and the prayers of the faithful, appear in the presence of the
eternal for the^. And this notes the carnal constitutions of many men's hearts
among us, which rashly enterprise their works without calling on the Lord, and
unprofitably end the^ to their own destruction. Oh how it grieueth God his
Saints, daily to hear his name abused by swearing, even among them that
husband the earth. They cry out on their servants morning and evening, abroad,
abroad, to work to the field: but who says, come let us first fall down
together and humble our selves in the presence of God, and call for a blessing
upon our labors, or say thus much, The Lord be with us: no, no, that will
hinder their days work, they hire their servants to labor, and not to pray.
Therefore the prophet says, Hag. 1.6.
You sow much, but you bring but little in, you eat, but you are not filled,
you drink, and are not satisfied, you cloth your selves, but you are not
warmed, and he that receives wages, puts it into a broken bag: therefore
thus says the Lord, Hearken unto my ways. This is the plague upon us that
mind our wealth, and not the welfare of God his Church, therefore we labor
like slaves, but other receive the benefit by us: we imagine the earth
brings forth of it self, children are borne by nature, the clouds must
needs rain, and our fruits must needs increase: thus we make many Gods,
while we ascribe the power of God to his creatures. But be not so rude as
brute beasts, the dog will crave his meat at the hands of his master: more
accursed are they which pray not for a blessing at the hands of God the father.

Thirdly, by this salutation of Boaz, we observe the duty of elder persons or
superiors, which is, first to salute or speak to their inferiors, as masters
to servants, magistrates to subjects, and pastors to their people: yet
against this, in outward behavior we have many and daily offenses, for you
shall have Gentlemen and yeomen which will hardly speak to a poor man, being
asked a question by him, much less when they meet him will they give any
courteous or friendly greeting. But here we see Boaz, though honorable, yet
humble, saluteth his poor and hired reapers, who condemns ten thousand that
are contrary minded, for proud and surly persons. Old Eli would speak to
young Samuel, a little boy: though he were the high priest, yet he scorned
not so gentle a child: what then shall become of these stately person, which
being saluted, will not salute again, as if every word were gold that comes
from them, so sparing are they to speak to a poor or a simple man, whereas
with their betters, their tongs are too big for their mouths, whom they
wearye with their unprofitable bablings. This kind of evil spirit will not be
cast out till the heart be humbled, pride abated, sorrow for sin increased,
and the whole man perfectly regenerated, for by thy words thou shall be
justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned, for an humble heart will
show it with meeknes, but a proud heart will look strangely.

Fourthly, as Boaz prayed for the reapers, so the reapers returned to him, and
said, The Lord bless thee. Where we see a mutual salutation much commended,
for as he saluted, so was he resaluted, like to the Queen of Shebah, which
gave princely gifts to king Solomon, and Solomon gave royal rewards to her
again: so that inferiors are bound, by the same law with as kind affection
to pray for other, as they themselves were first entreated: for this too much
shamefastnes in many is worthy blame, because it does not only cover the
countenance, but also cover the tongue, leaving them speecheles, when they are
to answer their superiors: but as these labuoring reapers use Boaz, so also
must we any of our betters: which is with reverence to speak our minds, and
godliness to pray for their welfare: and therefore we must put on the spirit
of meekenes, and every one esteem better of another then of our selves. But
some will say, there is no such necessity of salutation as you would make it,
2. Kin. 4. 29
for Elisehah sending his servant, commanded him to salute no man by the way,
and if any saluted him, Luc. 10.4
he should not answer them: likewise our savior Christ sending his disciples
to preach, willed the^ not to salute any by the way: therefore it is no such
sign of pride as you would make it.

To the which I answer, first that Elisehah sent his man in wonderful have,
which respected the life of the Shunamites son, therefore he wills him to
admit no let or hindrance in his journey, but with all speed to go forward,
insomuch as he should not do the common courtesy to strangers either in
salutation or in answer: Even so means our savior that his disciples being
hastily sent, as it were, to gather the harvest of the Lord, might admit no
delay either in necessary or unnecessary business. And this teaches us that the
labor of preaching excels all earthly duties, yea, that all other must serve
to it as handmaides and servant, to further the course, and not hinder the
proceedings. Therefore this must remain inviolable, as grounded on the law of
God and men, that courteous and godly salutations are very commendable.

Then Boaz. Now in these three verses following insueth the communication had
with his servant, who Ruth was: unto which his servant tells or answers in
the 6. and 7. verses. First, that it is Ruth which came with Naomi from the
country of Moab: secondly, that she asked him leave to gather among the
sheaues: thirdly, that she came but that morning, and had continued till that
instant. Where we see the carfulness of Boaz in doing good, would know the
persons whether they were worthy or not: and the faithfulness of the servant,
which so plainly declared the truth to his master. And this is the pure meaning
of the words: other doctrines can none be drawn from hence, and therefore let
us give praise to God for that which has been spoken.

The end of the fifth Lecture.
The sixth Lecture.
Chap. 2. Verse 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. 8 Then said Boas to Ruth, Hear
thou my daughter, go to none other field to gather, neither go from hence, but
abide here by my maidens.

9 Let thine eyes be on the field that they do reap, and go after the
maidens: Have I not charged the servants that they touch thee not? Moreover,
when thou art thirsty, go unto the vessels and drink of that which the
servants have drawn.

10 Then she fell on her face, and bowed her self to the ground, and said
unto him, How have I found favor in thy eyes, that thou should know me,
since I am a stranger.

11 And Boaz answered and said unto her, All is told, and showed me that thou
have done unto thy mother in law, since the death of thy husband, and how thou
have left thy father and mother, and the land where thou wast borne, and art
come unto a people which thou knew not in times past.

12 The Lord recompense thy work, and a full reward be given thee of the Lord
God of Israel, under whose wings thou art come to trust.

13 Then she said, Let me find favor in thy sight, my Lord, for thou have
comforted me, and spoken to the heart of thy handmaid, yet I shall not be like
to one of thy maids.

14 And Boaz said unto her, At meal time come thou hither, and eat of the
bread, and dippe thy morsel in the vinegar: and she sat beside the reapers,
etc.


IN these words the holy Ghost declares the communication which Boaz had with
Ruth: for so soon as he understood who she was, he turns his speech from the
man to the woman. This conference, according to the number of the persons, has
two parts. The first is of Boaz, and the second of Ruth. The first part which
respects Boaz, is the singular courtesy he offers to Ruth, ver. 8.9.14.
Wherein first he bids her to gleane freely among his maidens, not only in
that field, but also wheresoever the reapers bestow themselves: secondly he
commands his servants that they do her no injury, but give her drink when
she is thirsty, and himself called her to meat, and gave her so liberally,
that she being sufficed, left for her mother.

The other part which concerns Ruth, is her manner of behauior to this
courteous intertainment of Boaz, wherein first she boweth her self to the
ground, verse 10, secondly, she confesses the greatness of his kindness, in
the same verse, because she was a stranger, and her unworthiness of any
benefit, verse. 13, because she should be as one of his maidens. For this
speech of Ruth Boaz shows the cause of all his courtesy, ver. 11. because
she had dealt so well with her mother in law, and had forsaken country and
kindred to come to the people of God, therefore she deserved to be honorably
entreated: secondly, he prays for her, ver. 12 that the Lord would not
frustrate his promise, deceive her hope, but recompense her labor, and shield
her with his wings. Of these parts let us speak in order, as the spirit shall
give utterance, and the time permit.

Then said Boaz. So soon as he understood who that woman was, whereof he
had demanded his servant, he, turns his speech unto her, that so soon as
might be he might comfort her afflicted poverty, and testify any good will to
a godly stranger: where first of al it is commendable, that he vouchsafes to
call so base a person by the name of Daughter, for truly this loving word
bewrays the tender affection of a godly heart, forgetting his lofty degree,
and calling an abject stranger by the name of daughter, which proves that he
longed to give unto her some comfort of kindness. This humble and most tender
title of daughter and son are very usual in the scripture, for when the Lord
would comfort the Church of the Jews against the blasphemies of Senacherib and
Rabsakeh, he calls it a virgin the daughter of Sion, Esaias. 37, 22
as if he had said, even as a father is careful for the wealth of his
daughter, Luc. 23.28
so do I watch for the welfare of my church: in like manner Christ our savior
comforted the women that wept at his death, by the name of the daughters of
Jerusalem.

Out of the which we gather this profitable doctrine, that it is one property
and duty of an humble mind, to speak kindly where it wishes friendly,
especially, when we talk to our brethren and the professors of the same
religion, our hearts must be as the sweet roses, and our words as soft as
butter, to supple and refresh their troubled days. For we must not do as
many have both in their writings and familiar speeches, comforted them with the
vilest reproaches, tanting terms, and vncharitablest titles they could invent,
that the poison of aspes may seem to lodge in their mouths, being by their
words right devils, they speak, so cursedly: but handle them, if they be
faulty with gentle words, for men in authority must punish with the swoorde of
magistrates, not the words of slaunderers: equals by admonition, not by
reuiling: inferiors by petition, not by exclamations. If we will have humble
hearts, we must show them by gentle words, for out of the abundance of the
heart the mouth speaks: the faithful are compared to sheep which are meek
and silent, but the reprobate to dogs which are alwais barking and brawling. If
we brand other with the mark of contempt, we burn our selves with the iron
of an ungodly tongue: many can be content to distribute their wealth
liberally, but their scornful words disgrace their devotion, because they taste
more of wormewoode, then of the rose: and this I have noted in many great
persons, that their words are as kind to their dogs as to the poor: Oh how
unlike are they to the Lord himself, which calls us sons, to this godly
Boaz, which calls Ruth his daughter, to ye apostle Paul, which called the
meanest in the church of God a brother. Why do you forget your selves to be the
children of Adam? or rather will you not be their fellows heyrs of grace, yt
thus reign over your brethren in disdainful speeches, as though heaven were not
high enough for you both to abide in.

Go not hence. Now we are come to another courtesy of Boaz, which consists in
his commandment he gives to Ruth, first that she should not go into any
other field to gather: secondly, that she should join her self to his maidens:
thirdly, that she should follow the reapers whether so ever they go: that by
this it seems the man was delighted to handle her gently. Was it not
sufficient that he suffered her without denial or reproof, or if he gave her
leave by name above many other (as no doubt but there were many in the field)
but he must admit her into the company of his own maidens: or having given her
that liberty, he must also bid her to follow his reapers whether so ever they
go? surely this was strange kindness to a strange woman, to be entreated more
like a daughter than a Moabitesse: nay, he adds the second part of his
commandment, telling her that he had charged his servants quietly to endure
her presence, and give her for her necessity. Where we first of al note a
heavenly example of godly liberality, how far it differs from worldly
pinch-penies. They give in gentleness, the other in pride: they in
cheerfulness, the other in murmuring: they in liberality, the other in
covetousness: and look how many degrees the moon is above the earth, so many
the gifts of the godly surpass the carnal: the reason of this is, because
the one are persuaded to what end they give, but the other do think it to be
cast into the sea. Exodus, 36.9.
We read of the Israelits, when the tabernacle of the Lord was to be builded,
they offered so much, yt Moses proclaimed they should offer no more: this heat
of liberality is well cooled in this frozen age, for we have much ise, but
little water: as the ise will afford no water till it be thawed, so men will
give nothing to the church, poor, or tabernacle of the Lord, til they be dead:
now there is such striving to go foremost in godly contributions, that every one
sits still, many pluck from the church, personages and profits, tiths, and
sancitified offerings, but few add one mite into the Lords treasury. Let the
poor be famished, the gospel unfurnished, the churches vnbuilded, the people
untaught, learning contemned, idle and ignorant persons advanced, and many
poor souls condemned for want of the bread of life: yet they say still, come
let us search for more treasure, let us take to our selves the houses of God in
possession: yea, they spare not the very altars of the Lord, but think it a
charge that the sacraments should be so often administered at the cost of the
parish. Oh most miserable and ungodly behauior of wicked wordlings, who (like
the lions den) suffer all to come in, but none to come out: like the adamant
which draws all things, but casts abroad nothing. Where is the wonted
contribution, which in the primitive church we read? The Apostle commended the
Macedonians, that they gave beyond their power, willingly, not of constraint.
Which answers the carnal objection of many which say, 1. Cor. 16.^
they must give of their abundance, so if they have not abundance, 2, Cor. 8.23
they are exempted from giving. But the holy Ghost would exempt none, for
every one of his ability is bound to give to church and poor, none must
appear before the Lord empty, he which had not a lamb must offer a dove,
Deuteronomy, 16* Leuit, 12.
and she which had no more, gave two mites into the Lords treasury. The
servant for his wages, Luc. 21.2.
the laborer for his hire, the crafts-man for his taking, the yeoman for his
profits, the gentleman for his office, the noble man for his revenues, must
every one give somewhat to poor and religion: but some take from the Church
one hundred pounds a year, and give scant an hundred shillinges: some has
more and some have less, and they preie upon us as the Eagles on the altars,
carrying with their commodities coals of fire, which shall burn both their
houses and progeny, because they took it from the Lord.

Secondly, in this kindness of Boaz unto Ruth, this is worthy to be noted,
that he commands his servants to offer her no wrong: for to touch, is to
injury in many places of Scripture, as when the Lord speaks by the Prophet
David, Psa. 105:15
Touch not mine anointed, Zach: 2^:
neither do my prophettes any harm. That is, neither do you hurt my
Prophets, or anointed. And again by the prophet Zachary, He that touches
you touches the apple of his eye, that is, which hurts you, harmeth the
tenderest place of all his own body: even so does Boaz take it in this place.
For well knew that good man that her simplicity would be quickly abused by the
rigor of his servants, and we know it has been and also is a common plague
to most of the godly, evil and discurteous servants, as appears in the
history of Abraham and Lot, Genesis 13.7:
and very often the masters which are well affected in religion, are abused by
their servants, in their friends. If they be worshipful, then the servants
will churlishly intertaine those godly persons which resort to their masters
houses: if they be higher, they will scorn them, if baser, they will envy
them: this mischief had godly Joseph noted when he commanded his servants to
use his brethren so kindly: Genesis 42.25 1. Sam, 24.4.5
and David by a servant was whetted on to be revenged upon Saul. Therefore
right worshipful, and yet our brethren in Christ, as you are careful in your
own persons to do good to the godly, even so follow this Boaz, in commanding
your servants to deal friendly also. I know you shall never choose all your
servants of your own disposition, yet if you often warn them, you may chance
to win them, for the beginning of religion is the love of them that profess
it, even as hunger in a sick person is a token, of recovery. Then shall you
cheerfully receive Christ into our houses in his poor members, and joyfully
assure your consciences, you have unfeignedly loved him, for he which has
given his Angels charge over us, wills also that we should give our servants
charge over our brethren: the unkindness which many poor souls have received
at the hands of your churlish and stubborn servants, Mar: 10.13
has discomforted them more than all your liberality has comforted them.
What access could the little children have to Christ when the disciples
forbad them: even so, how shall we repair to your dwellings, when your own
servants, so much as in them lies, diswarn us of your houses, keep us from
your presence, envy our meetings, and deride our profession:

Wherefore she fell. This verse concerns Ruth, and her answer to those
words of Boaz first her gesture is described, that she fell upon the earth, and
bowed her self to the ground, that is, with all show of humility: secondly,
she commends this his kind courtesy, because she was a stranger: so that by
outward behavior, she gratifieth his gentleness, and exalts his liberality
toward her, by the consideration of her own person which was a stranger, and
therefore unworthy of so great kindness.

Out of the which we chiefly observe, first, that it is a duty of the poorer
sort, not only to acknowledge their thankfulness by words, but also to
testify it by outward submission: for Abraham himself used it even to the
idolatrous Hithits, Genesis 23.7.12.
when they gave him leave to bury his dead, twice together. This notes a
greater thankfulness then all the words of the world: in so much as it is
accounted a special duetye belonging to superiors, as we may see in
Bathshebah to her husband, when she came to tell him how Adoniah reigned, and
likewise in king Solomon toward her, 1. Kin. 1.16
when she came to ask Abisag. Now, if these stately persons bowed themselves,
but in courtesy, 1. Kin. 2.19.
much more ought we of duty. Then is here condemned, the uncivil behavior
of many stout persons, which are so far from bowing, that they will hardly
thank their brethren for their liberalityes, accounting it their duty, as they
say, to give: as if also it were not their duty to be thanfull. The known
example of the ten leapers, does much commend this kind of thankful
behavior, and also condemn the ungrateful affection. Other there be that
are in such love, with this cap and knee, that it does them more good to see
the poor people bend unto them, then they rejoice that they have given for
Christ's sake, insomuch as they give, that themselves, and not the Lord might
be honored.

This lack of reverence in the one, and love of honor in the other, are both
unlawful, because they both proceed from one root, which is the pride of our
own hearts, and the conceit of our own persons. Hest. 3, 2.
But some will say, we do but as that godly Mordecai did, which refused to
honor the wicked Haman, so we abstain from doing reverence to the proud and
vaineglorious, because we will not feed their disposition. Unto whom I
answer, that there were many causes for which Mordecai refused to bend unto
Haman, which they can never allege for themselves: Exodus 17.14
the first, because he was a wicked Amalekite, Deuteronomy. 25.17,
of a nation, whom the Lord commanded the Jews utterly to destroy, neither to
spare man, woman or child, 1. Sam. 15.9
as appears in the historye of Saul, who because he transgressed this
commandment of God in saving Agag their king and certain oxen to sacrifise,
it cost him his kingdom and displeasure of God. Because of this law of the
Lord, Mordecai would do no honor to this child of destruction, and was
blameles.

Secondly, it is thought that the honor which Haman obtained, was proper only
to God, because he was advanced above all other: and such kind of reverence we
must always beware of, for Shedrach, Meshach and Abednego, Dan. 3.16.17.18
had rather dye then fall down before the image of the king of Babylon: even
so we must not give more to man then is his own, but unto Caesar the things
which are Caesar's, and unto God the things which are Gods. And if any for these
causes defend their stately behavior, let them consider that the Lord bids us
not to destroy, but rather to love our enemies. And though they require such
worship as is due only to God, yet we must not refuse to give them that which
belongs to man. Other can be content to honor them whom they know to be
godly, but the wicked they think unworthy of reverence, because our savior
would do none to Herod or Pilate, Paul to the high Priest, when he called him
painted wall.

To whom I answer, that Christ (though he called Herod a fox, and would do
no miracle before him, because he desired but to wonder, and not to gloryfie
God by it.) Yet gave to Herod that duty which pertained unto him. Likewise
unto Pilate, when he told him, his power came of the Lord: so Paul did
reverence, not only the high priest, but also Felix, Festus and Agrippa, who
were heathen men, though magistrates, and therefore were honorable by the law
of God. So then this must remain for a grounded truth, that our betters must
be honored as men, not worshipped as God: we must with Abraham bend as well
to the idolatrous Hebron, as with Bathshebah to godly David: if they receive
more then they are worthy, it is not our default, but their danger, let us give
to the prophanest person his right, and vngodliest caytife that which is his
own.

Secondly, by this we note, that the godly in giving must have no respect of
persons, country or kindred, strangers, or neighbors children, as Boaz did
here to Ruth, who by her own confession was a stranger, and therefore
unworthy, but we showed you this in the first chapter by the example of the
Moabites, to Elimelech and his family, to be a thing incident to very natural
men, and by them condemned that use it not, Genesis 1.18 ad 9.
much more in them that have known the truth. The which Abraham did to
angels, whereupon the Apostle wishes, to keep hospitality, Haeb. 13.2.
for so some have received angels, in steed of men. Exodus 22.21
The Lord commanded very sharplye, Leuit. 19.33.
that no violence be done to strangers, neither yet that any should oppress
them.

Whereby the ungodly entreating of strangers, that many wish for among us; is
too wicked envying, that any should be permitted to come and soiourne among
us, like free borne children: Yet herein we are to praise God, that these
persons cannot bite, although they bark at poor harbourles strangers, and
also that he has blessed our magistrates with more pitiful minds. And let
these persons know and consider, that it is as easy to go out as to come
into England, this is, they may as sone be driven to other places out of their
own country, to be strangers there, as these are, repaired for succor
hither. The uncertainty of worldly estate, that has brought great princes to
extreme poverty, should bridle their churlishe and ungodly affections, from
offering one thought of injury to these poor harbourlesse strangers. We
know the parable of Christ, of a man that travailed from Jericho to Jerusalem,
and fell among thieves: the kindness of that stranger Samaritan, should move us
to do good to strangers while the world stands, seeing we are more helped by
their presence, then by our own neighbors: but these kind persons that thus
rail upon poor strangers, are such as are grieved against God and men, who
in their hearts would have no man living in the land, besides themselves and
their cursed posteritye. But some will say, you make too much account of
strangers, Deu. 23.20
the Lord does not make such reckoning of them, because, forbidding usury to
the Jews, yet he permitted them to take vsurye of the strangers, I answer,
those strangers were the cursed Cananites and none other, whom God had vowed
to destruction: to the intent the Jews might have them in all slavery. Of
them he permitted to take usury: for this is the blessing of God upon that
people, Deu. 28.12
that they should be able to lend to other, but stand in no need to borrowe of
other. Therefore that being but a permission for the Jews only, has ceased
in that common wealth: but in Christ there is no difference of Jew or gentile,
male or female, bond or free, for all are his and he the Lords: so that now
the name of a stranger is quite ceased, but all are neighbors and brethren for
evermore.

And Boaz answered. In this verse is contained the replye of Boaz unto the
speech of Ruth* wherein is set down the true cause of his liberalitye unto
her, first in regard of her mother in law and his kinswoman, with whom she
had dealt so well in her own country, secondly, in regard of her self, she
had forsaken father and mother with countreye and kindred, to come among
strange people.

Where we first observe, a singular encouragement to obey our godly parents,
for we see that our good actions needed not to be preached abroad by other,
for our farther commendation, but at the time appointed, they will show
themselves, as the life of trees by sending forth leaves in the spring time of
the year. Ruth, as we have heard, dealt most lovingly with her mother in law
in Moab, yet you see that her kindness has followed her to Bethlehem in Judah,
many miles distant the one from the other. If it had been known there to a
few only, it had bin sufficient: but being spread a broad; the chief man in
a city does commend her for it, among a multitude in a harvest field: the
place could not hide it were it never so far of, the time not conceal it, be
it never so secret: the commendation of it be covered, because she was a
stranger, nor the credit of it be lost in another country. Such is the
nature of good things which we do to other, that no oblivion can ever bury
it. What needs this boasting of our alms deeds, like the blowing of a
trumpet, this bragging of our worthynes: some of their manhood, some of their
friendship, other of their riches, and many of their labor: as if they slept
not foundly til all the world did ring of their commendation. This one thing
loses all our reward, for it is better that the works then the words should
witness it. We may also by this assure our selves, that we have done nothing so
secretly to the flock of Christ, but it is known, and the name of God praised
for it: Reave. 14.19
for as evil deeds remain to the grave, so good works re^ound to perpetual
memory.

Secondlye, by this we observe the excellencye of religion, for whose sake it
is commendable to forget nature, and praise worthy to forsake our parents and
people. Which, if we should do for any other cause whatsoever, we were
accursed.

When the Lord would establishe his covenant with Abraham ^ he called him
from Father and country, Genesis 12.1
to show that for religion sake it is a glory, and not only to do thus,
Leuit. 7.44.
but also for to be scourged, yea, Act. 5.41.
and to suffer death.

Why then is it so contumeliously vpbraided, so scornefully refused of many,
and but of few ^ectiued till this day. Among all the world, only Abraham's
posterity had the covenant and promises, and now though men be as the sand on
the sea shore, and the stars of heaven, Romans 9.27.
which cannot be numbered, yet shall but a remnant be saved; none come unto
it but by the especial grace of God, whereby he draws them, as it were,
against their minds: few persons would resort to Noah's arc, because they
scorned his preaching: even so few are religious, because they account it a
base work to hear the word of God plainly opened, and sincerely expounded.
Where is then become this ancient zeal, that made men and women, as well
noble as base, to be obedient to the calling of the Lord, for which cause they
forsook both wealth, parentage, cuntry, and kindred, but in these days men
will forsake Christ and his Gospel, religion and preaching for the least of
these. Once the Apostle said he accounted all things as dung in regard of
Christ, but now Christ is regarded as dung in comparison of the world. Once
Christ said, whosoever loves father or mother, wife or children, house or
lands more then me, is not worthy of me, but now whosoever loves Christ
more then these, is not worthy to live.

Once it was said, first seek the kingdom of God and the righteousness
thereof; and all other thing shall be cast upon you: but now, first seek the
worlds riches and wealth, and religion will follow too soon. Oh what
miserable days are we fallen into, where ignorance aduanceth it self like
the moon, and is not ashamed, the Gospel reviled by every atheist, the
ministers molested for every papiste, the sacraments profaned, the
professors termed by slanderous titles, which for Christ's sake have lost
their kindred and adventured their lives. Surely, surely, some great plague is
approaching, for the quenching of this burning heat of sin, when they shall
say, here is a God that rewards the righteous, verily there is a God that
judges the world.

Thirdly, we observe out of this verse, that we must not without consideration
give liberally to all, but with special favor do good to the godly: for you
see Boaz tells this second cause, of her forsaking both country and kindred,
as if he were bound to do for such, as for his own children, thereby
signifying, that if we have never so much to give, yet we can never give
enough to the saints of God. This our savior signifies when he says, Luc.
4.26.27
There were many widows in Israel in the days of Eliah, yet to none was he
sent but to Sarephthah, a city of Zidon, to a woman a widdowe: as if he had
said, as God with special kindness relieved her in the three years famine,
even so must we with the like favor succor the godly and laboring poor.
Therefore, Gal. 6:10:
when Paul bids do good unto all, he adds, especially to the household
of faith.

This is profitable for our days, that we might also learn to whom we may
give: for now our land is full of wandering and roaguing beggars, who as their
life is most base, yet their manners are far worse: first they work not at
all, but are idle, and he that works not, must not eat, because he walks
inordinatly: secondly, they are for the most part, utterly void of all fear
of God, atheistes, ignorant persons, blasphemers, prophaners of Sabaothes,
disobedient to magistrates and masters, common whooremaisters and whoores,
having almost every week new husbands and wives; thieves, and such drones as
suck away the alms from poor laboring persons. They will pray at every
door for any simple relief, with their hats on their heads, most
unreuerently: but if any man appear before them, they will presently break
off their prayers, and uncover their heads, esteeming more of the presence of
a seely man or woman, then of the majesty of the eternal God: if they be not
satisfied they will curse more vehementlye, then before they prayed earnestly.
Those are the poor which get our alms: but for other I hear of few, for I
speak nothing but that which I have heard and seen with my own eyes. And to
speak nothing of their changing of their voice, their counterfaiting sores,
and their common drunkenness: I think I may every way conclude, they are the
caterpillars of our country, the Canaanits of our common wealth, the
vngodliest and vnprofitablest members among us.

For whom I have two suits, the one to the magistrates, that so often as they
find such persons, they would duty execute the law upon them, that the
other may beware: and my other to the people, that they would be deaf at
their cries, and shut up their compassions from them, and bestow it upon the
poor laborers among us, to encourage them with patience to endure their
travails, and to discourage the other from this kind of wicked life.
Whatsoever you give them is but seed cast into the sea, whereof shall never
come any profit: but those that are of the house of the Lord let us wish them
prosperity.

The Lord recompense. This is the second part of this reply of Bohaz, which
is his prayer for Ruth: wherein as we showed you, are delivered two things:
first that the* Lord would give her some reward: secondly, he comfort her,
in that he tells her, she is come to trust under the wings of God. Where
first of all here seems some hold for popish merits, seeing he prays
for a recompense and perfect reward. Therefore it may be probably gathered,
will they say, from hence, that works after faith merit grace: for here I
cannot conceal the subtilty of our English papists which they learned from the
Remish Seminary, being asked whither works merit, they answer no, meaning
those works which go before faith, whereas they every one do confidently
believe that works after faith do merit eternal life. Thus they blind our
eyes with the school distinction of works before faith, and after faith, that
they might the better cover their sophistry, but we (praised be God for it)
most confidently affirm, that no works either before or after faith, do
concur in the matter or cause of justification. As for works before faith,
Romans 14.23
we acknowledge they are sin; for whatsoever is not of faith is sin; and
for works after faith, Romans 4.2. Galat. 2.16 Ephesians. 2.6.
we constantly believe with Paul, that our salvation comes not by them. But
let us come to this scripture, and continue a little with our
saluation*workers. We grant Bohaz prays for a reward: What then? therefore
works either merit, or he prays amiss: both which we deny, and will
confirm by this scripture. First did Bohaz think that Ruth had merited by
this forsaking of her, country? I answer no: why then does he pray for her?
if she had deserved it, God is not unjust, hut he that commanded that the hire
of a labourer should not be kept back one night, would not, or needed not
to be entreated for that which he must of necessity perform. By the which we
see, that the prayer of Bohaz the merit of Ruth, and the justice of God,
cannot stand together.

Secondly, for what cause does he pray for a recompense? Was it not because
she had forsaken her own idolatrous people, to come to the Lords common
wealth? yes verily it was so. Then was it of faith or of works? no work
assuredly, but faith; for faith caused Moses when he was grown up, to
forsake the court of Pharao, Heb. 11.2.
and to join himself with God his afflicted people: Faith caused Abraham to
come into the land of promise, from his own idolatrous country: Heb. 11.8
and this same faith caused Ruth to come from the Country of Moab to the
people of the Jews, and therefore Bohaz adds, that she was come to trust
under the wings of God, but confidence proceeds of faith, and not of works.
Therefore to conclude, Bohaz prays for such a reward, as God had promised to
all the faithful: for as the sun looks upon the earth, and the earth
looks upon the sun again, so faith respects the promise of God, and the
promise of God regards faith: Ioh. 3.18.
because it is written, whosoever believes in me has everlasting life; but
whosoever believes not (though he purchase lands for Catholics, build
Churches, ordain chaunteries, and got never so far on pilgrimage) yet is he
condemned already. But now they will renew their wonted outcry, saying, we
preach for faith, we condemn works, we drive men to a wicked life, and tell
them all is well, if they believe well: we condemn, say they, housekeeping,
giving to the poor, with builders of colleges, and Churches, and founders of
hospitals, with all charitable actions: but these are great thunderclappes, but
yet without rain. I ask the resolutest papist living, where ever he read any
of these, in all the writings of the protestants, once mentioned with out
singular co^mendatio^: for I am sure none of you yt are resolute papists, will
come to the churches, to hear our preachers speak against them: yet you cry
out, believe them not, they broche heresies. This is brought unto you, by your
pensioner hangbies, and luke warm professors, papisticall Atheistes, which
come to our Churches to sleep, and there dream, who being come unto you, make
you believe that their dreams, were the preachers sermons: and you that are
apt to believe lies, believe liars. But to come to the purpose, you accuse us
for condemning good works, when we attribute no merits unto them: this we
deny, for the reason is like this: None will become a papist, but he that
hops to be Pope: so none will do good works but he that hops to be
saved or crowned by them: If they grant the latter, then they must give the
former: which I am assured many honest minded papists would not be, though
they might have as much as the Popes father, the Devil offered Christ, which
was all the world. Therefore as a papist is not a papist, because he would
be a pope, so good works must not be done, that men might be crowned by
them. Every Catholic which believes as the Church believes, must not
presently step into Peter's chair: no more, every one that does a good work,
must by that ascend up into heaven Good works have another use then to
justify. Because the eye cannot smell; shall it therefore be pulled out? noe,
it was created to see and not to smell: because good works justify not, shall
no man do them, God forbid, they were given to the faithful, for outward
testimonies of faith, and of God his spirit, that by them they they might
assure themselves and others to be sanctified and elected: not that they should
help, in their salvation. As the tree dies without the bark, and fire is
nothing without heat, so works without faith, and faith without works, is
cursed and unprofitable.

Therefore we say, let every one that calls on the name of Christ, depart
from iniquity, eschew evil, and do good, feed the hungry, cloth the
naked, visit the sick and imprisoned, harbor the harbourles, provide for
children and widows, yea and build Churches, and Colleges for the
maintenance of God his worship and learning. Yet we say, Romans 6: 1.2.3.
we are justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom we were brought to this grace, through which we stand, and
glory under the hope of ye glory of God: for all the works in the world
cannot satisfy for one sin, because there is none other name under heaven by
which we may be saved, but only by the name of Christ.

Out of this, first we gather the goodness of God, which of his own promise
and own mercy, accepts that little obedience of faith, which we offer unto
him. What can we do to the fulfilling of the law? if we keept all and yet
failed in one, we had lost all our labor: but if we kept one point only, and
faulted in the rest it were like to a man that was bound to pay ten thousand
pound, and should offer a shilling: but we keep none, Romans 6.21.
and yet he accepts us in the death of his Son, that our righteousness
might abound to everlasting life. Now, the use of the mercy of God is, that
hereby we should be made more fearful and careful not to offend him: not
as some imagine, that hereby is given the greater liberty to sin, Esaias 24.18.
because the Lord speaks peace unto us in his beloved Christ: for this is,
as the prophet speaks, being escaped out of a ditch to fall into a snare, and
as a man which is drawn out of a river, should cast himself into the sea. But
the regenerate must be more affraide to offend the mercy of God, then the
unregenerate at his threatening judgments. They will not sin, because they
love God; the other will abstain fear of punishmente: the promises of the
Gospel terrify them more then all the terrors of the law; for they find a
sweeter comfort in the presence of the spirit, then to rest in all the gardens
of pleasure, when they find access to the throne of grace, through the blood
of Christ, and by him all their infirmities covered, their petitions granted,
their sins remitted, and they at peace with God: like joyful men discharged
from everlasting imprisonment, they walk in holiness and righteousness before
him all the days of their life. Oh that these mercies would sinked deeper into
our hard hearts, that the force of the cogitation of the blood of Christ might
both soften and mollify, purge and cleanse them from wavering and doubting,
wantonness and presumption, and prepare our fallow grounds fit to receive the
Lords own feed, his everlasting word which is able to save our souls.

Secondly by this when he says, under whose wings thou art come to trust: the
dignity of the faithful is commended unto us, for they live under the wings
of the Lord: Which is a Metaphor or borrowed speech, comparing him to a hen
which covers her chickens with her wings, showing unto us that then we are
in safety, when we are covered with the wings of the Lord. This our savior
noted when he said, that he would have gathered the City of Jerusalem, as
a hen gathers her chickens. This dignity of the faithful is by many such
speeches manifested in the scripture, Mat. 23.37
wherein the Lord shows us the care he has for our safety, when he calls
us the apple of his eye. He shows his love, when he calls us his children,
his brethren and spouse, to teach us our duties: he calls us the branches
of a vine, which are good for nothing but to bring forth grapes: even so are
the godly pleased with nothing which they do, save only the worship of God.
This consists in the holy fellowship which the faithful have with God, which
David faith, brings life for evermore, with whom is a well of life, and the
fulness of all joy. And in another place the Lord says, Behold I stand at the
door and knock, if any man open, I will come in, and suppe with him, and he
with me: and John says, He that abides in the doctrine of Christ, he has
both the father and the Son. 2 Ioh. 9.
Here is the comfort of the spirit that dwells in us, the assurance of faith
which overcomes all the world, the evidence of our salvation, 1. Ioh. 3.24
even the confession of the Gospel with the mouth, and the believing in the
heart, the hearing of it when it is preached, and praying in the assemblies of
the faithful; for wheresoever are two or three gathered together in my name,
there am I in the midst of them, says the Lord: for he dwells among his
saints, the Arc is with his ministers, the covenant or tabernacle of presence
with them that fear him for evermore. Oh, who will not be drawn to be the
member of Christ's own body, the heavenly Temple for the holy Ghost to dwell
in, the sincere professor of true religion, that they may have both the Father
and the Son. Who will not open to the Lords knocking, that he may receive
the king of glory for his guest? Finally, who would not forsake the shadow of
all the trees in the world, to be covered under the the wings of the Lords
presence, Where is more comfort to be found but one day, then a thousand
years in all the thrones of majesty?

Thirdly and lastly, by these words, as is noted the dignity of the faithful,
so on the contrary is utters the desperate and comfortles estate of the
wicked, namely, they are like uncovered birds also, but never are shielded with
the wings of the Lord: they lie open and scattered, subject to all the souls
of the air, every minute in danger to be torn in pieces by the hellish and
infernal devils.

Therefore David says, howsoever they be nobles, and Princes of the earth,
Psalm. 73.18.19.
and have houses and possessions, after their own names, yet they stand but
in slipperie places, so soon as they move, they fall. Our savior says, They
are like a man having no wedding garment: Mat, 22.13
so soon as the king espieth him, he is cast into utter darkness. Ephesians.
4.18.
Paul says, they are strangers from the life of God, so that being living,
yet they are but condemned persons, which every hour, look for the tormentor,
then to be burned in everlasting fire? Oh fearful estate of all Atheistes,
papists, idolaters, Jews, Turks and Pagans, carnal men and hypocrites,
despisers of the ministry and Gospel of Christ; who as in this world they are
without God, so in the world to come, shall be separated from his presence with
the Devil and his Angels. Look on your reckoninges, you guilty consciences,
which every day add thousands to your former inniquities. The greater your
debte is, the sharper shall be your imprisonmente. The oftener you are warned,
the more shall be your stripes: As none were saved but those that entered into
the arc, so not one of you shall ever see the face of God, (except at your
condemnation) unless you become zealous professors, and hear our sermons, be
partakers of our prayers, and as obedient to the voice of the Gospel in the
mouth of his ministers, as if there were a law of present death, to be executed
on you for every default.

I find favor. This is the second part of the speech of Ruth, wherein she
thanketh Boaz, and excuses her self. She thanketh in the first words when
she says: I find favor in thine eyes, oh my Lord, because thou have
comforted me, and have spoken those things which are to the heart of thy
handmaide. For she confesses his courtesy: and thankefulnes, by the verdite of
the learned, is the humble confession of a benefit. She excuses, when she
says, I shall not be as one of thy maidens. As if she had said, I am unworthy
of this courtesy, because I come to labor for my self, not for thee, as these
thy maidens do. Out of the which we observe these things.

First holy example of commendable thankefulnes, much accepted of God and men,
as unthankfulness is abhorred by heaven and earth: we have examples hereof in
many wicked persons, Genesis 21.2.
as Laban his discurtesie to Jacob, Saul unto David, 1 Samuel 19.10.
and the wicked Ammonites to his ambassadors: To speak nothing of Pharaohs
butler unto Joseph, of Nabal unto David, 2 Samuel 10.^
and also the inhabitants of Keilah, Genesis 40.23.
which being famous in the scripture for the enemies of God, 1 Samuel 25.10.
so are they branded with this note of unthankfulness, as if it were an
especial fruit of unrighteousness. 1 Samuel 33.12.
And truly this is most worthy to be urged in our sinful age, for the children
forget their duties to their natural parents, the people tread their
preachers under their feet, for telling them the truth; we always remember
what we have given, but forget what we have received: whereas it is a token of
the best nature, to forget what we have done to other, but to remember what we
have received. Surely, surely, unthankfulness toward God, and toward men,
never reigned or raged more. Toward God, for the continuance of his Gospel,
peace, plenty and welfare of our country: toward men, in gadging the benefits
that are daily bestowed, by casting in the teeth, as if they were deserved. The
heavens abhorred this wickedness, and the heavens will reign down
destruction upon these thankelesse persons, Luc. 17.27.28.
as they did upon Sodom and Gomorra for the like offense.

Secondly, by this we gather, that the prayers of the righteous, are more
acceptable to the godly, then giving or taking of alms. For when Boaz promised
Ruth this kindness, she thanked him, and no more: Verse 10.
but now, when he prayed for her to the Lord, she protested that he
comforted her, and that he had spoken those things which were to the heart of
his handmayde, (that is) which pleased her exceedingly well. As if she had
said, I am bound unto thee my Lord for thy kindness, but thou have comforted
me more with thy prayer, then with that: So that here for herself and for all
the godly, she protests, that of two benefits, she was most of all comforted
by his prayer: which notes in her, a more hungring and thirsting after
righteousness, then after all the maintenance of this present life: for
whosouer drinks of that water of worldely welfare, Ioh. 4.14.
shall thirst again: but whosoever drinks of the water of faithful prayer
shall never thirst any more. This one consideration made the blind men of
Jericho cry so importunately after Christ, saying, Jesus thou son of David
have mercy on us. Some heavenly benefit they looked for, earthly he had none.
And this teaches us, Eccles. 11.1
that when we give, we should also pray for a blessing upon our benevolence:
for Solomon compares the giving of alms to the casting of corn into a moist
or fruitful land, so as the husbandman prays for a blessing upon his seed,
even so he which gives to the poor must pray for a benefit upon his
benevolence. Iam. 2.15.16.
But if any gather by this my speech, that it is sufficient to pray, and not to
give to the pore, I answer, The scripture condemns this folly, when it
says: If a brother or sister be naked and want meat, and thou say unto him,
go warm thy self, and feed thy self and yet give them nothing, this is a
dead and damnable, not a living and a saving faith: of these kind of people the
world is full, which say, alas God help you, God provide for you, God give you
patience, but nothing comes from them, save only fair words. To whom we
may say as a beggar once did to a popish Bishop, desiring a piece of money of
him, were it never so little, but the Bishop said no, he would give him a
pardon: to whom the beggar replied, I perceive, if your pardon were worth any
thing I should not have it: even so if the prayers of these people were any
thing worth, they would not give them, because they give nothing.

Lastly, by this verse, when Ruth excuses her self that she should not be as
one of his maidens, she sets down a true example of Christian simplicity:
for it may be she thought that Boaz was deceived in her, that he might think
she came to work for him and not for her self: therefore she tells him
plainly that she should not be as one of his maidens, that is, as one of his
hired servants. So that these, words of Ruth tend to her own hinderaunce: if
Boaz had been deceived in her, yet godliness will not conceal that, which
makes against it self, if the question be made of profit. Whereby we note,
that encroching for bargains, facing for promises, suing for counterfeit
titles, and such like actions, cannot agree with the simplicity of a godly
minded christian: whose conscience is his court, his religion his attorney, and
the word of God his judge, to pronounce definitive sentence against his own
cause, if it tend to the peril and damage of his neighbor, or discredit of
his profession. Oh that we had more of this simplicity; and less of this
subtlety, whereby we deceive our own souls, betray the glorious gospel of
Jesus Christ, confound the weak minds of our wavering brethren, make
shipwreck of pure consciences, and cast our selves headlong for the world
into the fire of hell.

But Boaz said. This last verse shows unto us, that Boaz was not deceived in
Ruth, but shuts up the communication, by calling her to meat, and deals
to her so abundantly, that she leaves some. By the which words there is noted
two degrees of the kindness of this man. First, that in his own person he
calls her to meat: secondly, that with his own hands he gave her
abundantly. Where we see again and again commended unto us the humility and
liberality of this Boaz: he disdayneth not to call so simple a guest to his
table, knowing her to be a faithful sister, for whose sake, if need were, he
was bound to lay down his life. Whereby we are instructed to cast of the
statelines of our stomachs, standing upon our pantophles, scant vouchsafing to
look friendly on a poor man or woman, much less to speak kindly to either of
both. Again, his liberality by giving so plentifully unto her with his own
hands, it appears he was none of these counterfaite giuers, which promise
much and perform little, and for every carnal companions tale bearing, and
whispering, withdraw their promised and bounden liberality, from church and
poor, from minister and religion. Oh how cold is this devotion, which
proceeds from a sudden humor, and soon ends to God his dishonor: Better
had it been for those men, not to show any favor at all, then after they have
rashly begun, causlesse to withdraw their benevolence from Christ. But I
consider, there shall be some that shall say at the latter end, unto our
savior; we have prophesied in thy name, we have eaten in thy presence, and
yet he shall say unto them, depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I know
you not: then shall they be blessed, which have wasted their wealth for
religion, consumed their living on the faithful, and continued their
liberality unto the end. Now let us give praise to God.

The end of the sixte Lecture.
The seventh Lecture.
Chap. 2. ver. 15.16.17.18.19.20.21.22.23. 15. And when she arose to gleane,
Boaz commanded his servants, saying: let her gather among the sheaues, and do
not rebuke her.

16. And let fall some of the sheaues for her, and let it lie that she may
gather it up, and rebuke her not.

17. And so she gleaned in the field til evening, and she threshed that which
she had gathered, and it was about an eph^ of barley.

18. And she took it up, and went into the city. and her mother in law saw
what she had gathered, and she took forth and gave unto her, of that which
she had left, when she was sufficed.

19 Then her mother in law said unto her, where have thou gleaned to day? and
where wroughtest thou? Blessed be he that knew thee: and she showed her mother
in law, with whom she had wrought, and said the man's name with whom I
wrought to day, was Boaz.

20. And Naomi said unto her daughter in law: blessed be he of the Lord, for he
cease not to do good, both to the living, and to the dead. Again Naomi
said unto her, the man is near unto us, and of our affinity.

21. And Ruth the Moabitesse said. He said also certainly unto me, thou shall
be with my servants, until they have ended all the harvest which is mine.

22. And Naomi answered unto Ruth her daughter in law: it is best, my daughter,
that thou go out with his maidens: that they meet thee not in another field.

23. Then she kept her by the maids of Boaz, unto the end of barley harvest,
and wheat harvest, and dwelt with her mother in law.


THese verses unto the end of this Chapter contain those things which Boaz
and Ruth did, with Naomi also after that Ruth had dined. The words have two
parts. The first between Ruth and Boaz in the field. The second between Ruth
and her mother in law at home.

The first part is in ver. 15.16.17. wherein is set down what Ruth did after
dinner: that she arose to gather ears, which is declared by the time, verse
17. and the quantity in the same verse, an epha of barley. Secondly, Bohaz
renews his commandment to his servants for Ruth, wherein he wills them,
first, that they suffer her to gather where she please: verse 15. Secondly,
that they willingly let fall unto her out of the sheaues, and suffer her to
take it up.

The other part of Ruth and Naomi, is contained ver. 18.19.20.21, 22.23. and
declares what these twain did after Ruth came from the field, and after her
coming home, verse. 18. bringing both her gleaned corn, and reserved victual.
They twain commune of those things which Boaz had done to Ruth. First, Naomi
asks Ruth, where she had gleaned that day. ver. 19. To which Ruth answers,
telling the name of the man in whose possession she had gathered to be Boaz.
verse. 19. Secondely, his courtesy toward her, not only for that present, but
also bids her to abide with his maids unto the end of his harvest. After
this, Naomi first prays for the man, ver. 20. alleging his kindness* not
only to them that are living, but also to those that are dead, and telling
Ruth that the man was their kinsman. Secondly, she counsels Ruth, verse. 22.
that she take his proffer, and abide with his maidens, for fear she be denied
in another field: which Ruth perfourmeth ver. 23, and keeps with them to the
end of barley harvest, and wheat harvest, and afterward with her mother. Of
these parts let us briefly speak, as the spirit shall assist, and the time
permit.

Then she arose. After dinner, like one careful of her business, she repaireth
to her former work, and here by ye way this question may be made, whether Ruth
gave any thanks to God, for her meat, seeing it is not mentioned: for this
doubt must not be omitted, nor pass undissolved, lest our* carnal companions
in this age, which come and go to their meat like bruit beasts, may seem to
have the example of some godly persons, for the defense of their abominable
unthankfulness. To which I answer, first, if any godly person have at any time,
omitted his duty, we must not by his example be drawn to do the like; for we
must live by ye rule of the word of God, not by the examples of the faithful:
Secondly, we must know that every thing or circumstance is not needful in
every place of the scripture to be declared particularly, for in this place we
read not that Ruth gave any thanks to Bohaz for her meat: yet we must not
conclude that she gave none at all, and if she thanked a man, much more the
eternal God, which framed his mind to show her that favor. Thirdly, she
being with Boaz, it was his duty at his own table to pray, and to give
thanks, which no doubt but he did, and she did with him. Therefore to the
words, where we first note the true use of eating and drinking the benefits
of God, which is, that by them we may be enabled to follow our vocations: For
here we see Ruth after meat, returns to her work again, as if the holy
Ghost had flatly set down, that for this cause we must eat and drink that by
them we might work more freely, and labor more diligently. Therefore Solomon
pronounces a blessing upon a whole country, Eccles. 10.17.
whose princes and nobles eat for strength, and not for drunkenness: and these
are accounted two sins of Sodom, idleness and fulness of bread, that is,
eating and no working. Ezec. 16.53
This point can never be stood enough upon, that the belly-gods and vnorderlye
persons of our age might be persuaded therewith to leave their drinking and
drunkenness* their eating and gluttony, and their plays and pastimes: for the
meat is no sooner out of their mouths, but the renewing of their sport enters
into their hearts, how they may spend more time in idleness and vanity. And
above all, this is profitable for serving men to note, who wish nothing but
liberty: and their own consciences know, yt if they may choose, they will
dwell with no masters, but where they may do little work; therefore came the
old proverb, a young serving man, an old beggar; because vnthriftynes in youth
is seldom worn out in age: This I speak not against ye calling which no doubt
but is good and lawful, but only to warn them and exhort them, to banish
their untimely eating and drinking, and to put away idleness with some lawful and
profitable business. And let us all be Ruthes in this point, as in other her
conditions, that we may eat our bread in the sweat of our brows, and rise
to labor, not to pastime: that we may remember our old curse which came by
reason of sin, and ease the contagion of our diseased natures, with the daily
following our honest vocations.

Secondly, by this also may we urge, (although the holy Ghost in this place
speaks not of it) the worship and observation of ye Sabbath: for as men go
from work to meat, and after from meat to work again: even so reason would,
that as we sanctify the Sabboath in the fore noone, by preaching and hearing,
the afternoon should be hallowed with the same exercise. But of all works,
this the greatest is in smallest reputation; for men go from hearing to their
meat: but from their meat either to sleep, or to open profaning the Lords day,
with most execrable and accursed pleasure or negligence. They say, once a day
is enough, yea and too much also, except they did it better. Such clipping of
God his service to satisfy our pleasures, will not stand with the least and
the smallest point of christianity. And this they may be assured of, that in
the last day, their own diligence and weekly labors, in worldly business,
shall stand up in judgment against them, to condemn their negligence in the
travail of godliness: yea and till this slacknes be amended, the time lost and
past repented, they shall never come to the knowledge of God or his truth,
themselves or their own salvation: for he that sanctifies the Sabboath, has
all religion: but he that prophaneth the Sabboath, has none at all.

And Boaz. In these words Boaz renews his commandment to his servants
concerning Ruth, which we showed you was uttered in the ver. 9. and now he
wills them, that though she gather among the sheaues, yet none should shame
her: meaning, none should reprehend her: for reprehension to a godly and
modest woman, is a matter of blushing or shame: And this to be noted, that his
mind is, though she deserved blame, yet none of them should say, black be
her eye, (as the proverb is) that is, once accuse her for any fault, Where we
note the wonderful care that Bohaz had of her, that the longer he looked on
her, the better he liked her: her solitary behavior: her contented trauaill,
her diligent order in going so orderly to her business again, were as orations
or persuasions, to make him being godly, to approve and commend her above all
the residue. Which teaches us, that we should be haled on with the same
cords of honesty, diligence and religion, to extend our liberality in large
gifts and courteous speeches, to every poor person that wants our help: and
that the rather considering poverty is a curse of sin, wherein we are all
as guilty as they: therefore like feeling members of our brothers miseries:
where we see the foresaid graces appear, there let our bounden benevolence
excel, that they may be encouraged with our benefits, and we may be
comforted with their prayers, and both conjoined in this life, and in the life
to come.

Secondly, Ruth would not gather among the sheaues, because no doubt she was
studious to avoid offense, for if she had so done, she must needs in curre the
suspicion; though not the reproof of misbehauiour, coveting more then was her
due: for the ears, and not the sheaues were appointed for the poor. Whereby
we note that the poor must be careful above many things, they abuse not
the liberty of the rich: although they may go without correction to the
sheaues in the fields, or the heaps in the barn, yet they must not eat up
more then beseems them to ask. Now it were without conscience to ask so
much as the owners cannot give, without the shortening of their hands to other
their poor brethren. And this condemns the raking desire of them, which are
never contented: and those ungodly robbers and thieves, which ask and yet have
no need: both which kind of people will to the uttermost, crau^ and have all a
man's possessions, without any mercy, under prete^se of poverty, yea and will
never accept the willing mind of the^ that are not able to give, but like the
sea, gape for ye water out of the little land brooks. These are officers and
bribers, extortioners and usurers, rackers of farms, raysers of rents, takers
of fines and defrauders of simple persons, bargaining, who all are condemned in
the last commandment as the couetors of other men's goods: and therefore
guilty of eternal damnation.

And do you. These words are the second part of his commandment, whereby the
former point is confirmed, that Bohaz knew Ruth would not pick the sheaues;
and therefore wills to let fall on the ground plentifully, for her to avoid
her farther and more unprofitable labor, which he therefore does, that he
might testify, his goods, to be not only his, but all theirs that fear the
Lord: for no doubt but there were many that did gleane in the field beside
Ruth, with whom Bohaz did not thus deal: showing unto us that there may be a
difference in giving, and that we are not bound to give equally to all, but as
the persons are, so must be the gift: the poorest must not have the greatest
share, but the godliest, for poverty without godliness, is like the apple of
Sodom, which is as fair to look on, as any other, but being taken in the
hand, resolves to smoke and powder: so if ungodly poor folks be a little
examined, they shall be found as the apple not worthy eating, so the other not
worthy to be given to; although they cry like the horseleaches daughters,
give, give; yet we must answer the^ with spare, spare. But Bohaz does in this
place as Joseph did to his brethren, Genesis 43.34
he feasted all of the^, but Beniamins part was five times so big as the
residue: afterward, Cap. 45.22.
he gave to every one change of garments, but unto Benjamin he gave three
hundred shikles, and five change of garments, the reason of all this was,
because he was Rachell, his own mothers son, but all the other were his
fathers children only; even so must we do good to all that are our fathers
children by creation: but to our mothers children, which is, the Church of
Christ, the household of faith, whereof Rachel was a tipe, we must with special
portions, for feeding their hunger and clothing of their nakedness, compass
their wantes, Gal: 2.10.
with the supply of our benevolence, for which cause Saint Paul in his
preaching was willed by the other Apostles, to have special and heedfull care
over the poor brethren: which if it were put in practice, we should be more
able to do good unto the godly: and to deny the contrary minded. This one
thing is above all other to be required, yt every one give where God may most
of all be glorified; but the ungodly sort take their relief as the hungry
hounds their feeding, if they be hindered they will fly upon their own
masters, in like sort the wicked will blaspheme God liberally, and not humbly
thank or praise him, for any thing they receive. What if they murmr against
thee and say, my part is not so good as thine, you give him more then to me,
and you care for none but for these precise fellows. Tell them again, it is
lawful for thee to do with thy own as thou will: neither ought thy eye to
be evil, because my hand is good: the unworthiest in the world * shall have
the worthiest portion: they which with them are last, with thee let be first,
and the first with them, be last with thee: for spirtuall men must look for
spiritual hearts, to cast the seed of their alms into good ground, where the
fruit may be increased, the want of the faithful may be relieved, the glory
of Christ may be magnified, thy own duty may be discharged, a good
conscience satisfied, and thy soul for ever comforted. Secondly, by this we
observe, that Boaz might have admitted many hindrances, whereby he might have
been better advised before he gave such large liberty, either to Ruth or to his
servants for her, as to gather among the sheaues, or to let fall hand^ulls unto
her. He might have thought thus with himself, it was lately a derth for a
long time together, it may be shortly ye Lord will send such another, and then
all that I have will be too little for my self and my family, and therefore I
must be wise, and give not so much till I know what I shall lack: but all
this could not turn away the heart of Boaz from doing good unto Ruth, for he
esteemed more of one godly Ruth, then of all the possessions he had: neither
ought any of the godly once to admit any such doubt in their mind, as to be
vexed in distrust of the mercy of God to come. Psa. 119.36
They must pray with David, o Lord incline my heart to thy testimonies, and
not to covetousness. The widow of Zareptha might have so answered Eliah, 1.
King. 17.
that she had but so little left as would only suffice for one meal and give
him nothing, yet she was obedient and believed the word of the prophet, and
her store increased, that she wanted no more.

2. Cor. 8.2, 3.4.
The church of the Macedonians might have said, that they were poor saints as
well as the residue, therefore, as they asked nothing but were content with
their poverty, so none should charge them in giving to other, but yet the
Apostle Paul said, they supplied the want of the Cornithians, and gave more
then they were able. And everlasting is the commendation which he gives of
Onesiphorus, 1. Tim. 1.16 17, 18.
how often he refreshed him and was not ashamed of his chains, but came to
Ephesus and visited him there, and followed him to Rome many hundred miles,
that there also he might succor him, with his charity. Which teaches us, when
we have to deal with the godly, as all these persons had, no cost must be
spared, covetousness not admitted, no fear of want suspected, for he which is
Lord ouerall, is also rich unto all.

Obadiah in a famine fed an hundred prophets, yea and hid them in caves,
from the wrath of Iezabell. What want did he sustain thereby? surely none: 1
King, 18, 13.
for distrust causes want, and not liberalitye: for he which makes thee to
feed his saints now, will also provide another to feed the when thy store is
wasted. Oh hearken to this you possessors of the earth, upon whom in this
time of dearth the eyes of the poor do look, as on the hands of the Lord,
whereby he fills every living thing with his plenteous goodness. Open your
gates wider, that more poor may come into your houses, to be refreshed with
bread: open your purses farther, that more benevolence may come out, to be
cast into the fruitful land of the famished poor, for after many days
you shall find it again: put on the bowels of compassion, and let not your
own brethren want, seeing you have enough. He that wills you to do this
for his sake, will command heaven and earth, to restore his own debte, which
you have lent him: fear not that you shall want, for the Lord is the owner of
the earth, and this is sen^e upon us, to try your charity and compassion
toward the poor for his sake: if you now be liberal, Paul has prayed for
you that you may find mercy in the day of the dissolution of all things,
and the Lord has promised to the merciful mercy, at that day when he
lies sick upon his death bed. Make you treasures therefore of this worldely
wealth, and send them by the hands of the poor into God his kingdom before
you: spare not the sheaues in the barn, the ears in the field, nor the
heaps in your garners, for he that spends for the members of Christ, shall
receive the greater advantage. Remember you are the partakers of the same faith
which they had that sold their possessions to give to the saints and to gain
heaven: but you need not to sell any lands, only deliver your corn
plentifully to the poor: which if you do not, they shall rise in judgment
against you at the latter day, because they spared neither lands nor lives,
and you will not give a little corn for the name of Christ.

And so she gathered. This is the last part of that which Ruth did in the
field, showing her diligence she used in her labors, by working out the whole
day until the evening, and gathering an epha of barley: for by this
appears, that she labored as faithfully for her self and her mother, as if
she had been an hired servant; or her mother looking upon her. By the which
is noted unto us the diligence of children and servants, in the labors and
business of their masters and parents, for they must not seek or covet to
please them with eye service, but their duetyes are required as well in the
time of their absence as in their presence. Be Ruthes, my beloved, in this
point, whosoever are bond or free, for they wc are faithful in a little, shall
be made great rulers, and they which have not been faithful in the earthly
treasures, shall never be trusted with the heavenly. By this also they may
learn, which think they may lawfully take their ease in their own business:
but we see by this example of Ruth, that religion binds us to be as diligent
in our own, as in another man's travail, committed unto us upon trust, for as
to him we are faithful, because we receive wages, so in our own we must be
painful, least the Lord arise against us for the mispending of our time: and
we owe more duty to our heavenly father, then to all the earthly masters of
the world

Again; the quantity of her gathering is here described, to be an epha of
barley: for the understanding whereof we must note that there were three kinds
of measures among the Hebrews, Leu. 19:36. and. 27.16. Exo. 16.36
which are mentioned in the scripture: the first was an homer, which was the
measure of Manna that the Lord allowed to every household when they were
wandering in the wilderness, and contained of our English measure, six pintes
and somewhat more; the second measure was a bin, which after our measure
contained ten pints and somewhat more, the third was an epha, which is this
that measured the barley of Ruth, and it contained ten homers, which comes to
sixty pintes, which being divided by eight, amounts to the quantity of seven
gallons and one pottell, which is a bushel lacking one pottel, after our
English measure. By the which we may observe, how largely the Lord provided
for Ruth by the liberality of Boaz, for she gathered more in one day then
otherwise she could in two or three: where the Lord himself shows us how
she took the courtesy of Boaz, and the servants scattred for her according to
their masters commandment, that her hand might be quickly filled, her
travail the more eased, her labor better rewarded, and finally mother and
daughter be both more comfortably refreshed with their kinsmans kindness. And when
she took up. The day being ended and Ruth wearied with her unwonted and yet
diligent travail, up the takes her bundel of corn, and the scraps of meat
she had reserved, and trudgeth to her mother, that she might understand of her
good hap, and they both together rejoice for the corn Ruth had gatherred, and
the good will which Boaz had offered. Out of the which we may first of all
observe a heavenly and godly example of obedience and love toward her mother in
law, for we see in this place, that she does not only labor for her living,
but refreshes her with that which was given her to satisfy her own hunger;
while she was in the field in her diligent labor. Was it not sufficient for
Ruth, that she left her people and country to come with her mother in law,
but she must also go for her, she sitting at home, in a poor and contemptible
manner to gleane in the field: or if she did that willingly, yet must she save
the meat from her own mouth and put it into Naomies? Here we see she failed in
nothing that might either commend her love, declare her obedeince, and signify
her care toward poor and old Naomi her dear and godly mother. And this
teaches us, that we must be Ruthes to our aged parents, we must labor abroad,
and they must tarry at home, we must set our nimble bones to the heavy business,
and their wearied bodies must rest in the houses: It is ungodliness to say,
that the old man or woman, shall labor and care, for our wretched riot, and
careless expenses, but rather let the young gallant take his own parents upon
his back, Genesis 27.3
carry them from their house of trouble to the harbor of peace. Let Esau and
Jacob hunt venison for Izaack, for he is old and must tarry at home. Let Jacob
and little Joseph tarry in their tents and the lusty youths his sons and
brethern lie in the fields and keep their fathers sheep, Gen, 37.14
and rather then old Jacob should go, let young Joseph t^udge to his brethren
though he be sold for his labor. Let Ruth go gleane for Naomi, and not Naomi
for Ruth, for this is the first commandment with promise. But oh the
graceless generations of our ungodly age, where men are become so tender over
their disobedient brood, that in their labors they will spare their wanton
children, and wear their crazed carkases, they had rather put both feet into
the grave by their over labors, then bring their untamed steeres, and unruly
heyfers, their sons and daughters to the yoke of diligent travail. And these
graceless impes, will look and laugh upon their parents, and say, it does
their old bodies good: And does it so? why, is it better for a tired horse to
run a race, then for a reslye palfreye? You are ready enough to catch that
which is good from your parents, why take ye not their labors, if they be
so good for them? No, no, you are the heaviness of your parents: you should be
olives to make them look cherefully, but you are onions that make them weep
bitterly. But yet let not Ruth and the godly exhort us in vain, for if we
do the labor, we shall have the hire, if we honor our parents, with our
actions and deeds, as we do with our words, then shall our days be
multiplied in the land, or else our lives shall be shortened with untimely
death, and our posterity rooted out by the just judgment of God.

Secondly; by this example of Ruth, that she brought her mother of that which
she had left: we learn this doctrine, if our freindes give us liberally,
and we have plenty, let us not consume all upon our selves, but let us
reserve some for other. When our savior had twice feasted many thousands,
still there was some thing left which he commanded to be taken up: showing
us thereby, if God liberallye pour out his benefits upon us, it is not that
we should the more riotouslye lauishe them out upon meat or pleasure: for
it is a common answer in these days, if we reprove gamesters for their
play, drunkards for their costs, and proud persons for indecent apparel,
wherein every one spends more then would suffice two or three poor
persons, they will tell us, they spend nothing but their own, and what have
we to do with it? But we reply, that they spend more than is their own,
for the earth is the Lords, and all that therein is. They are but stewards of
their goods, and not Lords and masters, and therefore they shall give account
for every penny misspent, when it shall not profit them to say, we wasted
our wealth at dicing and gaming, we consumed our lands by eating and drinking,
and spent thus much money in ga^e apparel, and other bravery.

Secondly, God gave them those benefits, not so much for themselves as for
others: for as the Sun shines not for it self, but for us, the earth
brings forth fruit, not for it self but for us: so wealthy men, are not
wealthy for themselves only, but for all the poor members of Christ, that
they might liberallye bestow upon others. The Heathen king Assuerus, making a
feast to al his Empire; yet he gave this law, Esth. 1.8
that none should be compelled to drink or to eat more than they needed or
pleased: so abominable is gluttony, even in nature, that it hurts man,
spoyleth beasts, and kills the fruits of the earth: for the rankest corn is
none of the best. Then here is temperance by this example commanded: for the
physicians say, that it is most wholesome, to come and rise from meat with a
hungry stomach, and the word of God says, that we must eat for strength
and nature, not for appetite and drunkenness. But oh that our fat Basanites
would admit this as a wholesome and a godly doctrine, then would not their
bellyes and panche^ grow so great as they are, not their hearts so hardened
against the poor: for their dogs, should go empty, their abundance would
be minished, their gluttonyes and drunkenness banished, their pleasures and
delights expelled, and their pride and apparel be humbled, and their godly
and needy brethren succored.

Thirdely, by this we note, that the poorest must strive to bestow somewhat
unto their brethren that want: yea, though they spare it from their own
necessityes: but especially children to their parents, and one kinsman to
another: for thus we see Ruth does, she spared when she had enough, and that
she gave to her mother that wanted. Which godly kindness puts us in mind of
the poor widdowe in the Gospel, that came and gave two mites in to the Lords
treasory, Luc, 21*2.
and the Lord does greatly commend her for it, above the rich offerings of the
wealthy: as if a little thing that a poor man does, were more accepted then
the multitudes of rich men. Indeed to the world the largest gift makes the
greatest show, but to the Lord the little portions of a willing mind, if it
be but a cup of cold water, is greater then the flesh pots of Egypt, and all
the daintye fare of the king of Babylons court. For our savior encourages us
by this means that they which have little to give should not abstain, but
certainly know that the Lord looks on the heart not on the hand, on the
mind not on the gift, (...)
for that which in the presence of the world is despised, in the sight of God
is best accepted. Therefore every one must look to deal some good by their
living, be it never so small, for as there is no herb, but it yeldeth some
fruit, so there must be no man but he must give some what, that so he might
fulfill the law of the Gospel.

But her mother in law. Here in this verse Naomi seeing the plenty of the
gleaned corn, and reserved victual, like a godly woman falls to prayer for a
blessing upon him that had given so liberally unto Ruth: ^ is as a
thanksgiving for the benefit received: and ^^terward* she questioneth with
Ruth, where she had gleaned that day, and Ruth tells her, in the possession
of Boaz.

Where we first of all note the duty of parents to their children, and
masters to their servants, which is to call them to a reckoning where and how
they bestow their time, therefore says Naomi, where haste thou gathered to
day, and where have thou wrought. Condemning this softnes and suffering in
such kind of parents, as are afraid to speak to their children and servants,
not for their work, but for their mispending the sabbath, the idle iourneyes
they make to tauernes and plays, to feasting and dancing, should be examined
by their governors, as Naomi does Ruth. Where have thou wrought to day? Whose
business wast thou employed in? what place did call thee from the service of
God? and what motion did cause thee to dishonor the sabbath? No, no, they can
suffer them to violate the Lords day in pleasure, that they might drudge all
the week after in their worldly travails. Why does not some man give
recreation to his servants of his own six? but they must rob the Lord of the
seventh also, How unequal is this, to put him out that has but one part,
and to score him up that has so many? I am persuaded, that of all other
tokens, of irreligion among us, there is none greater then this, to suffer our
children and servants to violate the Lords own day, that they might the more
willinglye labor and travail for them on the week days. But yet let the
authority of parents remain, that God has given this power unto them, and
let the duty of children and servants appear, that as Ruth gives answer to
Naomi from point to point, how and where she applied her time, even so they are
bound upon pain of God his eternal curse, to give willing and gentle
accounts to them, when they are demanded in such like matters.

Secondly, by this prayer of Naomi, Blessed be (...) of the Lord, that knew
thee, that is; which approved thee and showed thee favor, we note this to be
our duty, to pray for our benefactours, seeing we cannot reward them, so does
Naomi in this place, Tim. 1.1^
and so does Paul for Onesiphorus, that the Lord would show mercy unto him in
the day of his appearing: teaching us that our spiritual praires are more
necessary for them, then their temporal benefits are for us: and therefore let
us learn to pray aright, seeing it is our duty to pray for our friends. These
painted prayers of many which come from the lips, or from wicked hearts, are
such as the prayers of roaguing beggars at every door for base relief, and
also the commonest that are among many poor people in these days, are
abomination in the eyes of the Lord, no benefit to them for whom they are
uttered, and the poison of those that thus do use them. Therefore beloved,
learn to acount of them as they are; clouds carried about with every wind,
wells and no water, great words, but no grace in them: stop your ears at
these bread prayers, and withdraw your hands from giving any relief to them
that abuse this heavenly blessing.

Then said Naomi. In this verse Naomi repeateth her prayer, and adds a reason
of the same, because he has not ceased to do good toward the living, and
toward the dead, that is, he did good to my husband and children when they
were alive, and now to us their posteritye, they being dead, for in doing good
to us for their sakes, they do it to them: for either interpretation will
stand. For we must not imagine, that this liberality does any good to them
that are dead, because they were in Moab ^ these in Inda, they were consumed in
their graves, and unfit for any benevolence, as for their souls they needed no
earthlye beneficence: for that remains true for ever which Solomon says,
Ecll. 9.5.6.
the living know that they shall dye, but the dead know nothing, neither have
they any more part, seeing their remembrance is forgotten, the thing which
they loved and the thing which they hated and the thing they desired is now
perished, with them, neither have they any more part of all the things that are
done under the sun. By the which we may see the delusion of them which teach
us, to buy prayers and pardons for our friends that are dead, that their pains
may be eased which now they endure, for if nothing can profit them that is
done under the sun, then neither our prayers nor purses can give them any
relief* But by these words we learn, that if we do good to the children and
widows of our deceased friends, it is all one, as if we did good to their own
persons. Thus said Naomi in this place, and thus David did good to his friend
Jonathan being dead, 2. Sam, 9.11.
when he did kindly entreat Mephibosheth his son being alive. The Lord
himself protestteth in the scriptures, that he did good to the Israelites and
Jews, Mat. 25, 40.
for Abraham, Isaac, and Jacobs sakes: and our savior in the Gospel
declares, that the good we do to the least of his brethren being on earth,
we do it to him which reigns in heaven; for this is a duetye of true
frendshippe, to make much of our friends when they are departed, to be a friend
to their friends and to be an enemy to their enemies, as the Lord promised
Abraham. Therefore let us cast away this counterfaite kindness, and perform
this godly love, wherein others before us have walked, Genesis 12.13.
and as we were wont louinglye to receive the parents being alive, so let us
ioyfullye entertain the children now they are dead, for true frendshippe
loves at all tmes, Pro, 17:17.
and godly kindness must never be removed. As we wish that others should
use us when we are gone, so let us use others now they are absent.

Moreover Naomi said. In these words she gives comfort unto Ruth, showing
her, that his benevolence was not causeless, seeing he was near unto them
and of their affinitye, being an appointed person to redeem their
inheritance. leuit. 25:25 Deuteronomy: 25:5, 6.
For in the law of the Lord, he has decreed for the poor of the Jews,
that if any person had sold his inheritance, the next of his kindred might
redeem it, and restore it to the familye again* which coming into the mind
of Naomi, she hops that by this means they should come to their
inheritance again, seeing Bohaz, who was one of the next of her kindred, had
so courteously entreated the widdowe and heir.

Whereby we note the great care that the Lord has over the poor, which by a
law decreed, that they should not for ever be deprived of their inheritance,
for at the farthest they should come to it again at the year of Iubile. And
truly this Iawe being ceased, because the Jews common wealth is overthrown,
yet the Lord executes the same in some measure amongst the gentiles daily.
For now we may see and hear, how he exalts many from the duste, to walk
and sit with princes: how he gives great possessions unto them whose
fathers had not one foot of land, and casts many from their unlawful
titles. And every day we hear of some cast down and humbled, and other lift
up and exalted. Who does this? Hest. 7.10. and 8.1. 1. Sa. 16.14 Esa. 22.20.
but the hand of the almightye that puts down Haman and raises up
Mordechai: refuses Saul and chooses David: remooueth Abiathar, and
establishes Sadoch: banisheth Shebnah, and aduanceth Eliakim: and finally,
that in few ages changes all things. Therefore promotion comes neither from
the east, nor from the west, nor from the wilderness, but from the throne of the
Lord of hosts, which opens, and no man shuts, humbles and no man sets
up, exalts and no man casts down, and rules the course of all mankind by
his unchangeable decree. Let not then the mightiest be proud for their honor
and dignity, for the Lord destroyed the Anakims great princes and giants
before the family of Caleb: much more will he do those that are lyfted up by
their wealth that should rather cast them down: and let us do good to these
poor brethren among us, for they shall be lifted up unto riches, when the
greatest and wealthiest among us shall be cast down into poverty. But of this
matter we shall have more occasion to speak in the fourth chapter.

But Ruth said. In this verse Ruth makes relation of those things which Boaz
had said unto her, and praying for a blessing upon him, because he vouchsafed
to take her into the company of his maidens, and gave her leave to gather to
the end of harvest. So that in this place, by these words of Ruth, we have an
example of perfect thankfulness, omitting nothing that might serve to
commend the kindness of Boaz: and also of womanlike and godly modestye, and
ver. 11.12
that concealeth the cause of all this curtesye, which was her own
commendation, as already we have showed you. So that it is no part or point
of godlynes, to do as our evil conditioned and ungrateful persons do, which
omit that which serves most for to commend their benefactours, and to lay
all the praise upon their own deserts. But Solomon willed that another man's,
and not our own mouth should praise us: and most ungodly is it, when men
will not in so ample manner confess the benefits they have received of other,
but by all means extenuate them, which makes men unwilling to do any good,
because they can have no thanks for their labor. And this it is that caused
covetousness and bribery, extortion and usury, to enter upon their bodies and
wealth, that would not gratifye with kind and deserved reports. So that now
men will please themselves with money and rewards, that would have been
satisfied with thankful words: which is a just judgment upon the world, that
would not be contented to recompense kindenes for kindness; are now plagued
with covetousness for kindness.

Wherefore Naomi. This is the last part of this conference or dialogue,
wherein Naomi counsels Ruth to follow and take the proffer of Boaz, and
abide with his maidens, to avoid all dangers, if the reapers deny her in
another field. Where we first of all note, that if we acquainte our parents
and friends, with our actions and enterprises, it might go far better with
us in the things of this life, for their aged counsel which they have bought
with much experience may stay our vnsteddie minds with their approved advise:
Ruth in this place, declaring the courtesy of Boaz, has it confirrmed with the
counsel of Naomi, and grounded upon a reason which she knew not, nor feared
not. For she thought, that in every place she should have found the like
entertainemente, and the reapers that then were, should so continue to the
end of harvest, but Naomi knew they were often changed, and so in the end it
might fall out otherwise, then Boaz appointed, or Ruth expected. And this (me
thinks) does show unto us what manner persons parents ought to be, for if
children want counsel they should be advised by their parents: if comfort,
it should be ministered by parents, if necessaries, they should be provided by
parents: if instruction, they should be guided by parents: and finally, if
correction, they should be orderred by parents: Ephesians. 6.2.
which is not only to be wished, but is required by the Lord that they bring
them up in the fear and nurture of the Lord. And if this were duelye weighed,
and reverently considered, as Eliahas cloak parted the waters of Jordan, so
this would part asunder, and break of many thousand marriages in our days,
where parents are not able to counsel nor willing to be counseled, which if
they would they had not been married. This I speak, not to the discredit of
marriage, but only I exhort, as from the Lord, that those which either are,
or intend to be married, would look and travail first for wisdom, and then
for wives, first for virtue, and then for husbands, wherein, if they follow my
advise, I assure them their marriages will be much merrier, and their posterity
much happier.

Secondly, by this we gather, that it is a dangerous or indecent thing, for
women to travail or work alone without any company, for the weakest are
soonest oppressed, and women are quickly conquered. Genesis 34.^.
We know Dinah travailing alone was taken and ravished by Sichem: and Abigail
when she went to pacific the wrath of David, took servants with hit, as in
this place Naomi counsels Ruth, to abide in the company of the servants of
Boaz, accounting it an indecent and unseemly thing for women and maidens, to
be seen alone. And truly if servants in our days had many times more
company, there would be less dishonestye among them; for we know and see
to our grief, that the daily and usual familiaritye of a few, has bredde
some disease in our church, and distemper in our common wealth. This I speak,
that even in these days of peace, men would be more careful over daughters
and servants, and not to employe them so commonly as they do, in iourneyes
and travail and solitarye business, but for more assurance keep them with
company, which may be their defense against all dangers, if any happen, and
the avoiding of dishonesty, if any be so lightly disposed.

Thirdly, by this we note, what company were best for both kind of youths,
either young men or maidens, when Naomi says it is good for thee to go forth
with his maidens: that is, thou art a woman, and abide among his women and
maidens, for all companions are neither fit nor lawefull, maidens among men,
and men among maidens is for many causes disalowed. First, because there is no
such equality in the sex, that they might keep together: for if they labor,
it is not alike, and if they sport their pleasures are contrary, and if they
dallye it is flat iniquitye. In consideration whereof in old time the wives
had one tent to dwell in and the husbands another: as we may see in Abraham,
Gen, 18.30 Genesis 31.33. Erod: 15.20
in Sara, in Jacob and his wives, and like this it is that Miriam, and the
women of Israel praised God by themselves after their deliverance out of
Egypt, and Moses and Aaron her brethren, with all the men of Israel by
themselves. And also we know how the virgins of Israel went up every year
in to the wilderness to lament and talk with the daughter of Iephthah. Whereby
we are taught, Iud. 11.37.
that not only for* fear of danger, but also for modestye and conscience
sake, we must avoid this mingled companyes of men and women, except in
necessary occasions, as prayer priuatelye and publiquelye, communication of
godly pretended marriages, and such like business. Whereby also we see at
once condemned the feasting, dancing, meeting, playing and running of men and
maidens together: without all respect of honesty or modesty. And that which is
worst, parents and masters will behold their pastime, and delight in the
vanitye of their wanton children, trayning them up in a dissolute life, and
commending their indecent and unseemly behavior. Amend this negligence in the
shell of infancye, and your children will grow up to your greater comfort, and
prosper to their more happy welfare, and the occasion of many sins will be
cut of, if we follow the counsel of the spirit of God.

And so she abode. This is the conclusion of this chapter, and second part of
this history showing unto us that Ruth followed ye counsel of her mother,
abiding with ye maidens of Boaz to the end of barley and wheat harvest, and
aferward dwells with her mother again. Where we observe another example of
obedience in Ruth, that hearkened to the voice of her mother, and went forth
with the maidens of Boaz. And surely it is commonly seen, that such as the
mother is, such is the daughter, for more Naomies would make mo Ruthes, and mo
good mothers would make more good daughters: And in these days all the faults
of children may justly be imputed to the folly of parents, as the old crabbe
goes, so goes the young, and as the old cock croweth, so croweth the young:
a serpent hatcheth a serpent not an eele, so evil parents bring forth evil
and ungodly chilren, but good fathers by diligent instruction and tender
admonition, Job. 1.5. and 42:12.
by praying with and for their children, as Job did, shall live to see their
generations as blessed as his was.

Secondly, by this we learn an excellent example of godly liberality. in
that Boaz suffered Ruth to gather wheat as well as barley, the best as well
as the meaner. In like manner must we as willingly depart with, for Christ's
sake our wine as our water, our drink as our draffe, and as we commonly
speak, our white bread as our brown: and truly in this many good men offend,
not because they give it not, but because they think it too much to give: as
if our best gifts were not best accepted in the presence of God. He which
fed the Israelites with Angels food, would also that we should feed him in the
godly poor with our worshipful and daintiest fare. This I speak not, that
those which ask, should be discontented with the meanest and fittest for
them, for the proverb is, beggars must not be choosers, as it is
covetousness not to vouchsafe, the best we have (if need require) to the
poor, so it is scornefulnes for the poor; like the Israelites, which loathed
Manna, and desired flesh to be discontented with their necessary and present
food, and to lust for that which is above their vocation. But the use of this
point is, to persuade to be like minded unto Boaz in this, to the godly
poor, that we every one without partiality or grudging, when necessity
requires, give our gold as well as our silver, and distribute our dearest
alms to our poorest breethren.

Thirdely, harvest being done, Ruth abides with her mother in law, for none
of the godly will make a daily and continual trade of asking alms, or forsake
their own parents or poor habitations, for worldly respects; as appears by
this example of Ruth. For it is no doubt, she fared well every day with the
servants of Boaz, and much better then her poor mother could provide for her
at home, but she is not drawn away therewith, but it as contented to eat the
hungry morsels with her mother at home, as the plentiful abroad. And it is
great pity that any should be succored, which are not contented to live
hardely at home, and then to ask, when there is no other honest means left to
live. And this condemns the common walking mates, which neither have houses
nor honesty, and it is greatest pity that they either should be succored or
suffered so to do, for they are drones, which never come in hiues, but to the
hurt of other: they waste all, but get nothing; neither have they any other
care, but to charge the godly and charitable people. Unto such give not, as we
have often said, for they which will not live of the sweat of their brows,
let them not eat of the bread of our labors. Now let us give praise to God.

The end of the seventh Lecture.
The eight Lecture.
Chap. 3. ver. 1.2.3.4.5.6. 1. Afterward, Naomi her mother in law said unto
her, shall I not seek rest for thee my daughter, that thou may prosper.

2. And now, is not Boaz our kinsman, with whose maid thou was, behold he
winnoweth barley in the floor this night.

3. Wash thee therefore and anoint thee, and put on thy clothes, and go down
into the floor, and let not the man know thee, until he have made an end
to eat and drink.

4. But when he lies down, mark the place where he lies: then come thou,
and uncover the place of his feet, and lie down, and he shall tell thee what
thou shall do.

5. And she said unto her, whatsoever thou have commanded me, that will I do.

6. And so she went down into the floor, and did altogether, as her mother in
law had commanded her.


THis third Chapter is the second occasion of this marriage, wherein Naomi
especially deals with Ruth, how she should make known her suit to Boaz.
The whole Chapter has these two parts, first the counsel of Naomi to Ruth,
secondly the effect of that counsel. The counsel is contained in these six
verses now read, consisting also of two parts: first, her care for Ruth, verse
1. that her desire is to procure her prosperity: secondly, the means whereby
Ruth might perform that which she advises: first because Boaz was then alone
in the floor winnowing of barley: secondly, she must prepare herself to go to
him: first, in her body, by washing and anointing it: secondly, in her
ornament, that she put on her best clothes, and so go down to the floor:
after she was come thither, she instructs her, how to behave her self:
first by keeping out of his sight and knowledge, till he had supped: secondly,
by marking the place of his bed, and lying down at his feet, and declaring her
suit unto him; and he would tell her what she should do. After all this Ruth
promises obedience, verse. 5.6. and accomplisheth her mothers desire. Of these
parts let us briefly speak, as the spirit of God shall assist us, and the
time permit.

Afterward Naomi. In these words is declared unto us the great care that
Naomi had of her daughter in law, Ruth, for they are thus much in effect. Now,
both of us are in quiet, and peaceable rest at home, yet I see that our welfare
cannot always endure, for I am old, and the grave gapeth after me, thou art
young and a good marriage tarieth for thee: it is my duty to look for thy
welfare, and to provide for thy continual rest, if I be taken away: and being
careful of it, I have now invented the means, etc. Out of the which we note
these two profitable doctrines.

First, that it is the duty of parents to provide for their children, when
themselves shall be taken away, yea though they have no certain assurance,
whether they shall need it or not. This we may see here practiced by Naomi:
for she was never in better case since her arrival at Bethlehem, then she was
at this present: Harvest was ended, provision obtained, household furnished, and
these two poor widows living lovingly together, yet then we see in her best
estate, she is most careful for the marriage of Ruth. And truly this is
required of all them that have any children, to provide for them that they
should not care only for their present maintenance, but also for their future
commodity. And this makes many godly persons to marvel, why men do trouble
their houses with their children, when they are able honestly to provide for
them abroad. Why do many permit and suffer their their sons and
daughters, to spend the best of their youth in single estate, when it is rather
required that while they are young, they should be bestowed. Truly this
makes many so marriages against ye parents minds, when they are negligent to
look to their children, and then the children provide for themselves. Men
look for offers, as the mariner looks for wind, and when the wind serves,
the tide falls: so many would provide for their children when it is too late.
This injury is all heaped on the children; they match without wealth or
blessing: they are detayned in the best time of their days; and finally, are
discredited by their own parents. Would God, you that are natural parents
would learn of Naomi, which was but a stepmother. She differred not the time;
she knew it a sin against nature, that youth should be wasted, and not in
marriage: she had a conscience of her duty; and a care to her daughter in
law, that her welfare might increase, her solitary life be comforted, her
name advanced, and her religion rewarded, with a temporal blessing of a godly
husband, and eternal salvation in the kingdom of heaven.

Secondly, by this we gather that for many causes marriage is better then the
unmarried estate, if with the fear of God it be undertaken. For in this place
Naomi calls it rest, as she did in the first Chapter: and therefore by
relation the unmarried life is disquietnes, and as rest is better then trouble,
Verse 9
so the married life is better then the other. And truly, in the unmarried life,
we find many inconveniences: First, the heart is never satisfied: if a man
have riches, honor, pleasure, health, and favor; yet wanting a convenient
marriage, he is not at rest, but desires that, If he be in sickness, the
diligence and care of a wife is better then a physician, Nature bids him
marry to increase his name. The world bids him marry, to multiply mankind.
The Lord bids him marry, to prepare some heirs for the kingdom of heaven:
So that if nature; world, and religion require it, who shall speak against it?
Secondly, in the unmarried estate, is either too too much solitariness, or too
too much pleasure: the mean between both is marriage, where he shall always
find company to expel sorrow, and joyful care to drive away over merry
pastimes: it calls a man to gravity, it admonishes of death, if shows the
world to be vanity, and has no hope but in heaven. Therefore Solomon
speaking of one kind, and alluding to both, says: Prou. 18.2^
He that finds a wife, finds a good thing, and receives favor of the
Lord: even so may a woman say, If she find a godly husband, she has a great
favor. Christ takes greatest delight in his Church, and his Church in Christ.
Such is marriage, when the heart of one rests in another, that is the rest
which is to be required. As for temporal blessings which further it: Deuteronomy.
8.18
they must be sought for by diligent labor, and prayed for by faithful
supplication, because it is the Lord that gives power to get riches, grace to
use them, and his blessing to increase them. We know, all the fathers so soon
as their children were grown up, they willed and wished them to marry, that
their minds might first be stayed at home, as it were the foundation, and then
their actions would be wiser abroad, which would make a perfect building. But
some will say, Paul affirms, 1 Cor. 7.1
it is not good for a man to touch a woman, that is, to marry. I answer, that
saying of Paul is because of troubles that are incident to marriage, by reason
of the wickedness of the world. The merchant that ventureth on the sea, has
greatest gain, and suddainest loss, not as if the sea were in fault, but
because the storms fall on the sea; even so, if any find their marriages bitter
unto them, let them know, the fault is not in the thing, but in the time,
place or persons: And though troubles follow it, it is but sour sauce to
sweet meat: as the furnace does purge the gold, that their love might be
manifested, their fidelity tried, their patience approved, and their religion
(if they have any) declared.

Again, they will object, the same Apostle says in the same Chapter, He that
gives in marriage does well, but he that gives not in marriage does better:
therefore the unmarried life is better then the married: To which I answer,
first, he speaks to them that have the gift, of chastity, but we know the
fewest part are endued therewith: Secondly, his speech is for those
troublesome days of persecution, when the faithful were in continual
troubles and fear of their lives, then was it better to die single, then leave
many helpelesse widows behind, that they might the better fly in danger, be
constant in affliction, and have no lets, or pul-backes, to keep them from
Christ: so he wishes and protests, for their troubles were means to keep
them from marriage, in which sense the Apostle calls it better not to marry,
and yet yields the other to be good and lawful. (...)
But in times of peace, where there is plenty and liberty, the swelling
nature will not be appeased, but only by marriage, where the gift is not, and
the Apostle says in those dangerous times, that it was better to marrye then
to burn: that is, to be vexed with the daily desire, through the feeling of
our own necessities.

Thirdelie, they may object, that the unmarried care for the things of God, but
the married to please their husbands and wives: to the which I answer, that
marriage hinders not the service of God, but furthereth it in many respects:
first, because a householde is a little Church, where the married persons are
the ministers of their families, by private instruction to draw both children
and servants to the kingdom of heaven. Secondly, it puts them in mind of
the love of God to them, when they love one another: and admonishes them of
their duties, which is to love God again. Thirdely, they have mo private
blessings, as the seals of God his favor toward them, which also stirs
them up to serve the Lord. Fourthly, two are better then one for if one be
negligent in the worship of God, the other may whette his fellow on, and
their prayers are more acceptable, because the number of them that pray is
greater. And if any omit these duties, the fault is in the persons, not in the
marriage: for that is it which the Apostle Saint Paul condemns, when either
party are so much inclyned to one another, that they weigh not the love of
God, and care of heavenly things, for the fondenesse over themselves and
travail for earthly commodities: but we must be married, as if we were
unmarried in this respect, we must use the world as if we used it not, rejoice
in the company of one another; as if we rejoiced not. Therefore, to conclude,
marriage is honorable in all, instituted by God himself, observed by the
Fathers before Christ, both princes, priests, and prophets, commanded by our
Savior and his apostles, to be undertaken, that such persons as have not the
gift of continencye might marry and keep themselves the undefiled members of
Christ's mystical body. Let us then be exhorted to be patient in the
troubles that accompanye it, for although a bitter shell do compass the
nutte, yet how sweet is the kernel that lies within: although it have as many
miseries, as the winter has cold days, yet unspeakable is the comfort of
it, to them that are equally minded. And as our labor in innocence was
nothing but pleasure, which now is nothing but sorrow: So marriage was then more
sweeter, though now for sin it is become more bitter: but the hardest labor
has some profit; and the poorest marriage has much comfort. But most accursed
are they, which for to avoid the troubles they have conceived of marriage, do
give their bodies to most filthy whoredoms, and wretched adulteries: Of whom
Saint Paul says, That God shall judge them, that is, utterly condemn them:
for they shall never be made the members of Christ, which have incorporated
them to be the members of harlots, and heirs of eternal and everlasting
damnation.

And is not Boaz. As in the former verse we have heard the diligent
carfulness of Naomi for Ruth, to prepare her some rest, that is, a marriage.
So now we are to entreat or speak of the means whereby this might be
accomplished, which Naomi expresses in this verse, to this effect. By my daily
study I have found out a means whereby thou may come to more continual
rest Boaz, with whose maidens thou have gleaned, and did so courteously entreat
thee, he is our kinsman and defendour, by the law, and even now he is alone
in the floor, winnowing his barley, to whom if thou will go, and follow my
counsel, he will show thee the way that tends to thy wealth.

Out of the which we gather, an example of ancient nobility, how they followed
not their daily pleasure, but continual labor: how they honored the wealth
that God has given them, with the diligent labor of their of their own
persons: that even this poorest work, Iud. 6, 11
of winnowing and threshing (as we read of Gedeon) was not only committed to
their servants, but performed by themselves. Whereby we are taught that it is
no such unseemly thing, as many would make it: for men of wealth to follow
their basest labors. This Boaz had a prince to his grandfather, and he was the
heir unto all his possessions, yet here we find him alone winnowing his own
corn. We read of Judah the son of Jacob, Genesis 38.13. 2 Samuel 13.24.
a progenitour of this Bohaz, that he went in his own person to the shearing
of his sheep: and so did the sons of king David, when Ammon was slain by
the servants of Absolon because he defiled his sister Thamar. Examples of
this are more plentiful, the^ the time will suffer me to rehearse, which are all
left to us, for patterns of thankefulnes, in their diligent labors, and
witnesses of our unworthiness in all our possessions. Adam could not dwell in
paradise, except in his own person he tilled it: but many with us, I think
would deride him and all their fathers, if they saw them in any thing but the
gentleman's trade: for being hindered neither by the magistracy, nor by the
ministry, they had rather follow hawking or hunting, gaming and playing, then
at any time to foil their hands with their own labors, but wasting their
wealth in unprofitable pleasure, while they might increase their substance by
godly travail. Cast away therefore this worshipful idleness, for men think,
nothing makes them gentlemen, but abstinence from bodily labor, whereas that
one thing is the greatest blot to our latest nobility, that they have cast of
the care of their labors to others, applying their time to greater liberty,
opening by idleness the passage to all manner of iniquity. Remember, the
fattest Ox comes first to the slaughter, when the laboring beast is merry
in the yoke: even so the idlest bodies are soonest seysed by sickness, and
consumed by death: whereas laboring persons have many days; in so much as it
seems a matter of murder, by idleness to hasten the death of of our bodies.
Therefore some loathing labor, take themselves to licentious riot, and sweat
out their sickness in unlawful pastimes: but bodily exercise profits little,
and will rather in the end procure the pains they most of all abhor, like
the hair of Absolon, wherein he most delighted, with which was wrought his
death. But the conclusion of all this is, 2 Samuel, 18.9
that those which are the cheifest in spending, should be the cheifest in
working: and the princes of the possessions, must be the principal in the
labors.

Wash thee therefore. These words contain the preparation, which she
counsels Ruth, before she descend to Bohaz in the floor, that she wash
her, and annoint her: Two usual things in those countries: and the meaning of
Naomi is, that Ruth prepare her self in most comely manner to go down unto
him, whom she desired to be her husband. For these actions of washing and
anointing, were and are very common in those places: washing, to scour of the
filth of the bodies; and anointing, to make them look cheerfully. So we
read of David, 2, Sam. 12.20. 2. Sam. 11.2
after he had long fasted for his adulterous child, hearing it was dead, he
washed and anointed himself: and as Bathshebah was washing her self, it
happened that he saw her; whereby his heart was taken with her love, and
drawn from God at one time. In so much as we see it an usual and accustomed
thing in those days the washing of men and women, Mat. 6.17.
and for anointing our Savior speaks that when we fast we annoyte, our
selves, that we seem not unto men to fast. Here then we see Naomi
commands Ruth no unseemly addressing of her self, but such as was usual,
and common among her own people, and lawful also for her to put in practice.
Whereby we first of all observe, that comely ornaments and modest addressing
of our selves, either of men, or women, is a thing required of them that fear
God; for the outward cleansing and washing away of the filth of our bodies,
being the savor of sin reigning in us: insomuch as it is a brutish thing, to
go in their bodies (as many will) without all respect of person or humanity,
hands spotted, face besmeared, countenance disfigured. And their natural
complexion defaced in them, through their daily uncivil and unnatural
behavior and negligence, who by their cruel laboring to get the world,
loose the comfort of their own bodies, while in swinish attire they wallow in
the company of God and men.

Secondly, by this we gather, that the Lord has given the fruits of the
earth, as well for our ornament, as for our nourishmente; because it is as
necessary in some respects for the comeliness of the body, that it be
raised up to handsomnesse, being nourished: as that it should be nourished
being weak. Therefore says David, Psa. 104.15
With wine he refreshes the heart of man, and he has given oil to make
him have a cheerful countenance: 14.
and in the verse before he says, He makes the grass to grow for the beast,
and the green herb for the use of man: not simply for the meat, but for the
service or use of man. And notable is the history of a woman, that came to
anoint our savior before his death, that powered on him a rich and coastly
box of ointment, and he excused her, and commended her for it. Mar: 14.34.
And it was an use in old time to anoint the bodies of them that were dead, as
we may see how those three women, Mary Magdalen, and Mary the mother of James,
Mar. 16.1.
and also Salome, came to anoint the body of Christ lying in the grave. If
this was lawful to be done to the dead carkases, much more is it to the
living bodies of God his Saints.

And here by the way we may profitably describe, what is to be thought of
starching, because the godly are much troubled therewith: for some think it
utterly unlawful: some suppose it to be indifferent; but other imagine it to
be necessary: and every one of these do mutually condemn one another:
Therefore let us hear the reasons that are brought against it, if they be
weighty receive them, if light and of little force, we will leave it to the
discretion of the faithful.

First, they say against it, that it consumes the grain of wheat whereof it
is made, so that the same which was ordained for food, is transferred to
another use, which is unlawful. To which I answer, so was oil ordained for
nourishment as well as wheat; yet the godly might take that most comfortable
creature, and apply it to the adorning and setting forth* of their bodies:
which was lawful for them, and therefore the other for us, if it be sparingly
used. But they will say, oil was applied to the body, but this is only in the
apparel, therefore the reason of them is not alike: To which I answer; that
which is done to the apparel, is done to the body, because it is done for the
bodies sake, as we read of Izaack, which smelled the savor of Esaus garments,
Genesis 27.29.
that Jacob wore when he got the blessing, and upon that pronounced his
blessing.

But they reply again, and say it maintayneth pride, and therefore is
unlawful: but I answer, it is hard to condemn, except we knew the
heart, for that is the feate of pride and not the apparel. Again, if any do
so abuse it, they more offend in that by a thousand parts, then if the thing
in it self were utterly unlawful: therefore the fault lies in the persons,
not in the manner of addressing themselves.

But they object again, That it is a great loss of time, for it asks much
more labor then simple washing: but I answer, so did this anointing and if
the reason be good against the one, it avails also against the other: so that
of the three former judgments, I think it in the mean to be indifferent.
And thus in a word, and briefly I have touched it, as a thing not worth any
farther handling, and have uttered my poor judgment in the same, in the
behalf of them that indifferently use it, because some have slanderously
given out, that none but proud and singular persons use it: others have
scornefully answered, that none but precise fools mislike it. But let us in
the spirit of meekness and gentleness neither condemn them that use it,
nor contemn those that do forbid it. Neither do I speak this to persuade
any to embrace it, whose consciences have always been against it, but I
charitablie desire them, to bear with their breethren, and in these
unnecessary trifles; to suffer all the faithful to enjoy their christian
liberty. But especially let us learn to praise the Lord, which has thus
carefully and plentifully provided for us every way: outwardly in our bodies,
making his creatures to comfort us: and inwardly in our souls, giving his own
spirit to be the earnest of our salvation: that we might want nothing to
draw us away from his majesty: but in all thanksgiving to walk before him
in the profession of the Gospel, being compassed about with the helps of this
life, as Elisha was with the mountains of Angels: that the comfortles sorrows
of worldly miseries may never drive us to desperation.

And put thy garments. This is the second thing which Naomi wills Ruth in
her preparation to go down to Bohaz, for first she commanded her to dress
her body: so now she wills her to put on her best apparel, as the
goodliest ornaments of her body: for we must not imagine, that Ruth went
naked in the house, although she bid her put on her apparel, but her meaning
is, that she should put on her best apparel that every way she might be
furnished to deal with so noble a personage, and so weighty a cause: Out of
the which we note.

First, another duty of humanity, that if God give any blessing unto us, we
should also be careful in these bodies of sin, to provide for our selves
change of apparel. For we know after Adam had sinned, Genesis 3.7
the first thing he thought on, was somewhat to cover his nakedness. By the
which we may learn that the first entrance or occasion of clothing was given
by sin, that we might cover the shame of our bodies, for if Adam had
continued in his estate of innocence, there had been no shame of nakedness,
no cause of garments, no fear of cold, or terror of heat: and therefore
before all things he sowed some fig leaves together, for the hiding of his
offense: but God made them garments of skins. So then we must be very
careful for the conscience of sin, that we cover our bodies with outward
apparel, which indeed is but a type of show, how our souls must be clothed
with Jesus Christ. For this cause it was usual in ancient time, that they not
only provided simply a garmente for the present necessity, but many changes
for their bodies commodities. And as the world grew, so sin increased, and
as sin increased, the miseries of our bodies multiplied: like a ruinous
house, that every day falls to decay more and more: Therefore more helps
were invented in the days of Abraham, then in the life of Adam: and more in
the time of Moses then in Abraham's, and more in Salomons, then in all the
residue or former: for as the soar spread it self, so the salve must be
lengthened; now the air is intemperate, the earth unfruitful, the bodies of
mankind molested by a thousand diseases, and every herb which was the first
man's nourishment, is our surfeit; in so much as, the avoiding of all these, must
be carefully provided by lawful devises. which the Fathers ordained and
appointed by long experience, to be not a little help by the change of
apparel. And here we see these poor people have this benefit for their
bodies, as well as the rich.

Now, because in some the excess hereof is so great, that they pass all
humanity: and in other the want is so indecent, that it shameth mankind, to
see their breethren go so basely: Some being able, yet like asses laden with
much wealth, they have no power to bestow it on themselves or other: again,
many poor souls, which have nothing to provide, or to cover them, are
neglected by them that are able: Therefore, in this place we must set down
some rules out of the word of God, to take away all these extremities.

And the first thing that must be known, is the cause for which it is not
only needful, but also lawful to provide apparel, which already we have
showed you, to be the sin of Adam which wrought in us the shame of our naked
bodies, and brought upon us cold and heat, sickness and soars, surfets and
death: so then the bodies covered by clothing, are made comelye again, are
armed against heat, warmed against cold, strengthened against sickness, and
the days of health lengthened, life prolonged, and death avoided: For as the
prisoner looking upon his irons, thinks upon his theft, so every one, when he
sees his garments, must think on his sins. And this one consideration
strikes down al devises of fashions, or conceits of pride: for alas what
glory has the these in his bands, or what profit by their making; for now
he is clogged with them, but anon he is tucked up with the halter: Zeph. 1.8.
so proud persons are now prancked up while they look on their feathers, but
anon are paid for their fashions, with eternal damnation. For the Lord cries
out by the prophet, that he will take vengeance of the princes and the sons of
the king, for using strange apparel.

Mat. 6.30.
Secondly, there may be a difference of apparel, one kind for the rich,
another for the poor; one for he prince, another for the people, one for the
noble man, and another for the gentleman: for our savior speaking of the
royalty of Solomon in all his apparel, does not discommend it: Genesis 27.29.
and we have heard already of the apparel of Esau lying in his father
Isaackes house. And this may be also in many suits; as Jacob had sent him by
his son Joseph, and Joseph gave his brethren to every one garments, but to
Benjamin* he gave five chaunges: But some will say, our Savior bids us not
to have two coats: and therefore this change is unlawful: To which I
answer, that it is unlawful to possess change, or variety of garments,
when we see and behold our brother has none: therefore our Savior Christ
adds, that he that has two coats must give to him that has none: So that
our abundance must never be to the want and necessity of our brethren.

But alas, where is this difference in manner of garments, I speak for the
matter wherefore they are made: we may make the old complaint of a christian
father, a thing worthy to be seen, yea rather to be lamented: The maid
follows the mistress in such bravery of apparel, that it is hard to know
whether maid or mistress goes foremost. Such confusion of degrees, consuming of
wealth and goods, condemning the humble, and aduauncing of base persons by
apparel into the place of worthy men, is the overthrow and destruction of a
whole country, the ruin of a common wealth, and the defacing of the Church of
Christ. But all this while the naked may go naked still, for any clothing they
can get of these that have such plenty and abundance: so that men cloth
themselves in the finest silks, feed themselves with the fattest calves, and
the case themselves in the softest beds; while Christ in his members is
harbourlesse without houses, hungry without bread, and naked without any
raiment to cast upon him. Oh woe be to you dainty persons, that thus provide
for your own mayntenance, and neglect the sustenaunce of the poor: you are
clothed in soft and gorgeous apparel, and fare deliciously every day: you
eat up the needy like bread: Ezec. 16.53
you are deaf at their cries, blind at their nakedness, and like the
citizens of Sodom, unmerciful to their miseries: Luc. 17.28
consider that their eating and drinking brought brimstone from heaven, with
fire to burn up their cities and souls. Luc. 16.17.
Consider the end of that rich glutton in the Gospel, which was so tormented
in the pains of hell, that he desired but a drop of water, and could not
obtain it. Your bravery shall be turned into shame, your pride into pains,
your ease into restles trouble, your abundance into everlasting want, your
friends into devils, your honor into hell, your unmerciful hearts into
insufferable plagues, and your pleasures repayed with eternal destruction both
of body and soul. The like may be said of those covetous persons, which go as
far under their calling as other above, and will hardely bestow any
garments on themselves worth the wearing, and disgrace the proportion of
mankind through their base apparel, and vnreuerent addressing themselves,
without all respect of honesty, regard of religion, conscience of their
places, and knowledge of the true use of the benefits of God. But many spend
all that they ^^n get upon their bellies, never caring how simply they go in
the face of the world; so they have any thing to cover their nakedness, and
we know what kind of beasts are the punishment of such slothfulnes.
Therefore let us every one help those that are not able to provide, yea and to
buy them apparel: and let us all learn hereby what care we ought to have of
the change of our bodies, that if we will be ruled by the example of the
godly, we must rather study and travail for our covering, then for our
nourishing; Therefore we must pray for our clothing of him that clotheth the
Lillies of the field, in such measure as we may be comforted, our nakedness
covered, our shame abated our vncomelines adorned, and the savor of sin
expelled, that we might praise his power for evermore.

Secondly, by this we also may note, what reverence, we owe to magistrates and
to men in authority, that we must be carfull in their presence to give no
offense even in our apparel, for here we see Ruthe going to Boaz, an elder of
Bethlehem, she is commanded by Naomi to put on her best apparel, as a duty
of all the faithful, that they make not their persence odious in the sight of
their rulers, and for this cause we read in stories, that when any were wont to
come before the magistrates having any suite unto them, they were apparelled
with white, which signified the innocencye of the person and puritye of the
cause, and also they had one suit, that in all decent manner they might deliver
their minds in the presence of the magistrate: for the baseness of apparel, is
loathsomenes to many. But this shall suffice for ye touching of this matter.

Let not the man. After she had commanded her to prepare her self, she
desendeth to instruct her of her behavior: after she comes down to the
place; which was this, that she let not him know of her till he had supped,
and were gone to lie down in his bed, which she aduertiseth her diligently to
mark, and to come and bestow her self at his feet. Where it may seem that
Naomi counsels her daughter an unlawful thing, yea rather to play the
whore, then to get her a husband by a lawful means; for she bids her to
trim and smooth her self up, she warns her not to come to the man till
he were laid to his rest, and finally she counsels her to lie down at his
feet. Truly in outward show it seems unlawful, yet in substance very
honest if we consider every circumstance. First I demand, what is it that
seems dishonest in this whole discourse; some will say, first the dressing of
herself is scant the part of an honest woman, for it is very likely, Naomi
had this intention, by this means, to draw the old man in love with her, for
she took him as it were at advantage alone in the floor, Pro. 7.9.1.0 11,
and such says Solomon is the part of whoores. I answer, Pro: 31.10. and.
21.
that them other of Solomon says, that it is also the point of a wise and a
godly woman to watch in the night, to be finely appareled, to clothe her
household and such like. Therefore seeing an honest woman may do these things.
Ruth did no dishonestye in this. Again this kind of dressing in Ruth was
needful, because she had to deal with an honorable man, and therefore the
more carefully and comely she must appear in his presence. But you will say,
that Naomi had some such meaning, because she bid her that she should not
let her self be known till the man were gone to his rest: I answer, this
she did, that they might more freely talk together of the matter of her
marriage, for if she had come before he went to supper, the day would not
have suffised to commune of the cause of her coming, niether would the old man
have gone to his loding, if he had known a woman to be present. Then you will
say, why did she not come to his own house at home, and that in the day
time? I answer, because it was a reproach to Ruth to be known to deal
publicly in her own marriage, which must needs be known if it had been
done in the city, or in the daytime: and therefore seeing time and place were
now convenient, the man being alone, they took opportunity by the forelock,
and prepare themselves for the adventure of her marriage.

Why then will some say: what moved Naomi to give such counsel unto Ruth,
seeing she knew it might be defamed? I answer, Naomi knew Boaz to be an
old man, not given to such lewd and filthy conditions, but especially she
knew him to fear God, and Ruth her daughter in law to be a virtuous woman,
and trusting to his age, and both their godliness, she is emboldened to give
this advise. And this may suffice any sober minds, from suspicion of Naomies
counsel, Ruthes dishonesty, or the religion of Boaz. But some will say, if
the matter be so clear as you will make it, then may we also follow the
example and do the like. To which I answer, if any do so, it is much amiss:
for we must not imitate every example we read of in the scripture, as that
of Rebeckaes counsel to her son Jacob, whereby he got away the blessing
from Esau. There is no cause that can move us, as there was Naomi, for Ruth
must be married in her kindered, we need not: she was bound to one or
twain, but we are free to many thousands: she might challenge in her own
behalf, for the law of God, but we cannot do so, except there be a promise
of marriage: therefore neither must we follow this example, nor yet suspecte
the actions of either.

And Ruth, Now the counsel propounded, and the means for the execution
thereof declared, Ruthe approves her mothers advise, by promise of obedience,
that first she would do it: and in the verse, 6, she does perform it. Where
we have a good example, in the matter of marriage for all children to depend
upon their godly and religious parents. If any ask me, whither they be
bound upon necessitye so to obey their parents, that if they offer them
husbands or wives they cannot refuse them, but their parents may compel
them: to whom I answer, first, if it be possible, hearken to the voice of
thy parents; but if thou can not, thy parents cannot command thee against
thy mind, for they must propounde it conditionallye, not absolutelye: In thy
body (concerning thy labor) thou must obey them in all things, because they
are the parents of thy body, but thy mind or soul which comes from God,
is always at liberty; so that disobedience to parents is the refusing of
their temporal commandment, but marriage is everlasting to the death of a
man.

Secondlye, children may refuse, because the Lord many times reuealeth that
to the child which he showed not to the parents: as we may see in the
example of Sampson, when he would marrye with a philistine woman: for his
parents gaine-sayeng it, ye scripture shows the reason of it, because they
knew it not to come from the Lord: but Sampson did, Iud. 143.4.5
and they fore stood in it, and his parents harkned unto him in the end and got
him yt woman for his wife. By the which we gather, that no children may
lawfully celebrate their marriage without the parents consent: secondly; that
they must be very circumspect to marry their children: thirdly, that they
cannot in any good conscience deny their consents to their children to keep
them from honest marriage, if there be any equality between the parties, or
hope of honesty in the time of loving. But of this matter we have often spoke
and therefore this shall suffice for this time: Now let us give praise to God.

The end of the eight Lecture.
The ninth Lecture.
Chap. 3. ver. 7.8.9.10.11.12.13 7. And when Boaz had eaten and drunken and
made his heart merry, he went and lay down beside the heap of corn, and she
came softly and uncovered the place of his feet and lay down.

8. And at midnight the man was afraid, and turned him self hither and
thither: and he hold a woman lay at his feet.

9. To whom he said, who art thou; and she said, I am Ruth thy handmaide,
spread the wing of thy garment over thy handmaide, for thou art the kinsman.

10. Which said, blessed be thou of the Lord my daughter, for thou have
performed more kindness at the last then at the first, because thou followedst
not young men, were they poor or rich.

11. Now therefore my daughter, fear not, whatsoever thou say, I will do
unto thee, for every one within the gates of my people knows thee to be a
virtuous woman:

12. Now indeed it is true that I am thy kinsman, yet there is one nearer than
I.

13* Sleep here this night, in the morning if he will do the part of a
kinsman, let him: but if he will not do the kinsmans duty, I will do the
kinsmans duty, as the Lord lives, sleep until the morning.


NOw it follows, in this scripture to speak of the effect of this counsel,
and of those things that happened, after Ruth came down into the floor; and
the happy success she had with Boaz: The words do easily divide themselves
into two parts: the first respects Boaz, the other Ruth.

The first part concerning Boaz, is that which he did after his work, and
before his sleep verse, 7. that he eat and drank and made his heart merrye,
and lay down beside his corn. For that he did after his sleep verse, 8.
first he feared when he felt a woman at his feet: and secondly, he asks
who she was. After he knew her, he blessed her, verse 10. Secondlye, he
comfort her, verse, 11. In these words fear not my daughter. His comfort
has 2. parts, first his confession that he was her kinsman, verse, 12.
Secondly, the counsel he gives to her verse 13, to tarry until the
morning, and then he would try her other kinsman: if he refused, Boaz promises
by oath to the confirm her right, and do her kinsmans duty: and therefore
bids her to sleep until the morning.

The second part, which concerns Ruth, is her behavior after she came to
the place appointed, and has these two branches: first that which she did
alone verse, 7. That she came and lay down at his feet, secondlye, that
which she did with Boaz: first she tells him her name, when she perceived
the man was afraid: secondly, she shows him her petition, desiring him to
spread the wing of his garmente over her, verse 9. Of these parts let us
speak in order as they lie, by the asistance of the spirit of God, and
permission of the time.

And when Boaz: These words concern Boaz and that which he did after his
work the day being ended and his body being wearied, he went to his meat,
eating and drinking, refreshing his stomach and cheering his heart with those
blessings of God which he had present: afterward getting him to his lodging
at the end of his corn; in sted of a softer bed harbors upon the straw.
Out of the which we observe these things.

First, the blessing of God upon his creatures, that are moderatelye taken;
for it is said that he cheared his heart after his eating and drinking; his
body was not only nourished, his hunger abated, and his stomach filled, but
also his heart was cheered thereby: as if the holy Ghost had said, Here is
my blessing upon meat that is moderatelye received, that the powers of the
soul are refreshed by it: therefore we read in the preacher, Eccl: 10.17.
that a whole land is blessed by the moderate receiving of these benefits in
eating and drinking. The experience whereof is plainelye proved every day
among us. For what is the fruit of this immoderate devouring the benefits of
God, but as Solomon says, Pro. 23.29.
the eyes, wounds without cause, quarrels and contentions to the woe of many,
wherein they that rejoice are void of all reason, which ought to be the
ground of all our mirthe: but like beasts some from feedinge to sleeping
conueye themselves: other from eating to gaming turn their bodies, delighting
in naught but vanitye, being as far from this cheerefullnes of heart by
their meat and nourishement, as Nabal was after his feast, when one word of
David's anger stroke his heart dead. But this Boaz was here alone and none
beside him: and yet you see, that in his solitarye barn void of companyons,
he made himself merrye, with the fellowshippe of the blessing of God upon
his meat. Even so assuredlye, if the hands of many could guide their mouths,
their mouths rule their appetites, and both were governed with the spirit of
God, that they received for strength to nourishe their weakness, not for
gluttony to stuff up their stomachs, they should with greater comfort sit
down to their meals, and exceeding ioyfullye, rise up again. But since our
minds have as many devises, as our stomachs receive morsels, we eat and
yet we are not satisfied, we drink and yet we are not merrye: but overcome
with the good creatures of God, we seek after idle songs, vain jesting, and
unprofitable fables of falsehood, and forged conceiptes in ungodly books,
which drowneth our spiritual joy, and plungeth our minds in the gulf of
worldly mirth and woeful misery. Then let us learn the wisdom of Christ, and
look for joy which stands not in laughter, but in the inward comfort of the
assurance of the spirit, being persuaded we feed in ye presence of God, we
may have Christ at our temporal and worldly meals, that we may eat and
drink with him in his everlasting kingdom.

Secondly, by this we observe, that our meat after our labors is much more
joyful to our hearts, and profitable to our bodies, then if it be received in
an idle life: for Boaz had wrought hard all this day, and the reward of his
labor is the work of his meat, which in the end of all makes his heart
merry. Genesis 3.19.
In consideration whereof, the Lord inflicted this as a punnishment upon
mankind, that their meat should be unprofitable unless it were eaten in the
sweat of our brows: for as sleep to a man that has long watched, Psa. 42, 1:
so is meat to a man that has long labored, and as the coursing of the Heart
makes him to breath for the water springs; so labor causes men to hunger
more vehemently, to eat more liberally and digest more effectually their
desired morsels. We read of Ionothan the son of king Saul, 1 Samuel 14.27.
when he had wearied himself in the slaughter of ye Philistines, and being
very hungry did but dippe the top of this batte in a honey comb, and putting
it to his mouth, his eyes received sight: so acceptable are the crummes and
drops to them that labor, that they restore the life and power of the body,
and for this cause the greatest persons in the first and purest age (when the
life of man was many hundred years) were not exempted from bodily labor. Pro,
23.20,
On the other side, as Solomon says, they which sit long at wine and seek
after strong drink, meanning those which with idleness follow their bellyes
are most noisome to the world, unwholesome to themselves, and woeful for ever:
for their end will be as the biting of a serpente and the stinging of a
cockatrice* teaching us that laboring men's morsels are most sweet: and if we
should joyfully recreate our selves in the benefits of God, we must
diligently prepare our stomachs in some honest travails, that the basest
fare may be acceptable meat unto us: for the health of the body is preserved
by labor, as the planted corn by the diligence of the husbandman: Pro. 12.14.
for he which tilleth the earth is satisfied with bread; but idleness is
nearest kinsman to madens. Against this we have often spoken heretofore, and
let this suffice for this time.

Thirdly, we must note, what manner of mirth or cheerfulnes was this of Boaz:
it could not be in talking, for he was alone, nor yet in jesting, for the
former reason: nor yet was it outward in singing, for it is said his heart was
cheerful, as if there were a mirth that were not outward. And truly, Romans
14.17 Ephesians. 5.22.
where the holy Ghost dwells, there abides this inward joy. Which
proceeds from it as a stream from a fountain, 1. Sam. 16.24
or heat from a fire. Saul could be merrye when David played on his harp,
the king of Babylon was merrye in the midst of his delicates, Assuerus was
merry among his princes, Dan. 5: 4; Est. 1.10.
and Nabal was merry in the midst of his reapers: but what makes the godly
merry among the wild beasts, 1. Sam. 25.36.
joyful in the dungeons of the earth, and sing hartyly when they receive
brown bread? nothing but this joy of Boaz, which is the joy of the holy
Ghost. This makes men joyful in death, merrye in miserye and leaping under
the yoke of christian troubles: which all the princes in the world cannot do,
upon their thrones of majesty: this is mixed with no fear, because it
proceeds from so excellent a root. Why do men marvel, that so many godly
persons live so solitarily? the bird had rather be in the wilderness alone,
then with thousands of her fellows sitting in a cage, and the godly are most
merry when they are farthest from worldly company. If the godly be a company
together, this their joy must be expressed by singing of psalms, as James
says, Iam. 5.13. Mar. 14.26.
and our savior with his disciples practiced this at his last supper, for when
they had done, they sung a psalm, and went out into the mount of olives, yea
even then when Christ had prophesied of his death, and they were sorrowful, yet
this inward and spiritual joy was not extinguished: wherein we see an
excellent commendation of singing after meat, that it might be an outward
testimonye of our inward joy. This strikes down all foolish talking for
stirring up of mirth, and answers to them that say, if they follow not
vain pastimes they cannot be merry: Truly that pleases the flesh, but
displeases the spirit: and let them assure them selves whosoever they be,
that this temporal and wanton sporting will bring upon them everlasting
lamenting. But some will say, is this singing and mirth at tables commendable,
seeing the prophet speaks so against it: Amo. 6.5.6
They sing to the viole, and frame to themselves songs like the songs of
David, etc. I answer; all curiositye and pleasure in outward singing at our
feastinges is forbidden by the prophet, which he does notablye describe in
the same place by these marks, First, when it is used to forget their sins
and to drive away the terrors of their consciences: Verse 3:


Verse 4.
Secondlye, when it is added for pleasure and ease. Thirdlye, that with greedier
appetites, they might devour their meat and drink, to draw away their
minds from the remembrance of the Lord. Fourthly, Verse 6.
such mirth as makes them forget the afflictions of the church of God. If any
desire mirthe for these causes, the woe of the prophet takes hold upon them.

And surely, here is condemned all playing on instruments and singinge at
table when we eat our meat, as a thing against which the prophet much
aymeth, and is too much used among us in England, for nothing makes us more
readily to forget the affliction of Joseph then that does: when two occasions
of mirth are joined together, meat and music, it is like two diverse
plasters laid to one wound, which by their vehemente operation, increase the
sore. In like manner we are more apt to be made worse then to be amended by
the benefits of God. For as too much rain drowneth and ouerfloweth, and too
much drought chippeth and cleaves the earth: so too much mirth and pleasure
overcomes the heart of man, This I speak not to discommende music, which
I acknowledge freely with all the godly, to be holy and lawful: but I exhort
and admonish, that it may not be used at the present time of eating, but
sparingly before or after our feasting. And let us all choose rather to sing
Psalm from a feeling spirit, with a grace in our hearts and minds, then to
hear a thousand songs upon instruments of pleasant music, without inward
comfort.

He went to lie down. Now we are come to the second part of that which he
did alone, which in these words is declared to be the choice of his lodging,
at the end or one side of his corn. Where we note another usage or custom of
ancient nobility: in stead of a palace, they had a cottage: in stead of
attendors and waitors, they had the instruments of their labors: and as this
Boaz, a heap of straw, in stead of a bed of down: such as his toil and
labor was, such is his lodging: a hard work, a hard bed: For he that is
wearied with travail or labor, can sleep and quietly take his rest on the
grass. And this puts us in mind, of the estate of all our forefathers many
years ago, before this softness and tenderness was invented, they were glad
we see, though they were great Lords, yet to be laborers: And although
their possessions excelled ours, yet they had less bodily ease then we: for
the richest and highest estate or dignity is not the quietest life. By the
which we are admonished; with all kindness, to harbor the poor and needy,
though it be but in a padde of straw, considering they be the images of the
ancient nobility, who were contented with the like entertainment: and the
poor are exhorted with patience to abide their tedious travails and hard
lodginges, seeing the Lords of the world, had no better estate; they which had
most wealth had least ease, and we which have scant one man's inheritance among
twenty, do peaceable enjoy more worldly securitye. And truly this makes us
to feel, that every commoditye is tempered with some molestation: ye
Israelites being delivered from Pharao thought they were well, but then they
were driven to go thorough the bottom of the sea, and being come to the land
of Canaan, they found many enemies, and did not overcome them all, till the
reign of David: so that every pleasure is mingled with some worldly sorrow:
they which use the sea get much wealth, but yet with great danger, and they
which are on the land, are in safety though not in such wealth. And thus must
we frame our minds, that when we enjoy the end of our desires, yet it
brings with it always some occasion of dislike: therefore it is better to be
contented with hard fare then discontented with dainty cheer, to like in hard
harbor then dislike in the softeste beds: and better is a little thing with a
quiet mind, then the possession of a kingdom with the trouble thereof.

And Ruth came. Boaz being wearye with his labors, and suffi^ed with his
meat, no doubt but being quietlye laid, a sleep had soon taken him: and
Ruth, when she espied a convenient time, came, and conveyed her self softlye
to the place of his feet, which at midnight was perceived by Boaz and not
before. For she so laid her self, as he being awaked, might quickelye espy
her: whereby we see the occasion that moved Naomi to counsel Ruth to come so
near him, which was this, that Boaz might first be grieved and then should
Ruth best utter her suite. But of all this we have spoken before, and therefore
to the petition of Ruth.

Spread the winge. Ruth omitting no opportunitye, so soon as she had uttered
her name, she puts up her petition, and by a figurative speech desires
him to be her husband and defendour: For* to spread the winge, we know, is
taken from birds who keep their young ones under their wings. And this speech
of Ruth to Boaz is indeed to entreat him to be her husband: for we read
the sense of these words to be spoken to Sara by Abimelech the king of Gerar,
Genesis 20.16.
that her husband Abraham should be unto her a cover against all those that
would oppress her. And therefore in ancient time, women were wont to be
covered in the presence of their husbands. And Ruth says to Boaz, spread thy
winge over me, that is, be thou my husband to cover me: for in times paste
it was a thing very odious to be without husbands, even as odious as to be
stark naked, or a maisterles dog, as the proverb is: Which appears by
that complaint of the prophet Esaye, Esa. 4.1.
That seven women should lay hold upon one man and desire to be called by
his name, promising to provide their own living. So that this figurative
speech, does most notablye describe, the duetye of husbands toward their
wives. Psa. 63.7.
First the wing signifies protection; for it is the duetye of husbands to
defend their wives, to be able and willing to shield them from injuries,
provide for them necessaries, cover them in dangers, minister to them comfort
and strength in their weakness, But truly it is pitye to see what married men
we have in these days, and how little commoditye many helples wives receive
by their retchles husbands, that surely they are driven with Abigail many
times to shifte for their own lives and the lives of their families. These
roisting companyons, hastye and headye husbands which for every light
occasion forsake their families, or weary their wives with their presence;
minister neither covering or comfort, according to their bounden duetye: but
like perjured and forsworn caitises, that have falsified their faith to God,
the church, and their wives: run headlong to their own destruction and
decay of their posteritye. Oh how sorrowful is the estate of women, if they
be not supported with the kindenes of their yoke-fellowes. Bearing of children
is nothing in comparison of this: for that is their deserved punishment of God;
but the other the intolerable hand of the Devil. We read, that the
Pellicane will tear out her own breaste to feed her young ones: but we
read of few so unkind as to feed upon their young ones, save only these
unnatural husbands. We read that the Storkes are always fed so long by
their young ones when they are old, as they nourished them when they were
young: But these godless fathers care neither for to nourish their little
ones being young, nor how they shall be maintained when they are old.

Finally, by this, wives are instructed their obedience to their husbands,
that as the little bi^de is at the call of his damme, so wives must be ready at
the beck of their husbands. And let us look upon the brute beasts for
examples of hues, who in their brutishe kind condemn our humanity. The Emme^
labors and provides for winter: that condemns sluggardes. The Ass
knows his owner, and the ox his masters cribbe: These condemn
unthankfulness to God. The Doves teach us innocence, the serpents wisdom:
the dogs watchfulness, the Foxes wariness, the Lions courage, and the
little birds our duties to wives and children. Therefore let us not be more
graceless then these, lest their diligence, like the voice of Balaams Ass,
condemn our disobedience to perpetual misery.

Blessed be thou of the Lord. Now comes the second part of the
conference between Bohaz and Ruth to be handled: wherein only Bohaz
speaks. And first of all, he blesses or prays for her, saying, Blessed
be thou of the Lord, for this latter favor is greater then the sor^er: Then
thou forsookest thy country to come with thy mother in law, but now thou
forsakest young and youthful husbands to come to me a diseased old man:
neither wealth nor poverty can alter or change thy mind, from following the
commandment of God to thy own hinderaunce. So in this example we have an
excellent pattern of true and unfeigned religion, which is this: when Ruth is
obedient to the ordinance of God, even in that which seems to her own
discommoditie and earthly consolation: for she was a young woman, and therefore
by nature desired a young companion, and not to be troubled with a withered
old man; from whom she could receive but little bodily comfort: yet because
by the law she was tied to her nearest kinsman of her deceased husband:
forsaking all other, she cleaves to him, making the law her choice, his age
her honor, and the trial of his former courtesy, as bands of assurance for
his future kindness. This was the faith of Ruth, that caused her like Leui to
forsake his custom: like Zacheus to depart from his wealth: Luc. 5.28. and
19.8.9. Act. 13.1
like the courtiers of Herod to forgo their honor, and also the saints of
God to forsake their dearest friends, to follow the voice of the Gospel.

And this teaches us, to cast of earthly commodities in worldly business, to
forsake nature and natural affection: to forget life and living, and account
all things but dunge in regard of obedience to the word of God. This is it
that touches the quick, and will prove the heart of every christian. If this
condition were propounded, Christ says, That for him, we must forsake all
that we have: Now, if this law were made, that whosoever went to hearing of
the word, should presently confiscate his goods at the pleasure of the
lawmakers. Who would in this case, be obedient rather to the bare voice of
Christ, then to the threatening words of the law. Examine beloved, and
arraigne every man his own heart, for this point and then you shall see,
whether the love and desire of the world has not drove out the love of the
Father. Every dastarde will offer and make show to fight hardely, till he
come to approach the field, but in the face of the enemy if he abide, there
is the trial: nay, if he see but one way to escape he will surely take
that, though it be to his own discredit. So I fear me, I fear me, many,
if danger were would not only turn from us, but fight hotlye against us,
for all their fair faces to us. They which now will hardelye of one hundred
pounds give one to the Gospel, will not then leave the principal to follow
the truth: but as the glare worm does not glister but in the night, so true
christians will not be known, till the days of darkness and error come, when
these dissembling hipocrites shall be found to be nothing but rotten wood,
good for nothing. But to come to Ruth, she perfourmeth her promise to God, as
Dauide says, though it be to her own hinderance, Psa. 15.4. Act. 4.19.
she knows it with the appostles, better to obey God then men, to follow
Christ and not the flesh, for the world it self shall be shortelye consumed
and then the lovers thereof shall be utterly condemned. Oh, let us then
practice the denial of our selves before the time of trial come, let us as
the martirs did, try the burning of our fingers before we venture our whole
bodies: let us give some of our wealth to the poor now, rather then keep all
to be spoiled by the wicked apostataes then: but how will men do this at that
fierye trial, when now in peace they will forsake and forswear the Lord,
some for their merchandise, other for rentes and revenues, some to bring the
poor Nabaothes into destruction, many for worldly profit and temporal gain:
but this queen of worldly desire shall one day be meat for the dogs; when
it shall be said, that happy are all you that in wealth and pouertye have
followed the son of righteousness in sinceritye.

(...) Fear not my daughter. His prayer and the reason thereof being ended,
now follows the consolation he gives to Ruth, in these words bidding her
to cast away fear, for what soever lies in his power he would do: for the
whole city would testify the estate of her person, and vprightnes in her
living: and therefore he should be much to blame, if he denied so lawful a
request. Out of the which we note.

First, here is set down the duty, of all magistrates, which is with meekenes
and gentleness to hear the petitions of their suitors: for Boaz was a public
person, or else Naomi had complained to the magistrate; but himself being a
godly elder, the suite is first privately handled with him. Therefore, they must
follow ye example of Bohaz here declared, which is with the kindest words to
entreat them, and just judgments to proceed for them, always yielding to
equity where the cause is required. For our savior accompteth a magistrate
that is contrary minded, neither to fear God, Luc. 8.2.4 5.
or to respect man: that is, such a one is hated of God and man: For if
magistrates love God or regard their subjects, they must be easily entreated
by the voices of their suitors. Therefore is that everlasting commendation of
Moses, yt he sat in the door of his tent in judgment from evening until
morning, where all the people might freely have access to his presence, and
godly conference with his person, the which all the judges in christendom
might imitate, without impeachment to their honors. Old Samuel when he had
anointed and appointed Saul to reign in his stead over all Israel, appealed
to the people what injury he had done to any, and the people justified him in
all things: 1. Sam. 12.2.3.4.5.
now he was easily come unto at all times, when Saul and his fathers servant
seeking for asses would go to the man of God, meaning Samuel. Oh that all that
are in authority would hearken to these examples, that with all gentleness
they might entreat the people of God committed to their government, that they
might freely come to them, and friendly speak with them, that at the day of
their deaths, they might have the poor saints of God* praying for their
deliverance, their consciences unburdened, their duties discharged, their
subjects satisfied, justice offered, and their souls everlastingly saved.

Secondly, by this we gather, that judges and justices must especially look
to the godly: for Boaz says, that all the city knew Ruth to be a godly
woman: So that he binds himself by her religion to be as careful for her
being a stranger, as if she were his natural daughter. For as all the city
knew her religious, so they would all rejoice to see her advanced. And this is
the cause wherefore the Lord has so much commended unto us the estate of
widows and fatherless children, Deuteronomy. 10.18 Prove. 3.3.
because for the most part they are oppressed, and not oppressors: vexed, and
not vexours: receyuers, and not doers of injury. And surely, such are simple
godly men, they will bear many burdens before they complain; and for every
trifle they will not trouble a magistrate. Therefore every magistrate must say
with David, Psalm. 101.6.
My eyes shall be on them that speak truth on the earth, and they that walk
vprighly shall be my servants: so have you respect of persons, though not in
judgment, yet in common opinion: for the professors of religion are your
dearest friends, who without ceasing power forth their prayers for you, that in
equity you might draw your sword for them. Oh how lamentable is it to hear,
how poor godly men are daily blasphemed and reproched for their religion: when
wicked Atheistes, carnal persons, common swearers, and godles wretches, have
their hearts desire at the hands of the magistrate. Surely such persons, who
desire your aid against other, deserve your swords of justice against
themselves: for they never come into your presence; but to the dishonor of
God. Execute judgment therefore, for them and upon them.

Thirdely, by this we gather what it is that most commends women: for Boaz
says virtue; and if all yt world cry the contrary, yet Bathsheba the mother
of king Solomon will confirm it: for thus she says, Favor is deceitful,
beauty is vain; but a woman that fears God, Prove. 31.30.
she shall get praise for her self: for virtue and the fear of the Lord are
both one thing. So that this is the thing they are most commended for, if
religion will take any root in their hearts: for beauty is worn by age,
proportion of body lost by sickness, love of men at the wagging of a hand, and
brave apparel when wealth decays, only the fear of the Lord endures for
ever. We read that Vasti the queen of Asuerus was exceeding beautiful, but
she disobeyed her husband, and was put from her princely room, Esth. 1.16
when godly Ester was taken in her stead. If the fear of God had been in the
former; to obey her husband, Esther had not so soon come into her place. But
the Lord, that he might punish the pride of the one, and reward the religion
of the other, lifted up virtuous Esther, and cast down that stately Vasti: to
show unto us, that much better is the fear of the Lord, then all the beauty
and glory of the world.

We find many commended in the word of God, for their faith, but few for
their fairness, that all should learn more earnestly to labor, 1. Pet. 3.4
that the hid man of the heart may be found in incorruption of a gentle and
a quiet spirit, which is very precious in the sight of the Lord.

Lastly, let us all learn by this, as well rich as poor, governors as
subjects, men as women, that above all things we follow the example of Ruth,
to please God more then our selves, to labor for virtue and religion as for a
treasure hid in the ground, to search for it as for gold and silver, that we
may boldly come before the judges of the Lord, and plead as subjects, seeing
the knowledge of the law rests in our hearts. And let us diligently labor
for good reports, that the magistrates may speak for us, as Bohaz does for
Ruth, to her singular comfort, that we may with boldness stand to be judged and
not to suffer as evil doers. Eccles. 7.1.
For a good name is better then a precious ointment, and the godly and
guiltless are most honorable, when they are causeles accused: even as Joseph;
the nearest way for him to come to the kings favor, was first of all to be
wrongfully imprisoned. So if we study to lead holy conuersations, let the^
draw us to the judgment seats as offenders; yet our religion shall speak for
us, not guilty: and though all the world should unjustly condemn us, yet the
son of God shall sue out our pardon.

And true it is, I am thy. We showed you in the beginning, that his
consolation had two parts. The first his confession in this verse: and the
other his counsel in the next. Now then con^meth his confession to be
handled, wherein he grants himself a kinsman, and therefore bond unto
that duty she required of him, but yet withal he soberly tells her, there
is one nearer then I: meaning to show her, that the whole care of the matter
does not cheesely depend upon him. Whereby we gather, the singular
conscience and humility of Bohaz: for if the fear of God had not hindered
him, he might like scorneful persons, have denied that he had any kindred so
base: and therefore he might have told her, that she was come to a wrong
man, that she had mistaken her mark, that she must not look so hic, as the
choice man in Bethlehem, and some baser husband will beseem a Moabitesse. But
he does not so, for he confesses against himself that her suite was equal,
and he bound to deal in it. Where again we have another worthy example for
all magistrates to imitate; even to pronounce judgment against their own
causes, and give evidence against their own commodity. For what a simple
thing was it for Boaz to marry with so poor a woman as Ruth, by whom he could
hope for no great portion, but only religion. Oh that this vprightnes would
enter into the hearts of men in our days, when they handle their mutual
affairs, to speak the truth indifferently, as well against as for
themselves, yea and forsake their dearest friends in unlawful suites. But
rather it rejoices them at the heart, to see bad matters bolstered up, and
wrong judgments through ignorance unjustly pronounced: whereas the
plaintifes, and defendantes themselves, do either of them in their own
conscience know their cause to be naught: yet against both conscience,
justice, and equity, will spend their money and hearts also to be thoroughly
revenged on their christian neighbors, to overthrow their cause be it never so
equal: yet this is their drift, to make the righteous law, the only defendour
of all their unrighteous and ungodly dealinges. How if there were no law nor
magistrate, would these malicious persons behave themselves, that dare to
wreste the helm of justice by corruption in these peaceable days, and are
more sit to be the inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorhe, then the fellow
dwellers with the godly and faithful? Would God, that every offendour were
bound to restore for every defaulte, four times so much, then would our
quietness be greater, our suites vprighter, the truth uttered, before danger,
causes ended without chargeable costs, wise men should be the lawyers, the
truth should be the evidence, yea and equity should give judgment against
our selves.

Tarry this night. This is the counsel that Boaz gives unto Ruth, that seeing
it was night; she should tarry till the morning, and then he will deal with
her kinsman in the behalf of his right, which if he will do unto her, Bohaz
cannot withstand him, but if he refuse, then will Bohaz perform the duty.
Which promise he confirms by an oath, as the Lord lives: bidding her to
sleep until the morning. Where we see first of all the kindness of the man,
that would not presently thrust a poor woman from the place of her lodging,
but quietly suffered her to harbor beside him, yea and bids her to tarry at
her rest, and to sleep until the morning.

Secondly, he would do nothing which might prejudice the cause of her other
kinsman, before he had gotten his consent to the delivery of his right:
teaching us thereby, that it is not lawful to enter into the least part of
our neighbors titles, though we may seem to have as great right in it as
Bohaz had in Ruth, without the free and willing agreement of him that has any
property or interest therein.

Lastly, Bohaz confirms his promise with an oath, which is the last speech
unto the woman, for her assurance to depend on his credit, and the last thing
that must be used in all our communications: But of these matters we have
already spoken, and therefore thus much for this time. Now let us give praise
to God.

The end of the ninth Lecture.
The tenth Lecture.
Chap. 3. ver. 14.15.16.17.18. 14. And so she lay at his feet until the
morning, and then she aros^ when one knew not another: For Boaz said, Let no
man know that a woman came into the floor.

15. And then he said, Give me the sheet wherewithal thou art covered, and
hold it up: then he measured six measures of barley, and laid it upon her:
afterward he went into the City.

16. But she came to her mother in law, which said, who art thou, my daughter?
and she declared whatsoever the man had done unto her.

17. And she said also, he gave me these six measures of barley, for he said,
thou shall not return empty to thy mother in law.

18. Then said she, Be of good comfort until thou know how the matter will
fall out, for the man will not rest unless he end it this day.


THese words are the last part of this Chapter: wherein is showed unto us
how Boaz dismisseth Ruth, after they had slepte till the morning: and Ruth
returns joyfully to her mother again.

The words contain two parts, generally in them: The first part is between
Bohaz and Ruth, verse 14.15. The second is between Ruth and Naomi, in the
three next verses following. The first part between Boaz and Ruth, is of
those things which they did together in the barn. First, that Ruth lay at
his feet until the morning. Secondlye, that she arose early before day,
because Bohaz would have none to know that a woman came into the floor. After
they were both risen: Boaz gives to her six measures of barley, lays them
upon her, and sends her away. Secondly, he himself goes into the city,
verse 15. to perform that which he had promised unto her.

The other part between Ruth and Naomi, in the three next verses, contains
a declaration of those things which passed between them twain, after she
came from Bohaz. Wherein first Naomi asks who she was because coming home
early before the day; she could not know her by her countenance: To whom
Ruth declares all things which passed between Boaz and her, showing unto her
the six measures of barley which the man gave unto her for Naomies sake, verse
16.17. Secondly, after Naomi understood the proceedinges of Ruth, she
comfort her, verse 18. assuring her of the diligence of Boaz, that he
would not sleep, till he had ended the matter the very same day. Of these
parts, let us briefly speak in order as the spirit of God shall give
utterance, and the time permit.

And so she lay at his feet until the morning. As we have heard in the former
verses, the conference had between Bohaz and Ruth, the end and conclusion
whereof was this, that Ruth should content her self to tarry with him, and
sleep until the morning, So in this place, the performance thereof is noted
unto us. For the holy Ghost undoubtedly expressing these words, does it to
signify unto us these two things: First that Ruth remained satisfied with the
answer of Bohaz, and troubled him no more with farther talk. Secondly, that
he might deliver these two innocent persons, from all suspicion of
incontinency: for neither talked they any more, or turned one to another, but
either of the^ both contented with their hard lodging, gave themselves to quiet
sleep until the morning.

Where we first of all note, that the gift of continency or chastity is not in
nature, or the power of man, but is a holy fruit of true and unfeigned
religion: yea, a special work of the spirit of God, as appears in both
these godly persons: for if either of both had been given over, no doubt but
nature has put them forward to the satisfying of their carnal lusts: But
seeing, as Christ says, Mat. 19 1^. Iam. 1.17
none can have it but them to whom it is given, and every gift comes down
from the Father of lights. This among other, is a special and extraordinary
blessinge of God, upon many persons truly religious: not for any other cause,
Genesis 39.9
but that thereby they might more freely give themselves to please the Lord,
as Joseph answered his wanton mistress, how shall I do this, seeing I fear
God? The use of this point is this, seeing we acknowledge this benefit, to
come from the Lord, let us among our prayers desire ye same, that we might
crucify the works of the old man within us, sanctify ye powers of our souls
and bodies, Gal. 5.24.
be strengthened to resist the temptations of Satan, and bring every wanton
desire and wavering affection into subjection of the spirit of God which
rules and reigns in the hearts of the faithful. And above all things let
us earnestly labor for the fear of the Lord, that we may have the tree
as well as the fruit, the fountain as well as the stream, the root from
whence it springs as well as the blade, and increase of the same, for except
the stream be supplied by the spring it will quickly die, except the blade be
nourished by the root, it will soon be withered, except the fire of the holy
Ghost be increased with the coals of the knowledge of God, it will soon be
quenched with the cold water of humane infirmities; or else willingly go out of
it self. And if ever this exhortation were needful, it is most necessary, in
these our unclean and filthy days: wherein fornications, adulteries,
whoredoms, and all actions of incontinency did never more abound* and the
reason hereof is this, because men and women, have refused the knowledge of
God: and therefore as the Apostle says, he has given them over to work
filthiness one with another. Romans 1 ^4
As the flesh lusts against the spirit, so the spirit lusts against the
flesh: the one is carnal and brings damnation^ the pure knowledge of God is
spiritual and works salvation: but if the bodies of men were made the temples
of the holy Ghost, how could they convert them to the members of harlots? But
be not deceived, for God who is true, is not mocked: you which now delight your
bodies in the pleasures of uncleanness, shall lament your woes in the sorrows
of bitterness, when your souls and bodies for their wonted follies, shall
eternally curse themselves, and cry vengeance vengeance to all their deserts:
Yea though the Almighty should grant you repentance, yet the consideration of
your whoredoms will trouble your consciences, that it will be much longer
before your hearts be eased, or sins released, for such as is the festered
wound, such must be ye searching and purging corasiue: he that stole little,
has but little to restore; but he that stole much, must recompense much again.

Secondly, by this we note, the diversity of the distribution of the gifts of
God, for many godly persons are clear from one sin which reigns in
other, and have some proper gifts which are denied to other, some are subject
to one sin and some to another. In this place Bohaz and Ruth are declared,
and commended for continent persons, but in another place David and Bathshebah
godly also, 2 Samuel 11.4 Genesis 38.18.
are overtaken with this folly: Judah the son of Jacob was a good man, yet
he lay with his daughter in law Thamar; sitting in the likeness of a whore;
Joseph his brother; also feared God, yet he refused his Lady and mistress: And
as it is in this, so it falls out in all other, Genesis 39.9
for some that have great gifts of God his spirit, yet are too much given to
the love of money; others again like Zacheus distribute the greatest part of
their possessions, to satisfy their injuries and relieve the poor: Luc. 19.8.
Other of the faithful like the Apostles James and John, desire the
superiority, and chiefest places in the Church: but many, like the other
Apostles, envy and disdain them for it.

And thus the Lord which delivers his spirit by measure, gives to some a
less, and to some a greater measure thereof, even as a rich man distributeth
his alms, giving to one a good reward, and to another a small, so the Lord
leaves some to be overcome by their lusts, other by their money, many by
their honor, some by their office, other by their pride, and every man has
some special sin that reigns in him above other: for diverse men being
called to one hope, and obtaining the like precious faith in regard of Christ,
yet are diversely affected and infected with sin. And this teaches us these
doctrines: first that we never condemn the persons of the sinners, but the
sinful acts they do committ: who should condemn Noah for drunkenness, David
for murder, Judah for incest, or ye Apostles for desiring superiority: surely
these were godly persons, and had their several falls, that the mercy of God
might be magnified in their raising up again: for none of the godly are able
to go upon the waters as Peter would, but they must sink as Peter did; and
yet they perish not, but are lifted up and saved by Christ, as Peter was:
though our old Adam cause us to commit many sins, yet our new Adam will
remove all: we must judge charitably of all our brethren that are overtaken in
their several sins: Sara lied unto the Lord himself: Onesimus was a thief
and a run away from Philemon, Rebecca caused Jacob her son to beguile his
own father, and all the holy Patriarchs had many wives, yet none must be so
bold as to condemn any of these, notwithstanding their several and manyfolde
faults: Even so in these our days, though we see and behold our brethren,
some overcome with the world, other by promotion, many by their lusts and
concupiscences, other in their brave apparel: nay if they steal and rob,
yet we must not judge but charitably of them. I speak not this to encourage
any hereunto: for if grace abound above sin, yet cursed are they that sin,
that grace and blessing might abound unto them: for if we may not do evil
where we certainly know good may ensue thereof, much less may we do evil,
to make the mercy of God the baude of our sins, but this we must remember,
that there is no condemnation to the righteous, although they fall seven times
a day, but if any sin upon presumption of God his mercies, their damnation
is just, and are like a thief that steals because he sees one among
twenty pardoned by the Prince.

Secondly, there are many that condemn the whole profession, because they live
not all in the same perfection, and bring not forth the same fruits which by
this doctrine we see here condemned: For as the grapes of the vine have some
less and some more sweetness, yet all are grapes, and grow of the vine: so the
Saints of God, Ioh. 15.1.
have some more purity and some less, and yet all are nourished by Christ the
vine: what if some (says the Apostle) have not believed, shall the grace of
God be made of none effect, Romans 1.11.12.
and what if some have often fallen into sin shall the whole Gospel for their
sakes be discredited? nay the Lord has always some that live so purely, such
as Isaacke, Joseph, Bohaz, Daniell, Zachary and Elizabeth, whom all the world
can never blemish: howsoever others have their public faults, first that the
work of repentance, which is a grace of God, might be practiced: Secondly,
that God his mercy in saving great sinners might be magnified: Thirdely, that
the faithful (seeing their daily falls) might more earnestly desire their
final deliverance: Lastly, 2. Pet, 2.1. 1. Cor. 11.19
that the wicked by this means might have occasion, by their blasphemies to
work their own damnation.

Afterward she arose, for Boaz said: Now the night well passed in quiet
sleep, and the dawning of the day approaching, Ruth at the commandment of Boaz
arises before the day light, least any should know she had tarried with him all
that night, whereby the good old man signifies unto us that it is no new
thing in the world, that slanders should be raised, for this was the thing
that Boaz feared, that if any should have seen the woman with him, they would
presently conceive it were for no goodness. For the world museth as it uses,
and they will soonest epsy a mote in the eye of a godly man: it ever was, is,
and will be, that causles surmises, and reproaches, shall be brought up, upon
the godly, for princes nor people can be freede therefrom: the which David felt
well enough when he said in a certain place, that one blessedness in God his
kingdom, Psalm. 31.20.
shall be this, to be kept from the strife of tongues, thereby insinuating,
that they must needs endure them in this life present. We know what our
savior reports of the Pharisees, how they accused him to be a friend of
publicanes, harlots, and sinners; Mat. 11.18.19.
and John Baptiste to have a Devil. Therefore this must work patience in the
faithful, that are like affected and afflicted with venomous tongues, for we
are not better then those fathers are, who many years ago sustained the same
reproaches, and left the burden behind them, to be borne by us, for the
world is no chaungeling: that which then they spoke against them, now they
spitte against us, and though the authors of these slanders be many years
since departed, yet their manners and heirs shall abide while the world
stands. But to come to the words, wherein the mind of Bohaz is, that none
should know that woman were with him, at such a suspected time: Why? will some
say, is it such a matter to talk with a woman privately and alone, we may do
it publicly, and who can say nay unto it: I grant we may and with less
offense, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.
yet Bohaz would give no occasion of offense because we must abstain from all
appearaunce of evil: we must not only be careful we sin not, but
Christians must be careful to avoid all suspicion of sin: it is not
lawful for Christians commonly to company and keep with enemies, because it
may be thought that they are secreatly in league with them it is not lawful
for a christian to go into the house of a harlot, because it will discredit
his name, it is not lawful for a Christian to go into a Temple of idols
unless it be to deface them, because it may be thought he goes to worship:
the like may be said of all other in the like kind, where men are as guilty
that look on, as they that are the principalles. And beloved I would to God
that this carfulness to avoid and shun the outward appearaunce of
iniquity were well considered: then extraordinary charges in diet or apparel
would be eschewed, lest we be accounted daynty and prodigal or proud:
slackenesse in going to sermons would be amended, lest we be deemed idle and
secure Atheistes: buying, selling, playing and gaming on the sabbath day,
would be punished, lest it be thought we have no fear or care to worship the
Lord: the daily and most lamentable swearing of rich and poor, old and
young, parents and children, masters and servants, husbands and wives, men
and women, would with terror of the Lords judgments be restrained: idleness
would be reformed, drunkenness in every degree would be corrected,
dalliaunce and wantonness ashamed, cosening and deceyuing simple persons be
banished: and finally if this fearing the shaddowe of sin would rest in the
hearts of mankind, neither should the substance thereof overcome them, the
pleasures allure them, the hope deceive them, the profit compel them, the
glory provoke them, or the end these* of condemn them. Let us therefore
beloved, neither frequent or approach to persons yt are suspected, or places
that are corrupted: we can touch no pitch but we must be polluted, nor any
unclean thing but we are defiled: sin is a contagious disease, it will
infecte the walls and the garments where it is committed, and what agreement
is between the children of God and Beliall, touch not their meats, handle not
their pleasures, and taste not their companies, for the world sees thee and
will slander, the Lord sees theee, and will recompense: We avoid the sight of
serpents as Moses fled from his rod, why should not we then fly from the
sight of that old serpent the father of lies which by all means possible
seeks to deface the name of Christ, and the nature of the faithful: we come
not to the picture of ye devil, which is devised by a painter, but we loath
the presence, and abhor the proportion of it, why should we not then, as
much the works of himself, whereby he is more sl^ly communicated unto us,
then in all the pictures and images of the world? We avoid the air where the
cockatrice lays her eggs, because she poisoneth the same: but alas, we
daily delight in the paths of unrighteousness, where is greater danger to our
souls, then all the poisons of the world can bring to the body: thus we
escape out of the snare, but we fall into the ditch, we strain at gnats but
we swallow up cammels: we play with the Lion, and are afraid of the lamb:
death is at the end of our journey, and yet we will not see it. Therefore,
again and again beware of offenses, that is, take heed you bring not the
glorious names of Christians to discredit, your faith to ignominy, your hope to
shame, your liberty to slavery, and fill not the mouths of the wicked, with
your unwise and intemperate walking.

Secondly, by this we note, yt we must not only abstain from the appearance of
evil things, but we must also beware, we make not good things evil, for Bohaz
knew it was lawful for him to talk privately or publicly, day or night,
alone or in company with any woman living: but he was afraid lest any should
take his example, as a rule or defense for their private wantonness, or judge
his company with Ruth to be utterly unlawful, whereby the name of a
magistrate, the title of an Elder, and the credit of two faithful servants
of God might be impaired. Therefore to stop these occasions, with timely
arysing, he was careful that the knowledge thereof should come unto none,
that a lawful thing misunderstood or conceived should not be made unlawful.
And truly, this teaches us also in christian wisdom to weigh all our
doings by the rule of the Apostle, when he says, 1. Cor. 12.1^
all things are lawful, but all things are not expedient^ all things are
lawful, but I will not be brought into bondage of any: where he wills us
not only to see what we may do without danger to our selves, but also
without danger to any other: Secondly that in nothing we prejudice our
christian liberty: whereby we gather yt every thing must be considered with the
circumstance of time, place, and persons, a lawful thing in time may be out
of place, and being lawful for time and place, yet it may be unlawful for ye
persons, this we will make plain by yt examples of alms fasting wc our savior
Christ himself used. It is lawful and a holy thing, to give alms at all times,
Mat. 6.1, 2.3.4.5.
yet if it be done in a market place, or with a public sign, as to blow a
trumpet, or toll a bell, or such like, it is hypocrisy by the sentence of our
Savior, and therefore unlawful: even so to pray continually is a good thing,
but if it be done in the corners of the streets, or in the Churches while all
the congregation be hearing the preacher, it is utterly unlawful: the same may
be said of preaching and reading, eating and drinking, laughing and weeping,
working and playing, buying and selling, watching and sleeping, with such like,
all which are good necessary and lawful, yet as they exceed in time, place and
persons, they may be unlawful, and therefore not to be done. By this let all
the godly learn, to use the mean in all their indifferent actions; and
specially according to this present scripture of Bohaz and Ruth, I would to
God, that this too common accompanying of men and women together were
altogether buried and banished from us, I mean such as is in this wanton
manner, not only in the married, who with their open and public dalliance give
great offense to sober minds, but also in the unmarried, in their unseemly
meetings, dangerous conuenticles, wanton feasts, and immodest running, and
dancing together, wc in many unstayed persons, stirs up the fire of
concupiscence, that ought rather to be quenched. Even as Phineas stroke ye
Israelite and the Madianitish woman, Number. 25.8.
together upon one spear, so would God our Zimries and Cozbies had some
punishment, to stay other from committinge the like in every age, for it is
much to be feared, that the heavy hand of God is gone out against us, by
reason of our open and public whooredoms, for even now the children are
infected with the example of their elders, and what hope can there be of the
ages to come, when those that must be the parents of them, are thus poisoned
with sin, in the days of their youth: surely as the rotten seed brings
but a sorrowful harvest, so corrupted and wicked children will bring forth a
woeful and lamentable posterity. Put away therefore this evil, of laying
stumbling blocks before the blind, giving offenses to the weak brethren,
breeding the selaunder of the whole Gospel, greeuing the hearts of the sober
minded, drawing the curse from heaven upon us, and utterly drowning our selves
and all our progeny in everlasting destruction.

And when he had said give me thy sheet.] This is the first thing which the
holy Ghost reports of Boaz since he awaked from sleep, and arose from his
lodging, wherein he calls for the sheet wherewithal Ruth was covered,
(which no doubt but she brought from home with her) the which he fills with
six measures of barley: the which measures as I take it, were hins, and
contained an epha, which we have showed you was seven gallons and a half of
our english measure, for so much gathered Ruth the first day of her gleaning.
Out of the which we note the duty of every godly man, which is this, never to
be weary of distributing to the Church: for Boaz had often bestowed much upon
Ruth and Naomi, yet we see so often as he could conveniently, he still
continues his liberality. For this cause Paul wills us never to be weary
of well doing, 2 Thessalonians. 3.13.
for he which needs our liberality to day, will also want our relief to
morrow, and so often as a faithful brother comes and complains, so often
are we bound (if we have) to succor his necessity. I know many are willing to
do good once or twice to one person, but to give so often as Boaz did to Naomi,
they cannot abide, yet this is our weakness and hardness of heart, for as we
pray every day for our daily bread, so every day (having enough) we must
distribute our bread: therefore we must follow the counsel of Paul, not to
slack in doing of good, for in due time we shall reap if we faint not, Gal.
6.9.10
and therefore while we have time, let us do good unto all, but especially to
the household of faith, for as a father does every day sustain and provide for
his own household, so should we which are the stewards of the Lords
possessions, give of his own to his poor servants, for we shame his majesty,
if we suffer his family to want. We read that our Savior came often to one
house, yet was not accounted a chargeable ghest. We read that all the poor in
the primitive Church, were daily maintained at the cost of the wealthy: Our
Savior has told us that we shall always have the poor among us, to whom we
may do good, not that we should once or twice bestow liberally, and ever
after close up our benevolence, but that the same poor persons that dwell
among us should daily receive their daily relief. For how shall we desire of
God to finish his work of redemption begun in our souls, when we cease to
perfect our liberality bestowed on the poor. And now beloved in the Lord, if
ever you did; put on compassionate hearts toward your poor brethren in this
time of dearth, and think not sufficient to distribute once, but stretch out
your hands again and again, to help the necessities of the poor saints
which daily cry unto you, give, give: that your love may increase your
compassion augment, and your fellow-feeling of the same hunger, may work a
fellow feeding on the same relief.

And she came home.] Now we are come to the second part of this scripture,
which concerns Naomi and Ruth. And first here is set down her coming home
to her mother in law before day, to whom she declares how the man had used
her, what promise he made her, and what gift he sent her: where we see the
diligence of Ruth, who hasted to her mother in law to show her the news, and
to avoid the slander which we spoke of before. And this teaches us a mutual
concord in the duties of our profession, that the weaker should be warned by
the elder, as Ruth was by Boaz, for we must not let any be lost through default
of our negligence, but the wisest must govern, and the other must obey, if any
be weary, let them lay their heads upon our advise, for the credit of ye
Gospel pertains to all, and therefore all must be careful to maintain the
same.

Then said she] Naomi hearing the report of this prosperous success, and
seeing the corn that Boaz had given her, comfort her daughter to tarry the
issue, looking for a joyful end of so happy a beginning; for she knew Boaz
would not faint in ye cause that so much co^cerned his credit as this did, nor
sleep till he had ended his intended devise. Whereby we first of all note,
that here is Genesis 22.78.
the Lord (said he) will provide a sacrifice, even so parents must show their
children, the prouidene of God to maintain them, his love to embrace them, his
care to defend them, his word to instruct them, and the merits of Christ to
save them. Secondly, by this we gather a Job. 29.15.16.
feet to the lame, father to the poor, and diligently fought out the strife
which he knew not: they are no Rulers, that in meekenes entreat them not, in
mercy forbear them not, and in justice reward them not. But of this we have
spoken before: now let us give praise to God for that which has been spoken.

The eleventh Lecture.
Chap. 4. Verse. 1.2.3.4.5.6. 1. And Boaz went up to the gate and sat down
there, when behold, the kinsman came by, of whom Boaz had spoken, to whom he
said, hoe such a one, come hither and sit down here; who came and sat down.

2. Then Boaz took ten men of the elders of the City, and said to them, sit
down here, and they sat down.

3. Afterward he said to the kinsman, Naomi that is come again out of the
country of Moab, will sell a parcel of land, which was our kinsman Elimelechs.

4. And I thought to advertise thee saying: buy it before the assistants and
the elders of my people: if thou will redeem it, redeem it, but if thou will
not redeem it, tell me, for I know there is none beside thee to redeem it,
and I am after thee. Then he answered, I will redeem it.

5. Then said Boaz, what day thou buyest the field of the hand of Naomi, thou
must also buy it of Ruth the Moabitesse, the wife of the dead, to stir up the
name of the dead upon his inheritance.

6. And the kinsman answered, I cannot redeem it, least I destroy my own
inheritance; redeem my right to thee, for I cannot redeem it.


NOw, by the permission of the almighty, are we come to the last Chapter and
last part of this history, wherein the holy Ghost shows unto us how Boaz
perfourmeth his promise made unto Ruth in the former chapter, and takes her to
be his wife^: the whole Chapter contains two parts, the first is the marriage
of Boaz, and the second is the description of his kindred, as well his
ancestors, as his offspring. The first part of his marriage is described in the
first 15. verses of this chapter, with all the circumstances thereof necessary
to be known, and we will divide it into two parts: first, must be considered
that which passed between the other kinsman and Bohaz in the first 10. verses:
secondly, the manner and circumstances of the marriage unto the end of the 15.
verse. The things that passed between Boaz and his other kinsman, are first
their conference about the matter in these first 6. verses: secondly, the
alienation of the right from the other kinsman to Boaz, in the four next
verses: the conference, is described by the place, that it was at the gate of
the City, verse 1. secondly by the witnesses, that it was before the elders of
the City verse 2. The matter being thus prepared, Bohaz propounds the cause
of their meeting in two parts, first, for the redeeming of the land at the hand
of Naomi, which was the inheritance of their kinsman Elimelech: whereunto he
answers, that he will redeem it verse 4. secondly, he propounds to him the
marriage of Ruth, that the case so stands, if he redeem the inheritance, he
must also marry with the widow, for otherwise she would not agree, and this is
in the fifth verse. Unto which latter condition the kinsman answers, that he
cannot do it, first showing the reason of it, least he destroy his own
inheritance, secondly yielding him power to redeem his right in his behalf
verse 6. Of these parts let us briefly speak as the spirit of God shall give
utterance, and the time permit.

And Boaz went up to the gate.] We have heard in the former Chapter how Boaz
after he had dispatched Ruth back again to her mother in law, Cap. 3.15^
himself went into the City, to finish up the matter, now in this verse, we
see the place mentioned where Boaz bestowed himself after he was come thither,
which is the gate of the City, where he waited till he could see his kinsman
come in or out, and seeing him, called, who came unto him, and sat down
beside him. Now the gates of the Cities in those ancient days were the
public places of judgment, as appears in many places of scripture, Genesis
34.20.
among other, when Hemor and Sichem would persuade their people to be
circumcised, it is said, they sat in the gate of the City; the like is that of
Moses that the obstinate son should be brought by his own parents to the
elders of his City, and to the gate of the place; Deuteronomy. 21.19. and 22.15.
likewise if any man should accuse his wife not to be a virgin at the day of
her marriage, then her parents should bring the signs of her virginity to the
elders of the City, and the gate thereof. But we must also know, that the
public judgments and trials, were done so openly for diverse causes; first,
that no truth might be concealed, and so wrong judgment pronounced, for
thither every one might freely come and speak their minds. Secondly, that
strangers might have law and justice as well as their natural and native
inhabitants, and therefore it was at the very entrance of their Cities, so we
see Abraham a stranger, in the judgment place was heard before Hebron and Heth
when he bought his burying place. Genesis 23.10.
Lastly, because ye munition, strength, furniture, power and defense of the
City lay in the gates: Genesis 22.17. Genesis 24.60. Rebecca.
as God blesses Abraham, and so also Laban and his mother bless their sister
Ribkah, that their seed should possess the gates of their enemies, that is
their strongest defenses; Mat. 16.16.18.
And our Savior Christ showing his Apostles that he would build his Church
upon the faith which they had confessed, says, that the gates of hell should
not prevail against it, meaning the whole power of the devil, should never
ouerturne it.

1. Tim. 5.20.
for the Apostle says, that those which sin openly must be openly rebuked.
Surely there is none of us that are ignorant of the great evil which comes
by the private handling of offenses, for thereby guilty persons escape
unpunished, unjust matters are by deceit confirmed, public peace is much
abused, as if colors were discerned by blind men, or gold without the
touchstone in the light: Yet herein are we much bound to magnify ye Lord, who
has vouchsafed us open Courts for deciding of controversies, punishing of
fellons, and maintenance of peace, some for waightier, and some for lighter
contentions, for as the wax melts before the sun, so the subtlety of
offenders at the examination of the magistrate.

Secondly, by this we note, that we must in judgment Deuteronomy. 24.17.
Pervert not the right of the stranger and infant, neither take the garment of
a widow to pledge. For we must remember that Abraham, Izaac and Jacob, the
fathers of the faithful, were all their lives strangers in other lands, and
therefore we which either would or should be their children, by doing injury to
harbourles strangers, do revile and oppress our spiritual fathers, when we
love not their persons, maintain not their right, receive not their suites,
and hear not their supplications, though they were against our own selves, if
we justly deserve them; but of this matter we have spoken in the first and
second chapters. Thirdly, by this we learn, that 1. Sam. 15.33.
child or beast alive, yet contrary to this commandment, he saved king Agag;
but the Lord refused him, and cast him out of favor, and Agag was hewn in
pieces by the prophet Samuel: even so it is to be feared, that there are a
great many Saules in every place, whose affections stand for law, sparing their
friends for favor, and great men for fear, who are likewise reprobated of the
Lord, and rebuked by his ministers. And here we have good occasion to be
thankful to the Lord, which has given our Magistrates this power, that all
things are done in the name of the Prince, and assisted by the country, for
the punishment of offenders: and I pray God increase more obedience to their
authority in others, and more courage in themselves, to strike asunder with
the sword of justice, the indissoluble knots of injurious and contentious
persons, and to give the offenders their deserved reward. Then here we have
Boaz sitting in the judgment place, as one that was not ashamed of his lawful
cause, and the Lord which guides all things, and would now reward the religion
of Ruth, brings the other kinsman to the sight of Boaz, who calls him, and
he comes at the request of Boaz, and there tarieth and sits down, where
we will leave him, and go to the second part, which is the witness of this
conference.

Then Boaz took ten men.] The witnesses of the actions which are to pass in
this place, we hear in these words to be ten men of the elders of the City:
there are only ten, in my judgment, because every City of the Israelites had
twelve governors, according to the number of the tribes of Israel, to whom
appertained the ordering of all civil causes among them, for they meddled not
with religion: now it is very likely that Boaz and this other kinsman, being
men of so great kindred and wealth, were two of the number of the elders, who
being the parties in suite, had the residue of their fellows to be witnesses
of the actions that passed between them. And this interpretation is confirmed,
by the diligent examination of the place, for it is said that Boaz took them,
as if he were equal or greater in authority then they, and the other being a
man of great wealth as appears by this that he was willing to redeem the
inheritance of Naomi, which could be no small charge considering the late
troublesome days, and after we shall hear in the 6. verse that he would not
take Ruth for fear his own name should be put out in Israel, whereby
appears his calling not to be mean, beside his lineage which was to the
greatest house in Judah, by the which it must needs follow that he was an
elder or ruler among them, which being plain both by this and other places of
scripture, that the civil government of the people was exercised by elders,
and that the elders themselves could do nothing without the consent of their
fellows. We see here noted unto us this excellent doctrine, namely, that men
in authority and government must exercise nothing without the due execution of
their own law and decrees: we see here this Boaz, a man of great authority,
and lead by the spirit of God, having a cause for himself, would not desire or
go about to accomplish it, but in the judgment seat and presence of the
elders, so that no favor of persons may break the course of justice, whereby
a common wealth is ruled. Some think it a base thing that great men shall
stand to be judged in the place of common persons: and I think it as great a
fault that common persons should have any access to Magistrates to be judged
by them, for as it debaseth their estate to be joined with these judgment, so
it troubles their quietness to be judges over the^. But some, and they of the
greater sort, which have the law in their own hands, deal with it as Judah
did, when it was told him, that his daughter Thamar was with child, then there
was nothing but fire and faggot to punish her for her whoredom, till she showed
him that he was the man by whom it came, as Nathan did with David, but then
the heat of the fire was well cooled, when himself was found to be the
greatest offender: even so many deal against the weaker and poorer sort, the
laws are executed to the uttermost, but the rich and wealthy which offer all
the iniurye, gather all the friendship, which is not only a fault to others,
but in their own consciences, for how can they judge another when the same
offense condemns themselves? and therefore as there was one general place of
judgment, so there was but one common manner of trial: like as God judges
the rich and poor, so a good Magistrate should equally receive both, and be as
willing to be judged themselves, as to give sentence upon other.

Secondly, by this example of Boaz and the elders of Bethlehem we observe that
in our public business, we must resort especially to the Magistrates even in
those things that require nothing but record and witnes-bearing. This Boaz
might have gotten some of his private friends, before whom he might have
effected the matter, but we see him here the sollicitour of his own cause,
and craves no friendship, but the witness of the elders, by the which this
doctrine is confirmed: Math. 8.3.4.
and therefore our Savior having cleansed a leper, bids him go show
himself to the Priests for a witness unto them, and for this cause it was
commanded in the law, that the weighty matters should be brought before the
Priests. for Magistrates must hear as well the conclusions of peace, as the
contentions of disquietnes between man and man. Wherein we are bound to render
most humble and earnest thanks to almighty God, who has vouchsafed us this
blessing, that the contracts of matrimony, the conueyance of possessions, the
redeeming of morgaged lands, the records of inheritances, and the purchase of
every lawful thing remains written in the several courts and offices of
credit, that they might be everlasting testimonies for the posterities
succeeding.

Afterward Boaz said] Boaz like a wise man concealeth his mind from the elders
and kinsman, till they were all quietly set together, and then he begins
with one part of his suite, telling his kinsman of the land of Elimelech, which
was to be redeemed by his nearest kinsman, the which Boaz propounds but very
obscurely, that thereby he might thoroughly try his mind and good will toward
Naomi, and making it known in the presence of the elders, he might by no
means recall his word, And this teaches us not only innocent vprightnes, but
also godly policy, that we be careful for the speaking in judgment, so much
as may further our just and lawful cause, and not hinder it. For thus deals
Boaz, he did not at the first show the drift and secret of his mind, which was
the marriage of Ruth, whereof as yet he speaks nothing, but beginning the
matter with the redemption of the lands, colors the marriage by the restoring
of the inheritance, for by this means, he opens the secrets of his kinsmans
heart, that he bore some good will to the cause of Naomi, but of this matter
enough.

Wherefore I determined] In the former verse and in this, Boaz propounds the
matter to his kinseman, testifying thereby that of duty and conscience he did
it in the behalf of the widow, and requires him for his duty and
conscience, to perform the part of a kinseman, which is either to redeem the
right, or to render it up, showing that beside them two, there is not one that
was bound unto it: and also promising, that if he refused, then he himself
would discharge that duty. Where we see first of all a holy any advantage,
for this is that meekenes that causes to inherit the earth, Math. 5.5.29. 1.
Cor. 13.5 Ephesians. 4.2.
for thereby we follow Christ, with whom we shall find rest for our souls,
for love deals not churlishly, it seeks not his own, it is not bitter, it
thinks no evil. Therefore as Paul entreated the Ephesians, so must I
entreat you, that we so walk as is worthy our vocation unto the which we are
called, in all modesty, meekenes, and gentleness of mind, bearing with one
another through charity. Oh how ungodly are these clamorous accusations among
us, for which many lie in wait, that they might have any cause to draw their
brethren, as it were stark naked into the presence of the magistrates, that
is, with most impudent and shameless untruths, to charge and examine them
upon their own suspicions, never thinking on the injuries they offer unto
them, or looking for the same measure again at the hands of other. Some there
ar^ also which for every trifling farthing, will call their neighbors before
the Magistrate, delighting in their own injuries, the troubles of their
friends, the disquietnes of the Magistrates, and the abuse of the law: whose
impatient constitution calls for vengeance at the hands of the Lord, and the
curse of the land is gone out against them, nothing is wanting, but that the
branches of their unquiet spirits, should be pruned by the sword of justice,
by them to whom they make their complaints.

judicial causes in these days and the times past. Then men in their own
persons did plead in judgment their own causes, but now others make gain of
it, then suites were not so tedious as now they are, then men sought not out
such sliding shifts to cover their falsehood, but they did as Boaz and his
kinseman does, the one simply propounded his grief, and the other gently
answered his question, for so should every one utter, the truth indifferently,
both to their benefit and damage: then the world was not troubled with writs,
fees, or counselors, but every man brought his cause and his witness, so the
injury was quickly confessed, easily tried, and speedily remedied, finally, we
retain almost nothing of the ancient manners in this point, but only the bare
and outward names. By the which we are admonished of humane misery, for as the
world grows, the troubles thereof are increased: in the first age they had no
wars, in the second age they had no certain dwellings, in the third age they
had no chargeable suits, in the fourth age they had no quietness, and ever since
wars have multiplied blood, one country carried to another, men's lawful
inheritances are taken by violence, the Church is spoiled of her liberty, the
world of her peace, our bodies of their health, our goods of their continuance,
our names of their credit, our corn of increase, our lands of their fruits,
and all our lives of their natural benefits. Our Savior showed us, that
before the end, the love of many should wax cold, but surely it is not only
cold, but frozen in our lamentable age: the Apostle has showed us, that men
should be lovers of themselves, and lovers of pleasures more then God, when
shall these days be if they be not now? may we not see that every man raketh
for his profit, as the Eagle raueneth for her pray, if they may get house or
land, leases or farms, goods or carrels, money or meat, apparel or ease,
they care not though all other lie harborles in the fields, naked in the
streets, and pining in their weary and daily labors. Does not now the
Gentleman make more account of his worship, then the worship of God, the
Merchant of his profit, then of Jesus Christ, the husbandman of his fruits,
then of the fear of the Lord, the labourer of his wages, then the wealth of
his soul, the beggar of his alms, then of unfeigned devotion, and every
craftesman of his trade, more then of true religion: when shall the day of
vengeance come, for the Church of God trauaileth with child of these miseries,
and every day is a thousand till she be delivered, surely the day cannot be
long before the small remedy appear.

But Boaz. said] After he had entered with the land, and the other had granted
to redeem it, he proceeds also to the second part of his speech, telling
him, if he redeem it, he must redeem it at the hand of Ruth the Moabitesse,
the wife of the dead, with whom he must marry, to raise up the name of the
dead upon his inheritance. Deuteronomy. 25.5.6.
This law for a man to marry with the widow of his deceased brother as it is
commanded by the Lord, so it had a special regard to many things, first, for
the continuance of the first borne in every family, who were the Lords by the
law; signifying thereby that Christ the first borne of the almighty, should
remain with all his Church, like the first borne of this world, and be the
heirs of grace for ever and ever. And as he would not suffer any family to
want a first borne, because it was the Lords, so not one of the faithful can
be lost, because they are the Lords. Secondly, because it was an image of the
resurrection, for as a man being dead without issue, his brother takes his
wife, begets a son, which shall be called the son of the deceased, and
he which is dead shall live in him, in as much as his name is revived: even so
the body laid dead in the grave, shall be revived at the last day by the
powerful working of the almighty, for as the first is wonderful, so the
second is admirable. Thirdly, by this law of subrogation, is signified the
great care which the Lord had for the temporal augmenting of every family
among the Israelites; and in that, the love of God in Christ to his Church,
that though we dye without fruit in barrennes, yet the Lord will give us a
name, whereby after a few days we shall live with him for ever.

But in these words we first of all note, when he says, Luc. 1.2.^.
that barrennes was a great reproach among women in those days, now we know
that this law was only for barren widows, and not for them that were
fruitful, and who would marry with such a woman, whom in his own heart he
feared would be fruitless: therefore the Lord to succor these poor desolate
widows, gave this for a law, that the brother or nearest kinseman to their
husbands deceased, should take them to be their wives: where he again
commends unto us the careful estate of destitute widows, if they be
oppressed, we must ease them, if rejected, we must receive them, if forsaken,
we must comfort them, if reproched, we must acquire them, and finally if they
will marry, they may, yea their own friends, or the Church must provide them
husbands. And seeing the Lord would thus decree by a law, the safeguard of
those that were despised, much more would he defend by judgment the cause of
poor fruitful widows, the mothers of many children. Now although we are not
bound to this law of marriage, yet we are tied to do good to the widows,
for the nature of the law being long since abrogated, yet the use thereof
remains for ever and ever. For maintenance by the word of God must be allowed
them wherewithal they may live, their husbands being dead: Therefore Boaz
tells his kinseman, that he must redeem the inheritance at the hands of
Ruth the Moabitesse, because by her marriage, it is made the widows, the
husband dying without issue, like as in this place we observe that all the
inheritance descends to the widow, and therefore she bestowed her self upon
the next of the kindred, who indeed with us is the heir to all. Therefore by
this we must all learn, but especially the married, or those that intend it
hereafter, that it is one especial duty of a careful husband, to provide
before hand for the maintenance of their wives, that if death never so sudden
take them away, yet they may not leave them as many have done, harbourles
without house, comfortles without friends, and wealthles without convenient
maintenance. By this we see, the commendable assurance of ioyntures and dowers
in lands or money, which many parents do wisely take for their daughters, to be
a thing alowable by the word of God: yet many offend in the excess, that they
will never match where they can have none, though there be never so great hope
in time to come, so that wealth and nothing else is the end of most marriages.
Then by this we see condemned first all those which having sufficient, will
hardly leave to their wives anything, beside that which they cannot keep from
them, and hence it is, that many leave to their children hundreds and
thousands, but scant twentyes or fortyes to their helples widows. Other having
many children, leave the greatest part of their wealth to their widows,
through whose youthful marriages, many times, their whole posterity is brought
to poverty. But a third sort there are which mind nothing save only marriage,
and to borrow a little for their festival day, but afterward let the world
sink or swim, children without bread, wives without comfort, themselves as
bare as the grasshopper in winter, and their whole families most pitifully
tormented, they repent though all too late, the children wish they had never
bin borne, the parents curse the day of their first acquaintance, the family
complain of poverty, the country of charges, the people of necessity, but
they poor seely souls, the innocent infants are left to the merciles world,
to live in beggary. Oh that this godly forecast would enter into the minds of
many headlong parents, that their lives might be more blessed, their children
more happy, their families more contented, the country better furnished, and
the poor better succored, that there might be no complaining in our
streets, no leading into captivity, and not one feeble person among us, that
our sons may be as the fruitful garners, and our daughters like the
polished corners of the temple: Oh blessed are the people that be in such a
case, yea blessed are the people whose God is the Lord. Then should the name
of God be honored by our lives, and praised in our deaths, when our widows
are provided for, our children maynetayned, our families nourished, and our
souls shall be blessed.

Then the kinsman said. This second question of marriage being propounded, the
kinseman in these words answers, that he cannot redeem the inheritance
upon that condition, and gives a reason thereof, because then to save
another, he should destroy his own, meaning if he had but one child by
Ruth, that should be for Machlon her deceased husband, and so his own name
should be forgotten in his inheritance. Whereby we see that he opposes the
fear of the loss of his own name, against the severe commandment of God,
and doubts that if he follow the law of God and custom of the faithful,
his land may lack an heir, his house a master, Genesis 38.9.
and himself a son. The like unto this was that of Onan the second son of
Judah, when he should have taken the wife of his deceased brother, would not
perform his duty toward her, but abusing in filthiness his own body, because
he would not benefit his brother, was therefore justly slain by the Lord.
And I fear that a great many are sick of this disease, that love the world
above the word, their land above the law of God, their children more then
charity requires, who think they are borne for no body but only for
themselves: but especially in marriage, they had rather have the land then the
man, the portion then the woman, like this man which was willing to take the
inheritance, but unwilling to marry the widow, for this cause they oppress
both children and widows, they prefer their private gain, before public
godliness, who for their posterity some are occupied in briberie, some in
usury, some in extortion, and many in unlawful bargaining, whose only and
chief care is for nothing, but that they may die rich: but better is poor
Lazarus at his death, then all the rich gluttons in the world: for wealth
makes not to die well, but rather choketh the soul with infatiable care,
only religion is the surest badge of a godly man, whose riches is poverty,
whose pleasure pain, and whose reward is salvation. But this man is well
contented to give over his right to Bohaz, wherein surely he does him a
pleasure, but if there had been any profit in it, he would first have
served himself: wherein we have a worthy example of a worldly mind, which
grants all things, til it touch his disco^moditie: for thus the world will
hear us preach till we rebuke their covetousness, or crave their benevolence,
for every one will go as far dry foot as they can, but none will be wet for
the law of the Lord: that is, so long as we tell them of their faithes, exhort
them to repentance, persuade them from pleasure, and drunkenness; but once
touch their purses, as John Baptiste did Herodes whoredom, then farewell
preaching, faith and repentance: But thus much shall suffice for this time. Now
let us give praise to God.

The end of the eleventh Lecture.
The twelfth Lecture.
Chap. 4. ver. 7.8.9.10. 7 Now this was the manner before time in Israel,
concerning the redeeming and changing for to stablish all things, a man did
pluck off his shoe, and gave it his neighbor, and this was a ^ure witness
in Israel.

8 Therefore the kinseman said to Boaz, buy it for thee and he drew off his
shoe.

9 And Bohaz said unto the elders, and unto all the people, ye are witnesses
this day, that I have bought all that was Elimeleches, and all that was
Chilions and Mahlons, of the hand of Naomi.

10 And moreover, Ruth the Moabitesse the wife of Mahlon, have I bought to be
my wife, to stir up the name of the dead, upon his inheritance, and that the
name of the dead be not put out from among his brethren, and from the gate of
his place ye are witnesses this day.


THese words contain the finishing up the matter between Bohaz and his
kinseman; how the one resigneth his right to the other, and the knitting up of
the marriage. They consist of two parts: first, a description of the ancient
manner of alienation, or changing of titles, rightes, and properties: in the
seventh verse, in these words: Now this was the manner before time etc, to the
end of the verse: The second is the manner how this man does give over, and
resign his right to Boaz, in the eight, ninth and tenth verses: and contains
two parts; the first respects the kinsman in the ninth verse: where first,
he bids Boaz to buy or redeem it: Secondly, he draws off his shoe.

The second part respects Boaz, and shows how he receives it in the 2.
next verses: wherein first he calls witness of the elders and people verse. 10.
Secondly, he accepts the proffer, or purchase which is double: first the
land or inheritance, verse. 10. Secondly the widdowe or wife of Machlon, verse.
11, of these let us briefly speak in order as they lie, with the assistaunce
of God his spirit, and the permission of the time.

Now this was] First of all here is described the manner of God his people, how
in ancient time, they were wont to alienate, or put of their right from one to
another, which the holy Ghost sets down for the better understanding of
that which follows. And this manner of changing or selling was commanded by
the Lord himself, Deuteronomy. 25.8.9, 10
as we read in these words. Then the Elders of his city shall call him and
commune with him, if he stand and say, I will not take her: Then shall his
kinswoman come unto him, in the presence of the Elders, and loose his shoe
from his foot, and spit in his face, and answer and say, so shall it be done
to him, that will not build up his brothers house. And his name shall be
called in Israel, the house of him whose shoe is put of. In the which words,
we note these things: First that it was the duty of the woman to complain of
such a man before the magistrates, as we may see in the 7. ver. Secondly that
the magistrates were bound to call and examine such persons, of the causes
of their deny all. Thirdely, that the woman should pull off the shoe and also
spit in his face, which the Lord did doubtless command for the poor
comfortles woman's sake, that no excuse should be admitted of delay, but that
they might either be presently received, or presently refused: for she which
was not fit to day, would not be to morrow, where we gather the great care
of the Lord for widows, which has warned their friends to provide for them
marriages, and armed the magistrates to defend their weakness, truly as they
which are least accounted in the world, are most esteemed of the Lord, even so
they which are most regarded of the world, are least respected of the Lord:
for in this law: the almighty had an especial eye to the poor, for he knew
the wealthy could want no husbands: Whereby we are taught first, to magnify
the goodness of the Lord: which as Marie says, looks upon the poor degree
of his servants, Luc: 1.48.
and beholds the rich a far off, his delight is in aduauncing of them that
are cast down, and all his laws defend the causes of the oppressed. Secondly,
that we make no light account or reckoning of those whom the Lord in his word
does so highly commend unto us: for it is an especial token of them that
shall be saved, that they make much of them that fear the Lord: Psalm. 15.4.
Luc. 16.29.
what though they be as poor as Lazarus, and never so contemptible in the
eyes of the world: yet it is a thousand times more commendable to be friendly
to such, then to all the rich gluttons of ye world, but of this point we have
spoken before, and it is sufficient to touch it now.

Secondly, by this we also note, that if there be any injury done to the
children by their parents, or to Romans 13.1.4.
because he bears it not in vain: and moreover it is flatly against the
Gospel: that any should do unto other, Mat. 7.12.
which they would not have done to themselves: much more this forcible dealing
with friends or children: And if it be lawful for the wife or husband to fly
to the magistrate in private injuries, much more for the children which are
weaker, and therefore need more help. This I speak not to stir up the
minds of any against their parents; but with the Apostle I exhort and command
that every one obey their parents in all things lawful: for he is accursed
that does otherwise; but to this end I utter it, that we may know what is
lawful and what is unlawful: for the same God which has commanded that
parents should bring their unruly sons and daughters for to be punished,
wills also that they wc do any hurt to their children, either in soul to
draw the^ from ye Lord: or in body, as in unlawful or ungodly marriages, in
unlawful and ungodly actions, their only rerefuge should be to ye minister of
God, ye lawful magistrate, to whom they owe more obedience then to their own
parents: Therefore Paul wills parents, that they provoke not their children
to wrath, which is by their tirannous commandments to bind their
consciences, and their cruel authority to murder their minds: For if a
private subject may sue against the Prince, and crave the law, much more a
son or a daughter, being grieved by their parents: The use of this doctrine
is to teach and instruct us, first what duty we owe to the magistrates, who
have greater care and charge over us for the peace of our country, and public
welfare, then parents for our maintaynance, and private obedience: therefore
Paul wills to pray and give thanks for the magistrates, that under them we
may live godly and quiet lives, 1 Timothy 2.2.3
for that is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior, whereby we
may justly complain of the slacknes of our unhappy age, wherein men murmr
and grudge at any charge which arises for our prince, but especialy that there
are so few which in all their lives have prayed for Prince or Magistrates, and
if they have, it was but a wish and no more, that they might live in peace to
gather wealth, not in godliness, for the profit of their souls: Again by this
all parents must be instructed how to deal with their children, that they
reygne not like Gods over the fruits of their bodies, but entreat them in
meekness, being of years of discreation, like their fellow heirs of God
his kingdom: even as they will answer to the Almighty, who gave them such
issue, and to the laws of our Prince, that requires account of them, for the
chiefest stroke lies not in them, but in those that govern both church and
common wealth, and we have already showed that in some causes, it is a glory
for their children, to decline from their counselles: Lastly, all children must
herein also be schooled, that with all reverence they submit themselves to the
advice of their parents: but especially like free men in Christ, they listen
always what the word of God says: for that must be their judge, and parents
also, when it shall not go for payment, that they did it for fear of their
friends: but they which fear them more then God, shall with them be excluded
for ever from God: and let us evermore give thanks to the Almighty, which thus
provides for our misery, to defend our innocence that if we be in one place
oppressed, we may be redressed in another, appointing courts of appeal from
our own parents to his own magistrates:

Thirdely, by this also we observe and note, when of earth and a twigge, of
houses all go forth and the buyer enters in alone and there abides, and this
I may say is a sure testimony in England. But you would know why the Lord
beside the record of the magistrates, required such outward and open signs:
To which I answer; he did it for this cause, that the simplest among them
might not be deceived, but might have yt as the evidence of his possession for
evermore: witness sayleth, magistrates dye, people are unconstant; yea, and some
will falsely swear and witness to any untruth, yet the shoe remained an
everlasting testimony. Therefore among us there is writing and seal, by the
which things are confirmed, which passed many ages ago; and this was taken
from the ancient usage, wherein men's names were entered in brass and stone, and
the quantity of their possessions described. Therefore does the holy Ghost so
precisely set down the purchase which Abraham made with Ephron: where the
field is named, Genesis 23.17.
the borders or bounds of it is described; the cave is mentioned, and the very
trees that grew in the same, are made sure unto him, the like may be said of
the stones in mount Gilead, that Jacob reared as a witness between him and
Laban, and many other which serve to this end, Genesis 31.52, 1. These. 4.6
that as Paul says, We should not defraude one another: For if he were
accursed that removed the land mark of his neighbor, what shall they be
which get marks and lands both, some by deceyuing, some by forged evidence,
other by false witness, and some force their neighbors, will they, nil they, to
depart from their dwellings and possessions, and to leave them for little or
nothing in the claws of these cormorantes, their great possessions require
great accomptes, and I fear me, when that day shall come, they will be as
ready to restore, as ever Judas was, but it shall be to late and without
fruit, for the sentence is already pronounced, that fire shall consume their
dwellinges, and their children or posterity shall be vagabounds, but the
righteous shall have the land in possession.

Therefore the kinseman] This verse shows how the right was resigned, first
the kinseman gives Boaz authority, when he bids him buy it for himself:
and secondly, he renounceth his own, when he pulls off his shoe. Where
first of all it may be demanded, why does he pluck off his own shoe?
seeing by the law, the woman should do it, and also spitte in his face; as
we have heard already. Unto which I briefly answer: First the law
beforesaide, wherein the woman was bound to pluck off the shoe, and to spit
in her kinsemans face, was for such as utterly denied both to redeem the
inheritance, and to marry the widdowe, as also that would not provide any
substitute to do it in their behalf: but this kinseman of Naomies, got Boaz
to redeem his right, as we may see in the 6, verse of this chapter, in these
words redeem my right to thee: Therefore that ceremony was needeles: Secondly
I answer, that the woman by that law was bound to complain to the
magistrates: but neither Naomi nor Ruth did make any complaint, save only a
private petition unto Boaz for to marry her in his own behalf; and therefore
the matter being confessed before the complaint, as he was willing to release
his title unto Boaz, who was ready to receive it, so with less rigor ye law was
executed upon him: for a penitent offender is worthy of most favor. Thirdly,
neither Naomi nor Ruth were present when this matter was in hearing, because
they were uncertain of their kinsemans mind, who if he had granted, it had
been immodesty for them, seeing they never asked him before: and if he denied
as he did, by their presence they should seem to distrust the promise which
Boaz made to Ruth: But seeing the consent of Naomi and Ruth was yielded to
Bohaz, and that being but the first motion, they needed not be present, and
the matter at the first confessed, was at the beginning dispatched: Out of the
which we first observe, that it is a point of godliness, and worthy of
frendshippe, that in our suites we should at the first confess our
oppressions: if we have done any; I know many will commit their unjust
dealing to the trial of the law, looking for a doubtful issue of the same:
and will say if I be condemned, the charge is but the more to my self: but I
reply and say, why do thou not confess thy folly, and the injury which thou
have done, and save ye charges wc thou spe^dest in the trial, thou do but ad
murder to thy malice, drunke^nes to thy thirst, and prodigality to thy
covetousness: Thou have already robbed thy neighbor, by thy oppression, now thou will spoil the Lord of those his goods, whereof he has made thee steward,
by cosuming them in Law to defend thy injuries: Follow the counsel of the
Lord, Mat. 5.25.
agree with thy adversary quickly, whilst thou art in ye way with him, lest
he complain of thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the tailor, and
so forth: Let wise men end your matters at home, abide not the verdite of the
law, it is too costly: for as you are accomptable to your neighbor for the
uttermost farthing, so you shall be answerable to the Lord for every mite, you
have misspent, when the very money you have laid out shall rise in judgment
against you to condemn your contentions.

Secondly, we note here in Naomi and Ruth: an excellent example of a godly
mind: for if Naomi would, she might have dealt with her kinseman, and he
denying, she might have done him all the disgrace set down in the law, to
have pulled of his shoe, to have spit in his face, to have defamed him and his
house for ever: but she deals not so, she would not revenge one injury by
another, she makes the matter sure before hand, that if he refused, Ruth
might be married, and the other not disgraced: So dear is the name and credit
of ones neighbor to a godly person, that they will adventure their own loss
and hinderaunce, to save the honesty of the other. Therefore says Peter, it is
the glory of a man to pass by the infirmities of his brother, Joseph might
have disclosed the lusts of his mistress, Genesis 39.17 18.
and saved his own imprisonment: but he concealed it which wrought first his
misery, and then his felicity. But oh how few are there like Joseph in our
days, which having their brethren at uauntages, will not to their uttermost
accuse them. We have many Zibaes which accuse poor Mephibosheth to David,
with gifts and with bribes, 2. Sam. 16.3
pretending simplicity, with words sweeter then honye: when war is in their
hearts, their lips have learned their flattering style, they are of their
father that old accuser of God his children, but as he is cast down, so they
shall be condemned: Rev. 12.10. Job. 1.10
yea even then when it is no benefit to them, how does it rejoice them to see
their neighbors imprisoned, their enemies slaundered, their possessions
removed, their wealth diminished, their credit abated, and they deprived of
friends and favor at one time.

Is this the thing that you would have them do to you? might not the Lord
have suffered him to stand, and cast down you that he might have laughed at
your destruction. Consider your selves beloved in the Lord, and let us be the
scholars of this godly Naomi, if we may get our own with fair speeches, let
us not use these threatening words: If we must hide the truth for the benefit
of our neighbors, much less must we conceal falsehood, that not one word
of disgrace be uttered to the discreadite of our neighbors. Oh that those
which contend with their neighbors would be instructed in this doctrine;
how much would it moderate their malice for the benefit of their
adversaries, and bring peace unto both, never to be repented of? Wherefore
lay aside all maliciousness and guile, 1. Pet. 2.1.^.
dissimulation, envy, and all evil speaking, as innocente and new borne
babes: and let us desire the sincere milk of the word of God, that we may
grow to be perfect men in Jesus Christ, that as he suffered and gave no
answer, being led as a sheep before the shearer, which opens not his
mouth: having many causes to allege against his adversaries, yet in silence
endured both their judgment and reproaches, that we with the same lenitye and
meekness, should forgive other, even as he has forgiven us.

Thirdely, by this also we observe, that the laws both of God and men be they
never so sharp, yet in some causes they may be moderated, according to the
discreation of the magistrate, especially when they respect private persons: In
this place the spitting on the face, and the disgracing of the name of the man
is omitted: which the magistrates might have constrained, if they pleased:
neither are they to be blamed, for the party which was most grieved, by this
denial was best pleased, neither did she call for extremity. And as Christ
would not in his judgment, John. 8.1
condemn or accuse the woman taken in adultery, but bid her sin no more,
even so the rigor of the Law is not to be executed upon every offendour, but
where hope of amendment is, there may be a testistimony of favor. This is
worthy doctrine for our days, wherein men lie in wait as the dragons do for
the Elephants, to get their brethren within the compass of the law, and
though God his word and their own consciences condemn them, yet if the law
say it, deprive men of their liuinges, Christians of their liberties, servants
of their freedom, in the service of God, parents of their children, wives of
their husbands, Churches of their preachers, and no man dare open his mouth
for them, that if Christ himself, were on the earth again in his humane
shape, they need no other argument, but this: we have a law, and by our law
he ought to die: But woe be unto you says the prophet, that urge the laws
of Omri, Mich. 6.16.
that is, which dare maintain the decrees of princes against any of the Lords
servants: Surely it is an argument that men fear the creature above the
Creator, which will not be drawn from their laws be they never so childish:
but in our days it is most lamentable, that any good laws should be wrested
against the course of the Gospel, which were made for the enlarging thereof,
such as is the forcing of men to abide with dumb ministers when the Gospel
preached calls for them at the next Church: But I speak not one word
against lawful authority, or against the law, but only the partiality of
the executioners thereof, is worthy of blame, many times punnishing seuerly
where is no or little offense, and pardoning by sufferance notorious
blasphemers. But let no magistrates think when they may mitigate offenses,
that they may altogether bury the force of the law, when they shut their
ears aagainst the cry of them that complain, or execute it not for favor or
frendshippe: But on the contrary they must not in matters of judgment repel
any information or evidence: but if the party grieved require extremity, by
wisdom they may persuade him; but by authority they cannot deny him:
Finally, in all things consider with the Apostle, not only what is lawful,
but also what is expedient, that charity being joined with authority, love
may rather amend our faults then law, and severity put unto justice, the
greatest faults may have the sharpest punishments, that not the words, but
the mind of the Lawmakers may ever be considered.

And Bohaz said unto the elders] Now the ceremony being ended, the resignation
delivered, the holy Ghost proceeds to express how Bohaz received it, where
he first of all calls witness of the elders, and of the people, that now he
has bought the inheritance of Elimeleches, and whatsoever was Mahlons, and
whatsoever was Chilions, he has bought at the hand of Naomi: So that here he
testifies with the witness before said, that it shall be as his own in
possession forever.

Where first of all here comes in question whether 1 King 21.3
and so might have saved his life. But Naboath had the express law of God on
his side, Leuit. 25.23
which commanded that the land should not be sold to be cut off from any
family: and gives this reason of it, because they were but strangers in the
land, and soiourners, but the fee simple (as we call it) was only the Lords:
Therefore Naboath was not wrong, but had the law of God for his defense: nor
yet Bohaz did not amiss, which bought Elimeleches possession or inheritance
of Naomi. Therefore we must briefly set down the conditions of sale, as they
may be gathered out of the law of God.

Leuit. 25.
First therefore these are the words, If thy brother be impouerished and fell
his possession, then his redeemer shall come, Leuit. 25.
even his near kinseman, and buy out that which his brother has sold: And if
he have no redeemer, Leuit. 26.
but his hand has gotten to buy it out. Then shall he count the years of
his sale, and restore the overplus to whom he sold it: Leuit. 27
so shall he return to his possession. Leuit. 28
But if he cannot get sufficient to restore to him, then that which is sold
shall remain in his hand that bought it, until the year of Iubilee: and in
the Iubilee it shall come out, and he shall return to his possession.

Out of these words we gather these proposititions for certain truth: First
that for poverty it was lawful for men to fell away their inheritance:
Secondely, that the next kinseman might redeem it, and no man else beside him
that sold it: and they might at any time redeem it, neither could the
possessour deny them. Thirdly, that no sale of any land was good or effectual
for any time after the year of Iubilee: By these three conclusions we may try
the title: Naomi was now impouerished, and therefore she might fell her
inheritance to whom she pleased; Bohaz was by substitution, the next
kinseman: therefore he might lawfully buy it: For Naboath, he was neither
poor nor wanted, neither was Ahab any of his kindred, and if it had once got
into the kings inheritance, who could ever have required it again.

Therefore Naboath was without blame in denying to sell his vineyarde, and
Bohaz without fault and blame for buying of Naomies: And Boaz knew that he
had the consent of the seller, and therefore he was the bolder. Then by this
we may gather, in what cause it is lawful to buy or to sell ones inheritance.

First it is lawful to buy with the consent and good will of him that sells:
so we read how Abraham bought a field of Ephron, after he had first
communed with his sons, and had their liking of his suite, and after at the
gate of the city, he had his assurance, Genesis 23.17.
and without this it is not lawful at all to deal, for except the will be
free and not compelled, it is no bargayne before the Lord, but plain robbery,
and unjust dispossessing, because in the last commandment the Lord says,
Thou shall not covet thy neighbors field, or his house, or his ox, or his
Ass, or any thing that is his, whereby is forbidden every thought of
covetousness, much more forcible and unjust dealing, to compel men to depart
from their inheritance: Therefore Ahab was blamed by Eliah, (though only
Iesabell wrought the murder) because he knew it was forcible dealing, and
he ought not to have entered, seeing the means of his death. But how many
constrained purchases are there made, the Lord only knows, and the country
every where ringeth of them, where many by one means or other, are driven to
depart from their patrimonies, are lest destitute of dwelling places, wives
without maintenance, children without inheritance, familyes brought to
poverty, by such daily and usual purchasing.

Secondly, it is lawful to buy if it be publicly done, not only for the
conueyaunce or assurance, but also for the price: Therefore Ephron made
Abraham the price of four hundred shekels in the gate of the City, and here
Bohaz does it before the elders. This is a most worthy consideration, because
by the neglect of this point it comes to pass, that great lyuinges are done
away for a song, as the proverb is, young men privately sell their
patrimonies, their fathers being alive, for little or nothing: others which
have not so much worldly wit, as were to be wished, make private bargaynes of
their lands, when they are in want or poverty, wherein they sell them half
for nothing. And thus young men are deceived with the sight of a little gold,
unwise and unthrifty persons are cosoned, with nothing in regard of the value
of their inheritance, widows lest comfortless, children left harbourlesse;
and the country troubled and pestred with such covetous encrochers, and why:
because they make subtle and deceytfull bargaynes in secreate, whereof they
would be ashamed, if either before judges, Elders or Magistrates this sale
were propounded. Therefore by the rule of God his word, we hold him a thief
and a robber, which has thus bought to the hinderance of the seller.

Thirdely, it is lawful to buy for necessity house or lands, or any other
thing lawful to be sold, the former conditions always observed, but it must
not be for vayneglorye, or for the aduauncing of their children or posteritye,
or that they might be land lords to many: Not every one that is wealthy and
has much money must always purchase land: the former example of Abraham
proves this: who being a very wealthy man; yet he never offered to buy any
land, till Sara his wife was dead, and that was for necessity to bury her
in. So did Jacob his son buy a parcel of land of Hemor the father of
Shechem for an hundred pieces of silver, Genesis 33.19.
whereon he pitched his tente, and builded an Altar: He might have bought and
purchased much more, as he was able, but he would not; only a dwelling
place and an Altar room he provided: surely we have an infinite and great
number that buy dwelling places, but few that give any of their lands or
livings to build aulters or Churches on. Nay, who sees not how men sue daily
to pull down the aulters, and to make arrable land where they stand; that is,
they pull personages and spiritual livings to their nests, they get away
tithes and oblations, they enter upon the lands and profits of the ministry,
and I think verily in many places they are grieved that the Churches and
Churchyards are so big, because they would have the more profit, these persons
I warrant you are none of Jacobs children nor Abraham's neither, which have
taken to themselves the houses of God in possession. Against these the Prophet
cries, woe be unto them that join house to house and field to field, Isa.
58.9.
that there might be no more place, that ye may be placed by your selves in the
mids of the earth: therefore hear their punishment. This says the Lord is in
my ears; surely many houses shall be desolate, even great and fair houses
without inhabitants; This shall be the end of these covetous cormorants, who
desire to be the Lords of the earth, And if good King David's posterity within
a thousand years after him had not one house to lodge in, but even in the same
which was their fathers: Joseph and Mary were feign to harbor in the stables;
fear not you but your posterities will be beggered within a hundred years
after you, which neither are so wealthy, or so godly as David was; but I may
sooner pour out my very heart, then make any forsake their purchasing, so
loving a sin is the desire of wealth, that men choose it with abundance here
for a season, and damnation there for ever, but let the godly use the world as
if they used it not, for the desire of money is the root of all evil.

But now we have labored for the buyers, whom I know will be more careful of
their profit, then my instruction, let us in a word direct the sellers also
before we go from this point. If any demand wherefore, or for what causes
they ought, or it may be lawful for them to sell their possessions, I answer
briefly, for these causes a man may and for none else. First, to relieve
health, being imprisoned for some good cause or lawful debt, being taken a
captive to pay his ransom, or such like, all this is understood by the name
of poverty, or any other means whereby a man may come into poverty: for the
Lord which gave inheritances, gave them for the benefit of the possessors, that
they might be helps unto them in this miserable life; for they must ever
esteem more of their life then of their lands, Genesis 47.18.19.
of their liberty then their inheritance, of their welfare and health then
riches or wealth, Genesis 47.20.
and therefore the Lord permitted the Jews to do away their inheritance: and
mention is made of a godly woman in the Gospel, Mark. 5.25.
that had spent all the substance she had upon Physicians, Mark. 5.26.
which is reported to magnify the goodness of our Savior unto her, which cured
her for nothing, and deferred to help her, till she had spent all, that she
might account more of her health, then her wealth, of the kindness of Christ,
then the cunning of the Physicians, but I need not many reasons to prove
this, and therefore I will leave it.

2. Sam. 24.24.
when the Lord stayed the plague, 2. Sam. 24.25.
after he had numbered the people: this was to special use, and therefore for
some special causes I think it lawful for men to give or sell their
inheritance. By this we learn what to judge of them which are so far from
giving or selling, that it is a hart-sore unto them to see such goodly
hospitalls and alms houses erected for the poor, although not of their cost,
yet to their grief, for they had rather be fatted with the rent of the houses,
then poor and miserable maimed people should be fed with the reuennewes: these
persons think nothing well spent, but that which is bestowed in surfeiting and
pleasures, in costly apparel and dainty fare, thinking the time long till
these poor almes-mens gowns be turned into velvet coats, but I pray God
their possessions may be hospitalls, not hospitalles their possessions. Other
think much if a poor body get a little Cottage to be builded upon the
Commons or wast grounds, they had rather have styes for their swine, then
dwellings for such destitute souls: surely let them take heed, that their own
styes, I mean their houses wherein such fat hogs as themselves are, living in
pleasure and in follyes, be not made worse then the silly houell of the other,
and God curse the^ and their posterity, because they have hated him in his
poverty: for if he which gives to the poor do lend to the Lord, then he which
reuileth the poor, reuileth or (as Solomon says) scorneth his maker, then he
which takes from the poor shall rob the Lord, and sure his judgment shall be
very severe, and his damnation very swift.

Thirdly, it is lawful to sell inheritances, and to bestow or employ the
money upon the Church, so we read of the primitive Church, how they which had
land, sold it, and brought the money, Act. 2.45.
and laid it down at the Apostles feet, and therefore is that excellent and
fearful history of Ananias and Saphira his wife, who keeping back but a part
of the money that was their own, and confirming it with a lie, were suddenly
stroke dead. I would to God the niggards of our age would consider this, which
will deprive the poor of that which they owe them, and pluck from Church and
ministry that which is given them. But of this latter disease, few are sick
in our days, that they will sell their land to give to the Church, rather
spend it in gluttony for their belly, then liberality for their soul, in good
fellowship among ruffians, then christian charity among the faithful, clothing
themselves above their calling, that for a season they may live like Gentlemen,
and ever after in woeful slavery: these singing fools of all other are most
miserable, for their friends will not comfort them, their fellows will forsake
them, their wealth will decay, but their woe shall be everlasting.

Lastly, by this verse we note, that women or widows had the rule of their
husbands inheritances, if they died without heirs, for here it is said, that
Boaz buyeth it at the hand of Naomi, because she was her husbands heir, and
being past childbearing, had given over her right to Ruth: this we have already
showed you was the singular care which the Lord has over poor desolate
widows, that they should not be despised, although they were barren, and
therefore, for their better preferment, willed the inheritance to descend unto
them: whereby we may see it is no new thing that women should be inheritours,
for the daughters of Job had inheritances among their brethren, Job. 42.15.
Numb. 36.6.
the daughters of Zelopehad had their fathers lot, Numb. 36.7.
and Caleb gave his daughter Acsah with an inheritance unto his kinsman
Othoniell, which may suffice for proof of this matter, Iud. 1.13.14.
for the perpetuities of inheritances are condemned by God and man; but I would
to God that the wealth of many women were not their undoing, and their riches
the cause of their casting away; especially where friends have aspiring minds,
there the misery of maidens and widows falls in nothing sooner, for setting
them aloft with wealthy portions, and forgetting what they are in nature,
their riches fall to vnthrists, and themselves to lamentable want.

And moreouer] After the lands, he descends to his marriage, which is
described in this verse: wherein he protests that he takes the lands, that
he might also marry with the woman, and he marries the woman for no other
cause, but to stir up the name of the dead according to the commandment of
God: for what else should move an old man, to do that in his withered age,
which he refused in his lusty youth. By the namely, that for them we must
depart with our own maintenance, and unto their good, not only to the
uttermost, but also beyond our power. And this is worthy to be noted of
widows, which are wealthily left by their husbands, who are wont but little
to care for their children, but to bestow their goods upon youthful
companions: see here this Naomi having but a daughter in law, she gives her
the whole inheritance, as if she had been borne for it: and truly, the only
cause (in regard of our selves) of all our wealth is, that we might bestow it
upon our children, how grievous is it in many places to see both lands and
livings consumed by them, which never swet for them, and many poor children to
whom of right they do pertain, to be destitute both of friends and
maintenance, and all through the wanton marriages of their youthful mothers,
but of this matter we have spoken already, and shall be sufficient to remember
at this time.

Secondly, by this we may gather, that a marriage is a

Thirdly by this we also observe the end of all marriages, which is first for
the commandment of God, and secondly for the increase of the Church. Both
these are here set down by Boaz in these words, to stir up the name of the
dead upon his inheritance, and that the name of the dead be not put out from
among his brethren. This was the special commandment of God that he should
marry his kinsemans wife, and raise up seed to his kinseman, which was as we
lately showed you for the multiplying of the Church. By the which we may
examine all the intentions of marriage, whatsoever. First, if we do not take it
in hand for the commandment of God, what hope can they ever have of the
blessing of the Lord upon them; like as a labourer which sets himself to
another man's work without his consent, has nothing for his pains, even so
all they whatsoever they be, which have married of their own brain, without
respect to the law of God, can never have or crave any blessing of the Lord
upon themselves or their posterity: Oh, fearful consideration, worthy to be
considered of all them which unadvisedly go about to marry, for a wild tree
brings forth sour fruit, and wicked parents which have no regard of
holiness in their marriages, do seldom bring any wholesome fruit to the Lord.
But some will say how shall we know how or in what sort to behave our selves,
that before we marry we might aim at nothing beside the commandment of
God? Hearken a little and I will briefly instruct you out of the word of God.

First of all, the care of those that will be married, Genesis 9.1.
amongst other confirming marriage, Moses says: Genesis 9.7.
And he blessed Noah and his sons, and said, Increase and multiplye, so that
they which look for any increase or fruit of their marriage, must first of
all be assured that the Lord has blessed them. But how shall we obtain this
blessing of God? I answer, by diligent reading of his word, and by prayer.
David asking this question, Psalm. 119.9.
wherewithal a young man shall cleanse his way? and then he answers
himself, and says, even by taking heed unto thy word. And Paul says, that
the unmarried care for the things that please the Lord, as if he had said, 1.
Cor. 7.34
they must remain unmarried for no other cause but that they might the more
freely give themselves to the service of God. If a man want faith, he may
obtain it by prayer, and if he want the blessing of God upon his marriage,
which is a less thing then faith, may he not obtain it by prayer? Izaac
having been married twentye years, yet was without children, Genesis 25.21.22.
and then he prayed for issue, and the Lord gave him two at one time, and may
not prayer obtain this for the unmarried as well as for the married? yes verily,
if either would take the pains to use it. But oh who are they that ever in
their lives once offered of their prayers to God to bless them with wives or
husbands? that is, that they might be so married as the name of God might be
glorified by them. Nay, what young man or woman among a thousand in these
days, that is delighted with either prayer or preaching, but rather affect
nothing but liberty, pleasure, and pastime, they never think of any need
they stand of these things, but rather imagine that their youthful days and
years must be consumed in riotous sports, and wanton wanderings, so that most
men and maidens come by their wives and husbands at feastings and dancing, by
dallying and playing,

(...)
it is bound to one, if life, it can not be solitary* if wealth, it must not be
possessed alone. 1. Pet. 3.7.
Therefore Peter said, husbands dwell with your wives like men of knowledge, as
if he had said, in your unmarried time you were wanderers, but now you are
married you are dwellers; in your unmarried age you were inconstant; but now you
are married you are as immovable as a house; when you were single, you were
ignorant* but now you be married* be men of knowledge: (...)
and finally, when you were young, you were troubled with the desire of many,
but now you are married you are comforted with the love of one; and as a man
without a dwelling place; so is the unmarried without a companion. Such is the
commodity of marriage if it be duly considered, and each party rightly
instructed, that it is as sleep to a weary man, as wine to the thirsty, as a
house to the harbourlesse, and as a garment against winter; and therefore is it
compared to the fellowship of Christ with his Church. Ephesians. 5.29.
How then comes it to pass that men live more riotously being married then
when they are unmarried, for they amend nothing* but think all things as
lawful for them then as it was before, their houses without their presence,
their wives without their company, their families without their government, so
that you shall see married persons wandering abroad, as if they were unmarried,
disporting themselves as shamefully and as loosely as any in the world: not
living in sobriety and modesty like the turtle dove, but in gaming and daunsing
like the wanton goat; these parties never married for the commandment of
God, but some rash desire possessed their minds, and a little youthful lust
tickled their fancies, much like the savor of juniper, which continues but a
little while. Other are so far from this point to marry, that they might live
more soberly, that they make their marriages the cover of their dishonesty,
making the world believe they live in perfect chastity, because they are
married, but privily they give themselves to most filthy adulteryes: but the
Apostle says, marriage is honorable, but adulterers God will judge, that is,
will utterly condemn; Heb. 13.4.
and if their behauiours were well examined, you should find this the cause,
that their houses cannot hold them, the filthiness of these parties is
condemned by the very brute beasts, and shall be punished by the seueare
judgment of God: for they which make the members of Christ the members of
harlots, shall be with harlots the members of the devil, therefore marry for
modesty, not for filthiness, that your ungoverned age may be brideled with the
consideration of your present estate, your wearyed days may be quieted in the
bed of godly, holy, and honorable marriage.

Thirdly, they which marry for obedience unto God, Math. 4. Genesis 34.15.
but they must say, as Jacobs sons said to Shechem and Hemor, if you will be
circumcised you shall have our sister: that is, if you fear God, and receive
his true knowledge, if you love his word and honor his sacraments, if you can
benefit the souls as well as the bodies: But a man may weary himself many
days before he find any of this inclination, for parents will deny their
consents, if they see not the riches for their daughters husbands, or sons
wives, keeping them in continual burning, for lack of this wealthy licour;
And I know many parents which have cast off their children for poor marriages,
but never any for the wealthy, were they never so wicked* therefore whosoever
for this cause, denies right to his child, shall be more faulty for their
ungodly disposition, then the children for their unadvised marriage. Now in
these days, it is a wonder to see how the minds of men and women can love for
wealth, that even as a harlot humbles her self for money to him, whom
otherwise she would not look upon, so men and women will marry themselves for
wealth, where if there were pouertye, they would think them unworthy to be
their servant. I marvel if the heathen law were now in force, that no man
should give any thing to their daughters marriage, in what time of their days
would these men marry, truly I think they would never marry, except it were
to make drudges of their wives. But these are not of Boaz his mind, for he
marries a stranger who had but little wealth, because the Lord so commanded
to take his kinsmans wife; although he might have refused, yet he was contented
for this cause, to buy her as he says in this verse, to teach us, that if God
bid us to marry, that is, if we find in our own consciences that we cannot
live otherwise, then rather adventure thy wealth, then the displeasure of God.
But some will say, is it not lawful to desire and to sue for wealthy
marriages? Yes verily with this affection, that thou like thy choice as well if
there were little, (...)
as now there is much. And therefore thou must evermore remember these
cautions, both in Act. 20.35.
more time to the service of God, therefore was it that Paul said, 1. Cor. 7.34
the married care for the things of this life to please their wives: showing,
that it is one misery upon the poor when they are married, that they are
troubled about worldly and necessary provision, but if these things be
supplied by a good marriage, thou may praise God with the greater diligence.

But who are they which have desired or obtained a wealthy marriage for either
of these causes? if the poor should go in collection for relief of them
which for this occasion have richly joined themselves, what should they gather?
or how far should they go? to how many persons might they come, before they
get a shilling? Truly for this cause they desire them, some, that they might
lavish out the more in riotous expenses, with the rich man in the Gospel, to
seed in pleasure, to be clothed in silk, to maintain dogs, hounds,
hawks, horses, and retinues of idle men, but never the Church of God fares
the better for them. Again by their wealth, they have idleness and time to
wander abroad, here to feast and to make merry, there to play and disporte
themselves in bodily exercises, and worldly vanities, but never one hour the
more is spent in the service of God, but much the less, for the Devils sweet
and pleasant baits draw away their minds from the consideration of their own
miseries. Again, they are many times a thousand fold more clogged with the
cares of their wealth, then the poorest soul to provide bread for his family,
by his bodily labor. Lastly, their desire is to leave great possessions to
their posterity, that the honor of their houses may be increased, and the
name of their memory might be everlastingly recorded, so that neither the
glory of God, the promoting of the Gospel, the relieuing of the faithful, or
the succouring of Jesus Christ himself, is any part of the thought of these
covetous wretches, but as they desire the inheritances of the Lord to be their
portion in this present life, so they have them for the canker of their souls,
the rust to consume them, the care to torment them, the fear to forsake them,
the love to enjoy them, the travail to increase them, and the reckoning for
abusing them to their endless confusion. Therefore except the Lord do build
the house, their labor is but in vain that build it, except the Lord make the
marriage, the riches of Solomon cannot continue them, for better is a little
that the righteous has, Psalm. 57.16.
then the great possessions of the ungodly.

Genesis 24.35.
Therefore when Abraham's servant came to the City of Nachor, among others which
he told unto Laban, Rebecca.
and the mother, of Ribkah, he showed them what cattle, and flocks, servants
and maidens his master had, which all should be Izaaks, thereby signifying,
that all necessary provision for their maintenance was already procured, and
there wanted nothing, but a wife for Izaak. Genesis 30.32.33.
So Iaakob after his fourteen years service with Laban, couenaunteth to have
the profit of the flocks which should be spotted, and this was when he knew he
was to depart from his father in law, and therefore was bound to provide for
himself. Now this provision is not so meant, as though every one were bound to
get all things before hand which are needful to marriage, but it is required
that every one should procure somewhat according to their degree, and the
maintenance of their calling. This point is clearer then the sun, and it
serves to the reproouing of them, which run headlong to marry one day, but
fall into woeful beggary the next, neither houses to dwell in, labor to work
on, meat to sustain them, money to procure them, friends to relieve them, or
credit to help them, only wives and husbands they must needs have, not
caring what shall become of them afterward. And truly, if the hurt did only
redound to their own hinderance, the pity was the less, but woeful it is to
tell how their miserable posteritye are thereby (even thorough their parents
rashness) brought to everlasting pouertye, and such as is most lamentable, for
their minds are not instructed, they have no knowledge of the true God,
neither can they pray to their comfort, or hope for any salvation. If it were
but the labor and pouertye of the body, it were much to be desired* and
nothing to be feared, but being the endaungering of both body and soul, how
much is it to be disliked, that any for their own lusts should leave their
wretched posteritye to the power of the devil. Therefore beloved, counsel
your acquaintance to be careful for their children as well as themselves,
first to try and then trust, first to prepare somewhat, that if sickness come or
charges come, or are overtake thee, yet then thou may comfort thy self with
thy own gotten goods, and rather be helpefull, then chargeable to any.

Fourthly, by this that Boaz says, he takes Ruth to wife, for to stir up
the name of the dead, and that the name of the dead be no more forgotten among
his brethren in the gate of his place: We note, that our marriages must be taken
in hand also to this end, for the multiplying of the Church of God; we have
already showed how one cause of this brothers marriage was for that use and
purpose, and in this place not unnecessary to confirm. For the law of this
marriage was special only for God his people, and therefore for the augmenting
of the number of the Lords flock. And as this was among the Jews, that every
family might have some temporal inheritours, even so is it among the Gentiles,
that if it be possible, eueryone should bring one infant or other, to be an
inheritour of the Lords kingdom. By the which parents are taught to be more
careful for the education and instruction of their children, then for their
procreation and birth, for they are made the fathers and mothers of Christ in
his members; therefore they must not leave him to Herod, that is, they must not
give their children to the power of Satan by their negligence and want of
teaching: they are accursed that lay stumbling blocks before the blind, and
shall not they also that lead them into the sea, where is nothing but
drowning? even so if godless parents do le^de their children and innocent
babes into damnable ignorance, who shall answer for their souls? shall not
the authors of this destruction? Had not parents need then to look to
themselves, for if they have as much gold as Solomon had, and as great
inheritances as Caleb had, and as much possession of Cattle as Job had, yet if
they be not able to bring up their children in the fear of God, it were better
for parents and children they had never been borne, then miserably to live in
wealth, and be every hour in danger of damnation. But how then will you say,
must we be careful for the instruction of our children? I answer, you must
be careful of these two things: first, that you teach them that which is good,
secondly, that you give no evil example unto them.

Concerning the first, for the teaching of them the truth, you must first teach
them the matter of their faith, and secondly how to pray. The matter of their
faith, is contained in the twelve articles, commonly called our creed or
belief, which every father and mother is bound to teach their children, with
the pure understanding thereof, and as they be able to show them the proofs
thereof out of the word of God, I mean as the children be able to receive it.
Herein, they must instruct them of the miserable estate of mankind after
their fall, by the use and understanding of the moral law, contained in the
two tables of the ten Commandments* with the proofs thereof out of the
scripture, and the deliverance by the death and bloudsheading of Jesus Christ
the eternal and only begotten son of God.

Again, you must teach them to pray according as the Lord has taught us in
that form which we call the Lords prayer, Math. 6.9.
with the understanding thereof out of the word of God, for except you teach
them what they pray for by the understanding of it, you were as good to teach
them in Greek or Latin as in English. For there are many thousands in England
that call God Father in their prayers, but I know not that there be any which
know the meaning of the word. I my self have reasoned with many both young
and old, and of men of good calling in the world, about that one word, which
is the easyest and playnest in all the word of God, but some few excepted,
which have labored for knowledge in the hearing of Sermons, I never met with
man, woman, nor child, that could give me any reasonable answer unto this
question beside this, that God made them, and therefore is their Father, which
every Jew and almost every Pagan knows as well as they: Therefore as our
righteousness must exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees,
Jews and Gentiles, so must our knowledge also, for by our knowledge of Christ
we are justified to be his members. Isa. 53.17.
And although we repeat the Lords prayer a thousand times every day, and
understand it not, we do but babble before the Lord, taking his name in vain,
using it in our lips, when our hearts have no understanding, and therefore our
prayers are without fruit.

Lastly, if you your selves do not walk before them without reproof, in pure
and sanctified conuersations, whatsoever you teach them, you presently tread
out again, for simple people and young children live by examples, and not by
precept: If you teach them to worship God, you must also before their faces,
worship the same, that they may practice by your example. If you bid them that
they swear not, you your self must be careful not to swear, or else they
will not believe you; for as the people look upon the life of their pastor,
so the young children behold the steps of their parents. And we see in brute
beasts that examples are much more effectual then precepts; they cannot
speak, yet how do they train up their young ones. It is reported of the Hearts
of Scithia, that they teach their young ones to leap from bank to bank, from
rock to rock, from one turfe to another by their own example, leaping before
them, which otherwise they would never practice, by which means when they are
hunted, no beast can ever take them. Even so, if you go before your children
in examples while they are young. Satan the hunter and roaring Lion shall
never have them for his pray. When they learn to speak, they take the words
from our own mouths, even so when they shall learn to worship, fear, love,
honor, and pray unto the Lord, let them take you for their examples, as Jacob
did Abraham and Izaak. Genesis 31.53.


Now let us give praise to God.
The fourteenth Lecture.
Chap. 4. ver. 11.12. 11 And all the people that were in the gate, and the
elders said, we are witnesses: The Lord make the wife that comes into thy
house, like Rahel and Leah, which twain did build the house of Israel, and that
thou may do worthily in Ephrathah, and be famous in Bethlehem.

12 And that thy house be like the house of Pharez, whom Thamar bare unto
Judah, of the seed which the Lord shall give thee of this young woman.


AS we have hitherto heard of Boaz and his kinseman, the one in resigning, and
the other in receiving his right, in the place of judgment, and the presence
of the elders and people: So now the holy Ghost proceeds to declare unto us,
the behavior of this latter sort at this marriage of Boaz: which is their
answer unto that speech of Boaz, when he calls them to witness the
bargain.

The words do easily divide themselves into twoe parts, the first is their
confessions to be witnesses of the contract, in these words: Then spoke all
the people and elders, we are witnesses. The second part is the prayer they
make for Boaz and Ruth in the next words, consisting of two parts; the first
is the fruitfulness of Ruth, when they pray she may be like Rahel and Leah:
that he may be wealthy in Ephrathah, and famous in Bethelehem: The second
member of this second part is for the blessing of God upon the posterity of
these two new married persons: In the 12. verse, that their house might be
like the house of Pharez the son of Aidah, which till that time, had the
cheifest dignity in the tribe of Judah, and so continued till the scepter was
taken from Judah, and the lawgiuer from between his feet, which was almost
fifteen hundred years, until the reign of the Idumean Herod: Of these
parts let us briefly speak in order, by the assistance of God his heavenly
spirit, and the permission of the time.

And all the people] These words as we showed you, are the first part,
wherein the rulers and people acknowledge their testimony with one consent,
freely yielding unto the request of Bohaz, and willingly rejoicing at that so
strange a matter, when one of the chief of their elders, for love of the law
of God, would to his own discommodity, marry with a stranger, and so base a
woman, looking neither on birth nor wealth, but on the hidden man of the
heart, making virtue his choice, and religion his portion: Out of the which we
note.

First, that it is the duty of the godly willingly in any good matter to give
their testimony for their brethren: for men in this latter age are grow^n so
fearful, that they, will hardely testify the truth, for dread of some evil
that might ensue thereby, these persons are not of the mind of these godly
Jews, both Elders and other in this place, which of their own accord, give
witness unto Bohaz for the purchase of his land, and the marriage of his
wife, 1 Samuel 12.4. 5
so we read the people witnessed with Samuel when Saul was a chosen king
yea against their own selves, because they had refused him, to be their king,
and choosed a king to reign over them, after the manner of the heathen. This
is the more worthy to be considered in this place, because this poeple did not
after any scoffing manner, but soberly and in the fear of God (as appears by
their prayer) witness this contract unto Bohaz: the world in these days, if
the like thing should fall out, that an old man in the presence of so great a
congregation, should take to his wife so young a woman, would rather mock,
scorn and disdain it, then with such reverent modesty pray for it: For herein
the world shows it self, which is wont to condemn that in others, which in
themselves they highly commend, and to look but upon the outward appearance,
discerning and judging but with bodily eyes and carnal minds, yet here these
Jews Bethlemites, shall speak for the godly not deriding strange actions,
not denying their voices to a lawful condition; not judging but with a
spiritual eye, pearcing through the bark of humane body, into the soul of a
godly old man: and this is the more commendable because the magistrates and
elders themselves join them to the people in so godly proceeding, by whose
example it is no doubt, the wavering multitude was much encouraged. And this
teaches us how excellent is the profession and forwardenesse of men in
authority, upon whom the eyes of the common wealth depends: they are never
alone, but as all beasts and creatures followed Noah into his arc, because
he went before; so all sorts will follow their disposition, be it good or
evil: We read of the wicked judges of Iezraell which condemned innocent
Naboath, had also wicked witnesses against him, 1. King. 21.12.1^
for such as Ahab and Iezabel were, such were their judges, and such as the
judges were, the same were the people, if they be godly, the lights of their
lives will shine unto others; if they be profane, their darkness is like the
darkness of Egypt which spread it se;lfe over all the land. Oh how comfortable
is your presence at our godly assemblies to ye despised members of Christ: if
you come, many come: if you abide at home, many follow your steps, the
soldiers will follow their captains, into the hottest skirmishes, but
without them, it is a grief to go into the easiest battles, so right
worshipful, if you continue your diligence in hearing the Gospel, we your
subjects and servants will follow you to the farthest, but if you fall away,
we are discouraged also: one word of your mouths in the commendation of
goodness, is like golden apples in dishes of silver; but one step of your
travail to the mountain of Sion, the company of the faithful is is like the
company of Jonathan and his armor bearer, 1 Samuel 14.16.
to drive a whole army of ungodly Philistines from the tents of Gods saints:
Iud. 7.20
If Gideon be once named, what are the company of the Madianites: if the
magistrate or gentleman frequent the exercises of religion, all ye mouths of
the swinish Atheistes, which tread the pearls of the Gospel under their
feet, are stopped. Look upon the Eunuch to Queen Candaces, Act. 8.27. Luc.
14.
which came every year many hundred miles to worship at Jerusalem: he was a
noble man, yet it was discredit to his honor to be diligent in God his
service. Look upon that noble Theophilus, Act. 11.
to whom Luke dedicateth his books, when all the world persecuted Christ,
yet he suffered his name to be foremost in the Gospel, that none should be
discouraged at the profession of Christ, when such a noble man would suffer
his name to go publicly in the book. Look upon the noble woman of
Thessalonica, Act. 17.4
which in greatest danger joined themselves to the profession of the Gospel.
Look upon that excellent Lady, to whom John writes his second epistle, and
her sister also, whose children favored and confessed the Gospel, as well as
the parents, the day would not suffice to follow all that I might; these went
before in the world; and before in the Lord, that is, they were noted in
wealth, but notable in religion, they were singular in authority, but
excellent in christianity, the memory of their wealth is lost, but the record
of their faith remains registered in God his book for ever. These men and
women were worthy of their places, such as could rule their riches by the
word, feed their servants with the Gospel, and clothe their souls with
Jesus Christ.

Secondly, by this we note, that seeing they all witnessed, and they all
prayed for Boaz, the duty of them that are gathered together in any godly
assembly, which is to join themselves in the same holy exercises, if they
hear the other must hear; if they pray the other must pray: if they sing, the
other must also sing: for this is the fellowship of the saints, or else
nothing is: When we read the church of God continued together in breaking
bread: Act. 2.46:
it is also said they continued in prayer, as if the holy Ghost had said, as
if every one did eat bread. so every one did pray to the Lord, as it avails
not a hungry man, to see another eat, and he have none, but rather increases
his desire, so if you be every day and hour where prayers are made, and your
selves taste not of them, Acts. 4.23.31.
it does but increase your damnation: So we read when the Apostles were
forbidden to preach in the name of Christ, they came to their fellows and lift
up their voices with one accord to the Lord, and when they had prayed, the
place was shaken where they were assembled, and they all were filled with the
holy Ghost, and spoke the word of God boldly, such is the effect of God his
faithful, when they pray unto him with one accord, like the assault of the four
winds upon Jobs childrens house, which not only shook but also ouerturned
the same: many hands make a great labor to be lightly dispatched, and many
men's prayers do pull down the mercyes of God upon us. This I think is very
needful for our days, wherein this dullness is grown so gross, that among a
churchfull of hearers, you shall have very few which are not faulty in this
doctrine: for it is a world to see how many have their bodies at the sermons,
but their souls and affections are wandering in a thousand matters: these
pray not when we pray, hear not when we preach, neither sing when we sing.
What profit have these persons by our prayers, or preaching: surely they are
idols, they have tongue but speak not, ears but hear not, eyes but they see
not. And this is most lamentable, to see many upon whom the Lord has bestowed
this gift of reading or learning, to come hand ouerhead to Churches, without
either book or mind to profit themselves or other: Thus they bury the graces
of God in them, they quench the fire of the holy spirit; they loose the costs
of their parents, which they bestowed to bring them to learning; they disdain
to sing with the faithful, they abhor the labors of their youth, and mock
the Lord with their presence: Look upon it my brethren, for if the Lord have
given any of you learning, that you are able to read his word, then he has
planted you to bear fruit in his own orcharde, but if you use not this gift
then you are fruitless trees, and the Lord will cut you down and cast you
into unquenchable fire, if you say you have no books: I answer, the fault
lies in your selves, for if you be poor ask the godly and your want shall
be supplied: if you be wealthy save some of your idle expenses to spend
upon such a holy business. If you say you forget your books behind you, I
answer, it is a sign you care but little for your iourneys end, for if you
had that reverence, to come prepared to the exercises of the faithful which
you ought to have, you could not forget your bibles, nay you should rather
forget your apparel, then your books, if you considered as it becomes you.
But some say, they understand well enough though they say not amen to our
prayers, and though they sing not to the Lord with us: but Paul says to
such, 1. Cor. 14.16.17.
that they do no good to their brethren, because they edify them not, and
that it is better in the Church to speak five words to instruct others, then
ten thousand for his own benefit: for in the Chuch we are assembled for our
brethren, not for ourselves only, and whosoever prays not with his brethren
in the Church or congregation, does break the fellowshippe of the faithful,
and stands for a cipher among the saints: Therefore if you have any care of
your duty to the Lord, of the love of ye faithful, of obedience to your
parents, of increasing your talent of learning, or the salvation of your own
souls, both magistrate and subject, elders and people, rich and poor, old
and young, men and women, fulfill the expectation of the godly, pray when we
pray, sing with us when we sing, hear us when we preach: for with such
sacrifice is the Lord pleased.

The Lord make] Now we have made an end of the first part, let us go to the
second, which is the prayer of these people and elders, the first member
whereof is contained in these words, wherein they pray for the fruitfulness
of Ruth, alleging an example to testify the love they bear to Bohaz that
they desire his wife to be as fruitful as either Leah, or Rahell, who builded
the house of Israel, so that they would have him the father of much people, in
so much as his name both of wealth and children might advance the dignity of
Bethlehem Ephrathah.

First therefore hence we note the duty of all the godly which is to pray for
the welfare one of another, but especially in marriage, for the prayers of the
faithful are as needful for the married as skillful mariners in the boat of
passengers. Therefore we read of few godly marriages in the scripture, but
they were celebrated with prayer, Genesis 24.60.
when Rebecca was married to Isaake, her mother, brother and friends prayed that
she might grow up into thousand thousands; and her seed to possess their
enemies gate: and in this place these friends of Bohaz pray the like for Ruth,
for what make the peoples presence, the multitude of lookers, the number of
acquaintance, at the time of celebrating marriages, except it be to pray for
the parties, we have showed you the last Saboath, that for the ignorance of
the people, which could not pray, came the ministers to have a hand in it,
for supplying their want: and how lamentable is it to see in many places, and
most persons that are married, where their company are none but godless
ruffians, ignorant Atheistes, profane swearers, and notable blasphemers, to
be present at their unhappy weddinges, what prayers can these power forth, for
their new married friends, can the Cockatrice breath forth any thing but
poison, or the spider spinne any sounder cloth then her web; no more can
these persons but curse them with their prayers, not bless them with their
cursinges: Is it not a world to see how many against their marriages compass
the country, some to provide delicate diversities of meats, to feed both the
belly and the eye, other to inuit their friends which come ruffling into the
Churches, in silks, veluets, sattins, and soft apparel, and some to deck up
themselves in brave clothing, against their marriage day, but never one thought
for the faithful prayer of the godly, that their prosperous life may be
blessed in wedlock, this they ought to be most careful for, and yet not to
leave the other undone, but godly prayers are better then great portions, and
it is better to have poor Christ at your weddinges, then a thousand thousand
of these glistering gallantes. Truly in these days how do men and women
provide for mirth, not for modesty, that their day of marriage may be joyful
with worldly disportes, not godly with Christian exercises: they buy and hire
musicians to pass the time in pleasant dancing, but never entreat or speak
one word to the godly, to bestow their hearty prayers upon them. Let therefore
beloved, this be our direction, that as we marry for the Lord, not for the
world, so we study for prayer, and not for pleasure.

Secondly, by this we gather that the greattest blessing in marriage is the
bearing of children, the blessing upon the vine, is to bring many grapes, the
blessing upon the earth is to be fruitful in bringing and springing much
corn, and pasture: the blessing on the sea, is the multiplying of the fish,
and the blessing of marriage is many children: Therefore in this place they
pray that Ruth might be like Rahel and Leah, which builded all Israel, that
is, they were the mothers of a great nation, they multiplied in their
posterity to a number like the stars of heaven. Genesis 9.1.
For this cause the first blessing upon mankind after the floode, was that
they should increase and fill the earth, for this cause the fathers desired
children so much, and the ouerloue of many children, increased the multitude of
their wives: and for this cause the Apostle says, ^. Tim. 2.15
that women through bearing of children shall be saved, if they continue in
faith, and love, and holiness with modesty. For all other blessings may be had
without marryage, wealth and riches, comfort and friends, honor and pleasure,
quietness and rest, may be found in the lives of unmarried persons, only
children must come of a grafted stock, which is a holy and sanctified
marriage, or wedlock: When Abraham wanted a son he prayed for one: when
Rebecca was barren, Isaacke prayed for her, and she conceived: When Mauoah
wanted children, he prayed, and the Lord gave him Sampson: when Amah was
barren, she prayed and obtained Samuel: and when Zachary and Elizabeth had
no issue, by prayer they obtained John Baptist. So they accounted of their
marriage without children, as a fair and pleasant garden without fruits, and
as the one does fructify by seasonable showers, so the other does multiply by
faithful supplications: Therefore here this people of God pray for Bohaz and
Ruth, that many pleasant twigges may spring out of their fruitful bodies. By
the which we see the ready remedy for barrenness, which are godly and zealous
prayers, powered forth into the ears of the Almighty, that he would remove his
hand from punishing, and withdraw the curse of barrenness from penitent
sinners. But in our prayers we must always take heed that we appoint not the
Lord what he shall give us, either sons or daughters, but rest upon the will
of God to receive either of both. And indeed be it that children are the
greatest blessing of marriage, yet all things considered, it is much happier to
be barren, for our miserable days, adn sinful lives call for a scourge, and
once more the saying of Christ shall be fulfilled, that there shall be woe to
them that are with child, Mat. 24
and that give suck in those days, yea undoubtedly our posterity count them
happy that are unborn, and themselves shall wish with Job and Jeremy they had
never seen the sun. Oh who are they that have any desire of many children?
Look upon the world, it falls to Atheism look upon the Church, it
declineth to error: look upon the Gospel, it is persecuted by the Devil,
and view every degree, if corruption grows not upon them: truly, truly as
Esau said, the days of mourning for my father will shortly come, so may all
the faithful say, Genesis 27.43.
the day of mourning for ye Gospel and knowledge will one day come, and the
Lord knows how soon. Therefore if you would leave your children to be
atheistes, your issue to be heretics, your posterity to be afflicted, and
all your offspring to be corrupted, and miserably punished in this life, or
eternally plagued in the life to come, then desire little children, be it you
can provide lands to maintain them, teachers to instruct them, learning to
defend them, honor to advance the^, friends to assist them, and castles of
security to keep them from the hurt of the world: yet alas, alas, into how many
thousand adversities may their souls descend, I speak not this to discourage
any from desiring children, but I admonish from the Lord that you be wise in
your petitions, and think as well of your infantes misery, as your own
suffering: now you desire ease without pains, but they in all manner of
afflictions may send up cries to the heavens and not be heard. Oh that all
degrees both married, and unmarried would have pity on their posterity, before
they be borne, then should fewer be vagabondes then now are, and more be
provided for then now can be, then should men and women for their childrens
sake amend their loose and desperate behavior not fit for pagans, much less
for christians, left the children should be plauged for the fathers fault:
Assuredly beloved, the Lord has spoken it, that if your children prove wicked,
they shall suffer and bear the sins of all their ancestors, yea though they
be dead many hundred years ago.

Thirdely, by this prayer of these elders and people, we note that for the
helping of our weakness in prayer, and releeuing of our wantes, we may set
before us the goodness of God unto others. In this place they pray that Ruth may
be as fruitful as Rahel and Leah which were the wives of Jacob, who bare him
eight sons and one daughter, expressing their hearty prayer for Bohaz and
Ruth, by the example of these twain. The like we may read of the Apostles,
Act. 4.25.
when they prayed after their deliverance from the rulers and elders, they
allege David for their help, as he speaks in the second Psalm. For we
many times know not what to ask as we ought, but the spirit which wrought
these gifts in the fathers, helps our infirmities by the examples of the
ancient godly, that we should ask the same graces which they enjoyed, to
lead the same lives which they lived, and obtain the same crown, wherewith
they are all rewarded. Yet we must always remember the rule of the Apostle, that
this is our assurance, 1. Ioh. 5.14.
if we crave any thing according to his will, we receive it: that is, we
must not desire the least thing in worldly affairs, but under this condition,
If it be thy will O God, because the Lord is not bound to give us any thing,
no more then we are to give every beggar that asks an alms of us, but if we
absolutely crave without this exception, we break the law of prayer and bring
the majesty of God into bondage by our petitions.

This teaches us this profitable lesson, that before we pray, we should
learn and consider our wantes by the word of God, that we ask not at the
hands of the Almighty, any thing beside that which is godly, honest and
lawful: for many I am persuaded, do suddenly and unadvisedly starte up into
the presence of the Lord with rash and ungodly desires, because they want the
knowledge of the word of God, and the due consideration of those things which
they want. Of this sort are all the prayers of the papists, for they neither
understand their prayers in a strange tongue, nor yet will examine them by the
word of God: Unto these I add the prayers and wishes of the ignorant
multitude, which are as far from the (...) yers of the faithful, as the
Moon is from the earth. For as it is impossible for a man to go without his
legs, or to see without his eyes, so is it impossible for these to pray
without the knowledge of the Gospel: For in our prayers we must speak to the
Lord in his own tongue, as he speaks in his word, but what can these
persons bring out of the treasures of the holy scriptures? scant one sentence
in the whole gospel rightly understood, how the^ can they bring the matter of
their whole prayers, if they want but one thing that will suffice? but who is
living which stands not in need of many thousand mercyes? But I know their
old excuse, for they say they pray according to the Scripture, Mat. 6.9.
when they repeat the Lords prayer, which is set down in the scripture: to
whom I answer, they do well if they understand it, but where do they find
those wishes to grow rich, those curses upon them with whom they are angry,
whether it be man or beast, and tell me the understanding of one petition in
the Lords prayer. Therefore beloved, pray in spirit, but pray in understanding
also, use the scripture for the rule of your supplication, for as no man can
say that Jesus is the Lord, but only by the Spirit of God; so none can pray
rightly, but by ye knowledge of the Gospel: If you once entertain this
knowledge of God his word, then you will do with it as a cunning workman in
his trade: he will ever take delight in his work and occupation, even so if
you had this this feeling, you would delight in prayer, which now is a hell
unto many, then your hearts both privately would be as studious in meditating
goodness, as ever they were desirous of worldly pleasure, and would publicly
breathe after it as the Heart in his chase does after the well springes. But oh
dearly beloved, this condemns the world of hatred of God, of the pride of
themselves, of ignorance in the truth of coldness in religion, of tru^^ing in
the world, mispending of time, loving of pleasure, and lack of devotion, that
they are as hardely drawn to prayer, according to the common Proverb, as a
hare taken with a tabret. Think you that these persons, which absent themselves
from public petitions, and private prayers, have any love of God in them: nay
are not those condemned which are drawn to them against their will, and where
shall these cursed companions appear, which forsake sermons, go out of
Churches, lie idly at home, and are disporting themselves in bravery abroad,
when the time of prayer calls for their presence at home or in the Church,
do they not separate themselves from the faithful in this life? and therefore
they shall be miserably damned with the Devil and his aungelles, and
everlastingly excluded from Christ and his Saints.

Fourthly by this prayer of these elders we observe, that we must especially
pray for the multiplying and augmenting of the faithful, for they pray that
Ruth may be like, not to the daughters of Lot, of whom came the cursed
Moabites and Ammonites: nor yet to Rebecca, of whom came the ungodly Edomites:
nor yet to Keturah, from whom came the godless Madianites and Arabians, but to
Rahel and Leah which builded the house of Israel, that is which increased the
Lords people, which multiplied the heirs of the promised land, and augmented
the number of the faithful. This our savior commanded to be done, next to the
glorifying of God: for first we say, hallowed be thy name; and then thy
kingdom come, which is, first that the spirit might reign in our hearts; and
the^ that mo saints may be added to the Church. For we must pray for the friends
and not for the enemies of Christ. For this cause Paul compares marriage to
ye conjunction between Christ and his Church: for as the one ingendreth many
saints, Ephesians. 5.24.25.
so the other must beget many faithful members: and truly as one pearl is
worth ten thousand pebles, so one good child is better to the parents, then
many thousands of evil. The use of this doctrine is, that we should not be
like the Jews, desirous of many children, because our families should grow
great, but like the doves which bring forth few, which might be the children of
innocence: the Elephant being the greatest, and yet the meekest beast,
conceaueth but once in all her time, whereas the lesser and more hurtful
creatures increase many, yet it is better for the first to have but one, wc are
good and hurtles, then for the latter to have many which are evil and
harmefull, even so beloved it is good to increase doves and not serpents,
Elephantes and not Tigers, and better is one Isaacke the son of promise, then
a thousand Ismaels the children of bondage: We know the most precious herbs
bring the least fruits, and that is not the best which does most of all
multiply, so the godly like good trees, must rather desire one or two children
like themselves, and to bring forth and grow in issue sparingly, by little and
little, then suddenly to swell up like the waves of the sea. Genesis 25.^6 28.
We read that Ismael had twelve sons, all princes, but Isaacke his brother
had only twain, Jacob and Esau, and them he obtained by prayer, so hardely
the godly are borne and conceived, when with the wicked they come as thick as
the hailestones in Egipte for the confusion of the fruit of the land.
Therefore as the seed is cast in vain upon the land, which the souls do
presently devour, so those children had been better they had never been
borne, whom darkness blinds, ignorance possesses, malice rules, ungodliness
leads, and Satan tormenteth: for the fewest number are the godliest
posterity, in whom light shines, knowledge dwells, meekenes reigns,
godliness guides, and Christ eternally blesses.

Fifthly, by the prayer of these people we note, ye second blessing of a godly
marriage, which is to gather by lawful means much wealth: for that which in
the English is, do worthily in Ephrathah in the Hebrewe is, gather wealth in
Ephrathah: For it is more general in the english, then in the original, for
to gather wealth by honest means, is to do worthily, because it is the
blessing of God: Therefore we will take the surest and the safest
interpretation, by ye which this collection is confirmed, and their meaning is,
that Boaz which in his marriage respected not riches, should by his godly choice
enjoy a virtuous wife to bring up faithful children, and increase his
substance by the blessing of God, that he might advance the honor of their
country and City. Neither is this unknown that after children, the growing
in wealth is the next blessing of the Lord, as Abraham's servant tells Laban,
the Lord has blessed my master exceedingly, Genesis 24, 35.
and made him very great, for he has given him flocks and heardes, silver and
gold, servants and maidens, cammels and Asses, all this did the Lord bless
Abraham with, after his marriage with Sara: Again, Job. 1.3.
the holy Ghost describing Job, after his children which were seven sons and
three daughters, he reckons his wealth and faith. His possession was seven
thousand cattle, three thousand camels, five hundred yoke of oxe^ and five
hundred she asses, with a great household. For wealth in marriage, is the best
servant that can be entertained, I might speak of many more, but few
persuasions will suffice in this point, because wealth was wont to be the
maid, and godliness the mistress: but now riches is become the mistress, and
religion the maid: For wealth, men rise early and go late to bed, labor
diligently, and fare hardely, travail earnestly, and sweat painefully, and I
can find no fault but with too much following this wealthy trade: For first of
all, I must complain with Solomon, that there is but one and not a second,
who has neither brother nor son, Eccles. 4.7
yet there is no end of his labor, neither is his eye satisfied with riches,
for this old canker infecteth every age, whereby it is a pleasure to certain
covetous wretches, to toil their bodies with untimely labors, to clogge their
minds with golden cares, and to weary their senses in numbering their wealth:
and what is ye end hereof? surely this the gatherer is like an ass which
carries the treasure but cannot use it, Eccles. 6.2.
being laid on his back it must be taken of again: the heirs like the
drones spend all, but gather none, for as they sweat not for it as it was in
getting, so they spare not as long as it lasts, lauishing out that in riotous
company, which was gathered in covetous encroching. Others, that they may
thrive, count all things lawful: for they say God has given the earth to
the children of men, therefore they spend the sabbaothes in buying and
selling, in bargayning and laboring: they get by right and wrong, forgery and
deceit, play and work, neither lands not cattels come amiss to them, so they
may have them: But we must always remember, that we neither go to the right
hand nor to the left, that is if thou have many children, thou must use no
unlawful means to keep them: if thou have none, thou must not hoarde up thy
wealth, as if thou had some, but remember the day of adversity, and deal
somewhat for thy present need, and not altogether for thy own commodity. But
you will say, show us some brief rules, by which we may practice the truth:
by your favorable audience I will give you these three rules: the first is in
getting, the second in keeping, and the third in departing from it.

Concerning the first, which is getting of wealth; first our only care must
be for the blessing of God to increase us: Gen 30.33.
We have an excellent example in Jacob, having nothing in the world beside his
wives and children, yet would receive no wages of Laban, but promisde his
service for the spotted lambs, choosing rather to depend upon the blessing of
God, then the policy of his own wit, to testify his vprightnes in the
presence of Laban, and to teach us all, that thriuing comes more by ye favor
of ye Lord, then the wisdom of the world. For Laban thought he had made a
good bargain for himself, wc indeed proved to his great hinderance, even so
when men think they have compassed the world to increase their profit, Deuteronomy.
8.18.
suddenly the Lord sends a cross to disapoint their purpose yt they might
know yt to be true wc Moses says, that it is the Lord wc gives power to get
wealth: against this those offend wc increase their wealth, and live upon
usury, for they depend not upon the blessing of God, but bind their debtors in
bands, win or loose, they will have both principal and increase. Again, others
are so greedily bent upon their profits, that their only desire is to wax rich,
of who^ Paul speaks. 1. Tim. 6.9.10
They which will wax rich fall into many temptations, and snares; and many
foolish and damnable lusts, wc drown men in everlasting destruction: for ye
love of money is the root of all evil, which while some desired, they erred
from the faith, and pierced themselves with many sorrows. This strikes to the
earth false measures, naughty wares, breaking of promises, detaining of heirs,
raising of rentes, oppressing the poor, deceytful bargaynes, and unlawful
trades; for none of these depend upon the Lord, but give their souls to the
Devil, for increasing their wealth. Secondly, you must know how to use your
wealth according to the word of God: wc is thus, according to the counsel of
The Apostle, if thou have little, 1. Tim. 6.6.7.8
be contented, for godliness is great gain, if a man be contented with that he
has, for we brought nothing into the world, neither shall we carry any thing
out of the world: this is the reason of contentation, but some will say, how
much shall we have before we be contented, the Apostle answers in the next
verse: if we have meat and clothing, we are there with all contented. Again if
they be rich, the same Apostle shows how they shall bear their wealth in
these words, 1. Tim. 6.17
Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not high minded, neither
trust in their uncertain riches, but in the living God, which gives us all
things to enjoy abundantly; That they distribute to other, 1. Tim. 6.18.
that they be rich in good works, that they be willing to give, and easy to be
entreated; 1. Tim. 6.19.
Laying up for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they
may lay hold on eternal life. Out of the which words we must observe these
things. First, that riches must not make men proud, for they are the gift of
God, but our rich men scorn and disdain their poor brethren of Christ,
commanding and oppressing them both by word and deed, in most odious and
shameful manner. Secondly, they must not put any confidence in their wealth,
but repose their trust in the living God, who gave it to them, and to whom
they shall give an account for using and abusing it, for to put trust in their
wealth, is to think they may do with it what they please. Thirdly, they must
distribute willingly, liberally and daily, for as they are rich in substance,
so they must be rich in good works, that is, they must excel other in giving,
as they do in possession. Fourthly, that those men which do thus bestow
their wealth, have laid the foundation of their salvation, and lay hold on
eternal life. This is the way to keep wealth after the word of God, and who
so ever does otherwise either in marriage or vnmariage, does hoord up but rust
to torment him; the canker to consume him, the care to molest him, and
vengeance against the day of vengeance eternally to condemn him.

Lastly in departing from his wealth, first, if he Luc. 19.8.
and he shall be blameless for that, spend liberally upon his family in good
sort, after the counsel of Solomon, for this pinching of servants and families
favors not of God, Prou. 5.15.16.17.
nor of religion, nor of humanity, the brute beasts condemn it, but spend
nothing in waste, for thou art but steward of thy goods, now you know a
steward must give an account to his master. Finally, that which thou
reseruest, give to thy children, as Abraham and all the godly did to their
posterity: and whosoever follows this counsel, shall be guiltless for
mispending, clear from evil keeping, free from wrong getting, and acquitted
from the dreadful reckoning which all the world shall make one day to the
Lord for abusing his benefits.

Now let us give thanks to God.
The fifteenth Lecture.
Chap. 4. Verse. 12.13.14.15. 12 And that thy house be like the house of Pharez,
whom Thamar bare unto Judah, of the seed which the Lord shall give thee of
this young woman.

13 So Boaz took Ruth, and she was his wife, and when he went in unto her, the
Lord gave that she conceived, and bare a son.

14 And the women said unto Naomi, Blessed be the Lord, which has not left
thee this day without a kinseman, and his name shall be continued in Israel.

15 And this shall bring thy life again, and cherish thine old age, for thy
daughter in law which loves thee has borne him, which is better to thee then
seven sons.


WE have showed you the last sabbath, that this 12. verse is a part of the
prayer of the elders and people at the marriage of Boaz and Ruth, for in the
first part they prayed for the fruitfulness of the woman, but in this they
commend unto God the blessing for their posterity, and because we then divided
it, we will first of all handle it, and then proceed to that which follows.

First therefore out of this second part in their prayer, Genesis 12.4.
that unto his seed he would give all the land of Canaan, as a comfort unto
him, to think that his posteritye should be so well provided for, whereby they
might not only be continued, but richly advanced as the Lords of the earth.
The like was it that he promised to David, 2. Sam. 7.12
that he should always have a son to sit on his seat, not simply a son,
but a son to sit on his seat, as if the Lord had said, thou shall always
have the kingdom in the possession of thy posteritye, and the shall reign as
Kings for evermore. So on the contrary, it is a curse when the name of houses
are put out, Psalm. 10^.8.9.10.
their memory forgotten, their wealth dispersed, their honor abased, and their
children like vagabonds upon the earth. Deuteronomy. 28.12
It was also a special promise to the people of the Jews, that if they
observed the statutes of the Lord, then should they and their seed be able to
lend to other, but they should not need to borrow of any.

These things considered by the example of these promises of the Lord, and the
persons of these fathers, we have an excellent way described for the
mayntenaunce of our possession, in the name of our posterity: which is this,
to commend it by prayer to the tuition of the eternal God, for that which he
has promised, may we pray for, the same way, that makes barren women to
become fruitful, the increase of the earth to multiply, the heavens to give
their rain, Countries to be delivered from sword, famine, and pestilence, and
pulls down all the blessings of God upon us, is also the appointed means
for the continuance of worldly families. But how long, how long shall I
persuade the world before they believe it? do they not spend their days in
worldly devises, to compass the earth by multitudes of purchasings, which are
always travailing abroad in restless iourneyes by many bargains to augment
their substance, using all lawful and unlawful means for to increase their
wealth, and enlarge their possessions, that their posterity might be
honorable when they are dead, their children advanced by money not by virtue,
maintained by pride not by humility, reign like kings in all manner of
pleasure upon the earth, while the fathers are tormented in hell for their
wrongful oppressions; thus men pray on the world as the eagles on the altars,
and the birds on Abraham's sacrifice, but not to the Lord, as the young ravens
that call upon him, who being left of their own parents, are fed by the Lord,
that his kindness might be manifested to our children as well as to birds, and
that their welfare depends upon the blessing of God, not the benefit of
elders, the favor of our maker, not the covetousness of our fathers. Against
these it is that the Prophet cries and curses, Esa. 5.89.
because they join house to house, land to land, field to field, inheritance
to inheritance, that themselves might reign alone upon the earth, this is the
care of them, which are suddenly from the dust to the chair of wealth
advanced, from slavery to honor, from beggary to riches, that they might (as
the Prophet says) build fair houses, Psalm. 49.12.
encroch greater compass of lands, that their names might be famous upon the
earth. But who is he that makes any ordinary and daily prayer unto the Lord,
that his substance might be by his blessing increased, with his favor
preserved, and to his glory bestowed. Nay, nay, if none had no more wealth then
that which they had gotten by prayer, their glorious shows would in little
space grow as bare as the trees in the winter, when they have neither fruit
nor leaves to cover them. This I speak not to the discredit of any wealthy
persons, but show them the way to attain the end of their desire, the
continuance of their posterity in godliness and wealth, which is by prayer. For
as Christ prayed for Peter that his faith should not fail him, Luc. 22.32.
so parents must pray for their posterity, that their names may not decay in
them. If any think when their barnes are enlarged, their corn gathered, they
filled, health enjoyed, wealth increased, and rest obtained, that either souls
or children shall have the greater rest, like that fool in the Gospel, Luc.
12.16.17.18.
their marks are much amiss, for wealth and issue are lost both in an hour,
look upon the example of Job, the death of his children, and decay of his
wealth. Again, none must be hereby emboldened, to present their prayers before
the face of the almighty, for the maintenance of their children in worldly
vanity, to make that the only end of all their desire, which is, to be more
careful for the shoe then the foot, for the raiment then the body, and for
the body then the soul: but this must be their direction as the Lord
commanded the Jews, Deuteronomy. 28.12 Psalm. 144.12.13.14.
if they kept his statutes then should their oxen be strong to labor, their
sheep bring forth thousands and ten thousands in their streets, their
daughters like the polished corners of the temple, and their sons as their
fruitful garners, which never are emptye. For ungodly Haman was hanged, Esth.
7.10.
though he were the prince of the princes, but godly Mordecay was advanced,
which was as poor as the basest. Shebna was deprived of his office, because he
was wicked, when godly Eliakim was promoted to his place, Esa. 22.20.
even so it is not honor, but the fear of God that brings and sustaineth
honor, that you must pray for your children, Kings for ungodliness were
deprived of their seats and thrones of majesty whereunto they were borne, much
more will the Lord execute his judgments of poverty and slavery upon those
that would be advanced and yet are wicked; for Solomon says, that the
prosperity of fools slay them, and the crown does not endure from generation
to generation, yet the fear of the Lord abides for ever.

Genesis 38.18.29.
the wife and widow of his eldest son, dissembling her self to be a whore, by
her apparel and place, had the company of her father in law, by whom she was
conceived of two sons, the elder was this Pharez, and the younger Zerach: yet
we see how ye Lord does magnify this Pharez with a glorious and godly
posterity. By the which he teaches us these two profitable lessons, that the
sins of the faithful are forgiven, though they be never so great. We see
this Judah an excellent man, yet overcome in this action, had not any such
plague inflicted on him, as Ruben his eldest brother, or Simeon and Leui, but
he which covered and omitted that sin of Abraham with Hagar, of Jacob with
Bilhah and Zilpah, of this Judah with Thamar, Lot with his own daughters, and
such like, will also forgive all the defaults of the godly unto the end of the
world. By the which we gather exceeding comfort when we come to this
persuasion, that there is no condemnation to them that are in Jesus Christ,
that the gates of hell shall not prevail against the mercies of ye Lord, that
the victory of our faith shall conquer the world, when Noah shall be cleansed
from his drunkenness, Moses and Aaron from their doubting, Miriam from her
murmuring, David from his murder, Peter from his denial of Christ, and all
because the Lord will cover the sins of his Saints, be they never so great,
when he punishes the faults of many thousand wicked persons with eternal
damnation, although they have not sinned with the like transgression. Secondly
by this we learn, that the Lord does not punish the children for the parents
faults, if they commit not the like themselves, for this Pharez begotten in
incest, was blessed by the Lord, not only with temporal glory in himself and
his issue, but also with this, that he was made one of ye fathers of Christ.
And this teaches us, that this vpbraiding of men for their birth, be they base
borne or free borne, is no fruit of the word of God, but the malice of the
devil, which first deceived the parents, and now would discredit the child.
Let it not therefore beloved be any speech in our mouths, to shoot at them whom
the Lord has wounded by nature, any thought of our hearts to envy their
welfare, were their parentage never so base, but pray for them, that though
they proceed not of a sanctified birth, yet they may grow up to a sanctified
and holy life, to make a godly and a blessed end. And finally, let us be
encouraged unto religion by the favor of God, which deals thus mercifully
with his Saints, never suffering any thing to be laid to the charge of his
chosen, stopping the mouth of the devil himself, yt he never rise in
judgment against ye faithful, or bring any little sin of theirs into the
remembrance of God, but washing them all in the lauer of regeneration, ye blood
of his son, and will give the^ white robes cleansed from al filthiness, yt they
may be chaste virgins for ye Lords service, and feed at his own table for
evermore, this consideration made David to cry out, and say oh when shall I come
and appear before the presence of God? it made Simeon to say, now Lord let thy
servant depart in peace, it caused Paul to utter these words, I desire to be
dissolved and to be with Christ, for blessed are the people that are in such a
case, yea blessed are the people whose God is the Lord. Thus much for this
verse. Now let us go to the verse following.

In these three verses following, the holy Ghost declares the blessing of God
upon this marriage of Boaz and Ruth. The words contain in them two parts, the
first part is of Boaz ver. 13. the second is of the women that were present at
the travail of Ruth. The first part shows, how Boaz taking Ruth, and using
her as his wife, had the blessing of God, in conceiving and bearing him a
son: the other part of the women, is their rejoicing with Naomi for this
fruitfulness of Ruth; it comprehends two parts, the first, their
thanksgiving to God, verse. 14. in these words, Blessed be God, secondly, the
matter of their thanksgiving in the words following, first, for Bohaz his
sake, in that God had left him to be Naomies kinseman, secondly, because this
child of Ruthes her loving daughter in law, should renew her years, and
cherish her old age: of these parts let us briefly speak in order.

So Boaz, tooke] After the solemnity of this marriage, in the presence of the
people, and their prayer ended which they powered forth in the behalf of both
these parties and their posterity, Bohaz proceeds to the end of this action,
and takes Ruth to his house to be his wife, as a duty of a kind and a godly
husband. For all this while we must imagine that Ruth was absent from the place
of this communication, and according to the counsel of her mother, Cap. 3.18.
sat waiting at home, for some prosperous news, and praying no doubt, for a
joyful success of this desired marriage, our of this we gather.

Genesis 24.67. Rebecca.
how he took Ribkah his wife, and brought her into the tent of Sarai his
mother, and was comforted after his mothers death, where the holy Ghost does
not only declare the kindness of Izaak, but also the commodity of dwelling
with a wife, for the presence of Ribkah caused her husband to forget the death
of his mother, Rebecca.
as if he had said, the presence of a wife is greater then the comfort of a
mother. 1. Pet. 3.7.
For this cause Peter exhorts that husbands should dwell with their wives,
like men of understanding, giving honor to their wives as to weaker vessels,
because they are the heirs of the same grace, and that their prayers be not
hindered, as if he had said, they must dwell together, and they must pray
together, for as Christ is always present with his Church, so husbands must
keep the companies of their wives. This point being evident both by reason and
religion, it condemns the wandering abroad of many idle husbands, some which
are never satisfied with riches, by markets and merchandise, travailing in the
world, deprive their wives of their due benevolence; others for their pleasure
walk from Country to Country, spending their days in pleasant disport among
carnal and suspicious companions, leave wife and family, to the sea of this
world, like children in a Ship, without guide or mariner; many are present, but
to the discommoditie and discomfort of their poor wives and children, oh how
do any of these persons take their wives with godly minds either to dwell or
pray together? How can the vine prosper when the root is uncovered, and how
can women be comforted, when their cover is taken from them, I mean their
husbands, Genesis 20.16.
as Abimelech the king of Gerar told unto Sara, Is not the body dead without a
head, yea if it be but a minute of an hour, do not then our wandering youths
murder the body of their own family, being absent about unnecessary business,
sometime for the space of many months. Is not the body maimed if it want but
the least member, yea, but a finger, how is then those households wounded,
where the chiefest parts either husbands or wives be wanting and wandering
abroad, and finally what is this but to divorce themselves for a season
without any lawful cause, to put asunder them whom the Lord has joined
together, to break the fellowship of holy wedlock, to despise the society of
godly marriage, to lay open themselves to the temptations of the devils, and to
thrust both bodies and souls into danger of damnation. This I speak not, as
if all absence from either party (which consent for a time about necessary
business) were utterly unlawful: for so Jacob, Moses, Aaron, David, and the
Apostles, should be faulty; but I speak against this wilful departing of one
from the other, without either consent of man or wife, conscience of the law of
God, or regard to their own persons, for the company of these twain is
greater then parents or children, for which the Apostle says, that if one be a
believing person, and the other an infidel, 1. Cor. 7.13.
yet they must not depart if they be willing to dwell with them, and he gives
no liberty for breaking their company, Verse. 5.
except it be to pray the more fervently, and wishes also that if they do so,
yet it must be but for a season, that satan tempt them not, so great regard
must be had of the fellowship in marriage, that the zeal of prayer, the
worship of God, the love of our own parents, the increase of wealth, and the
pleasure of the world, must not separate, without the voice of both parties,
and yet the time must be but short for the avoiding the temptation of Satan,
and the danger of their own damnation.

Secondly by this we may gather who is the author and sender of children, which
is the Lord: for this scripture says that the Lord gave her to conceive, for
as Paul says of the corn that is cast into the earth, 1. Cor. 3.6.
that it increases neither by the planter nor yet the waterer, but by the
Lord, so must we say by the seed of mankind, that it lies neither in the
husband nor in the wife, but in the blessing of God: for which cause, when
Rahell said to her husband Jacob, give me children or else I dye; Genesis 30.1.2.
he answered her in anger, am I in Gods steed, that kept thee from the fruit
of thy womb? as if he had said, it is God that sends issue, and not man:
Psalm. 127.3.
therefore David says, that children are the possession of the Lord, and the
fruit of the womb is his reward. By the which we are taught many excellent and
worthy lessons: first, that seeing they come from the author of every good gift,
we have a ready way where to ask them, when we want them, for as when we want
wisdom, the Apostle says, we must ask wisdom at the hand of God, so when
we want children, Genesis 25.21. Rebecca.
we must ask children at the hand of God. When Ribkah was barren, by her
husbands prayer she was made fruitful, so barren women by their husbands
prayers have been made the mothers of many children. Annah obtained by her
prayer at the temple not only Samuel, 1. Sam. 2.21.
but also three other sons and two daughters. Oh let us not be vexed then for
many children, but let every one ask confidently by the will of God, and they
shall receive (if it so please him) plentifully to their own desire. Secondly,
seeing children come of the Lord, we are taught to use them as the blessings of
God, and as the child by nature should first know his mother that bare him, so
we by instruction should first teach our children the fear of God that gave
them; it is far better for many children that they had never been borne,
except their parents had more knowledge to till their minds with the immortal
seed of God his holy word, then to look upon the sun as the condemned
person which comes out of prison, and so goes to execution, in like manner
children without the knowledge of ye fear of God, do come from the womb of
their mothers, which is their prison, to the fire of hell which is ye place of
execution. Oh my beloved, look upon your tender children, and so often as you
see them, you behold the blessings of God upon you, make much of their souls
by praying for their salvation: you have brought the^ into the world, leave
the^ not to the devil. Thirdly, seeing children are ye gift of God, those which
have children have greater account to make, then those which have none, for of
him to whom much is given shall much be required, and they to whom ye Lord has
given children and servants, lands and cattels, shall answer for every one of
these to ye Lord: therefore parents must finish their reckning which they must
give to the Lord, and let not one farthing of their debt be omitted, for he
will plague the^ as well for not doing their duties to their own children, as
graceless children for contemning of God. And this one consideration, should
mitigate ye desire of posterity, because if they abuse the^, their own
damnation shall be the greater, if they be unruly, they bring nothing but
sorrow to their parents, if they be godly, the world will hate them, and if
they be wicked the devil will have them. Were it not a pitiful sight to see
the father burned, for murdering his son, how much more grievous is it to
see both father and son, mother and daughter, husband and wife, master and
servant, mistress and maids, pastors and people, to go all to damnation
together, because the former did not guide the later, oh, would God that the
desire to escape this judgment, would sink into the hearts of all, that we
might every one addict our lives to holiness, our minds to knowledge, our bodies
to obedience, our hearts to understanding, our children to instruction, our
servants to religion, and all our souls to salvation.

Thirdly, by this we gather, that it is a greater blessing the Lord gave her
and she conceived and brought forth a son, as if he had said, the Lord gave
her her own desire, and the best issue, which was a manchild: for this cause
our Savior says, John. 16.20
that a woman forgets her pains in travail so soon as a man child is
borne into the world. Therefore is it that the Lord promised Abraham a son,
Genesis 18.10. Luc. 1.13.
that he gave Zachary and Elizabeth a son, and finally therefore the Lord
calls us all his sons, as a father reioyseth more for a son, so the Lord
reioyseth in the salvation of all the faithful. By this we are taught to
magnify the name of the almighty, for every one his benefits in their degree,
and if we want any, by prayer to crave it at the hands of God, always
remembering that we leave the end of our desires to be agreeable to his will.
And here we see the prayer of the people in the former verse to be in part
fulfilled, when the Lord did so soon bless this good old man, by giving him a
son: for it is no doubt but the holy Ghost does so presently after their
prayer add her conception and his birth, that he might stir us up with
greater zeal, to desire the prayers of the faithful, which are always
available in the presence of ye Lord. Come therefore my brethren, and let us
fulfill the desire of the Lord, and account more of the petitions of the godly,
then all the possessions of the wealthy: by prayer the earth is made
fruitful, and the heavens drop down abundance, by prayer famine is removed,
wars appeased, the wrath of God pacified, and the health of the body
recovered, by prayer wisdom is increased, faith confirmed, remission of
sins obtained, the barren woman made a fruitful mother of many children, the
days of life lengthened, peace of countries and consciences prolonged, and the
kingdom of heaven eternally inherited. Therefore those which cannot pray,
abhor the presence of God, are weary of our assemblyes, forsake sermons and
congregations, depart from the fellowship of the faithful, and have their
sins sealed up, their lives accursed, and their souls everlastingly
condemned.

And the women] Now we must proceed to the second part of this scripture,
wherein is declared what issue and effect this wrought in other, for so soon
as the child was borne, it did not only bring comfort to the parents, but also
joy and gladness to the godly citizens of Bethlehem: among whom these women are
reported by the holy Ghost (which no doubt, were present at the delivery of
Ruth) to magnify the name of God, for this so great a benefit bestowed upon the
old woman: although her children were dead, yet her name might be recovered by
her loving daughter in law. By this we first of all observe the duty of all
the faithful, Romans 12.12 15.
and to weep with them that weep, for as there godly Jewish women rejoice
with Naomi for the fruitfulnes of Ruth, so must we every one be like affected
for the blessings that are powered upon our brethren. The like unto this, may
we read of the neighbors and kindred of Elizabeth, hearing of the wonderful
mercy of God unto her, they reioysed with her. Luc. 1.58.
This teaches us the same duty, that the joy of our brethren should be our
rejoicing, and their sorrow our lamentation, for there is no fellowship, but
there must be a feeling of the same joys or miseries, not only in public
affairs which respect their whole common wealth, but also in private business
the benefit of every particular person. The head is sore when the stomach is
sick, the hand is grieved, when the foot is maimed, and every part of the
body being in prosperity, reioyseth together. For this cause Paul bids us
to endure all things with the same mind, Romans 12.16
meaning that every man's mind should be like his brothers either in sorrow or
rejoicing. But is this the fellowship that reigns among us in these days? or
rather are we not merryest when our neighbors are tormented, and does it not
grieve us to see other to prosper beside us: yes surely, for there is no more
hearty and unfeigned friendship among men in our days, then is between the
hawk and the bird, when either of them is taken, the other reioyseth. This is
the cause that men are no more accounted after wealth fails, friendship
withdraws when they stand in most need, and least pity is in the greatest
extremity. Every tree is green in the Spring, every bird will sing in summer,
and every false hearted Christian, will faune upon their brethren in
prosperity, but be ashamed of their want in adversity: yea, there never
wants privy repiners and grudgers, at the wealth and welfare of every one:
for some say it is too much if their neighbors corn increase, others say it
is too little, when they are vexed and troubled by loss of their goods, and
this makes many medlers in other men's matters, many backbiters for other men's
welfare, many envy that any should have their shares as good as themselves,
like him in the Gospel, whose eye was evil because the Lords hand was good,
and as all the waves of the sea do beat upon the shore, so all the brains of
the world do breathe against the prosperous.

Blessed be the Lord: wherein they testifye perfect joy both to the Lord by
praising him and giving thanks; and also to Naomi, unto whom nothing could be
more acceptable, then to hear the name of God to be blessed for her sake. To
bless in the scripture whenever it is referred to God, signifies to praise
or to give thanks: as when Zachary says, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel,
Luc. 1.68.
for he has visited and redeemed his people; that is, Praised be the Lord God
of Israel. 2. Cor. 1.3.
Likewise the Apostle Paul says, Blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the father of mercyes, and the God of all consolation, that is, praised
be God. And in another place he says, If thou bless with the spirit, how
shall he that occupies the room of the unlearned, 1. Cor. 14.16.
say Amen to thy thanksgiving, that is, if thou give thanks with the spirit. In
this place it is of the first sense, as if these women had said, We praise thee
O God, that thou have looked on the misery of Naomi, and have reserved her a
kinseman, by whom the name of the dead might be raised upon the inheritance,
and his own honor continued in Gods people. By the which we are taught what
manner of joy the faithful are to have for their brethren, namely, such as
may redound to the praise of God, according to the saying of the Apostle, that
he which reioyseth, 1. Cor. 1.3^
must rejoice in the Lord: for as bodily exercise profits little, so carnal
joy profits less, such as is the framing of vain songs, giving over our
labors, and to rejoice in pastimes, and such as is used in ringing of bells,
and the like sort, being only for man and not for God. Therefore here we
have an excellent manner of rejoicing, when God is glorified by our mirth.
Exodus 15.
Thus we read Moses and Aaron with their sister Miriam did, after they came
out of Egypt. Iud. 5. 1. Sam. 18.5
Thus did Deborah and Barach after the victory against Sisera. Thus did the
women after the victory of Saul and David, when they came from the slaughter
of the Philistines. Thus did Zachary when his tongue was restored unto him. Luc.
1.68.
Thus did the children of Jerusalem cry when Christ came riding upon the Ass.
Luc. 19.38.
Thus do the faithful rejoice after the destruction of Rome and Antichrist,
singing, Reave. 19.1.2.
Praised be God, salvation and honor and glory and power to our Lord God:
Reave. 19.5.
And the Lord cries out of heaven unto us, Praise the Lord all ye his
servants, and whosoever fear him both small and great. Therefore beloved, seeing
it becomes the just to be thankful, let us praise the Lord both evening and
morning, and let us not see a sparrow to light on the ground, without some
praise to God, by whose providence all things are governed, by whose will all
things are ordered, for whose glory are all things appointed; that we should
evermore give thanks to him that sits on the highest heavens, and rules the
mightiest princes, appointing the measure for the sea, and calling the whole
world to judgment, in whose presence is light and life for evermore.

these the Apostle also wills us to pray, 1. Tim. 2.1.
and one cause of these two miracles upon Lazarus and Dorcas, was that their
life might be prolonged with the church of God, and more kindness showed to
their godly friends: Ioh. 11. Act. 9.
Secondly, by this all those that are able to bestow any kindness upon other,
are taught their duties to their own kindred, that especially they be
careful for the relief of their poverty, the maintaynance of their dignity,
the preservation of their honesty, and the nourishing of their own flesh, for
unto that end has ye Lord increased their substance, continued their name,
prolonged their day, and advanced their seats, that they may be more able to
do for their poor brethren which are commended to them by the Lord, committed
by the world, and compelled by nature, which are bone of their bone, and flesh
of their flesh, that they might be maintained as your own selves: When David
was made king he advanced his sisters sons and his kinsemen: when Saul was
king, he advanced Abner and other his friends; and we know that many of
Christ's Apostles were his kinsmen: unto the which end Paul exhorts, 1. Tim.
5.16
that poor widows be provided for by their friends, that the Church be not
charged with them. This condemns the forgetfulness of many in our age, which
being in wealth, will scant acknowledge their poor kindred, whereby they show
themselves like unnatural beasts, as if the Lord were not able to bring the^
down to ye footstool in the place of the other, yt they might cry and not be
heard.

And this shall] In this verse is the second part of their joy, in so much as
now Ruth has brought forth a son, it is better to Naomi then seven sons, for
seven is taken for many, and not for any definite number, as when David says,
that he prayseth God seven times a day, yt is many times every day. Also they
protest in this verse, Psalm. 119.164.
that it rejoices them to see Naomi so comforted with the birth of this
child, as that now her life is restored, whereas before it was dying like an
old stubble, which had no green twigges upon it; but now this one being
shoot forth, she reuiueth and gathers comfort in her old years.

By this we see the duty of parents, which is to rejoice when their
children increase, and they see their childrens children: these Jewish women no
doubt but spoke by the experience of their own days, that as a woman, lying
at the point of death, being recovered, is joyful and thankeful for the same:
even so old persons have new lives in their childrens children: for which
cause they ought to be thankeful to the Lord: for the comfort of their
children, who may likewise rejoice when they see their parents delight in
their offspring. Thus no doubt but Abraham did when he saw Esau and Jacob his
son Isaackes children, being borne about fifteen years before his death:
this did Jacob when he saw Manasseh and Ephraim his son Iosephes children,
Genesis 48.10.11.
kissing and embracing them, and saying, I had not thought to see thy face any
more, but the Lord has let me see thy seed and posterity, as if he had said, I
thank God for seeing thee, but I rejoice that I see thy children also. And
truly, this I am sure will godly aged parents do, who have these for their
examples, of faith and conversation that they might with more thankfulness
praise the Lord who lets them see their childrens children, and with
greater comfort rejoice in them, that were born of their own bodies, but with
greatest joy and most willing minds commend their withered age, and all worn
years to the hands of the Lord, who has multiplied their seed in this life,
and will glorify themselves in the life to come:

Now let us give praise to God.

The end of the fifteenth Lecture.
The sixteenth Lecture.
Chap. 4. ver. 16.17. 16 And Naomi took the child and laid it in her lap,
and became nurse unto it.

17 And the women her neighbors gave it a name, saying, there is a child
borne to Naomi, and called the name thereof Obed: the same was the father of
Ishai the father of David.


IN the former words we heard the last Sabboath, the prayer and thanks
giving of the people, or the women of Bethlehem, for the birth of this son of
Bohaz, and the comfort of Naomi: but now in these words the holy ghost
proceeds to the education and circumcision of the child in these two verses:
wherein the holy Ghost delivers unto us these things: first that Naomi took
the care of the education of this child verse 16. Secondly, the naming of the
child by the neighbors, the women of Bethlehem, which they gave unto it by
occasion of their own words, when they said in the 15. verse, that he should
cherish her, namely Naomi, and therefore they call him Hobed, which signifies
serving; thereby signifying, that he should serve for the comfort of Naomi: of
these parts let us briefly speak in order, as the spirit of God shall give
utterance and the time permit.

And Naomi took the child] After the mercy of God in the blessing of Ruth with
a son, who was the only heir unto the house of Elimelech, the husband of
Naomi, which brought no small joy to the old woman, to see her name and the
name of her family revived in the birth of this son, when it was utterly
decayed in the sight of the world, for she was old and a stranger in Moab,
and had no hope of any more children, neither was it likely that her daughters
in law (their husbands being dead) would return from their country and
kindred unto a strange people, with whom they had small acquaintance, even none
at all, Naomi their mother in law excepted, so that the hope of her posterity
being buried in Moab, the life of her family must needs decay in Bethlehem.
Therefore her return to her own country was a favor of God unto her, and
raising up the mind of Ruth to be partaker of her journey, and companion in
her travail, was an especial comfort to her wearied age, but providing so
honorable a marriage for her, and making her so fruitful a wife in short
time, was the life of Naomies death the renewing of her family, the restoring
of her hope, and the resurrection of her dead sons, for the continuance of
their names in the gate of their places: and therefore she like a joyful and
thankful grandmother for discharge of her conscience, love of the infant, and
ease of her daughter; becomes a fellow nurse for the better educatio^ of the
child: out of the which we note.

First, that as we have heard how the miseries of Naomi were cast upon her
together, so now the mercies of God are multiplied in the same in greater
measure: For then her woe was begun by the death of her husband, continued
through her long dwelling with the wicked Moabites, and ripened through the
death of her two sons: so now it falls again, as the darkness departs
at the dawning of the day, and gives place to the light of the Sun, so her
miseries are repealed, first with the loving and constant fellowship of her
daughter in law Ruth, who was as a careful husband to her, in laboring for
her living, and a blessed child to increase her posterity: Again, she now was
in quiet dwelling among the people of God, enjoying the company of the
faithful, and the fellowshippe of her friends: moreover her posterity is
restored in the fruitfulness of Ruth, and she, even she herself lives to see
the day when all this falls upon her, to the endless comfort of her withered
age, and present praise of the name of God. Thus we see it a righteous thing
with God, first to wound and then to heal; first to strike and then to stroke:
first to cast down, and then to lift up: for this is certainly the cup of
all the faithful, that they must taste of many bitter afflictions, before they
come to the possession of eternal blessedness, yea of worldly misery, they
must sustain some cross, before they can be thankful enough for that which
they quietly enjoy. So we read of Job, how in one day he had his corn
burnte, his cattle stolen, and his children slain: Job. 1.14.15.16.17. and
42.12.13.
this was bitter unto him for many days, yet in the end he was restored two
for one, and saw more sons and more beautiful daughters, yea his childrens
children to his unspeakable comfort: The like may be said of innocent Joseph,
he was rebuked by his father, Genesis 37.10.11.
hated and sold by his brethren, imprisoned by his master, forgotten by
Pharaohes butler, all these were no small discouragements to so young a man,
yet in the end he was advanced to the highest step of honor as a
recompense for all the tribulations he had endured. I may also add this of
David being persecuted by Saul, betrayed by the inhabitants of Keilah, driven
to the Philistines his sworn enemies, to crave a dwelling of them, seeing many
martired for his sake, in the end had the possession of the kingdom of Judah,
and after of Israel, which was the gift of the Lord, the reward of his
afflictions and his religion. By the which we may see the hope of the godly:
not that which they seele, but that which they may lawfully look for, the ease
of their pains, ye remedy of their grief, the comfort of their troubles, and
the end of their misery to be speedy redress, if with patience they look and
wait for the pleasure of the Lord: Therefore the godly say with David, if ten
thousand compass them round about, they will not be afraid, for the Lord
is the eye witness of all their miseries: the hot furnace of Babylon fears
them not: the Lions den cannot drive them to dishonor God, if flames of fire
consume their bodies to ashes, the darts of Satan pierce their souls to the
quick, the reproaches of the world destroy their names, and the enemies of God
spoil their substance, yet they are not left destitute, for their faith
overcomes the world, their patience, all their afflictions, and their love of
God their desire of earthly prosperity. All which, caused the Apostle to say,
Heb. 6.19.
that hope was the anchor of the soul, meaning that as the anchor stays the
ship in the midst of all the waves, though they be never so great and huge:
in like manner the hope of the godly keeps them in the bark of Christ's
Church, among the thousands of worldly tribulations: For David says, great
are the troubles of the righteous: for the Lord delivers out of all, as if
he had said, the righteous and godly are afflicted to this end, that the
Lord might show his power in their deliverance: And in another place he
complaining of his sufferinges, and the sorrow of his soul: yet concludes
with this figurative speech: Why art thou so sad O my soul, Psalm. 13.1. and
43.7.
and why art thou cast down within me, trust still in the Lord, for by him I
have deliverance against all my pains and grief. Even so do I say to all my
poor brethren in the world: why are you so sad, if you want mayntenance, the
earth is the Lords: If frendshippe, the hearts of kings are in his hands, as
the rivers of waters: if liberty, he can break asunder the iron gates, and
deliver the prisoners from their tormentors: if health, in his presence there
is joy and life for evermore: if children, he makes the barren woman to bring
forth many children: if apparel, he clothed the Lillies above the royalty of
Solomon: if meat, he can multiply the leasse morselles into the greatest
measures: and finally, if defense, he gives his royal Aungelles charge over
the poorest of the godly, that the violence of princes, and the force of the
Devil him self shall never go beyond the decree and purpose of the Lord?
Therefore if grypes of grief, and torments of sorrow do lodge with us all
the night, yet joy shall come in the morning, when the poor shall be restored,
the sick recovered, the sorrowful comforted, the faithful rewarded, and the
wicked eternally plagued.

Secondly, by this verse we also gather a worthy example of a godly
grandmother, which for the ease of her daughter, the love of the infant, and
the thankefulnes she owed to God, she became a fellow nurse unto this young
son of Bohaz: for although the words of the Scripture be these, that she
became nurse unto the child; yet the meaning is not, that she took it from
the mother, but that her tender care over it was such, that during the weakness
of Ruth, and absence of his mother, she laid it in her lap, and was as
careful for it, as any nurse that was hired to that duty: for Naomi could
not be a nurse in these old days of hers, without husband or milk: which we
know is the chiefest nourishment for young children, and therefore a nurse in
this place, is taken for one that had a great care to procure the welfare and
ease of the child.

By the which we note another duty of aged parents, which live to see their
childrens children, namely that they be as nurses unto them, to be as careful
for them as their own, for therefore the Lord suffers them to see the
increase of their seed, that they might cover and nourishe it in their own
presence. For this cause we may read, that the sons of Manasses, and his
sons sons were brought up on the knees of Joseph their great grandfather,
Genesis 50.23.
for this laying in the lap or on the knee, signifies a most tender care
over the infantes, that they be always not only in the presence, but also in
the hands of their grande parents, as Rahell when she gave her maid Bilha
unto Jacob, and said, that she might bring forth upon her knees: that is,
Genesis 10.3.
she would be as careful in the nourishment of them, as if they were her
own. Then by this they are taught their duties, upon whom the Lord has
vouchsafed to bestow this blessinge, that they see their childrens children;
namely, that it is required at their hands, that they provide for their
education, good instruction and bringing up: for they may say as Laban said to
his daughters children, yt they are their own, and therefore the care of the
bringing up depends upon them: we see the little twigges at the top to be
nourished as well by the root, as the bows that grow out of the body of the
tree, even so grand-parentes provide as well for the mayntenaunce of their
childrens issue, as for their own: so that in all kindness they must be
entreated, in all wisdom be instructed, with all carefulnes be corrected,
and with all religion be governed: for alas if the twigges fail, there can be
no fruit, and if your seed be corrupt, there will come but a hard harvest, so if
your childrens children be not ouerseene by you that are parents and rulers of
both, your name will decay, your family die, and your posterity be utterly
forgotten.

Thirdely, in this place we may profitably enquire, about the nursing of
children, seeing Naomie is said to be the nurse of this child of Ruth: Whether
it be lawful at all to put out children to nurse from their own mother, or
whether the care of parents be not to bring up their children in their
infancy, in their own persons or presence, or else commit the tuition of the^
to other. Unto the first question I answer, that every woman being in health
of body and mind, is bound by the word of God to nurse her own children, and
the reasons for the confirmation hereof are these, first because the Lord in
the creation of their bodies, has given to every woman breasts which are the
means whereby children suck their nourishment: and therefore either the Lord
created their breasts in vain, or else they sin, if they set them not to
work: if any say, that the Lord did give the breasts not for any necessity
that they are bound so to do, but that they might be furnished with the
means if they had the pleasure to do it, to whom I answer by the like
example, the Lord has given to every one hands to work, eyes to see, ears
to hear and tongues to speak; is it in the choice of men, to cut of their
hands, to pull out their eyes, to stop up their ears and to keep their
tongues in silence all their life, and never use them, as many women do their
natural breasts: I think not, for if they should, they must deface the
workmanship of God; dismember their own bodies, and murder the parts of
mankind: Therefore as the Lord has given to every one hands, every one must
work, or else he is accursed, unless they will be idols: of whom David
speaks, they have hands and handle not, eyes and see not, ears and hear
not, feet and walk not, noses and smell not, and such are women that have
plentiful breasts, and yet give no suck. Secondly, the example of all the
godly confirm it, as we see in Sarah, which nursed her son Isaacke: Genesis
21.7. Exodus 2.8.9 Iud. 13.4.24. Cant. 8.1.
in the mother of Moses, which was careful that her child should be nursed
by no other then her self: in Manoahs wife the mother of Sampson: so did Bath
shebah the mother of king Solomon, being a queen in Israel the wife of king
David; yet she thought it her duty to take her own child and nurse it: 1 Samuel
1.23 Luc. 1.80. Luc. 2.7 Psalm. 22.9
I will speak nothing of Hannah, of Elizabeth the wife of Zachary and mother
of John Baptist: of the virgin Mary, which gave suck to the Lord of glory,
Jesus Christ her savior: and of the mother of David, all which are as
patterns of natural affection, for all the godly women in the world to
imitate, and what blessing was powered upon their children, who knows not:
Therefore either women must follow their godly examples, or show some charter
of their liberty above these, or proclaim open disobedience to God, and the
godly, because they swerve from his holy word, and their most pure and worthy
examples: but it is better to obey God then men, and to be ruled by the
troublesome lives of the faithful, then by the peaceable, and pleasant devises
of all the gentlewomen in the world whatsoever.

Thirdely, Romans ^.30.
it is a sign of the want of love and natural affection in the parents (as
the Apostle speaks) when the mothers do not bestow the labor to give their
own children their natural milk: for if they had the same natural feeling
of their duties to their children, they could not (having no occasion) commit
the nourishing of their children to strangers, who can never be so inwardely
kind to the infantes, as the mothers either are or ought to be: therefore
although though they pretend a kind of sorrow for their childrens absence or
departing from them, yet it is like the lamentation of Esau, which wept when
he could not get the blessing, whereas he sold it before, and was the only
cause of his own reprobation: so women weep at the departure of their
children: whereas it lies in their own power to keep them in their own
possession, and more thankful would the child be in his heart to his
mother; if she had bestowed the labor to nurse him.

Fourthly, it is not so natural for the child to be nursed where he was not
borne, for the same body whereof he had his being, is most fit for his
feeding, as we see a plant does best prosper when it is grafted where it
sprunge up first of all, then being removed into another ground, so the bodies
of children do grow more freely, and like mote cheerfully with their own
mothers milk, then with all the world beside, and the auncientest Physicians
say, that it were also better for the mothers if they gave themselves to this
labor, therefore they do but hinder their own infantes borne of their own
bodies, and as it were keep them from their natural welfare, when they give
them to be made another nature, which is by their nursing and feeding: These
causes and more also being duly and carefully considered, you shall find it a
greater sin, to give your children to other to be nursed, then heretofore
you conceived of it, so that you must for this one thing, condemn the use of
your breasts, (which were the creation of God, and the practice of the
ancient godly women, which were every way as noble as any alive) forsake the
tender love that annother ought to bear to her innocente babe, bring your
childrens bodies to a second, yea, a contrary disposition and complexion, and
stop up the plentiful conduytes of streaming milk in your breasts, to the
loss and hinderaunce of your own health: Therefore if any have any power to
perform this natural duty to their children, let them practice it: for all
the carnal reasons of the world, must not prevail against the least
collection of the word of God. But some will say, admit that any through
negligence do put their children to be nursed of other, does the fault
only rest in the parents, and nothing in the nurse? to whom I answer, if
it be unlawful for the parents to give, it is also unlawful for the nurse to
take: so that whatsoever is said against the one, may also be brought against
the other. But in causes of weakness in the woman, danger to the child, or
sickness in either of both; it is not only a duty of necessity, but of
conscience, to nourish and cherish the children of other.

Therefore although the mothers had the nursing of their children, yet there
were others also like peti-nurses, which had some especial care in the keeping
of the children, as we may read of the nurse of Rebecca, Genesis 24.59.
which was the true use of nurses for the ease of the mother to take the
custody of the children in all things, save only in giving them suck, and
therefore is it, that we may read in ancient histories, that one child had
many nurses, that is, many to attend the welfare and nourishment of the
infant: of this sort was Naomi at this present, who took upon her some care of
this son of Bohaz, that they both might be more diligent for the education
thereof. Now for the other question, whether it be lawful for the parents
during all the time of the infancy thereof, if the mother be not able to give
it suck, to commit their children to other to be brought up: I answer, that
every man and woman are bound to see their childrens first instruction, that
is, if it be possible to have them in their keeping at their first entrance
into knowledge, and when they are first of all capable of any goodness. So we
read Isaacke remained with his father Abraham in the time of infancy, Genesis 21.
12 13 and 42, 4 2. King. 11 2.3
when God commanded Ismaell to be cast out: so Jacob kept little Benjamin
with him: neither would he depart from him unto any, til Simeon was bound in
Egypt: so we read of the king Ioash, whom his aunt Iehoshebah hid from ye rage
of Athaliah, who was brought up in the house of her husband Iehoiadah, where
he was most worthily instructed in the fear of the Lord: so we read our
savior Christ kept till he was twelve years old, with his mother and
supposed father, and after he had been at Jerusalem, he was obedient to them
till the year of his preaching, which was when he came to the age of thirty
years. Therefore the conclusion af all this is, that neither the nursing nor
instruction of our children must be deferred to other, at the least so as we
seem not but to be many ways as careful for them, as if they were in our
presence, to be evermore mindful for the wealth of their bodies, and health of
their souls.

Fourthly, and lastly, by these words we may gather, how great and excellent
is this work, the bringing up of children, for which the Lord has expressed
in his word, that it is required that many should be applied, for in this
place we see Naomi and Ruth bestow their labors for the education of this newborn babe: and we have heard that Rebecca had a nurse that came with her from
her fathers house to the land where Abraham dwelt; which signifies unto us,
that neither their infancy can be vnfedde, nor their youth unruled; for this
is not so base a work as many think it, that one is enough, if not too much
to take the care of their children, for we know they are easily drawn to
many inconveniences, neither can the parents be present to foresee all, but
if any be helpers in this buisines, their care is much eased, the children
less endangered, their welfare better provided, and the parents duty better
discharged, Every flock has a keeper beside the owner, every garden has a
dresser, beside the master: and if it be possible, let every child have an
ouerseer beside the parents, for alas the silly infant is soon cast into the
fire, falls into the water, ouerturned with the wind, and every beast is
ready to work his destruction: all which may be wisely prevented, though not
with the presence, yet with the counsel and care of the parents, by providing
such careful persons to be their guides, as may also defend them when they are
absent.

And the women her neighbours] In this verse is the second part which
concerns the naming of the child, where the holy Ghost does declare unto us
the persons that named the child to be the women of Bethlehem, the neighbors
of Naomi, which no doubt was then given to the child, at the eight day which
was the circumcision, according as we see in the history of John Baptist,
after the law of the Lord, calling him by the name of Obed, which signifies
serving, or a servant; showing how he should serve for the comfort of Naomi,
Boaz and his mother.

By this we first of all note and observe, that it is the duty of the
faithful to be helpers one to another in the service of God, and admonition of
their duties: for here the child being circumcised, was accompanied with many
godly women, whose devise they used, and followed in the naming of the child.
Indeed we may often read that the parents gave names to their children,
sometimes the fathers, sometime the mothers, and sometimes the Lord himself,
as in many persons we may perceive: but we never read that the people were
so kind to help in this matter, and to further the duty of any godly minded,
(only this place excepted) so that these women are a most godly example for
all the faithful to behold, how they must further, and help one another in
the cause of religion: For the naming of children in old time was very
excellent, when they were careful by their earthly and outward tytles to
admonish them of their inward and heavenly duties. And that which these did in
this one, must we do also in all other duties, to draw more and more to the
love of religion: as we read the Apostles did one another, when they came to
the first knowledge of the Messiah: for as a little leven seasoneth a whole
lump, even so a few godly persons may draw a great many to religion.
Therefore this one duty of all other belongs to the flock of Christ, that
they help one another in the works of Christianity. When the ruler of the
Temple his daughter was sick, for the little child he went to our savior,
by which means he recovered her life, this was the duty of a godly father:
when the sick man of the palsy could not come to Christ, four of his
neighbors brought him to his presence, and the Lord forgave him: this was
charity and the duty of neighbors: When Dorcas was dead, the women sent for
Peter, who being come, she was restored to life. And thus parents must help
forward their children, neighbors, their fellows, and every man one another:
if they want knowledge, let us teach them knowledge out of the pure word of
God: if they cannot pray, let us pray with them, and for them, to the almighty
God; if they travail to hear the word, let us travail with them to encourage
their carefulnes: But of this matter we have often spoken: Now let us give
praise to God.

The end of the sixteenth Lecture.
The seventeenth Lecture.
Chap. 4. ver. 18.19.20.21, 22 18 These are the generations of Pharez: Pharez
begat Chetzron.

19 Chetzron begat Ram: Ram begat Hamminnadab:

20 Hamminadab begat Naschon: Naschon begat Salma^.

21 Salman begat Bohaz: Bohaz begat Hobed.

22 Hobed begat Ishai, Ishai begat David.


Now by the merciful kindness of the Lord we are come to the last part of
this history and the conclusion of this Chapter, where the holy Ghost
describes unto us, the kindred of Boaz, even all the generations, from Pharez
to king David: showing unto us the increase of these Jews, from their dwelling
in the land of Canaan, before they went into Egypt until the time that David
was anointed and appointed king in Israel: we may, for the easier handling of
these words, divide them into these two parts: The first is, those persons
that were the progenitors, ancestors or fathers of Bohaz, in the ver. 18. 19
and 20. which are set down to be Pharez the first, Chetzron the second, Ram ye
third, Hamminadab the fourth, Naschon the fifth, and Salman the sixte, who was
the immediate and natural father of Bohaz. The second part is the progeny, of
spring and children of Bohaz, which succeeded him; first Hobed: secondly,
Ishai, and thirdely David the king. Of these parts and persons, let us briefly
speak, so much as serves for the exposition of the Scripture, and the
satisfying of the time, through the assistaunce and help of the spirit of God.

These are the generations] Now that the holy Ghost had declared unto us this
history of Ruth, though briefly and in a few words, yet in ample and large
circumstances, for the understanding of his mind: at the end hereof he
annexeth the kindred of the persons, whom it chiefly concerns, that he
might show unto us, that they were no mean or base persons for whom this
history was compiled, but such as descended of the noblest family in all ye
world; who were the appointed fathers of many kings, and that which is most of
all, the persons, of whose seed our savior Jesus Christ took the beginning
and substance of his humane nature. And therefore in this place we must
declare the causes that moved the holy Ghost to be so careful in the rehearsing
of the genealogies of the fathers; for we must not imagine^, that he mustereth
not the names of those ancient persons, to work any wonder in our minds at
the recital of them, or that the scripture could have been perfect without
the several generations therein described: but we must know that there were
diverse necessary and weighty causes, by the judgment of the auncientest and
most approved writers, which moved the Spirit of God to intersert these
genealogies.

First therefore according to the condition of all mankind, there is equally
described, the generations both of the godly and ungodly in the scriptures, for
this cause to show the multiplycation of mankind: of this sort are the
generations of Adam, Seth and Cain reported by Moses, Genesis 5.
that hearing the number of mankind so quickly multiplied, we might the more
earnestly give praise unto God: Again the genealogies of the sons of Noah
are described unto us, to show the replenishing of the earth, the destruction
of countries, Genesis 10.
and the restoring of the world: But to come nearer unto the matter we must
take this for a general rule that the genealogies of the wicked are reported
in the scripture for to show the blessing and love of God upon the godly and
righteous men: as for example, the Lord reckons up the posterity of Ismaell,
Genesis 25.13.16.
the son of the bond woman, showing us how great a people he became, and
how many Dukes or princes proceeded out of his loins; to show unto us the
promise and covenant which he made to his father Abraham, that he should be
a great people, was fulfilled, and this served to magnify and exalt the name of
godly Abraham: Genesis 21.13.
We read that the Lord bestows a great genealogy upon wicked Esau or Edom,
Genesis 36.
numbering or reckoning up his sons, and his sons sons, his kingdom and
the kings of his seed that reigned after him, for no other end but to report
and to manifest the blessing upon godly Isaacke and Rebecca his parents,
according to the oracle that he gave to his mother, when she demanded and
enquired the cause of the struggling or striving in her womb. The like may be
said of godless Cham for Noah his fathers sake, Genesis 25.23.
of the sons of Jacob for Isreal's sake, of Ephraim and Manasses for Iosephes
sake. By the which we gather and note this excellent doctrine, that if the
wicked have any good, it is for the sake of their godly and righteous parents
or friends: We see they should not have so much as a name in the book of God,
were it not for the cause of the righteous and godly: we read that when the
Sodomites were overcome in war, their people lead captives, Genesis 14.16.
and their goods spoiled by the company of Cedorlahomer, then for Lots sake,
the Lord stirred up Abraham, and armed him with men and courage, who won the
victory, recovered the spoil, brought back the prisoners, restored their
goods, and gave them all liberty, for godly Lots sake, who was shortly after
despised by them, but they for their wickedness were burned in brimstone, when
righteous Lot was delivered from them. If Joseph had not been, they had had no
corn in Egypt. If Moses had not been, the Lord had often destroyed the
Israelites while they wandered and wauered in the wilderness. For Jacobs sake,
the Lord increased the flocks of Laban; For Joseph's sake he blessed the
affairs of Potiphar; for Paul's sake he saved all them that suffered
shipwreck at Myletum. Even so also he blessed the house of Obed-edomi, because
the arc was kept therein, and at this day gives greatest peace to those
Countries, where his Gospel is promoted. Let the atheists think if there were
none that feared God, they should quickly be condemned, let the drunkards know,
if there were not some temperate persons, their bodies should be quickly
consumed, let the covetous wretches assure themselves, if there were not some
liberal men, their own goods would turn to their death, let the profaners of
sabbaoths remember, that if there were not some sanctifiers thereof, their
delightful vanities would long ago have wrought their sorrowful destinies,
let the contentious plaintifes be certified, that if there were not some
peaceable Christians among them, their wealth had long ago been wasted: for
the prayers of the faithful are like the walled Cities against the rage of
enemies, to keep the vengeance of the Lord from falling upon us: as the blood
of the Lamb spotted upon the posts of the Israelites houses, caused the angel
to pass by them, when all the first borne in Egypt were slain, even so the
blood of the lamb of God, which is shead in the hearts of the godly, makes
his messengers of death to depart from our country and kingdom. If there were
not a remnaunt among us that are in league with the Lord that daily are the
hearers of his word, the beseechers for his mercy, and as the ambassadors of
peace to dissuade him from punishing our contempt of his word with
condemnation, our abuse of his creatures into pining famine, our wantonness in
peace into lamentable wars, our riotous lives into foreign captiuitye, and
our pampered bodies, to the slaughter of the sword. You, even you, that
blaspheme the name of God, if there were not a number that reprove your
abominations, the heavens would reign down stones to revenge your accursed
tongues: you, even you, that spend the Sabbaoths in dancing and playing, if
there were not a company that refrain your pollutions, you had been cut off
from your pleasure with some fearful death, before you had passed thus many
days of security: you, even you, that think the preaching of the Gospel
like the voice of one that sings, whereunto you owe no more obedience, then
eare-seruice: if there were not a remnant that heard the word of power, which
they believe is able to save their souls, you had been many years since,
suffering the reward of such impious infidelity. What stays the Lord from
coming to judgment, but the faithful and elect company: what keeps you in
your possessions, reuennews, and lands, but the poor Saints of God, who are
hardly admitted to the tables of your servants, who prays for the increase of
your wealth, the prosperity of your lives, the feeding of your bodies, and the
continuance of your honor, but these despised persons who have entered a
covenant for your daily welfare with the king of heaven and earth. They are
the flock for whose sake you have your wool to clothe you, and your milk to
feed you; they are the bees, for whose sake you enjoy the honey for your
delight, and the honey comb for the pleasure of your meat; they are the birds,
which have builded up your palaces and houses of rest, for the defense of your
weakness; they are the oxen that bring your corn to your barnes, and your
store into your garners; they are the beasts, that bear you out of the
dangers in safetye, and deliver your lives from trouble. Finally, there is not
a usurer, but he has his money for their sake; there is not a Gentleman, but
he has his lands for their sake; there is not a Prince but he has his
Crown for their sake; there is not a rich man, but he has his wealth for
their sake; there is not a Minister but he preaches for their sake, and there
should be no peace, prosperitye or plentye, if it were not for them, for the
Angels are their servant, the earth is their mayntenaunce, and heaven is
their inheritance. Be assured therefore beloved, if righteous Lot go out of
Sodom, or godly Noah into his Arc, then fire will fall from heaven, and the
depthes will open their fountaynes of water to burn and destroy the world:
even so if the Lord take away the righteous from among us, then, even then
presently shall follow the destruction of our country, the consuming of our
kingdom, the confusion of the world, and the condemning of the reprobate, and
therefore let us make much of them, in whom we see any hope of religion, for
they are the right heirs of the world, and you that have their lands, are but
overseers of their fathers testaments, and therefore shall give an account of
your possessions to them when they come to age, and be answerable for every
farthing which you spent not upon them.

Secondly, another cause of the genealogies, or recital of generations in the
Scriptures, is for the Chronologies or noting of several times, wherein every
worthy thing was done, and how the world grew in years, and the mercy of God
in sparing the wicked lives of so many godless men, and choosing but one
family among all the world, with whom he would establish his covenant: for
this cause in the genealogy of Adam, we read how long he and every one of
his children lived, to show how long the Lord suffered the wicked before he
brought the flood, Genesis 5.
and in what age of the world the same ouerflowed, which by the genealogies
there set down, appears to be in the year of the world one thousand six
hundred fifty and six, when Noah was six hundred years old. Again we read
in the genealogy of Sem, Genesis 11.
by the supputation of the years therein mentioned, how long after the flood,
Abraham was called from his country, and received the covenant of promise,
concerning the incarnation of Jesus Christ, and the salvation of the world. The
same may be said of the often repetition of the age of Abraham, as at his
calling, Genesis 12.3. Genesis 17.24.
at the time of his circumcision, at the birth of Izaak, and at his death,
which gives a great light to every part of the scripture, for thereby the
occasions of many excellent histories are taken, the darkest places are opened,
the faithful are confirmed, and the Church of God instructed of her age, of
her continuance, of her members, and of her condition, which is subject to many
often changes. Sometimes her glory is greater, as in the first age, sometime
lesser, as in Abraham's time, sometime afflicted, as the estate of Jacob in
Egypt, and all his children testifies: sometimes without any known and
public ministry, or offices, as till Aarons days, sometime without any
civil or politic government, as in the time of all the Patriarks, sometime
without peace in persecution, as in the time of the Judges, wherein these
persons here named, lived, and sometime in most flourishing estate, as under
David, Solomon, Asa, Josiah, and such like. By the which we gather, that it
never stands in one stay, but either increases or decreaseth, ebbeth or
flows, rises or falls, waxes or waineth: therefore herein lies the
great comfort of the godly even in these troublesome days (but yet the best
that ever are to be looked for in this earth) wherein they see the ancient to
depart, and new men in their room, one generation comes, and another goes,
iniquity advanced, coldness in religion embraced, dissimulation and hypocrisy
maintained, wars and persecution threatened to the Gospel, schisms defended,
errors invented, the world blinded, the truth declined, godliness defaced, and
the Church of God disquieted, with a thousand greater calamities, this all the
fathers suffered before us, and this we their children must also abide; only
herein let us rejoice, that we shall be accounted worthy to suffer for Christ,
and that our names are written in the kingdom of heaven.

Thirdly and lastly, the especial cause of this genealogy, Luc. 3.23.
for this cause Luke the Evangelist, gathered together the several
descriptions of all the genealogies pertaining to Christ, throughout all the
whole scripture, as a necessary ground of the Gospel, to declare the kindred
of our Savior from the beginning of the world, whereof these persons mentioned
in this place are a part, from whence he took them into his number.

Now least any man should think, that the birth of Christ should be obscure,
and the taking upon him the flesh of mankind, should be incertaine, as well to
convince all errors that arose about his humanity, as to testify the
nobility of his birth, and worthiness of his parentage, the persons of whom he
descended, are in many books of the scripture severally named, and not without
great commendation. For this family of Christ had many and special blessings,
which were the arms of the same, by which it was distinguished from all other.
In Adam it had this promise, Genesis 3.15.
that the seed of the woman should break the serpents head; meaning, that
Christ which should be borne of a woman, should overcome the force of the
devil. In Noah it had this promise, Genesis 9.9.
that the covenant of God should be established with him and his seed,
meaning that his promise which he had made unto Adam, should be performed in
his posterity, which was for the coming of Christ. This promise was renewed
unto Abraham, unto Izaak, and unto Jacob, and most plainly unto Judah, the
third son of Jacob, Genesis 29.10.
who was the father and graundfather of this Pharez, that the Scepter shall not
depart from Judah, nor the lawgiuer from between his feet, until Shiloh
come, and the people shall be gathered unto him: Psalm. 132.11
and again unto David he swore, that the fruit of his body should sit upon
his Throne, both which promises or prophesies respect the coming John. 5.39.
for in them you think to have eternal life, and they are they that testifye
of me. Again, John. 20.31
John speaks in the end of his Gospel, that the Scripture was written that
we might believe in Christ. Act. 18.28.
And we read that Apollo did mightily confound the Jews, proouing by the
Scriptures that Jesus was Christ. But most evident and plain is that of the
Disciples going to Emaus, Luc. 24.27. to 46.
and Jesus ouertaking them by the way, it is said, that he began at Moses and
all the Prophets, showing them, that Christ ought so to suffer, and that
redemption and remission of sins, might be preached in his name to all the
world. By the which it is most easy to be gathered, and does necessarily
follow, that the sum, drift, and scope of the Scripture, depends upon
Christ. First, because all the godly that are named therein, were either his
Fathers according to the flesh, or else the singular types prefiguring his
person, such was Melchizedeck, Joseph, Moses, all the Judges, Samuel, and the
Prophets, which although they were not of his natural lineage, (Melchizedeck
excepted) yet they did most lively represent him, Moses and the Judges in this,
that as they delivered the people from earthlye captivity, so should he
redeem them from everlasting calamitye. Samuel and the Prophets in this, that
as they instructed the Jews in the law of the Lord, which was given by Moses,
so Christ should put his law in the inward parts of the Church, and teach
them the Gospel of truth, their redemption wrought by himself, the law of
righteousness, the words of eternal life. Aaron and his fellows in this,
that as they sacrificed for the sins of the people with bullocks and beasts,
and sprinkled the blood with hysop for their outward cleansing, so Christ
sacrifices his own body, and cleanses from sin, thorough the sprinkling
of his own blood. David and the Kings in this, that as they ruled the people
by their temporal laws conquering their enemies, and giving them rest and
worldly honor, so Christ does reign with the spiritual law of his word,
triumphing over hell, death, and satan, leading captivity captive, ascending
up on high, receiving gifts for men, delivering his Church from their
aduersarye the Devil, bestowing upon them spiritual peace and liberty,
giving them the honors of his Ministry, Word, and Sacraments in this life
present, and Crowns of glory in the life to come. Thus if we look upon the
Judges, they show us our redemption. If we look upon the Kings, they show
us our salvation. If we look upon the Prophets, they show us our
instruction. If we look upon the Priests, they show us our reconciliation,
and if we look upon the very names of the fathers of Christ which are
described in the old Testament, they teach us that our names are also described
in heaven, and this is the profit we reap by the generation or genealogy of
the faithful, to confirm unto us the true humanity of our Savior.

So that herein most lively appears the dignity of the Scriptures, and the
majesty of Christ, one mutually looking on another, as the sun does the
stars, and the stars the sun, for as the excellency of the sun
appears by the glory of the stars, to whom it gives light, so the majesty
of Christ is manifest by the scriptures, to whom he gives credit: On the
other side, as the glory of the stars is magnified because it is the light of
the sun, so the credit of the scriptures is exalted, because they concern
the Son of God. If the doings of earthly men be but painted in some
pamphlets, tragedies, or books of Chronicles, we account them famous, because
their actions are commended in print, what shall we then say of the Son of
God, whose works excel the worthiest enterprises of all the world together,
and are recorded by the holy Ghost, the eternal God of truth, thoroughout all
the sacred books of his eternal word, far above the credit of worldly
commendations, is not his majesty incomparable? Do we buy the books of earthly
men's devises, to read the feigned and doubtful adventures of Princes long
since in their graves, and shall we suffer this book of the heavenly
stratagemes of our Savior lie asleep in the shops? Compare their worthiness
together, you shall find the difference as great, as is between the light of
the sun, and a little rotten wood glistering in the dark. They overcame some
worldly Princes, but he overcame the Prince of the whole world: they thorough a
multitude of earthly soldiers, but he thorough himself alone an infinite
number of infernal powers: they invented politic laws for their peaceable
government, but he gives spiritual precepts, and rules by them the hearts of
men himself: they had the heads of many noble persons uncovered at their
presence, but he has the tongues and knees of all them in heaven, in earth,
and under the earth, bowing unto him, yea, the Angels do him reverence, for he
is their head: they prepared names of Ships to cut the seas, but he could
command the waters to bear him up when he walked upon them: they had their
glory in gold, silver, precious stones, and soft apparel, but he being on
earth, had his countenance like the brightness of the sun, and his garments as
white as the light; they could dig in the earth to find treasures for their
maintenance; Mat. 17.2.
but he commanded the fishes of the sea to render him his want: they were able
upon infinite charges, to keep great families: but he without any charge fed
five thousand men, besides women and children with a few barley loaves and two
fishes, and caused much more to be taken up, then at the first was divided
among them, finally they were able to destroy the bodies of men; but he is
able to destroy both body and soul, they showed themselves in outward glory,
but he shall show himself in flaming fire, to render vengeance to all them
that have not obeyed his Gospel. Therefore here must we learn the majesty
of Christ even in the Scriptures, who was promised to these Fathers, appeared
in their flesh, satisfied for our sins, to whom all the Scriptures give
witness, that he shall be the judge of Princes, and subjects, living and dead.
Unto whom we must give reverence, as to his Majesty appertains, for even
now he beholds with what fear we hear his word, with what love we receive
it, with what hunger we desire it, and with what conscience we will practice
it. Oh come let us kiss the Son least he be angry, let us wash his feet
with the tears of our eyes, and wipe them with the hears of our head. Let us
sue to him, for he is the Judge we are the rebels, he the Savior, and we
the slaves. Against him only have we sinned by contemning his Majesty,
profaning his Sabbaothes, blaspheming his honor, disobeying his Gospel, and
treading the pardon of our souls under the feet of our pleasures; therefore
while we have time, let us love his truth, receive his Gospel, believe his
word, sanctify his Sabbaothes, magnify his name, reverence his Ministers and
repent us of our sins.

Pharez begat Cheizron] Now after the causes of the Genealogies described and
the use of them, gathered out of the word of God and godly writers, we must
proceed to the special persons here mentioned, for whose sake the former
has been spoken; we showed you in the beginning that these generations were
some of them before Boaz, and some after him, as his children, and this we must
put you again in mind of, that here is handled the Genealogy of Christ. In
the which this seems doubtful that he begins with Pharez, what should move
him thereunto, seeing (as already we showed you) that this Pharez was an
incestuous birth: and therefore to common reason, it seems much more
commendable that he should have been utterly blot out of the note of these
Fathers, or else the Genealogy should have been farther repeated as from
Abraham to Noah, that so the consideration of his birth might have been
hindered, thorough the company of other godly Fathers. Unto which I briefly
answer, that for this cause he begins at Pharez, for the better
understanding of the Prayers of the Elders, in the 12. verse, which desired
that the house of Boaz might be like the house of Pharez, whom Thamer bear
unto Judah, wherefore at the end of this History the Author annexeth the
description of the house of Pharez and of Boaz, for whom they prayed, unto the
third generation. So that in those days, most commendable was the posterity
of Pharez, for they were ye chief of the tribe of Judah, because this Pharez
was by nature the heir of the birth right of Judah, because he was the Son of
Thamar, the widow of Judah his eldest Son. Again, the scripture is not wont
to cover the faults of the dearest children of God, neither does the holy Ghost
ever conceal the sins of the godly. It tells us of the drunkenness of
Noah, the incest of Lot, the unlawful oath that Joseph swore to his brethren,
(by the life of Pharao:) the adultery of David, the distrust of king Asa, the
fellowship that good king Iehosaphat had with wicked Ahab, and Peter's denial.
At all these the spirit of God never stands, but indicteth them of their
sins, though he give them their pardon by Christ. But we must know farther
that the spirit of God so ruled the pen-writers of the Scriptures, that he
suffered them not to omit the grievous sins of themselves their fathers and
children: as for example, Leui was the great graund-father of Moses, which was
the first writer of the Scripture, yet he sets down the curse that the
Lord pronounced by Jacob against him for the slaughter of the Sichemites.
Exodus 6.20.
Likewise it is held of every one that Job was the writer of his own
History, Genesis 49, 7.
yet how does he lay open his own corruptions, cursing his birth, Job. 4.
accusing God of injustice, and desiring to plead with him. Moreover, Samuel
wrote his own History, especially the greatest part of the first book, yet
he lays out the corruptions of his Sons in the government of the people and
how wicked they were, for whose sake the people were driven to desire a King,
the like may be said of many other, whose cursed sins are by themselves
detected, being not ashamed to confess them, as they were not to commit them,
but thus the godly are their own judges to condemn their own sins, for
they know if they condemn themselves, they shall not be condemned of God.
They say with the prodigal Son that they have sinned against heaven and
against earth, and are no more worthy to be called the sons of God: they say
with Paul, that they are the greatest of all sinners, and therefore have
received the greater mercy: they say with the man in the Gospel, I am not
worthy that thou should come into my house, and evermore they lay the worst
side of their garments outward, that they might be more vile in their own
eyes, more fearful to sin, more loving to God his mercies, more humble in
the world, and more hunger for righteousness. Cast away therefore if you be
the children of God, this shame to acknowledge the infirmities where withal
you are infected, for he that confesses not his sins, even to his brethren,
can never confess the mercies of God to himself. He that commends a
Physician, tells what dangerous sickness he delivered him out, and he that
will commend Christ the Physician of our souls, must tell what sins his
soul was sick of, and how his Savior has delivered him: but yet always
remember that no man is bound upon necessity to declare his particular sins,
except when his conscience is grieved for them, that he (...) receive comfort,
or when he must satisfy the iniu^^^ he has done to his neighbors. But we
must learn not once to despise any penitent sinners, but rather embrace them or
lay them in our own bosoms; they are the sheep which wandered, but now is
found; the groate which was lost, but now is recovered; and the branches which
were dead, and now are green, for the Angels rejoice for them; Christ dyed for
them, heaven is prepared for them, and we must pray for them. We have heard
already that this Pharez was the incestuous Son of Judah: now if any ask why
the Lord would take any part of such ungodly beginnings, I answer with Paul,
1. Tim. 1.15
that Christ came to save sinners, that is, he was incarnated of incestuous
progenitors, to show unto us that he could save such; of adulterous birthes,
to show unto us that he could save the children of adultery, of Gentiles such
as Ruth, Rahab and Bathshebah was, that he might show unto us, he was the
appointed Savior of the Gentiles, because he vouchsafed to take his nature
from them: for thus it be comes him to fulfill all righteousness, to
destroy the gates of Hell, to deliver his members from the thraldom of
Satan, to gather together in one, from the East and West, North and South, all
the children of Abraham, to enjoy the presence of his Majesty, the inheritance
of his kingdom, and the end of their faith, the salvation of their souls.

Pharez begat Hezron] Now we will briefly give you the exposition of the names
and so make an end of this History. Pharez or rather Peretz in Hebrew
signifies a division; and the occasion of this name was, because of the two
twins in the womb of Thamar, he first of all brake forth, Genesis 38.29 Genesis
46.12
and therefore they called him a division, from the time of his birth, he was
borne in the land of Canaan. Hezron or Chetzron, which was also borne in the
land of Canaan, and the Son of Peretz, who was borne about the time, that the
Israelites went into Egypt, and signifies in our English tongue, the arrow of
joy; for till the Israelits went into Egypt, they endured a great famine,
which ^zechiel calls the arrowe of famine, and when they were delivered from
this famine, Ezech. 5.61
by going into Egypt for corn, this child being then borne, he was called the
arrow of joy, as the famine is called the arrowe of sorrow, as a remembrance of
the mercy of God to them, in giving them bread. Ram was the Son of Chetzron,
and was borne in Egypt, about the time of Jacobs death, when the children of
Israel began to be hated of the Egyptians; and therefore they called him Ram:
which signifies in our English tongue, cast down, or cast off, because they
then began to be afflicted, and saw (no doubt) great misery like to fall upon
them, and they should be cast down so soon as either the king or Joseph
should be dead. Haminadab the Son of Ram, was also borne in Egypt, about the
time of Iosephes death, when he told the Israelites, that the Lord would
visit them, and deliver them from the Egyptians, and it signifies in our
English tongue a people that would be free, being compounded of two words;
wherein the Israelits testify the hope of their deliverance, that although
they were now in thraldom, yet they should be in freedom again. Nahashon or
Nachschon, the Son of Haminadab, was also borne in Egypt a little before the
departure of the Israelites, when hey cried grievously to the Lord for their
affliction which they endured in Egypt under the Taxemasters, and it signifies
a crying or complaining, thereby noting in the name of the child that he was
borne in affliction, which might put him in mind of his Fathers misery, this
man when the children of Israel were gone out of Egypt, Genesis 50.24. Number. 1.1.
and 7.
and pitched their tents in wilderness of Sinai; was by election or
appointment of God, made the Prince of the whole Tribe, Salmon or Shalmon the
Son of Nachschon, was borne after the Israelites were departed from Egypt,
while they wandered in the desert and were delivered from the Amalekits and
other their enemies; and his name signifies peaceable, because they lived then
peaceably, being freed from the Egyptians and other calamities, this man
married with the victualer Rachab of Jericho, of who^ he begat Boaz. Boaz
signifies in strength, who was born about the time of the deliverance of ye
Jews, Mat. 1.5.
from the tyranny of the Moabites by the hand of lame Ehud: Iud. 3.16.
by which means they got strength, and remained a long time in peace* Obed
signifies a servant, who was borne as we see in Ephratha Bethlehem, his
mother being Ruth the Moabitesse, the women gave him this name, because he
should serve for the raising up of Elimelechs family, the restoring of Naomies
life, and the comfort of his parents, Boaz and Ruth. Ischai; or Ishai, the
Son of Obed, signifies an oblation, and was borne about the days of
Iipthach; and it may be had, his name given by reason of the vow of Iipthach,
when he went against the Hammonites, that he would offer the first living thing
that met him after he returned with ye victory, whereupon his daughter meeting
him, she lived in perpetual virginity. David the youngest Son of Iischai,
who no doubt was borne in the time of Heli, signifies beloved, because
commonly the youngest are best loved, or else his name did prophecy that he
should be so loved of God, with whom he would establish his covenant concerning
Christ, and advance him to the kingdom. By which we may plainly see, that
this History was written after he was chosen from his brethren and anointed to
be king after Saul, or else the eldest Son of Iischai, should have been
named because the birthright belonged to him.

Lastly by this we may gather, that the foundation of the Gospel must be
searched for in the old Testament for this Genealogy, as all the other of
Christ is taken from thence, and the Apostle defining the Gospel, says that
God had promised it before by the Prophets, in the holy Scriptures, that is in
the old Testament: Romans 1.2.
and therefore it was needful, for Matthew to begin his Gospel with the
Genealogy of Christ, from Abraham and David who had most lively promises of
his incarnation; also Mark and Luke begin with John Baptist who was the
promised Eliah, and the forerunner of Christ according as before it was
prophesied: and John fetches it from the creation and beginning of the world,
as it appears in the entrance of his Gospel. By which we may see the hope
of the Fathers for the coming of Christ, to be the same with ours, and had the
lively promises thereof revealed in the law and the Prophets. Secondly, the
heavenly agreement that is between the old Testament and the new, for there
he was promised, thence he was proved to be the Messiah, all the Prophets give
witness unto him, now he is exhibited, humbled, and advanced to the highest
degree, the government, heaven and earth: sitting at the right hand of God,
making intercession for his Saints, working in the calling of his servants,
with the ministry of his word, disposing all things to the damnation of the
wicked, and the salvation of the godly. Now let us give praise to God.

FINIS.

