A WARNING TO ENGLAND TO REPENT, AND TO TVRne to god from idolatry and
popery by the the terrible exemple of Calece, given the 7. of March. Anno. D.
1558.

BY BENTHALMAI OVTIS.

HEBR. 13. Brethern abide the word of exhortation.

JOEL. 2. Turn unto me with all your heart, in fasting, weeping, and
lamentation.

Imprinted Anno. D. 1558.

IF GOD ALMOST BY MIRAcle has cast so terrible lightninges upon Calece, as
make, either al men's ears to glow, and tingle, or their hertes to tremble,
and quake, that hear how sore that town is suddenly plaged, what may thou
look for, o England, whose most detestable, and most abominable horrible vices,
so far excede the vices of Calece, as Sodom ever passed Sio^ in vilainous
tragical acts. For to considre this matter thoroughly, and to begin with the
chiefest, the governor of Calece did bear in deed with idolatry, and false
religion, and therefore is justly brought in to a captives wretched state. But
thy ruler England with raging madness, and open tyranny at her first entrance
restored in have idolatry and false popish religion, being before luckely
beaten dounne, thorough out the hole realm, and now continues a shameless
aduancer, and bloody mainteiner of the same. The governor of Calece ioied not
to see the people defile them selves with vile popery, with idolatrious mass
hearing, with crouching to domme stocks, and stones, with kissing of canferd
crosses, with sprincling of enchaunted and exchaunted waters upon their
forloren bodies, with eating of charmed bread, instead of Christ's holy
sacrament: Thy ruler co^pelleth al men to those, and many other like horrible
abominations, with thondring threats, and most violent flames of fire. The
governor of Calece ernestly bewailed in his heart, the decaie of sound doctrine
graciously renewed and repared in the days of holy king Edward. Thy ruler
reioiseth, and triumphs in treading, and stamping it under her fete. The
governor of Calece reverently spoke, and thought of true religion. Thy ruler
most blasphemously raileth upon it, and most dedly hates it. The governor of
Calece kept his hands pure from shedding of innocent blood. Thy ruler has
bathed her self, and swimmeth in the holy blood of most innocent, virtuous,
and excellent personages. Let the bloody body of the courteous, modest,
godly, wise, and well learned Lady Jane, and of the gilteles lord Giltford
comme forth for witnesses. In noble Thomas Wiat perchance, and his company
thy ruler may have some pretense, and yet that valiant captain, and right
virtuous man, with the rest of that band, without doubt put on armor, and
rose up in defense of their country, which than began to be betrayed. And
the like may be said of the good duke of Suffolk, and of that worthy man my
lord Thomas Graie his brother.

Of whom if any thing were don amiss, thy ruler was the very author,
headspring, and principal cause of it, and therefore stained her self with
blood in killi^g them, whose fault, if there were any, she her self caused,
bred up, and brought forth. But what color, or cloak can she have, if I call for
the burnt bones and ashes, of the sobre learned, and holy martyr Thomas
grammar archbishop of Ca^terburie? of the excellent, wise godly, and skilful
man Nicolas Ridleie bishop of London, of sondrie other virtuous and learned
bishops, and ministers of gods word, and of a nombre of good, simple,
very innocent, harmles, and right godly men, and women, whom she has most
cruelly roasted, and fried in flames for mainteining the open truth, and keeping
of their conscience upright before god. So that if thou compare her with the
old persequutors of gods truth Nero, Decius, Diocletian, Domitian, Maximine,
and such other thou shall perceive, that she has matched the outrageous
cruelty of them, and that her extreme tyranny has dured longer tha^ the
tyranny of the most part of the other, and in some points is gonne farther.
For none of those persequuted the bones, and ashes of ded men, nor sought the
further affliction, and famishment of such as by them were already driven out
of their native countrees, as this, furious tyranness has don most gredely
unnaturally, and unmercifully. But to proceed in our former comparison, whereby
thy state shall be better known, the governor of Calece never condemned any,
whose cause he had not heard before, and perfectly vndrestanded. Thy ruler has
cast in to raging fires more than three hundred virtuous, innocent, godly me^,
whose cause she never heard, never vndrestode, never labored to know
thoroughly. Yea lest her conscience should condemn her of most horrible murder,
and lest her bloody desire might be dulled, she obstinately refuses once to
look upon the books of excellent good men, which plainly prove, that only the
open truth has been the matter, for which so many holy personages must suffer
most cruel death. The governor of Calece maintained an honest family, godly
servants both men, and women.

Thy ruler has about her raueners, snatchers, flatterers, effoeminate
Ganimedes, Alcinoes youth, and among her women very strompettes, and to well
known baudes, and witches. The governor of Calece what so ever is now forged
to cloak the queen's treachery, and to bleare the peoples eyes, bare a singular
love to the town, and procured the wealth of it to his power. Thy ruler not
only being warned of imminent danger left that town purposely spoiled of good
soldiars, and warlike strong men, to make a way to her lust in meaning to
give it up to another, but has also studied these 4. years to betraie the o
England in to the hands of a stranger, and of a nation most defamed in all
the world for pride, and cruelty. She has sought means to make the fight
against thy self* whereby being enfeebled and weakened, thou might be less
able to resist the force of the spaniard. She began war with a mighty
king, where peace was sought, and desired, only to satisfy her wilful head, to
increase the force of the spaniard, and to maimme the of thy best capitaines,
and soldiars. She has spoiled the of thy artillarie, of thy treasure, and
iuels sent in to a foraine country, I think no more, for the love of the
stranger, tha^ for the hate, that she bears against thy people. For because
she has begone a thing nawghtely upon her own head, she will now proceed
wickedly without stay and extremely hates al them, as either like not her
doings, or by them stand in danger of destruction. And she is so bereft of
wit, that she thincketh it better, to do madly, and nawghtely still a pease,
than to seem to have don madly, and nawghtely at the beginning through wilful
desire, and she is now sunk so far in folly, that she weeneth, that she may
wype away the blotte of her first madness with continual pursuit of the same
Finally the governor of Calece, his cloking, and dissembling of gods truth
except, was a good man, gentle, loving, courteous, harmeles, plain, temperate
sobre, honest, and virtuous. Thy ruler is thoroughly spotted with papistrie,
and idolatry, a stock worshipper, a cakeworshipper, a bold blasphemer of the
true Christ, whose blessed body is gloriously placed in heaven, and not pinde
in popes pixes. Thy ruler is disdainful, and so proud, that to be the wife of
an emperors son, and for hope that she shall once be called my lady
emperesse, she is content not only to make the as bare as a birds tail, but
also unnaturally to betraie the her native country, and make the subject to a
popish proud, unmerciful, and ungodly nation. She is despiteful, cruel,
bloody, wilful, furious, gileful, stuffed with painted processes, with
simulation, and dissimulatio^, void of honesty, void of upright dealinge,
void of al semelie virtues. I speak not this of hatred god I call to record,
nor for any lust to recompte others lothesome evils, but only to call her to
spedie repentance, by the vgle sight of her most horrible sins. I judge
surely that of al other I ought most to lamente her, as the most unfortunate
woman, that ever was. For whereas besides these detestable open, and well known
vices, and other more secret foul sores, she is guilty of the blood, and
damnation of al those that have perished, daily perish and shall perish thorough
the most abominable gross idolatry, and false religion, that she has set
up, and thorough want of the true knowledge of Christ, which she has by all
means possible quenched, and oppressed, yet she has not one that will warn
her, of the most miserable, and most terrible state that she stands in.
Wherefore since al her friends, and lovers, shauelinges, and other slaves of the
poleshore^ swarm with silence, and closed lips, see her run hedlo^g in to
the lake, that burns with unquenchable fire, I thought it my duty to do good
for evil, and by opening, and laying corrosies to her piteful festred sores, to
prepare them to a farther cure, that she perish not everlastingly. And I
beseech god most hertely to bring my desire to effect, which is surely none
other, but that her soul, thorough the great mercies of god, and her humble
knowleging, hating, and renouncing of her sins in time, may be saved from
helfier. It may well be that for this my warning, she will seek my death, but
she shall surely seek the death of him, that loves her better, and would do more
for her perpetual safety, than all the fat fed preistes, and papists either
in the court, or in the country. And if she knew as much as I do she would be
gladder of the wounds that I have given her, tha^ of all the kisses that ever
she had in all her life, first, or last. For what should it avail her, if with
the loss of her soul for ever, she might a while possess in this world all the ioies together, that are contained therein. Nothing erthlie would be bought
with everlasting torment, which shall as certainly comme upon her, as god
lives, and is true of his word, onles before corporal death she repent her
of these most detestable abominat^^^s, that I have now laid forth, and turn
(...) time from the false pope, and patched popery to the true Christ, and true
religion, and be purged, and sanctified, not by coniured waters, and men's
fantastical devises, but by the holy spirit of god. Which grace if god of
his infinite goodness shall grant her, I will seek no greater reward of my
trauail. But let us proceed in our consideration, and comme now to the
counsel of Calece, one of the chiefest whereof, the greatest sembler, and
dissembler, the subtilest flatterer that lives, called to another office in
the court by the death of a vile nonnish papist, was absent at the subduyng of
the town. That Ulysses I say, the deviser of mischeife was absent, not to
avoid, but to run in to a more horrible plage, onles he preuente it with
spedie repentance. This is he who in king Edwardes time put on a mask, and
visor of a protestant, and with his melie mouth, and flering looks crepte in
to good men's bosoms. This is he, who thorough craftines of wit, and by the
help of a mad calfe begiled the good lord wentworth, and drue him from a
better purpose, and so was the occasion of all the mischeife, and miseries, that
have ensued sit^^ns. Besides this false traitor to god, to his srendes, and to
his country, who as I said, was away at the ruin of the tounne, the rest of
the counsel of Calece, were not notoriously nawghtie men. In the most part of
them, a man cold desire nothing, save more zeal to the truth, that they
knew, more strenghth of mind, more fear of god than of a woman. For this in
deed was a commune fault among them al, and worthy many deaths, and vttre
destruction, that they stood not to the known truth, but for fear, and to
satisfy the will of an ignorant wilful woman, suffered them selves to be defiled
with abominable mass idolatry, and were content with grudge of conscience to
seem to drink in again all the popes filthy dregs. Certain of them were
papists to, I wot well, and yet they retained some ciuilite, and outward
honesty. Turn thine eyes now to thy counsel England, how fierce tygres, how
cruel wolves, how ravening bears, how lecherous goats how wily foxes, or to
speak plainly without figure, what perjured traitors to god, and to the, what
murderers, what oppressors of the poor, what voluptuous Sardanapales, what
adulterers, how vile flatterers shall thou find among them? It were a small
fault, and a very peccadulia^ in them to dissemble the truth of religion.
They rail upon it, they toss it with scoffs and mockes, they bloodely, and
tyra^nously persequute it. It might be wicked at, if they took bribes, only to
oppress the cause of a few poor me^, they take bribes to betraie the hole
realm. It might be passed over with silence if they had murdered but one man a
piece, the blood of innumerable saints cries up to heaven against them and
the groninges of many thousands oppressed ar heard every where. It might
perchance be perdoned, if they spent but some weeks in pleasures, they wallow
continually in vile voluptuousnes, and wanto^ daliance, and waste al their
unhappy days in beastly delites, nether can change of women, nor women only
satisfy their filthy abominable desires. Breifely there be no vices in the
world whereof you may not see great buddes, or rather great bounnies, and
bunches in them. Here I may not let escape the pristes of Calece, a foul
brood of thy hen. Papists they were and very furies of hell. But if they be
compared to thy prelates and preistes, they were but demipapistes, and
demidiuels. For he that would discover the foul inward parts of thy
shauelinges, and filthy smered flock, should seem to rake up the botome of
hell, yea he that would show the outward parts of them naked, should show the
fowlest sight, that ever was seen in the world. For what idolatry, what pride,
what covetousness, what cruelty, what lechery, what sodomitrie, was ever heard
of in any age, that they have not far exceded? Thou can not name a bishop,
but thou shall see his tou^ge swollen with blasphemy, his fingers dropping
with the blood of innocents, his body spotted with most filthy villainy, and
the rest of thy Egyptian shauelinges, strive which shall pass other farthiest
in all kinds of beastly abomination. And to speak as I think, among them,
Weston, who has worn, and weried himself in whoredom, these twenty years,
and now for his late chaste behauior is judged to leese his stones, may be
compted an honest man. So manifold, so execrable, so outrageous is their
filthiness, and wickedness. Who can think on that bloody beast Bonner, but a
most grisly, vgle, and horrible monstre shall be presented before his eyes, such
a one as no Polyphemus in boisteousnes, no furies of hell with their snakie
hears in all points of mischeife, no Cerberus in blasphemous roaring, no find
in raging, in tearing, and in devouring innocents, ca^ ouermatche. But I will
leave that botomeles sea, of most filthy stinking vices, and pass farther.
The commons of Calece consisted partly of papists, and partly of men
reformed in religion. The papists were there, as they be every where,
murmurers against god gredie scrapers, envious, lecherous, full of secret
vices, but they were few in nombre, and less besprincled with innocent blood.
The Christianes were weaklinges, dissemblers, quenepleasers, worldlinges,
riotous, wanton, and given to al fleshly lusts for the most part. I comme
now to thy commons England, of which some be gentle men, and those either
papists, or protestants. The papistical gentle men ar slaves to poleshorne
preistes, to exequute their boucherie, following therein part of thy nobilitee,
in bloody cruelty worse than Shythians, in oppressing the poor Neroes
hellish ofspringe, in greedy conuetousnes very Harpyes, in malice, and envy
young devils, traitors to their country, open deceauers, vile flatterers,
filthy lechers, herteles cowardes, shameless braggers, godles Epicures. The
gentle men ptotestantes for the most part differ from the other in knowledge
only, and not in life, in words, and not in worckes. The life conuetousnes,
the like malice, and envy, the like craftines, the like cowardice, and
unfaithfulness in defending their country, the like flattery, the like
lechery, the like dronckennes in fleshly pleasures, the like liynge is found
in both sorts. And the commune people to be short so countrefaite the
beastly, and abominable manners of their superiors, that they may be compted
their own children, their own broad as well as their cou^tremen, I speak of
the great multitude. For I know that in every sort, and condition of men,
there be some that truly fear god. But in the order of thy nobilitee all the
godly may be graven in one ringe. Among thy prelates, and preistes I know
not one, and yet I exclude not al of that most filthy swinestie. Among thy
gentlemen there be so few, that would god the tithes, yea the twentithes, yea
the hu^drethes might be sanctified to god, as men endued with some little
sparcke of fear toward him. Among the commune people undoubtedly there be
more, but they ar oppressed, and drouned in the huge multitude, and infinite
swarms of nawghtie wicked men. Since than that beiond nombre, and measure thou
excedest Calece in outragiousnes, and multitude of most mischeuous factes, and
horrible vices, what thought can thou have to escape the present dradful
vengeance of god, which thou have so many ways deserved, and daily prouokest
to be powered upon the. For thou art not so witles, and starcke mad, as to
think that wealth, artillarie, or force of men can drive back the vehement
tempests of plages, that have to hurl the down. For what power can stay
god, when he will strike, or any thing at al draw back his heavy hand. And
besides that, though riches, and force might help, as they can not, yet thou
art altogether unfurnished. For thou art brought to very beggerie. Thy best
ordinance is lost, given, or conueighed away. Thy capitaines ar purposely
murdered, or pined away thorough thought of thy ruin. Thy noble men ar either
starcke cowardes, or starcke fools for the most part, and more meet for
their effeminatenes to handle a spindle, than to bear a spear, Thy commune
people thorough poverty, and continual misery ar hertles more ready to bear
burdens, and packes on their wretched shulders, tha^ harness on their manly
backs. What remains than o most miserable country? Ca^ any other thing be
looked for, but wasting of fruteful fildes, burni^g of cities, and tounes,
slawghter upon slawghter, murdering of infa^tes in their mothers wo^bes, death
before life, deflowri^g of virgins rauishi^g of wives, a worse life than death
it self in them that shall remain vnmurdered, haling, harr^yng, and tugging
hither, and thither by the hear of the head, miserable captiuitee, vile
slavery, and al kinds of extreme, and most intolerable oppressions. O yet
notwithstanding the infinite heap of thy detestable deserts, hear what thy
god says. For thus he speaks unto the, unto the I say, if thou will yet
give ear by the mouth of his holy prophet Jeremy in 3. chap. Return thou
back slidden Israel, and I will not make mine anger to fall upon the. Some times
thou wast gods Israel, gods holy congregation, and sanctified people. For
the pure word of god sou^ded every where in the, his sacraments were rightly
administered, image service, superstition, and al pilde pestilent popery was
clearly banished, newnes of life, and the goodly fair blosomes of gods
spirit in many were well seen. But now thou art slidden, and have taken a
foul fall. For instead of gods word thou have now men's doting dreams, instead of Christ's sweet gospel the popes sower draffe, instede of Christ's
reverend supper, the popes toiy shapes play and monkisshe munming mass, instead of gods true service, thou have stock service, bone service, and wafer
service. For right holiness of spirit, thou have a countrefaite popeholines,
that stands in butter forbearing, in fish feasting, in flesh fliyng, with
mouth, not with mind, in wymple wearing, in graie coat gatting, in lowering,
in whimpering, in howling, in prating to painted posts, in biyng of
blasphemous bulls, breifely for all virtues, thou have embraced al vices. The
witty poets feign, that Ixion would adulterously have lain with Juno, which
thing Iuppiter her husband perceauing turned a cloud in to her likeness, which
cloud Ixion hasted with great fond joy, to embrase instead of his peramour.

Has not the like, or a thing far worse happened unto the? Have not thou
catched after clouds, and vain shadows instead of the truth not only
whereby thou have made thy self a lawghi^g stock to all the world as Ixio^,
but also most furiously pulled upon the, the heavy indignation of almighty
god. Thou have in deed gone a whoring and committed adultery with stocks and
stones, and thin weerisch bread, while thou would seem to follow the true
spouse, and to seek his spiritual embrasinges, and, thereby thou have deserved
confusion, and everlasting damnation. And yet for all this thy god, and most
loving husband, bids the turn again to him, and he will stay his just
indignation. O refuse not, as a desperate mad woman, to hear his sweet
comfortable, and gracious voice. Repent, and deteste thy unkindness, thy
filthiness, and beastly abomination, Away with thy wafergoddes, with thy
masking masses, with thy latin mumbling, with thy lost liplabor.

Away with thy lies, and false sacrificing for the quick and the ded, the
greatest abomination before god that ever was devised. Away with thy coniured
water, and charmed bread. Away with thy proud pompous pope, and al his
pestiferous popery.

Away with thy stinking lechery, bocherlie cruelty, greedy catching,
wretched sparing. Away with thy pride hatred, envy, and malice, that mass of
a mischief, that hangs on thy flesh, and turn at the last to thy most
gracious husband whose favor is as the due in the morning to dry withered
herbs, whose displeasure is most doleful death. Dimnes, and darcknes
desperation, and anguish, al horrible miseries, and calamities, death and
destruction draw fast on, which al thou may yet avoid, if thou will turn
at the loving calling of thy most merciful lord. Calece was called, and would
not hear, and therefore is beaten low, and sore pressed with gods plage, and
shall thou escape, if thou despice the like calling, in so great appearance of
destruction. For there was no such likelihode of misery ha^ging over Calece,
when she was called, as there is now a full sight of vttre ruin hasting
toward the. Thou art now warned by me, and wast long since warned by the
notable prophet of god master Latimer, and thou art most lively warned by the
terrible oppression of Calece. The cup tha^ must needs be double mixte, that
thou shall drink up dregs and al, and in comparison of thy misery the
beating of Calece shall seem a benifite.

Look upon stories, and thou shall find, that those realms have ever ben
sorest plaged that were most warned, and would not repent Nether the criynges
of the prophets, nor the ruin of Samaria, cold call Jerusalem to repentance.
Wherefore the plages, sorrows, and miseries that rained down by heaps upon
Jerusalem, were incomparable, and excedingly passed the cacalamities of
Samaria. Thou than o England, if thou have any pity on thy self, on thy
grave headded fathers, on thy grave matrones, on thy sweet children, on thy
semelie maidens, and towardlie youth, shake of al sluggischnes, seek no vain
shifts flatter not thy self in thy wickedness, hear not the blasphemous
blustering of those helhoundes, that impute the loss of Calece to the
neglecting of popery, as the heathen in S. Augustines times affirmed, that the
forsaking, and despicyng of their old gods, and goddesses, was the cause of
the decaie, and ruin of the empire. Which their shameless, and abominable
affirmation, god incontinently revenged, with the overthrow, sacking, and
burning of Rome the imperial city. The like talk now I wotte well streameth
out of the foul mouths of thy babilonical prelates. For where as they
thorough their treachery have, ever wrought the destruction and vttre ruin of
tounes cities, and countrees, as the loss of al Asia, and of a great part of
Africa, and Europe does overmuch testify, they yet please them selves in
their outrageous mischeife, and will rather fight against god, and ascribe the
miseries of the world to gods fault, tha^ that they will acknowledge the very
cause of al plages in deed, namely their own extreme horrible wickedness.

And it is no meruail, if they would have the professing, and preaching of the
gospel to seem the cause of the realms shame, loss and decaie. For they hate
no poison in the world so much, as they hate, and abhor gods word, and his
truth. For that bewraieth their hypocrisy, their idolatry, their false
doctrine, their fine devises their traitorous counsels, breifely al their
secret abominations. That undermines their popes throne, pulls their mitres
from their heads, breaks their crociars* chaseth them not only out of kings
counsels, where they occupy the chief places, the aunciau^t nobilitee being
hoisted out, but also from house, and home, and makes them detestable to all the world. And therefore they care not by what means they defame it. But hear
not thou their blasphemous bellowing, and hellishe roaring, considre rather thy
woeful state, and measure thy self with thine own foot, look upon thy faults
with thine own eyes, and not with their false spectacles, acknowledge as the
truth is just causes of al misery to be in thy self, not for receiving, but
for leaving true doctrine once plainly preached unto the, not for renouncyng of
vile popery, but for eating of it in eftsoon, when thou had once cast it
up, not for thy swimming out of the mire of filthy vices, but for thy
returning, and wallowing in to the same again. Heap not sin upon sin with
shameless shifting. Nether yet for all this let thy ruler fall to desperatio^,
wha^ she shall see no color of excuse, no starting hoale in so great a multitude
of furies meeting her in every corner. Let her not say in her heart, who shall
wasche my bloody hands? Who shall cleanse my soul full of leprosy? Who shall
wipe away the spots of my idolatry, witchcraft, sorcerie, traitorous
devises, proud thoughts, filthy desires, long continued hatred, malice, and
envy? How shall I escape the vengeance to comme, how shall I abide the face and
presence of god, whose saints I have partly burnt to ashes, partly
tormented in prisons, partly robbed of their lands, and goods, and sondrie
wise cruelly afflicted, whose spirit I have dotingly accused of heresy, whose
word I have defamed, and railed upon, as new doctrine, and chased out of al
churches, whose people generally I have defrauded and spoiled of the bread of
life, and have caused them to be miserably fed with the popes sluttisch
unsavory soppes, with stinking mingle mangle, and dedlie dregs. Let not thy
nobilitee, and commons say, our sins ar greater than that they may be
forgeuen. Let thy ruler set king Manasse before her eyes, of whom it is
first written that he builded up chapelles of idolatry, that he caused his
own son to pass thorough fire, that he maintained sorcerers, witches, and
enchaunters, that he filled all the corners of Jerusalem with innocent blood,
and nevertheless afterward this follows of him in the 33. cha. of the 2. book
of chro. When Manasse was in distress, he entreated the face of the lord his
god, and humbled him self exceedingly in the sight of the god of his fathers.
And when he prayed to him, he was entreated, and appeased, and he heard his
prayer, and restored him to his kingdom, and Manasse acknowleged, that Iehoua
was god. Let this exemple comfort the sinful heart of thy ruler.

Let thy nobilitee, and commons remember the Ninevites, which were al heathen,
al idolatres, and therefore al wicked men, and yet repentinge upon the
preaching of Jonas they escaped the imminent plages of god, and present
destruction. If thy preistes and prelates, or any other have persequuted the
known truth, of very malice, and despite against god, and so sinned against
the holy ghost, let them die in their sins, and perish everlastingly. Let the
rest think this spoken unto them: thou have committed whoredom with many
companions, but turn unto me, says the lord. Turn unto me back slidden
children, and I will be your lord, I will receive you, and bring you to Sion.
Let them than with all spedines, and humilitee of heart fall dounne flat before
the lord, hold up their hands to heaven, ask mercy, and turn to their
loving lord to the true Christ, who calls them not out of a cankerd brazen
box, or out of a piece of foistie starche, but from his glorious celestial
palace, let them embrase his goodness graciously offered. Let them kiss the
son of god, lovingly coming toward them, and after their unnatural
behauior, after their exceeding great unkindness, after their long continued
adulteries, bending down his heavenly head, and offering his sweet divine
mouth unto them. Let them reverently receive him, let them reverently
receive him, I say, lest his anger shortly kendle, and they perish, be
stricken with lightninges from heaven, and confounded for ever.

A WARNING TO THE READER.
Who soever thou art, whose lotte it shall be to read this admonition, think
not fondly that the author hereof, would serve his affections in reproving men's
vices, or thereby delight him self, or other men's ears, or procure hatred
to any state, or any person, and blow a trompette to malice. For so without
doubt thou shall fowly begile thy self, displease god highly, and leese the
fruit of his trauail in writing, and of thy time in reading. But assure thy
self, that he has spared no condition, and state in this great, and weighty
matter, for none other purpose, save only to move al sorts to repentance,
seeing plainly the hole stay of the realm now shaking, and threatening a
fall, to rest thereupon. And if thou shall use this nedeful warning to any
other end, than to amend thy self, and to stir other to amendment of life,
and to the advancement of gods glory, thou shall tormente the heart of the
writer, disturb the holy desires of the gdolie, and pulle the vengeance of
god upon thine own head. Nether on the other side be thou so weak, as to think
that the author should have forborne to have vttred all that he either knew him
self to be true, or had learned of other, because of the nobilitee of the
personages, but considre that it becamme him in gods cause, and in a matter
touching the safety, or vttre ruin of his country, to have regard rather to
the wealth, and preservation, than to the honor of the persons, with who^ if
they continue in their wickedness, the hole realm must certainly comme in
danger of gods wrath, and unrecoverable destruction. Walk thoue therefore
uprightly, and be nether to wordly wise, nor to wordly foolish, nether hasty
to hate, nor slack to redress both thy self, and other, but pray with this
writer that god of his infinite goodness will vouchsafe to co^uerte the, thy
ruler, thy nobilitee, and al other thy countremen from wickedness of life, and
from al popish superstition, and idolatry unto himself that yet his people
may be herboured in England, that yet his gospel may sound, and have free
course in England, that yet his holy name may there be magnified, and
advanced in peace, and quietness.

FIN.
LVKE 13. THINK YE THAT THESE GALILAEANS WERE SINNERS ABOVE AL OTHER BICAVSE
THEY HAVE SVFFRED SVCH THINGS. NO I SAY UNTO YOU, BUT ONLES YOU REPENT YOU
SHALL AL PERISH LIKE WISE ETC.

printer's device (not in McKerrow) of a tree with a serpent, a crucifix, a
field of corn or wheat, and a figure below a banner with Greek lettering

Imprinted Anno Domini 1558.


