ALBVMAZAR.

A Comedy presented before the Kings Majesty at Cambridge, the ninth of March,
1614.

By the Gentlemen of Trinity College.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks for Walter Burre, and are to be sold at his
Shop, in Paul's Churchyard. 1615.

Dramatis Personae.
ALBVMAZAR. An Astrologer. RONCA. Thieves. HARPAX. Thieves. FVRBO. Thieves.
PANDOLFO. An old Gentleman. CRICCA. His servant. TRINCALO. Pandolfo's Farmer.
ARMELLINA. Antonio's Maid. LELIO. Antonio's son. EVGENIO. Pandolfo's son.
FLAVIA. Antonio's daughter. SVLPITIA. Pandolfo's daughter. BEVILONA. A
Curtezan. ANTONIO. An old Gentleman.
The Prologue.
THe brightness of so great and fair a presence,
They say, strikes cold amazement. But I feel
Contrary effects. For from the gracious center
O'th Honorable assembly, some secret power
Inflames my courage; and, me thinks, I am grown
Taller by th'vertue of this Audience.
And yet thus raised, I fear there is no retiring.
Ladies, whose beauties glad the whole Assembly,
Upon your favors I impose my business.
If It be a fault to speak this foreign language,
(For Latin is our mother tongue) I must entreat you
To frame excuses for us; for whose sake
We now speak English. All the rest, we hope,
Come purposely to grace our poor endeavors;
As we to please. In whose fair courtesy
We trust; not in our weak ability.

ALBVMAZAR.
Act. 1.
Scoen. 1.
Enter ALBVMAZAR, HARPAX, RONCA. ALBVMAZAR. COme brave Mercurials sublimed in
cheating,
My dear companions, fellow soldiers
In The watchful exercise of Theevery:
Shame not at your so large profession,
No more then I at deep Astrology.
For in the days of old, Good morrow Theife,
As welcome was received, as now Your Worship.
The Spartans held it lawful, and the Arabians,
So grew Arabia, Foelix; Sparta valiant.

RONC. Read on this lecture, wise ALBVMAZAR.

ALB. Your patron Mercury in his mysterious character,
Holds all the marks of the other wanderers,
And with his subtle influence works in all,
Filling their stories full of robberies.
Most Trades and Callings much participate
Of yours; though smoothly gilt with th'honest title
Of Merchant, Lawyer, or such like: the learned
Only excepted; and he is therefore poor.

HARP. And yet he steals one author from another.
This Poet is that Poets Plagiary,
And he a third's, till they end all in Homer.

ALB. And Homer filtch't all from an Egyptian Preestesse.
The world's a Theater of theft. Great rivers
Rob smaller brooks; and them the Ocean.
And in this world of ours, this Microcosme:
Guts from the stomach steal, and what they spare,
The meseraicks filch, and lay't in the liver:
Where (least it should be found) turned to red Nectar,
It Is by a thousand theevish veins conveyed
And hid in flesh, nerves, bones, muscles and sinews,
In tendons, skin and hair, so that the property
Thus altered, the theft can never be discovered.
Now all these pilfries couch't and composd in order,
Frame thee and me. Man's a quick mass of the every.

RONC. Most Philosophical ALBVMAZAR!

HARP. I thought these parts had lent and borrowed mutual.

ALB. Say they do so: it is done with full intention
Nere to restore, and that is flat robbery.
Therefore go on: follow your vertu's laws
Your card'nall virtue, great Necessity,
Wait on her close, with all occasions.
Be watchful, have as many eyes as heaven,
And ears as harvest: be resolved and impudent,
Believe none, trust none: for in this City
(As in a fought field Crows and Carcasses)
No dwellers are but Cheaters and Cheateez.

RONC. If all the houses in the town were prisons,
The chambers cages, all the settles stocks,
The broad gates gallowses, and the whole people
Justices, Iuries, Constables, Keepers and Hangmen,
I Would practice spite of all, and leave behind me
A fruitful seminary of our profession,
And call them by thy name Albumazarians.

HARP. And I no less, were all the City thieves
As cunning as thy self.

ALB. Why bravely spoken,
Fitting such generous spirits: I Will make way
To your great virtue with a deep resemblance.
Of high Astrology. Harpax and Ronca
List to our profit: I have new lodged a pray
Hard by, that taken is so fat and rich
'Twill make us leave off trading, and fall to purchase.

HARP. Who is it? speak quickly.

RON. Where good Albumazar?

ALB. It Is a rich gentleman, as old as foolish.
Th'poore remnant of whose brain that age had left him
The doting love of a young girl has dried:
And which concerne's us most, he gives firm credit
To Necromancy and Astrology, Enter FVRBO.
Sending to me, as one that promise both.
Pandolfo is the man.

HAR. What old Pandolfo?

ALB. The same: but stay, yon's Furbo whose smoothest brow
Shines with good news, and's visage promises
Triumphs and Trophies to's. FVRBO plays.

RON. My life h'as learnt out all, I know it by's music;
Then FVRBO sings this song. Bear up thy learned brow ALBVMAZAR,
Live long of all the world admired,
For Art profound, and skill retired
To cheating by the height of stars.
Hence, Gypsies, hence, hence rogues of baser strain,
That hazard life for little gain:
Stand off and wonder, gape and gaze a far
At the rare skill of great ALBVMAZAR.

FVRB. Albumazar,
Spread out thy nets at large, here is foul abundance:
Pandolfo's ours, I understand his business
Which I filch't closely from him, while he revealed
To His man, his purposes and proiects.

ALB. Excellent!
Thanks to this instrument: for in pretense
Of teaching young Sulpitia, the old man's daughter,
I got access to the house, and while I waited
Till she was ready, ouer-heard Pandolfo
Open his secrets to his servant: thus it is.
Antonio, Pandolfo's friend, and neighbor,
Before he went to Barbary, agreed
To give in marriage.

ALB. Furbo, this no place
Fit to consider curious points of business.
Come let us away, I Will hear't at large above.
Ronca stay you below, and entertain him
With a loud noise of my deep skill in Art.
Thou know my Rosy modesty cannot do it.
Harpax up you, and from my bedchamber,
Where all things for our purposes are ready,
Second each beck, and nod, and word of ours.
You know my meaning.

HAR. Yes, yes.

FVR. Yes sir.

Furbo goes out singing, Fa la la Pandolfo's ours. ACT. 1. SCEN. 2.
RONCA. PANDOLFO. CRICCA. RON. There Is old Pandolfo, amorous as youthful May,
And gray as January. I Will attend him here.

PAN. Cricca, I seek thy aid, not thy cross counsel,
I am mad in love with Flauia, and must have her:
Thou spend'st thy reasons to the contrary,
Like arrows against an Anuile: I love Flauia,
And must have Flauia.

CRI. Sir you have no reason,
She Is a young girl of sixteen, you of sixty.

PAN. I have no reason, nor spare room for any,
Love's herbinger has chalk't upon my heart,
And with a coal writ on my brain, for Flauia;
This house is wholly taken up for Flauia.
Let reason get a lodging with her wit:
Vex me no more, I must have Flauia.

CRIC. But sir, her brother Lelio, under whose charge
She Is now, after her father's death, swear boldly
Pandolfo never shall have Flauia.

PAN. His father, ere he went to Barbary,
Promised her me: who be he live or dead,
Spite of a Last of Lelio's* Pandolfo
Shall enjoy Flauia.

CRIC. Sir you are too old.

PAN. I must confess in years about three score,
But in tuffe strength of body, four and twenty,
Or two months less. Love of young Flauia,
More powerful then Medea's drugges, renew's
All decayed parts of man: my Arteryes
Blown full with youthful spirits, move the blood
To a new business: my withred Neru's grow plumpe
And strong, longing for action. Hence thou poor prop
Of feebleness and age: walk with such sires
As with cold palsies shake away their strength,
And loose their legs with curelesse gouts. Pandolfo
New molded is for Revels, Masks, and Music. Cricca,
String my neglected Lute, and from my Armory
Skowre my best sword, companion of my youth,
Without which I seem naked.

CRIC. Your love, sir, like strong water
To a deplored sick man, quick's your feeble limbs
For a poor moment. But after one night's lodging
You Will fall so dull and cold, that Flauia
Will shrike and leap from bed as from a Sepulcher.
Shall I speak plainer, sir? She Will Cuckold you:
Alas she will Cuckold you.

PAN. What me? a man of known discretion,
Of riches, years, and this gray gravity?
I Will satisfy'r with gold, rich clothes and jewels.

CRIC. Were not far fitter urge your son Eugenio
To woo her for himself?

PAN. Cricca be gone,
Touch no more there: I will and must have Flauia.
Tell Lelio, if he grant m'his sister Flauia,
I Will give my daughter to him in exchange.
Be gone, and find me here within this half hour.

ACT. 1. SCEN. 3.
RONCA. PANDOLFO. RON. It Is well that servant's gone: I shall the easier
Wind up his master to my purposes.

PAN. Sure this some novice of th'Artillery,
That winke's and shoots: sir, prime your piece anew
The powder's wet: tick. tock. tick. tock.

RON. A good ascendent bless me: sir are you frantic?

PAN. Why frantic? are not knockes the lawful courses
T'open doors and ears?

RON. Of vulgar men and houses.

PAN. Whose lodging's this? is it not th'Astrologers?

RON. His lodging? no: it is the learned Phrontisterion
Of most divine Albumazar.

PAN. Good sir,
If the door break, a better shall redeem it.

RON. How! all your land sold at a hundredth years purchase
Cannot repair th'dammage of one poor rap,
To thunder at the Phrontisterion
Of great Albumazar?

PAN. Why man? what harm:

RON. Sir, you must know my master's heavenly brain
Pregnant with mysteries of Metaphisickes,
Grows to an Embryo of rare contemplation,
Which at full time brought forth, excel's by far
The armed fruit of Vulcan's Midwifry
That leapt from Jupiter's mighty Cranium.

PAN. What of all this?

RON. Thus one of your bold thunders may abortiue
And cause that birth miscarry, that might have proved
An instrument of wonders greater and rarer
Then Apollonius the Magitian wrought.

PAN. Are you your Masters Countryman?

RON. Yes: why ask you?

PAN. Then must I get an Interpreter for your language.

RON. You need not* with a wind instrument my master made,
In five days you may breath ten languages
As perfect as the Devil, or himself.

PAN. When may I speak with him?

RON. When It please the stars.
He pul's you not a hair, nor pare's a nail,
Nor stirre's a foot without due figuring
The Horoscope: sit down a while and't please you,
I see the heavens incline to his approach.

PAN. What Is this I pray you?

RON. An engine to catch stars,
A mase t'arrest such Planets as have lurk't
Four thousand years under protection
Of Jupiter and Sol.

PAN. Pray you speak English.

RON. Sir, it is a perspicill, the best under heaven:
With this I Will read a leaf of that small Iliade
That in a wall-nut shell was desk't, as plainly
Twelve long miles off, as you see Paul's from Highgate.

PAN. Wonderful workman of so rare an Instrument!

RON. 'Twill draw the Moon so near that you would swear
The bush of thorns in it prick your eyes: the Crystal
Of a large Arch multiplie's millions,
Worke's more then by point blanke: and by refractions
Opticke and strange, searches like the eye of truth,
All closets that have windows. Have at Rome,
I see the Pope, his Card'nals and his mule,
The English College and the Jesuits,
And what they write and do.

PAN. Let me see too.

RON. So far you can not: for this glass is framed
For eyes of thirty: you are nigh threescore.
But for some fifty miles 'twill serve you,
With help of a refractiue glass that is yonder.
For trial sir: where are you now?

PAN. In London.

RON. Ha you found the glass within that chamber?

PAN. Yes.

RON. What see you?

PAN. Wonders, wonders: I see as in a Land-shappe
An honorable throng of noble persons,
As clear as I were under the same roof.
Seems by their gracious brows, and courteous looks
Something they see, which if t b'indifferent
They Will fau'rably accept: if otherwise
They Will pardon, who, or what they be, I know not.

RON. Why that is the coure * at Cambridge forty miles hence, what else?

PAN. A Hall thrust full of bare-heads, some bald, some busht,
Some bravely branch't.

RON. That Is th'Vniversity
Larded with Townes-men. Look you there: what now?

PAN. Who? I see Dover Peer, a man now landing
Attended by two Porters that seem to groan
Under the burden of two loades of paper.

RON. That Is Coriatus Persicus, and's observations
Of Asia and Afric.

PAN. The price.

RON. I dare not sel't.
But here is another of a stranger virtue:
The great Albumazar by wondrous Art,
In imitation of this Perspicill,
Has framed an Instrument that multiplies
Objects of hearing, as this does of seeing,
That you may know each whisper from Prester John
Against the wind, as fresh as 'twere delivered
Through a trunk, or Glosters listening wall.

PAN. And may I see it sir? bless me once more.

RON. It Is something ceremonious; but you shall try't.
Stand thus. What hear you?

Pan. Nothing

TO. Set your hands thus
That th'vertex of the Organ may perpendicularly
Point out our Zenith. What hear you now? ha, ha, ha.

PAN. A humming noise of laughter.

TO. Why that is the Court
And University, that now are merry
With an old gentleman in a Comaedy. What now?

PAN. Celestial music, but it seems far off.
List, list, it is nearer now.

TO. It Is music twixt the Acts. What now?

PAN. Nothing.

Ron. And now?

PAN. Music again, and strangely delicate.
O most Angelical! they sing!

RON. And now?
Sing sweetly, that our notes may cause
The heavenly Orbs themselves to pause:
And at our music stand as still
As at Ioue's amorous will.
So now release them as before,
Th'haue waited long enough, no more.

PAN. It Is gone, give mee't again. -- O do not so.

RON. What hear you now?

PAN. No more then a dead Oyster.
O let me see this wondrous instrument.

RON. Sir, this is called an Otacousticon.

PAN. A Cousticon?
Why it is a pair of Asses ears, and large ones.

RON. True: for in such a form the great Albumazar
Has framed it purposely, as fit'st receivers
Of sounds, as spectacles like eyes for sight.

PAN. What gold will buy't?

TO. I Will selt you when it is finished:
As yet the Epiglottis is imperfect.

PAN. 'Soone as you can, and here is ten crowns in earnest.
For when it is done, and I have purchasd it,
I mean t'intail't on my heirs male for ever,
Spite of the ruptures of the common law.

RON. Nay rather giu't to Flauia for her ioncture:
For she that marries you, deserves it richly.

ACT. 1. SCEN. 4.
CRICCA. PANDOLFO. RONCA. CRIC. SIr, I have spoke with Lelio, and he answer's.

PAN. Hang Lelio, and his answer's. Come hither Cricca,
Wonder for me, admire, and be astonished,
Marvel thy self to Marble at these engines,
These strange Gorgonian instruments.

CRI. At what?

PAN. At this rare Perspicill and Otacousticon.
For with these two I Will hear and see all secrets,
Undo intelligencers. Pray let my man see
What Is done in Rome; his eyes are just as yours are.

RON. Pandolfo, are you mad? be wise and secret:
See you th'steepe danger you are tumbling in?
Know you not that these instruments have power
T'vnlocke the hidden'st closets of whole states?
And you reveal such mysteries to a servant?
Sir be advised, or else you learn no more
Of our unknown Philosophy.

PAN. Enough.
What news from Lelio? shall I have his sister?

CRI. He swears and vows he never will consent.
She shall not play with worn antiquities,
Nor lie with snow, and statues; and such replies
That I omit for reverence of your worship.

PAN. Not have his sister? Cricca I will have Flauia,
Maugre his head* by means of this Astrologer
I Will enjoy Flauia. Are the stars yet inclined
To his divine approach?

TO. One minute brings him.

CRI. What Strologer?

PAN. The learned man I told thee,
Th high Almanacke of Germany, an Indian
Far beyond Trebesond and Tripoli,
Close by the worlds end: a rare Coniurer,
And great Astrologer. His name, pray sir?

RON. Albumazarro Meteoroscopico.

CRI. A name of force to hang him without trial.

PAN. As he excels in Science, so in Title.
He tells of lost plate, horses, and strayd cattle
Directly, as he had stolen them all himself.

CRI. Or he, or some of his confederates.

PAN. As thou respects thy life, look to thy tongue,
Albumazar has an Otacousticon.
Be silent, reverent, and admire his skill,
See what a promising countenance appears:
Stand still and wonder, wonder and stand still.

ACT. 1. SCEN. 5
ALBVMAZAR, RONCA, PANDOLFO, CRICCA. ALB. Ronca, the bunch of planets new found
out
Hanging at the end of my best Perspicill,
Send them to Galilaeo at Padua;
Let him bestow them where he please. But th'starres
Lately discovered 'twixt the horns of Aries,
Are as a present for Pandolfo's marriage,
And henceforth styled Sidera Pandolfaea.

PAN. My marriage Cricca! he foresee's my marriage:
O most Celestial Albumazar!

CRI. And sends y'a present from the head of Aries.

ALB. My Almanacke made for th'meridian
And herght of Iapan, giu't The East Indy company:
There may they smell the price of Cloves and Pepper,
Munkies and China-dishes five years ensuing;
And know th'successe o'th voyage of Magores.
For in the volume of the Firmament
We children of the stars read things to come,
As clearly as poor mortals stories past
In Speed or Hollingshead.

TO. The perpetual motion
With a true larum in it to run twelve hours
Before Mahomets return.

ALB. Deliver it safe
T'a Turkey Factor, bid him with care present it
From me to the house of Ottoman.

TO. I will sir.

CRI. Pray you stand here, and wonder now for me,
Be astonished at his Gorgon, for I cannot.

PAN. Upon my life he proves a mere Impostor.
Peace, not a word, be silent and admire.

ALB. As for the Issue of th'nezt Summers wars,
Reueal't to none, keep't to thy self in secret,
As touchstone of my skill in Prophecy. Be gone.

RON. I go sir.

ALB. Signior Pandolfo, I pray you pardon me,
Exoticall dispatches of great consequence
Staid me; and casting the Nativitie
O'th Cham of Tartary, and a private conference
With a Mercuriall intelligence.
You Are welcome in a good hour, better minute,
Best second, happiest third, fourth, fifth, and scruple.
Let the twelve houses of the Horoscope
Be lodged with fortitudes, and fortunates,
To make you blessed in your designs Pandolfo.

PAN. Were not much trouble to your starry employments,
I a poor mortal would entreat your furtherance
In a terrestrial business.

ALB. My Ephemeris lies,
Or I foresee your errant: thus it is, thus.
You had a neighbor called Antonio,
A widdower like your self, whose only daughter
Flauia, you love, and he as much admired
Your child Sulpitia. Is not this right?

PAN. Yes sir: O strange! Cricca admire in silence.

ALB. You two decreed a counter-match betwixt you,
And purposed to truck daughters. Is It not so?

PAN. Just as you say it. Cricca admire and wonder.

CRI. This no such secret: look to your self, he will cheat you.

ALB. Antonio after this match concluded,
Having great sums of gold in Barbary,
Desires of you before he consummate
The rites of matrimony, he might go thither,
For three months; but as now it is three and three
Since he imbark't, and is not yet returned.
Now sir your business is to me, to know
Whether Antonio be dead or living.
I Will tell you instantly.

PAN. Have thou revealed it?
I told it none but thee.

CRI. Not I.

PAN. Why stare you?
Are you not well?

ALB. I wander 'twixt the Poles
And heavenly hinges, amongst excentricals,
Centers, concentrickes, circles, and epicycles,
To hunt out an aspect fit for your business.

CRI. Mean ostentation! for shame awake your self.

ALB. And since the lamp of heaven is newly entered
To Cancer, old Antonio is stark dead,
Drowned in the sea stone dead: for radius directorius
In the sixth house; and th'waning moon by Capricorn,
He Is dead, he is dead.

CRI. It Is an ill time to marry.
The Moon grows fork't, and walks with Capricorn.

PAN. Peace fool: these words are full of mysteries.

ALB. What ominous face, and dismal countenance
Marked for disasters, hated of all the heavens,
Is this that follows you?

PAN. He is my servant,
A plain and honest speaker, but no harm in him.

CRI. What see you in my face?

ALB. Horror and darkness, death and gallowses,
I de swear th'wert hanged, stood'st thou but two foot higher,
But now thy stars threaten a nearer death.
Sir, send to toale his knell.

PAN. What is he dead?

ALB. He shall be by the dint of many stabs:
Only I spy a little hope of scaping
Thorough the clouds, and foul aspects of death,

CRI. Sir, pray give no credit to this cheater,
Or with his words of Art he will make you dote
As much on his feigned skill, as on fair Flauia.

ACT. 1. SCEN. 6.
HARPAX. FVREO. ALBVM. PANDOLFO. CRICCA. HAR. STay Villain, stay, though
safety't self defends thee
Thou die.

FVR. Come do thy worst, thrust sure, or die.

CRIC. For heaven sake Gentlemen stay your hands, help, help.
Help Albumazar.

HARP. Thus to the hinderer
Of my revenge.

CRIC. Save me Albumazar.

FVRB. And thus, and thus, and thus.

CRI. Master I die, I dye.

HARP. Fliest thou base coward? it is not thy heels can save thee.

ACT. 1. SCEN. 7.
ALBVM. PAND. CRIC. CRI. Ooh!

PAN. What ailes thee Cricca?

CRI. I am dead, I am dead,
Trouble your self no more.

PA. What dead and speakst?

CRIC. Only there is left a little breath to tell you.

PAN. Why, where art hurt?

CRI. Stabbed with a thousand daggers,
My heart, my lights, my liver, and my skin,
Pearst like a sieve.

PAN. Here Is not a wound, stand up,
It Is but thy fear.

CRIC. It Is but one wound all over.
Softly, o softly: y'haue lost the truest servant; Farewell I die.

ALB. Live by my courtesy, stand up and breath.
The dangerous and malignant influence is past:
But thank my charity that put by the blows,
The least of which threatened a dozen graves.
Now learn to scoff divine Astrology,
And slight her servants.

CRI. A Surgeon, good sir, a Surgeon.

ALB. Stand up man, thou have no harm, my life for thine.

PAN. Thou Art well, thou art well.

CRI. Now I perceive I am:
I pray you pardon me Divine Astrologer.

ALB. I do, but henceforth laugh at Astrology
And call her servants Cheaters.

PAN. Now to our business: on good Albumazar.

ALB. Now since the Moon passes from Capricorn,
Through Aquarius to the watery Sign of Pisces,
Antonio's drowned, and is devoured by fishes.

PAN. Is It certain?

ALB. Certain.

PAN. Then let my earnestnes
Entreat your skill a favor.

ALB. It shall, but first
I Will tell you what you mean to ask me.

PA. Strange!

ALB. Antonio dead that promised you his daughter,
Your business is t'entreate me raise his ghost,
And force it stay at home til't have performed
The promise past, and so return to rest.

PAN. That, that, y'haue hit it most divine Albumazar.

ALB. It Is a hard thing; for de preuatione ad habitu^ non datur regressus.
O what a business what a master piece
It Is to raise up his Ghost, whose body's eaten
By fish. This work desires a Planetary intelligence
Of Jupiter and Sol, and these great Spirits,
Are proud, fantastical: It ask's much charges,
T'entice them from the guiding of their Spheres
To wait on mortals.

PAN. So I may have my purpose, spare for no cost.

ALB. Sir, spare your purse, we will do it an easier way.
The work shall cost you nothing.
We have an Art is called Prastigiatory,
That deals with spirits, and intelligences
Of meaner office and condition,
Whose service craue's small charges: with one of these
I Will change some servant, or good friend of yours
To th'perfect shape of this Antonio:
So like in face, behavior, speech, and action,
That all the Town shall swear Antonio lives.

PAN. Most Necromanticall Astrologer,
Do this, and take me for your servant ever.
And for your pains, after the transformation
This chain is yours, it cost two hundred pound
Beside the jewel.

AL. After the work is finished, then -- how now?
What lines are these that look sanguineous?
As if the Stars coniur'd to do you mischief?

PAN. How? mean you me?

ALB. They Are dusky marks of Saturn.
It seems some stone shall fall upon your head,
Threatening a fracture of the Pericrantum.

PAN. Cricca come hither, fetch me my staff again,
Threescore and ten's returned: A general Palsy
Shakes out the love of Flauia with a fear.
Is there no remedy?

ALB. Nothing but patience.
The Planet threatens so, whose prey you are.
The Stars and Planets daily war together.
For should they stand at truce but one half hour
This wondrous Machin of the world would ruin.
Who can withstand their powrefull influence?

PAN. You with your wisdom, good Albumazar.

ALB. Indeed the Egyptian Ptolamee the wise,
Pronounst it as an Oracle of truth; Sapiens dominabitur astris.
Who Is above there? Ronca bring down the cap
Made in the point of Mercury being ascendent:
Here put it on, and in your hand this Image,
Framed on a Tuesday when the fierce God of war
Mounted th'horizon in the sign of Aries.
With these walk as unwounded as Achilles,
Dip't by his mother Thetis.

PAN. You bind me to your service.

ALB. Next get the man you purpose to transform
And meet me here.

PAN. I will not fail to find you.

ALB. Mean while with Sciofericall instrument,
By way of Azimuth and Almicantarath
I Will seek some happy point in heaven for you.

PAN. I rest your servant, sir.

AL. Let all the Stars
Guide you with most propitious influence.

ACT. 1. SCEN. 8.
PANDOLFO. CRICCA. PAN. Here Is a strange man indeed, of skill profound:
How right he knew my business, before he saw me,
And how thou skoft's him when we talked in private.
It Is a brave instrument his Otacousticon.

CRIC. In earnest sir I took him for a Cheater;
As many, under name of cunning men
With promise of Astrology, much abuse
The gaping vulgar, wronging that sacred skill,
That in the Stars reads all our actions.

PAN. Is there no arches over our heads, look Cricca.

CRI. None but the Arch of heaven, that cannot fall.

PAN. Is not that made of Marble? I have read
A stone dropped from the Moon: And much I fear
The fit should take her now, and void an other.

CRI. Fear nothing sir, this charmed Mercuriall cap
Shields from the fall of Mountains: it is not a stone
Can check his Art, walk boldly.

PAN. I do, let us in.

Finis Act. 1.
Act. 2.
Scoen. 1.
TRINCALO. ARMELLINA. TRINCALA. HE that says I am not in love, he lies De
cap a pe; For I am idle, choicely neat in my clothes, valiant, and extreme
witty: My meditations are loded with metaphors, and my songs sonnets: Not a one
shakes his tail, but I sigh out a passion: thus do I to my Mistress; but alas
I kiss the dog, and she kicks me. I never see a young wanton Filly, but,
say I, there goe's Armellina; nor a lusty strong Ass, but I remember my self,
and sit down to consider what a goodly race of Mules would inherit, if she
were willing: only I want utterance, and that is a maine mark of love too.


ARM. Trincalo. Trincalo.


TRINC. O it is Armellina: now if she (...) the wit to begin, as I mean she
should, then will I confound her with complements drawn from the Plays I see
at the Fortune, and Red Bull, where I learn all the words I speak and
understand not.


ARM. Trincalo, what price beare's wheat, and Saffron, that your band's so
stiff and yellow? not a word? why Trincalo! what business in Town? how does
all at Totnam? grown mute? What do you bring from the Country?


TRIN. There it is. Now are my floud-gates drawn, and I Will surround her. What
have I brought sweet bit of beauty? a hundredth thousand salutations of the
elder house to your most illustrious Honor and Worship.


ARM. To me these Titles? is your basket full of nothing else?


TRIN. Full of the fruits of love, most resplendent Lady; a present to your
worthiness from your worship's poor vassaile Trincalo.


ARM. My life on it, he scrap't these complements from his Cart, the last Load
he carried for the Progress. What ha you read that make you grow so eloquent?


TRI. Sweet Madame, I read nothing but the lines of your Ladyships
countenance, and desire only to kiss the skirts of your garment, if you
vouchsafe me not the happiness of your white hands.


ARM. Come, giue's your basket and take it.


TRI. O sweet! now will I never wash my mouth after, nor breath but at my
nosthrils, least I loose the taste of her fingers. Armellina, I must tell you a
secret if you will make much on it.


ARM. As it deseru's: what is it?


TRIN. I love you, dear morsel of modesty, I love: and so truly, that I Will
make you Mistres of my thoughts, Lady of my revenues, and commit all my
moueables into your hands, that is, I give you an earnest kiss in the high way
of Matrimony.


ARM. Is this the end of all this business?


TRIN. This is the end of all business, most beautiful, and most worthy to be
most beautiful Lady.


ARM. Hence fool, hence.


TRIN. Why now she knows my meaning, let it work: She put up the fruit in
her lap, and threw away the basket: It Is a plain sign, she abhorr's the
words, and embraces the meaning: O lips, no lips, but leaves besmeared with
mel-dew! o dew no dew, but drops of Honey combs! o combs no combs, but
fountains full of tears! o tears no tears, but --


ACT. 2. SCEN. 2.
PANDOLFO. TRINCALO. PAN. CRicca denie's me; no persuasions,
Proffers, rewards, can work him to transform.
Yonder Is my Country Farmer Trincalo.
Never in sitter time good Trincalo.

TRI. Like a lean horse t'a fresh and lusty Pasture.

PAN. What rent do pay me for thy Farm at Totnam?

TRI. Ten pound; and find't too dear a peny-worth.

PAN. My hand here: take it rent-free for three lives,
To serve me in a business I Will employ thee.

TRI. Serve you? I Will serve, reserve, conserve, preserve,
Deserve you for the one half: o Armellina,
A Ioincture, hai a Ioincture! what is your employment?

PAN. Here Is an Astrologer has a wondrous secret
To transform men to other shapes, and persons.

TRIN. How? transform things to men? I Will bring nine Tailors
Refused last Muster, shall give five Marks a piece
To shape three men of service out of all,
And grant him th'remnant shreds above the bargain.

PAN. Now if thou wilt let him change thee, take this Lease;
Drawn ready; put what lives thou please.

TRI. Stay, Sir.
Say I am transformed; who shall enjoy the Lease?
I? or the person I must turn to.

PAN. Thou,
Thou. The resemblance last's but one whole day:
Then home true Farmer, as thou were before.

TRIN. Where shall poor Trincalo be? how is this? transformed?
Transmuted? how? not I; I love my self
Better then so: there is your Lease. I Would not venture
For the whole Fee-simple.

PAN. Tell me the difference
Betwixt a fool and wise man.

TRI. 'Faith as much
As twixt your Worship and my self.

PAN. A wise man
Accept's all fair occasions of advancement,
Flye's no commodity for fears of danger,
Venter's and gains, lives easily, drinks good wine,
Fare's neatly, 's richly clothed, in worthiest company;
While your poor fool and Clown, for fear of peril,
Sweat's hourly for a dry brown crust to bed-ward,
And wake's all night for want of moisture.

TRI. Well, sir,
I Would rather starve in this my loved Image,
Then hazard thus my life, for others looks.
Change is a kind of death, I dare not try it.

PAN. It Is not so dangerous as thou take it; we will only
Alter thy countenance for a day. Imagine
Thy face mask't only: or that thou dream'st all night
Thou were apparelled in Antonio's form,
And waking find'st thy self true Trincalo.

TRI. TO Antonio's form? was not Antonio a Gentleman?

PAN. Yes, and my neighbor, that is his house.

TRIN. O ho!
Now do I smell th'Astrologer's trick: he will steep me
In soldiers blood; or boil me in a Chaldron
Of Barbarous Law French: Or anoint me over
With supple oil of great men's services.
For these three means raise Yeomen to the Gentry.
Pardon me sir: I hate these medcines. Fie!
All my posterity will smell and taste on it
'Long as the house of Trincalo endures.

PAN. There Is no such business, thou shall't only seem so
And thus deceive Antonio's family.

TRI. Are you assured? 'twould grieve me to be brayed
In a huge Mortar, wrought to paste, and molded
To this Antonio's mould: Grant I be turned: what then?

PAN. Enter his house, be reuerenc'd by his servants,
And give his daughter Flauia to me in marriage.
The circumstances I Will instruct thee after.

TR. Pray give me leave: this side says do it, this do not.
Before I leave you Tom Trincalo take my counsel.
Thy Mistress Armellina is Antonios Maid,
And thou in his shape may possess her. Turn.
But if I be Antonio, then Antonio
Enioyes that happiness, not Trincalo.
A pretty trick to make my self a Cuckold.
No, no; there, take your Lease. I Will hang first. Soft,
Be not so choleric Thomas: If I become Antonio,
Then all his riches follow. This fair occasion
Once vanished, hope not the like; of a stark Clown
I shall appear speck and span Gentleman.
A pox of Ploughes, and Carts, and Whips, and Horses.
Then Armellina shall be given to Trincalo,
Three hundred Crowns her portion: we will get a boy
And call him Transformation Trincalo.
I Will do it sir.

PA. Art resolved?

TRIN. Resolved? it is done*
With this condition: after I have given your Worship
My daughter Flauia, you shall then move my Worship
And much entreat me, to bestow my Maid
Upon my self, I should say Trincalo.

PAN. Content, and for thy sake will make her portion
Two hundred Crowns.

TRIN. Now are you much deceived*
I never meant it.

PAN. How?

TR. I did but jest.
And yet my hand, I Will do it. For I am mutable
And therefore apt to change. Come, come sir, quickly,
Let Us to th'Astrologer, and there transform,
Reform, conform, deforme me at your pleasure.
I loath this Country countnance; dispatch: my skin
Itch'es like Snakes in April, to be stripped off.
, o quickly, as you love Flauia, quickly.

ACT. 2. SCEN. 3.
ALBVMAZAR. PAND. RONCA. TRINC. ALB. SIgnior Pandolfo, y'arriue in happiest
hour.
If the seven Planets were your nearest kindred,
And all the Constellations your Allies:
Were the twelve houses, and the Innes of the Zodiac
Your own fee-simple; they could nere have chosen
A fitter place to favor your designs.
For the great Luminaries look from Hilech,
And midst of heaven in angles, conjunctions,
And fortunate aspects of Trine and Sextile,
Ready to power propitious influences.

PAN. Thank's to your power and curt'sie that so placed them.
This is the man that is ready for the business.

ALB. Of a most happy countenance, and timber fit
To square to th'gentry: his looks as apt for changing,
As he were cou'red with Camaelions skins.

TRI. Except my hands; and 'twill be troublesome
To fit these fingers to Antonio's gloves.

PAN. Pray let us about the work as soon as may be.

ALB. First choose a large low room, whose doore's full East,
Or near inclining: for th'Orientall quarter's
Most bountiful of favors.

PAN. I have a parler
Of a great square and height, as you desire it.

ALB. Southward must look a wide and spacious window:
For howsoever Omar, Alchabitius,
Hali, Abenezra, seem something to dissent;
Yet Zoroastres, son of Oromasus,
Hiarcha, Brachman, Thespion Gymnesophist,
Gebir, and Budda Babylonicus,
With all the subtle Cabalists and Chaldees,
Swear the best influence: for our metamorphosis
Stoopes from the South, or as some say, South-east.

PAN. This roome's as fit as you had made't of purpose.

TRI. Now do I feel the calfe of my right leg
Tingle, and dwindle to th'smalnesse of a bed-staffe.
Such a speech more turns my high shoes strait boots.

RON. Nere were those Authors cited to better purpose.
For through that window all Pandolfo's treasures
Must take their flight and fall upon my shoulders.

ALB. Now if this light meridionall had a large casement
That ouer-look't some unfrequented alley,
'Twere much more proper: for th'Intelligences
Are nice and coy, scorning to mix their essence
With thronged disturbance of cross multitudes.

RON. Spoken by Art* Albumazar: a provident setter:
For so shall we receive what thou hand'st out
Free from discovery. But in my conscience
All windows point full South for such a business.

PAN. Go to my house, satisfy your curious choice,
But credit me, this parler's fit, it neighbors
To a blind Alley, that in busiest tearme-time
Feels not the footing of one passenger.

ALB. Now then declining from Theourgia,
Artenosoria, Pharmacia, rejecting
Necro-puro-geo-hydro-cheiro-coscinomancy,
With other vain and superstitious sciences,
We Will ancor at the Art Prestigiatorie,
That represents one figure for another,
With smooth deceit abusing the eyes of mortals.

TRI. O my right arm! it is altered, and me thinks
Longs for a sword: these words have slain a Plowman.

ALB. And since the Moone's the only Planet changing:
For from the Neomenia in seven days
To the Dicotima, in seven more to the Pauselinum,
And in as much from Plenilunium
Through Dicotima to Neomenia,
It Is she must help us in this operation.

TRI. What towns are these? the strangeness of these names,
Has scaled the marks of many a painful harvest,
And made my new-pil'd fingers itch for dice.

PAN. Deeply considred wondrous Albumazar:
O let me kiss those lips that flow with science.

ALB. For by her various looks she intimates
To understanding souls, that only she
Has power to effect a true formation.
Cause then your parler to be swept carefully,
Washed, rubbed, perfumed, hanged round from top to bottom
With pure white lunary Tapistry, or needle-worke;
But if'twere cloth of silver, 'twere much better.

RON. Good, good! a rich beginning: good! what is next?

ALB. Spread all the floor with finest Holland sheets,
And over them fair damask Table-cloathes,
Above all these draw me chaste virgins aprons:
The room, the work, and workman must be pure.

TRIN. With virgins aprons? the whole compass of this City
Can not afford a dozen.

RON. So, there is shirts
And bands to furnish all on's for a twelue-month.

ALB. An Altar in the midst, loaded with plate
Of silver, Basens, Yewres, Cups, Candlestickes,
Flaggons and Beakers, Salts, Chargers, Casting-bottles.
'Twere not amiss to mix some Bowls of gold,
So they be massy; the better to resemble
The lovely brotherhood of Sol and Luna.
Also some Diamonds for Jupiter.
For by the whiteness and bright sparkling lustres
We allure th'Intelligences to descend.

RON. Furbo and I are those Intelligences
That must attend upon the Magistery.

ALB. Now for the ceremonious sacrifice,
Provide such creatures as the Moon delights in,
Two sucking lambs, white as the Alpine snow:
Yet if they have a mole or two, 'twill pass.
The Moon her sefe wants not her spots.

PAN. It Is true.

RON. Were they hell-black, we would make a shift to eat them.

ALB. White Capons, Pheasants, Pigions: one little Blacke-bird
Would stain and spoil the work. Get several Wines
To quench the holy embers: Rhenish, Greek wine,
White Muskadell, Sheery, and rich Canarie,
So't be not grown too yellow: for the quicker,
Brisker, and older, the better for these ceremonies.
The more abundance, sooner shall we finish.
For it is our rule in such like businesses,
Who spares most, spends most: either this day must do it,
Or th'reuolution of five hundred years
Cannot: so fit are all the heavens to help us.

RON. A thousand thanks, thou wilt make a complete cheat.
Thus loaded with this treasure, cheered with wine,
Strengthened with meat: we will carry thee in triumph,
As the great General of our atchieuement.

PAN. Sir, for rich plate and jewels I have store,
But know not how to furnish you with hangings.

ALB. Cannot you borrow from the shops? four hours
Shall render all as fair as you received it.

PAN. That can I easily do.

ALB. And hear you sir:
If you chance meet with boxes of white Comfites,
Marchpane, dry sucket, Macarouns and diet-bread,
'Twill help on well.

RON. To furnish out our banquet.

ALB. I had clean forgot, we must have Amber Greece,
The grayest can be found, some dozen ounces,
I Will use but half a dram: but it is our fashion
T'offer a little from a greater lump.

PAN. All shall be done with expedition.

ALB. And when your man's transformed, the chain you promised.

PAN. My hand: my deeds shall wait upon my promise.

ALB. Lead then with happy foot to view the chamber.

PAN. I go sir. Trincalo attend us here,
And not a word on peril of thy life.

TRIN. Sir, if they kill me I Will not stir a foot,
And if my tongue's pulled out, not speak a word.

ACT. 2. SCEN. 4.
TRINCALO. CRICCA. TRIN. O what a business it is to be transformed!
My master talks of four and twenty hours,
But if I mue these Flagges of Yeomanry,
Guild in the sear, and shine in bloome of gentry,
It Is not their Strology, nor Sacrifice,
Shall force me cast that coat. I Will never part with it
Till I be Shriefe of th'Countie, and in commission
Of Peace and Quorum. Then will I get m'a Clarke,
A practiced fellow, wiser then my Worship.
And dominere amongst my fearful neighbors,
And feast them bountifully with their own bribes.

CR. Trincalo!

TRI. Wear a gold chain at every quarter Sessions,
Look big, and grave, and speak not one wise word.

CR. Trincalo!

TRI. Examine wenches got with child, and curiously
Search all the circumstances: have blank Mittimusses
Printed in readiness; breathe naught but Sir,
Rogue, ha? how? hum? Constable look to your charge.
Then vouch a Statute and a Latin Sentence,
Wide from the matter.

CR. Trincalo.

TR. License all Alehouses,
Match my son Transformation t'a knights daughter,
And buy a bouncing Pedigree of a welsh Heralt: and then --

CRI. What in such serious meditations?

TRI. Faith no; but building Castles in the air.
While th'weather's fit: O Cricca, such a business!

CRI. What is it?

TRI. Nay soft, they are secrets of my master.
Locked in my breast: he has the key at's purse-strings.

CRI. My masters secret? keep it good Farmer, keep it,
I would not lend an ear to it if thou would hire me. Farewell.

TRI. O how it boyles and swells: if I keep't longer,
'Twill grow t'impostume in my breast, and choke me, Cricca.

CRI. Adieu good Trincalo, the secrets of our betters
Are dangerous, I dare not know it.

TRI. But hear'st thou,
Say I should tell, can keep't as close as I do?

CRI. Yes: but I had rather want it. Adieu.

TRI. Albumazar.

CR. Farewell.

TR. Albumazar.

CR. Prithee.

TR. Albumazar
Th'Astrologer has undertook to change me
TO Antonio's shape: this done, must I give Flauia
To my old master, and his maid to Trincalo.

CR. But where is Pandolfo and Albumazar?

TR. Gone newly home to choose a chamber fitting
For transmutation: So now my heart's at ease.

CR. I fear the skill and cunning of Albumazar
With his black Art, by whom Pandolfo seeks
To compass Flauia, spite of her brother Lelio,
And his own son Eugenio that loves her dearly.
I Will loose no time, but find them and reveal
The plot and work to cross this accident.
But Trincalo, art thou so rash and ventrous
To be transformed with hazard of thy life?

TRI. What care I for a life, that have a lease
For three? But I am certain there is no danger in it.

CRI. No danger? cut thy finger and that pains thee;
Then what will it do to shred and mince thy carcass,
Bury't in horse-dung, mould it new, and turn it
TO Antonio? and when thou art changed, if Lelio
Smell out your plot, what worlds of punishment
Thou must endure, poor Trincalo! The desire
Of gains abuses thee: be not transformed.

TRI. Cricca thou vnderstandst not: for Antonio
Whom I resemble, suffers all: not I.

CRI. Yonder they come, I Will hence and have to Lelio.

ACT. 2. SCEN. 5.
ALBVMAZAR. PANDOLFO. CRICCA. ALB. THe chamber's fit: provide the plate and
hangings,
And other necessaries: give strict order
The room be cleans'd, perfumed, and hanged, mean while,
With Astralobe, and Meteoroscope,
I Will find the Cuspe and Alfriduria,
And know what Planet is in Cazimi.

PAN. All shall be ready sir, as you command it.

TRI. Doctor Albumazar, I have a vein of drinking,
And artery of lechery* runs through my body:
Pray when you turn me gentleman, preserve
Those two, if t may be done with reputation.

ALB. Fear not, I Will only call the first, good fellowship,
And the other, civil recreation.

TR. And when you come to th'hart, spoil not the love of Armellina.
And in my brain leave as much discretion
As may spy falsehood in a Tavern reckoning;
And let me alone for bounty to wink and pay't.
And if you change me perfectly,
I Will bring y'a dozen knights for customers.

ALB. I warrant thee: sir are you well instructed
In all these necessaries?

PAN. They Are in my table-booke.

ALB. Forget not clothes for th'new transformed, and roabes
For me to sacrifice: you know the fashion.
I Will rather change five, then apparel one:
For men have living souls, clothes are vnanimate.

PAN. Here take this ring, deliver it to my brother,
An officer in the Wardrobe, he will furnish you
With robes and clothes of any stuff, or fashion.

ALB. Almuten Alchochoden of the stars attend you.

PAN. I kiss your hands divine Astrologer.

ACT. 2. SCEN. 6.
PANDOLFO. TRINCALO. PAN. UP quickly Trincalo to my child Sulpitia,
Bid her lay out my fairest Damask Table-cloathes.
The fairest Holland sheets, all th'siluer plate,
Two gossips cups of gold: my greatest Diamonds:
Make have.

TR. As fast as Alchochoden and Almuten
Can carry me: for sure these two are Devils.

PAN. This is that blessed day I so much longed for:
Four hours attendance till my man be changed,
Fast locks me in the lovely arms of Flauia. Away Trincalo.
How slow the day slides on! When we desire
Times have, it seems to loose a match with Lobsters,
And when we wish him stay, he imp's his wings
With feathers plumed with thought. Why Trincalo!

TR. Here sir.

PAN. Come let us away for cloth of silver,
Wine and materials for the Sacrifice.

ACT. 2. SCEN. 7.
LELIO. EVGENIO. CRICCA. LE. Eugenio, these are wonders past belief.
Is your old father of so poor a judgment
To think it in the power of man to turn
One person to another?

EV. Lelio, his desire
T'inioy your sister Flauia, begets hope,
Which like a waking dream, makes false appearance
Lively as truth it self.

LE. But who is the man
That works these miracles?

EVG. An Astrologer.

LE. How deals Astrology with transmutation?

CRI. Under the veil and color of Astrology,
He clouds his hellish skill in Necromancie.
Believe it, by some Art, or false imposture,
He Will much disturb your love, and yours, Eugenio.

LE. Eugenio, it is high time for us t'awake.
And as you love our Flauia, and I
Your sister fair Sulpitia; let us do something
Worthy their beauties. Who falls into a sea,
Swollen big with tempest, but he boldly beats
The waves with arms and legs, to save his life?
So let us strive against troublous storms of love,
With our best power, least after we ascribe
The loss to our dull negligence, not Fortune.

EV. Lelio, had I no interest in your sister,
The holy league of friendship should command me,
Besides the seconding Sulpitia's love,
Who to your nobleness commends her life.

LE. She cannot out-loue me, nor you out-friend me,
For th'sacred name whereof, I have rejected
Your fathers offers, importunities,
Letters, Conditions, Servants, Friends, and lastly
His tender of Sulpitia in exchange
For Flauia* But though I love your sister
Like mine own soul; yet did the laws of friendship
Master that strong affection; and denied him.

EVG. Thanks ever, and as long shall my best service
Wait on your will. Cricca our hope's in thee,
Thou must instruct us:

CRI. You must trust in Fortune
That make's or marr's the wisest purposes.

LEL. What sai'st? What think?

CRI. Here Is no great need of thinking
Not speech; the oil of scorpions cure's their poison.
The thing it self that is bent to hurt and hinder you
Offer's a remedy: it is no sooner known
But th'worst on it is prevented.

EVG. How good Cricca?

CRI. Soon as you see this false Antonio
Come near your doors with speeches made of purpose,
Full of humility and compassion:
With long narrations how he escaped from shipwreck
And other feigned inventions of his dangers:
Bid him be gone; and if he press to enter,
Fear not the reverence of your father's looks,
Cudgel him thence.

LEL. But were not better Cricca
Keep him fast locked, till his own shape return,
And so by open course of Law correct him?

CRIC. No. For my master would conceive that counsel
Sprung from my brains: and so should I repent it.
Advise no more, but home and charge your people,
That if Antonio come, they drive him thence
With threatening words, and blows if need be.

LEL. It Is done.
I kiss your hands Eugenio.

EVG. Your servant, sir.

ACT. 2. SCEN. 8.
EVGENIO. CRICCA. FLAVIA. EVG. CRicca commend my service to my Mistress.

CRI. Commend it t'her your self. Marked you not, while
We talked* how through the window she attended,
And fed her eyes on you? there she is.

EVG. It Is true.
And as from nights of Storms the glorious Sun
Breake's from the East, and chaseth thence the Clouds
That choked the Air with horror; so her beauty
Dispels sad darkness from my troubled thoughts,
And cleare's my heart.

FLA. Life of my soul well met.

EVG. How is it my dearest Flauia?

FLA. Eugenio,
As best becomes a woman, most unfortunate.
That having loved so long, and been persuaded
Her chaste affection was by yours requited,
Have by delays been famished. Had I concealed
Those flames your virtue kindled, then you had sued,
Entreated, sworn, and vowed, and long e're this
Wrought all means possible to effect our marriage.
But now.

EVG. Sweet soul despair not, weep not thus,
Unless you wish my heart should life-bloud drop,
Fast as your eyes do tears. What is it you fear?

FLA. First that you love me not.

EVG. Not love my Flauia?
Wrong not your judgment: rip up this amorous breast
And in that Temple see a heart that burne's
In The vestall sacrifice of chastest love,
Before your beauties Deity.

FLA. If so,
Whence grows this coldness in soliciting
My brother to the match?

EVG. Consider sweetest,
I have a father rival in my love;
And though no duty, reverence, nor respect
Have power to change my thoughts: yet it is not comely
With open violence to withstand his will;
But by fair courses try to divert his mind
From disproportioned affections.
And if I cannot, then nor fear of anger,
Nor life, nor lands, shall cross our purposes.
Comfort your self sweet Flauia: for your brother
Second's our hopes with his best services.

FLA. But other fears oppress me: me thinks I see
Aontonio my old father, new returned,
Whom all intelligence gave drowned this three months,
Enforcing me to marry th'foole Pandolfo,
Thus to obtain Sulpitia for himself.
And so last night I dreamed, and ever since
Have been so scared, that if you have not
Expect my death.

EVG Dreams flow from thoughts of things we most desire,
Or fear, and seldom prove true Prophets, would they did.
Then were I now in full possession
Of my best Flauia: as I hope I shall be.

CRIC. Sir, pray take your leave, this to no end,
'T will but increase your grief and hers.

EVG. Farewell
Sweet Flauia, rest contented with assurance
Of my best love and service.

FLA. Farewell Eugenio.

ACT. 2. SCEN. 9.
SVLPITIA. FLAVIA. SVL. FLauia I kiss your hands.


FLA. Sulpitia I pray you pardon me, I saw you not.


SV. I faith you have some fixed thoughts draw your eyes inward when you see
not your friends before you.


FLA. True, and I think the same that trouble you.


SV. Then it is the love of a young Gentleman, and bitter hatred of an old Dotard.


FLA. It Is so, witness your brother Eugenio, and the rotten Karcase of
Pandolfo. Had I a hundred hearts, I should want room to entertain his love,
and the other's hate.


SV. I could say as much, were it not sin to slander the dead. Miserable
wenches, how have we offended our fathers, that they should make us the price
of their dotage, the medcine of their griefs, that have more need of Physic
our selves? I must be frost-bitten with the cold of your Dads winter, that
mine may thaw his old ice with the Spring of your sixteen. I thank my dead
mother that left me a woman's will in her last Testament: That Is all the
weapons we poor girls can use, and with that will I fight against father,
friends, and kindred, and either enjoy Lelio, or dye in the field in's quarrel.


FLA. Sulpitia, you are happy that can withstand your fortune with so merry a
resolution.


SV. Why? should I twine mine arms to cables, and sigh my soul to Air? Sit
up all night like a Watching Candle, and distill my brains through my
eyelids? your brother loves me, and I love your brother; and where these two
consent, I would feign see a third could hinder us.


FLA. Alas, our Sex is most wretched, nursed up from infancy in continual
slavery. No sooner able to pray for our selves, but they brayle and hudde us
so with sour awe of parents, that we dare not offer to bate at our own
desires. And whereas it becomes men to vent their amorous passions at their
pleasure; we poor souls must rake up our affections in the ashes of a burnt
heart, not daring to sigh, without excuse of the Spleen, or fit of the mother.


SVL. I plainly will profess my love of Lelio, it is honest, chaste, and
stains not modesty. Shall I be married to Antonio, that has been a soust
Seafish, this three months? and if he be alive comes home with as many
impaires, as a Hunting Gelding fallen Pack-horse. No, no, I Will see him freeze to
Crystal first. In other things, good father, I am your most obedient
daughter, but in this a pure woman. It Is your part to offer, mine to refuse if
I like not. Lelio's a hansome Gentleman, young, fresh, rich, and well-fashioned,
and him will Sulpitia have, or dye a maid: And in faith the temper of my blood
tel's me I was never borne to so cold a misfortune. Fie Flauia, fie wench, no
more with tears and sighs, cheer up, Eugenio to my knowledge loves you, and
you shall have him: I say you shall have him.


FLA. I doubt not of his love, but know no means, how he dares work against
so great a Rival: your father in a spleen may disinherite him.


SVL. And giue't to whom? has none but him and me: What though he dote a while
upon your beauty; he will not prove unnatural to his son. Go to your
chamber: my Genius whispers in my ear, and swears this night we shall enjoy
our loves, and with that hope farewell.


FLA. Farewell Sulpitia.


Finis Act. 2.
Act. 3.
Scoen. 1.
PANDOLFO. CRICCA. PAN. WHile the Astrologer hew's out Trincalo,
Squaring and framing him to Antonio,
Cricca I Will make thee partner of a thought
That some thing troubles me.

CRI. Say, sir, what is it?

PAN. I have no heart to give Albumazar
The chain I promised him.

CRI. Deliver it me
And I Will present it to him in your name.

PA. 'Thas been an Aireloome to our house four hundredth years,
And should I leave it now, I fear good fortune
Would slye from us, and follow it.

CRI. Then give him
The price in gold.

PAN. It comes to a hundred pounds.
And how would that well husbanded grow in time?
I was a fool to promise, I confess it,
I was too hot and forward in the business.

CRIC. Indeed I wondered that your wary thriftinesse
Not wont to drop one penny in a quarter
Idly, would part with such a sum so easily.

PAN. My covetous thrift aims at no other mark
Then in fit time and place to show my bounty.
Who gives continually, may want at length
Wherewith to feed his liberality.
But for the love of my dear Flauia
I would not spare my life, much less my treasure.
Yet if with honor I can win her cheaper,
Why should I cast away so great sum?

CRI. True: I have a trick now hatching in my brain
How you may hansomely preserve your credit,
And save the chain.

PAN. I would gladly do it,
But fear he understands us what we say.

CRI. What can you loose to try't, if it take
There Is so much saved, if otherwise, nothing lost.

PA. What is it good Cricca?

CR. Soon as Albumazar come's, loded with news
Of th'transmutation of your servant Trincalo,
I Will entertain him here: mean while steal you
Closely into the room, and quickly hide
Some special piece of Plate: Then run out amazed,
Roaring, that all the Street may know you are robbed.
Next threaten-to attach him and accuse him
Before a Justice, and in the end agree,
If he restore the Plate, you will give the Chain,
Otherwise not.

PAN. But if we be discou'red!
For by his instruments and familiars
He can do much.

CRI. Lay all the fault on Trincalo.
But here is the maine point. If you can dissemble
Cunningly, and frame your countnance to express
Pity and anger, that so learned a man
Should use his friend so basely: If you can call
An outcry well, roar high, and terrible*

PAN. I Will fetch a cry from th'bottome of my heels
But I Will roar loud enough; and thou must second me
With wonder at the sudden accident.

CRI. But yours is the maine part, for as you play't
You win or loose the chain.

PAN. No more, no more, he comes.

ACT. 3. SCEN. 2.
ALBVM. PAND. CRICCA. ALB. SIgnior Pandolfo, three quarters of an hour
Render's your servant perfectly transformed.

CR. Is he not wholly changed? what parts are wanting?

AL. Antonio's shape has clothed his bulk and visage,
Only his hands and feet, so large and callous,
Require more time to supple.

CRI. Pray you sir
How long shall he retain this metamorphosis?

ALB. The complete circle of a natural day.

CRI. A natural day? Are any days unnatural?

ALB. I mean the revolution o'th'first mover,
Just twice twelve hours, in which periode the rapt motion thieves, thieves!
Rowles all the Orbs from East to Occident.

PAN. Help, help, thieves, thieves, neighbors I am robbed,

CRI. What a noise make you sir?

PAN. Have I not reason
That thus am robbed, thieves, thieves, call Constables,
The Watch, and Sergeants. Friends and Constables,
Neighbors I am undone.

CRI. This well begun
So he hold out still with a higher strain.
What ailes you sir?

PAN. Cricca my chamber's spoild
Of all my hangings, clothes, and silver plate.

CRIC. Why this is bravely feigned; continue sir.

PAN. Lay all the Gold-smithes, Keepers, Marshals, Bayliues.

CRIC. Fie sir, your passion falls, cry louder, roar
That all the Street may hear.

PAN. Thieves, thieves, thieves!
All that I had is gone, and more then all.

CRIC. Ha, ha, ha: hold out, hold out; lay out a Lions throat,
A little louder.

PAN. I can cry no longer,
My throate's sore, I am robbed, I am robbed, all is gone.
Both my own treasure, and the things I borrowed.
Make thou an outcry, I have lost my voice:
Cry fire, and then they will hear thee.

CR. good, good, thieves,
What ha you lost?

PAN. Wine, Jewels, Table-cloathes,
A cup-boord of rich plate.

CRIC. Fie, you will spoil all.
Now you outdo it. Say but a bowl or two.

PAN. Villain, I say all is gone; The room's as clean
As a wiped Looking-glass: oj me, oj me.

CR. What, in good earnest?

PA. Fool in accursed earnest.

CR. You gull me sure.

PAN. The window toward the South stand's open, from whence
Went all my treasure. Where Is th'Astrologer?

ALB. Here sir: and hardly can abstain from laughing
To see you vex your self in vain.

PAN. In vain Albumazar?
I left my plate with you, and it is all vanished,
And you shall answer it.

ALB. O! were it possible
By power of Art, to check what Art has done,
Your man should nere be changed: To wrong me thus
With foul suspicion of flat felony?
Your Plate, your cloth of silver, wine, and jewels,
Linen, and all the rest, I gave to Trincalo,
And for more safety, locked them in the lobby.
He Will keep them carefully. But as you love your Mistress
Disturb him not this half hour, least you will have him
Like to a Centaure, half Clown, half Gentleman.
Suffer his foot and hand that is yet untouched,
To be innobled like his other members.

PAN. Albumazar, I pray you pardon me,
Th'vnlook'd-for bareness of the room amazed me.

ALB. How? think you me so negligent to commit
So rich a mass of treasure to the open danger
Of a large casement, and suspicious Alley?
No sir, my sacrifice no sooner done
But I wrapped all up safe, and gave it Trincalo.
I could be angry, but that your sudden fear
Excuses you. Fie, such a noise as this
Half an hour past, had skar'd th'intelligences,
And spoiled the work, but no harm done: go walk
Westward, directly Westward, one half hour:
Then turn back, and take your servant turned to Antonio.
And as you like my skill perform your promise.
I mean the Chain.

PAN. Content. Let Us still go Westward,
Westward good Cricca, still directly Westward.

ACT. 3. SCEN. 3.
ALBVM. RONCA. HARPAX. FVRBO. ALB. HArpax. Furbo, and Ronca, come out, all is
clear,
Why here is a noble prize worth ventring for.
Is not this brauer then sneake all night in danger,
Picking of locks, or hooking clothes at windoes?
Here Is plate, and gold, and cloth, and meat and wine,
All rich: and easily got. Ronca stay here about,
And wait till Trincalo come forth: Then call him
With a low reverence Antonio,
Give him this gold with thanks, tell him he lent it
Before he went to Barbary.

RON. How loose ten pieces?

ALB. There Is a necessity in it, devise some course
To get't again: if not; our gaine's sufficient
To bear that loss. Furbo find out Bavilona
The Curtezan, let her feign her self a Gentlewoman
Inamored of Antonio, bid her inuit him
To banquet with her, and by all means possible
Force him stay there two hours.

HAR. Why two hours?

ALB. That in that time thou may convey
Our treasure to the Inn, and speak a boat
Ready for Grauesend, and provide a supper:
Where, with those precious liquors, and good meats,
We Will cheer our selves; and thus well fed, and merry,
Take Boat by night.

FVR. And what will you do?

ALB. First in and usher out our changeling Trincalo:
Then finish up a business of great profit,
Begun with a rich Merchant, that admires
My skill in Alchymie. I must not loose it.

RON. Harpax bestow the plate, Furbo our beards,
Black patches for our eyes, and other properties,
And at the time and place meet all at Supper.

ACT. 3. SCEN. 4.
ALBVMAZAR. TRINCALO. AL. STand forth transformed Antonio fully mued
From brown soar feathers of dull yeomanry
To th'glorious bloome of gentry; prune your self slick,
Swear boldly you are the man you represent
To all that dare deny't.

TRI. I find my thoughts
Most strangely altered* but me thinks my face
Feels still like Trincalo.

ALB. You imagine so.
Senses are often deceived. As an attentive Angler
Fixing his steady eyes on the swift streams
Of a steep tumbling torrent, no sooner turns
His sight to land, but giddy, thinks the firm banks
And constant trees, move like the running waters:
So you that thirty years have lived in Trincalo,
Changed suddenly, think you are so still; but instantly
These thoughts will vanish.

TRI. Give me a looking-glass*
To read your skill in these new lineaments.

ALB. I Would rather give you poison: for a glass
By secret power of cross reflections,
And opticke virtue, spoils the wondrous work
Of transformation, and in a moment turns you*
Spite of my skill, to Trincalo, as before.
We read that Apuleius by a rose
Changed from an Ass to Man: so by a mirror,
You Will loose this noble luster, and turn Ass.
I humbly take my leave; but still remember
T'auoyd the Devil and a looking glass.
Newborn Antonio, I kiss your hands.

TRI. Divine Albumazar I kiss your hands.

ACT. 3. SCEN. 5.
TRINCA. RONCA. TR. NOw am I grown a gentleman, and a fine one,
I know it by th'kissing of my hands so courtly,
My courteous knees bend in so true a distance,
As if my foot walked in a frame of purpose.
Thus I accost you: or thus, sweet sir, your servant:
Nay more, your servants servant: that is your grand-seruant.
I could descend from th'top of Paul's to th'bottome,
And on each step strew parting complements,
Strive for a door while a good Carpenter
Might make a new one. I am your shadow sir,
And bound to wait upon you. In Faith I will not: pray sir, etc.
O brave Albumazar!

RON. Just Aesop's Crow, prink't up in borrowed feathers.

TRI. My veins are filled with newness: o for a Chyrurgian
To open this Arm, and view my gentle blood,
To try if it run two thousand pounds a year.
I feel my understanding is enlarged
With the rare knowledge of this latter age.
A sacred fury ouer-swayes me. Prime!
Deal quickly* play, discard, I set ten shillings six pence.
You see it? my rest, five and fifty. Boy, more cards;
And as thou go, lay out some roaring oaths
For me; I Will pay thee again with interest.
O brave Albumazar!

RON. How his imagination boyles, and works in all things
He ever saw or heard!

TRI. At gleeke? content.
A morneuall of Ases, gleeke of Knaves,
Just nine apeece. Sir my gray Barbary
Against your dun cow, three train sents and th'course,
For fifty pound: as I am a gentleman
I Will meet next Cocking, and bring a haggard with me
That stoopes as free as lightning, strikes like thunder.
I lie? my reputation you shall hear on it.
O brave Albumazar!

RON. He Will grow stark mad I fear me.

TR. Now I know
I am perfectly transformed, my mind incites me
To challenge some brave fellow for my credit,
And for more safety, get some friend in private
To take the business up in peace and quiet.

RON. Signior Antonio?

TRI. There Is not a crum of Trincalo.
In all this frame, but th'loue of Armellina:
Were not for thee I Would travail, and home again
As wise as I went over.

RON. Signior Antonio? welcome ten thousand times:
Blessed be the Heavens and seas for your return.

TRI. I thank you sir: Antonio is your servant,
I am glad to see you well. Fie, I kiss your hands: and thus accost you.

RON. This three months all your kindred, friends and children,
Mourned for your death.

TRI. And so they well might do,
For five days I was under water; and at length
Got up and spread my self upon a chest,
Rowing with arms, and stearing with my feet;
And thus in five days more got land: believe it
I made a most incredible escape,
And safe return from Barbary: at your service.

RON. Welcome ten thousand times from Barbary.
No friend more glad to see Antonio
Then I: nor am I thus for hope of gain;
But that I find occasion to be grateful
By your return. Do you remember sir,
Before you went, as I was once arrested,
And could not put in bail; you passing by,
Lent me ten pound, and so discharged the debt?

TRI. Yes, yes, as well as 'twere but yesterday.

RON. Often have I waited at your house with money,
And many thanks: but you were still beyond seas.
Now am I happy of this fair occasion
To testify my honest care to pay you:
For you may need it.

TRIN. Sir, I do indeed,
Witness my treasure cast away by shipwreck.

TO. Here sir.

TR. Is the gold good, for mine was good I lent you.

TO. It was, and so is this. Signior Antonio, for this courtesy
Call me your servant.

TR. Farewell good servant, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha. I know not so much as his name!
ten pound? this change is better then my birth: for in all the years of my
yeomanry I could never yoke two crowns, and now I have hearded ten fair
twenty shilling pieces. Now will I go to this Astrologer, and hire him turn
my Cart to a Caroch, my four Iades to two pair of Dutch mares, my mistres
Armellina to a Lady, my Plow-boy Dick to two guarded footmen: then will I
hurry my self to the Mercers books, wear rich clothes, be called Tony by a
great man, sell my lands, pay no debts, hate Citizens, and beat Sergeants: and
when all fails, sneake out of Antonio with a two-peny looking-glass, and
turn as true Trincalo as ever.


ACT. 3. SCEN. 6.
HARPAX. TRINCALO. HAR. SIgnior Antonio, welcome.

TRI. My life here is ten pound more. I thank you heartily.

HARP. Never in fitter season could I find you.
If you remember sir, before you went
To Barbary, I lent you ten pound in gold.

TRIN. Faith I remember no such thing excuse me.
What may I call your name?

HARP. My name is Harpax,
Your friend and neighbor, of your old acquaintaince,

TRIN. What Harpax! I am your servant, I kiss your hands:
You must excuse me, you never lent me money.

HAR. Sir, as I live, ten twenty-shilling pieces.

TRI. Dangers at Sea, I find, have hurt my memory.

HAR. Why here is your own handwriting sealed and signed,
In presence of your Cosen Iulio.

TRI. It Is true, it is true; but I sustained great losses
By reason of the shipwreck. Here Is five pieces,
Will that content you? and to morrow morning
Come to my house and take the rest.

HAR. Well sir,
Though my necessity would importune you
For all, yet on your worships word, the rest
I Will call for in the morning. Farewell Antonio.

TRI. I see we gentlemen can sometime borrow
As well as lend, and are as loath to pay
As meaner men. I Will home, lest other creditors
Call for the rest.

ACT. 3. SCEN. 7.
RONCA. TRINCALO. RON. SIgnior Antonio? I saw you as you landed,
And in great have followed to congratulate
Your safe return, with these most wished embraces.

TRI. And I accept your joy with like affection.
How do you call your self?

RON. Have you forgot
Your dear friend Ronca, whom you loved so well?

TRI. O I remember now my dear friend Ronca.

RON. Thanks to the fortune of the seas that saved you.

TRI. I fear I owe him money: how shall I shift him?
How does your body Ronca?

RON. My dear Antonio,
Never so well as now I have the power
Thus to embrace my friend, whom all The Exchange
Gave drowned for three whole months. My dear Antonio.

TR. I thank you sir.

TO. I thank you.

TR. While my dear Ronca
Clipped me, my purse shook dangerously; yet both his arms
And hands embraced my neck: here is none behind me,
How can this be?

RON. Most dear Antonio,
Was not your passage dangerous from Barbary?
We had great winds and tempests; and I fear me,
You felt the force at sea.

TRI. Yes dearest Ronca.
How Is this? I see his hands, and yet my purse is gone.

TO. Signior Antonio, I see your mind's much troubled
About affairs of worth; I take my leave,
And kiss your hands of liberality.

TRI. And kiss my hands of liberality?
I gave him nothing: O my purse, my purse!
Dear master Ronca.

RON. What Is your pleasure sir?

TR. Show me your hand.

TO. Here it is.

TR. But where is the other?

RON. Why here.

TRI. But I mean where is your other hand?

RON. Think you me the Giant with a hundred hands?

TR. Give me your right.

TO. My right?

TR. Your left.

TO. My left?

TR. Now both.

RON. There Is both my dear Antonio*
Keep your self dark, eat broth; your fearful passage,
And want of natural rest has made you frantic.

TRI. Villain, rogue, cutpurse, thief, dear Ronca stay: he is gone
In The Devils name, how could this fellow do it?
I felt his hands fast locked about my neck;
And still he spoke, it could not be his (...)
For that was full of dear Antonio.
My life he stol't with his feet: such a trick more
Will work worse with me then a looking-glass.
To loose five pound in curt'sie, and the rest
In salutation!

RON. Signior Antonio,
What ailes you?

TRI. Ronca a rogue, a cutpurse,
Has robbed me of five twenty-shilling pieces.

RON. What kind of man was he? something like me?

TRI. Had such a theeuish countenance as your own,
But that he wore a black patch ore his eye.

RON. Met you with Ronca? it is the cunningst nimmer
Of the whole company of cutpurse hall*
I am sorry I was not here to warn you of him.

ACT. 3. SCEN. 8.
FVRBO. BEVILONA. TRINCALO. BE. FVrbo no more, unless thy words were charms
Of power to revive him: Antonio's dead.
He Is dead, and in his death has buried
All my delights: my ears are deaf to music
That sounds of pleasure: sing then the doleful'st notes
That er'e were set by melancholy: O Antonio!
Furbo sings this song. Flow streams of liquid salt from my sad eyes,
To celebrate his mournful exequies.
Antonio's dead, he is dead, and I remain
To draw my poor life in continual pain,
Till it have paid to his sad memory
Duty of love: o then most willingly
Drowned with my tears, as he with waves, I dye.

BE. Break thy sad strings, and instrument: O strange! he is here.
Signior Antonio! my heart's sweet content!
My life and better portion of my soul!
Are you returned? and safe? for whose sad death
I spent such streams of tears, and gusts of sighs?
Or is it my love, that to my longing fancy
Frames your desired shape, and mockes my senses?

TRI. Whom do you talk withal fair gentlewoman?

BE. With my best friend, commander of my life,
My most beloved Antonio.

TRI. With me?
What Is your desire with me sweet Lady?

BE. Sir to command me, as you have done ever,
To what you please: for all my liberty
Lies in your service.

TRI. Now I smell the business*
This is some gentlewoman inamored
With him whose shape I bear: Fie, what an Ass
Was I to strange my self, and loose the occasion
Of a good banquet, and her company?
I Will mend it as I can. Madame I did but jest
To try if absence caused you to forget
A friend that loved you ever.

BEV. Forget Antonio,
Wbose dear remembrance does inform the soul
Of your poor servant Beuilona? no,
No, had you died, it had not quenched one spark
Of th'sweet affection which your love has kindled
In this warm breast.

TRI. Madam, the waves had drowned me.
But that your love held up my chin.

BEV. Will It please you
Enter, and rest your self, refresh the weariness
Of your hard travel: I have good wine and fruits,
My husband's out of town: you shall command
My house, and all that is in it.

TR. Why are you married?

BE. Have you forgot my husband? an angry roarer?

TR. O I remember him: but if he come?

BE. Whence grows this fear? how come you so respectfull?
You were not wont be numbed with such a coldness.
Go in sweet life, go in.

TRIN. O! I remember while I lived in Barbary
A pretty song the Moors sing to a gridiron:
Sweet Madame by your favor I Will sing't to this.
Alcoch Dolash, etc. Thus it is in English.
My heart in flames does fry
Of thy beauty,
While I
Die.
Fie?
And why
Should thou deny
Me thy sweet company?
My brains to tears do flow
While all below
Does glow.
O!
Foe
If so,
How can thou go
About to say me no?
This the Moors call two wings upon a Gridiron.
But it goes sweeter far 'oth' iron Instrument.

BEV. There Is one within my Kitchen ready strung: go in.

TRI. Sweet Lady pardon me, I Will follow you.
Happy Antonio in so rare a Mistress!
But happier I, that in his place enjoy her:
I say still, there is no pleasure like Transforming.

ACT. 3. SCEN. 9.
RONCA. BEVIL. TRINCALO. RON. NOw is the Ass expecting of a banquet,
Ready to court, embrace, and kiss his Mistress.
But I Will soon staue him. Tick, tock, what ho!

BEV. Who Is that so boldly knocks? I am not within;
Or busy: Why so importunate? who is it?

RON. It Is I.

BE. Your name?

TO. Thomas up William, up Morgan, up Dauie, up Roger, etc.

TRI. ^pinola's Campe's broke loose: a troop of Soldiers!

BEV. Oj me! my Husband! Oj me wretch, it is my Husband.

TRI. One man, and wear so many names!

BEV. O sir,
'Has more out-ragious devils in his rage,
Then names. As you respect your life, avoid him.
Down at that window.

TR. It Is as high as Paul's.
Open the Garden door.

BEV. He 'has the keys.
Down at some window, as you love your life,
Tender my honor, and your safety.

RON. Beuilona?
Down, or I Will break the doors, and with the splinters
Beat all thy bones to pieces: Down you whore!

BEV. Be patient but a little; I come instantly.

TRI. Ha'you no trunck nor chest to hide me?

BE. None sir.
Alas I am clean undone, it is my Husband.

RON. Doubtless, this whore has some of her companions
That wrong me thus. But if I catch the villain,
I Will bath my hungry sword, and sharp revenge,
In his heart-bloud. Come down.

BEV. I cannot stay.
There stands an empty Hogshead with a false bottom
To open and shut at pleasure: come hither, in,
In, as you love your life.

TRI. But hear you Madam,
Is there no looking-glass within't, for I hate glasses
As naturally, as some do Cats, or Cheese.

BEV. In, in, there is none.

TO. Who now? Is the Ass past?

BEV. I tunn'd him up, ha, ha, ha, I fear he will fall a working.

RON. Second me hansomely, we will entertain him
An hour or two, and laugh and get his clothes
To make our sport up. Wife, where is the empty hogshead
That wont to stand under the stairs?

BE. There still.

RON. Out with it quickly: I must have it filled.

BE. Not to day, good sir, to morrow will serve as well.

TO. I must have it now.

BE. It Is more then I can carry.

RON. I Will help thee: so, so. Foh! this vessel's musty.
Fetch out some water.

BEV. Fetched your self.

TRI. Pox of all Transmutation, I am smothered.
Lady, as you love me, give the Hogshead vent.
The beer that is in it will work and break the vessel.

BEV. Signior Antonio, as you love your life
Lie still and close, for if you stir you die.

RON. So, so, now shake it, so, so.

TR. Oh I am drowned, I drown!

TO. Whence come's this hollow sound?

TR. I drown, I smother!

RON. My life it is Trincalo, For I have heard that Coxcombe,
That Ass, that Clown, seeks to corrupt my wife,
Sending his fruit and dainties from the Country.
O that 'twere he. How would I use the villain!
First crop his ears, then slit his nose, and gueld him,
And with a red hot Iron sear his raw wounds;
Then barrel him again, and send the Eunuch
To the great Turk to keep his Concubines. Tick, tock, who is within here?

BEV. One that you dare not touch.

RON. One that I dare not?
Out villain, out. Signior Antonio!
Had it been any but your self, he had died.
But as you saved my life before you went,
So now command mine in your services*
I would have sworn y'ad drowned in Barbary.

TRI. 'Twas a hard passage: but not so dangerous
As was this Vessel. Pray you conceive no ill,
I meant no harm, but called at your wife to know
How my son Lelio did, and daughter Flauia.

RON. Sir I believe you.

TRI. But I must tell you one thing,
You must not be so jealous, on my honor
She Is very honest.

TO. For you I make no question.
But there is a rogue called Trincalo, whom if I catch.
I Will teach him.

TR. Who? you mean Pandolfo's Farmer.
Alas poor fool, he is a stark Ass, but harmless.
And though she talk with him, it is but to laugh,
As all the world does at him: Come be friends
At my entreaty.

RON. Sir, for your sake.

BE. I thank you.

TRI. Let Us have a fire; and while I dry my self,
Provide good wine and meat. I Will dine with you.
I must not home thus wet. I am something bold with you.

RON. My house and self are at your service.

TR. Lead in.
Alas poor, Trincalo had thou been taken,
Thou had been tunn'd for Turkey. Ha; ha, ha; fair fall Antonio's shape.
What a notorious Wittall's this! Ha, ha, ha.

Finis Act. 3.
Act. 4.
Scoen. 1.
ANTONIO. THvs by great favor of propitious Stars,
From fearful storms, shipwreck, and raging billows,
Merciless jaws of death, am I returned
To th'safe and quiet bosom of my Country,
And wished embracements of my friends and kindred.
The memory of these misfortunes past,
Season's the welcome, and augment's the pleasure
I shall receive of my son Lelio*
And daughter Flauia. So does alloy
Make gold, that else were vselesse, serviceable.
So th'rugged forehead of a threatening Mountain,
Threateus the smoothness of a smiling Valley.

ACT. 4. SCEN. 2.
CRICCA. ANTONIO. CRI. WHat do I see? Is not this Trincalo
Transformed to Antonio? it is: and so perfectly
That did the right Antonio now confront him,
I Would swear they both were true, or both were false.

ANT. This man admires the unexpectedness
Of my return.

CR. O wondrous power of Stars,
And skill of Art t'apply't. You that are married
May justly fear, least this Astrologer
Cloth your wives servants in your shape, and use you
As Jupiter did Amphitrio: You that are rich,
In your own form may loose your gold.

ANT. It Is Cricca.

CRI. He seeme's so just the man he represent's,
That I dare hardly use him as I purposed.

ANT. Cricca, well met, how fares my friend Pandolfo?

CRI. Your friend Pandolfo? How are your means improu'd;
To style familiarly your Master friend?

ANT. What say thou?

CRI. That I rejoice your Worship's safe returned
From your late drowning. The Exchange has given you lost.
And all your friends worn mourning three months past.

ANT. The danger of the Shipwreck I escaped
So desperate was, that I may truly say
I am newborn, not saved.

CRI. Ha, ha, ha, through what a grace
And goodly countenance, the Rascal speaks?
What a grave portance? Could Antonio
Himself outdo him? o you notorious villain!
Who would have thought thou could have thus dissembled?

ANT. How now? a servant thus familiar? Syrrha
Use your companions so: more reverence
Become's you better.

CRI. As though I understood not,
The end of all this plot and goodly business?
Come I know all, see! this vntil'd clod of earth
Conceits his mind transformed, as well as body.
He wringes and bites his lips for fear of laughing. Ha, ha, ha!

ANT. Why laugh you sir?

CRI. Sir, to see thee changed
So strangely, that I can not spy one inch
Of thy old Clownish Carkas. Ha, ha.

ANT. Laughter proceeds
From absurd actions that are harmless.

CRI. Ha, ha, ha.
Sententious Block-head!

ANT. And you are ill advised
To jest in steed of pity. Alas! my miseries,
Dangers of death, slau'ry of cruel Moors,
And tedious iournies, might have easly altered
A stronger body; much more this decayed vessel,
Out-worne with age, and broken by misfortunes.

CR. Leave your set speeches. Go to Antonio's house,
Effect your business. For upon my credit
Thou Art so well turned, they dare not but accept thee.

ANT. Where should I hope for welcome, if not there;
From my own house, children, and family?

CRI. Is It possible this. Coxcombe should conceive
His mind transformed? How gravely he continues
The countnance he began? Ha, ha. Why block-head?
Think to deceive me too? Why Trincalo?

AN. I understand you not. Hands off.

CRI. Art not thou Trincalo,
Pandolfo's man?

ANT. I not so much as know him.

CRI. Dare thou denie't to me?

AN. I dare, and must
To all the world, 'long as Antonio lives.

CR. You arrant Ass, have not I known thee serve
My Master in his Farm this thirteen years?

ANT. By all the oaths that bind men's consciences
To truth, I am Antonio; and no other.

ACT. 4. SCEN. 4.
PANDOLFO. CRICCA. ANTONIO. PAN. WHat means this noise? o Cricca! what is the
matter?

CR. Sir heare's your Farmer Trincalo, transformed
So just, as he were melted, and new cast
In the true mould of old Antonio.

PAN. Th'right eye's no liker to the left, then he
To my good neighbor. Divine Albumazar!
How I admire thy skill! just so he looked,
And thus he walked; this is his face, his hair,
His eyes, and countnance; If his voice be like
Then is th'Astrologer a wonder-worker.

ANT. Signior Pandolfo, I thank the heavens as much
To find you well, as for my own return.
How does your daughter, and my love, Sulpitia?

PAN. Well, well, sir.

CRI. This is a good beginning,
How naturally the rogue dissembles it?
With what a gentle garb, and civil grace
He speake's and looks: How cunningly Albumazar
Has for our purpose suited him in Barbary clothes. I Will try him further: Sir,
We heard you were drowned, pray you, how escaped you shipwreck?

ANT. No sooner was I ship't for Barbary,
But fair wind followed, and fair weather led us.
When entered in the Straites of Gibraltar,
The heavens, and seas, and earth, conspired against us,
The tempest tore our helm, and rent our tackels,
Broake the maine Mast, while all the sea about us
Stood up in watery Mountains to ouerwhelme us.
And struck's against a Rock, splitting the vessel
T'a thousand splinters. I, with two Mariners
Swam to the Coast, where by the barbarous Moors
We were surpised, fettered, and sold for slaves.

CR. This tale th'Astrologer penned, and he has cond it.

ANT. But by a Gentleman of Italy
Whom I had known before.

PAN. No more, this taste
Proue's thou can play the rest. For this fair story
My hand I make thy ten pound, twenty Marks.
Thou look and speak so like Antonio.

ANT. Whom should I look, and speak like, but my self?

CRI. Good still*

PAN. But now my honest Trincalo,
Tell me, where is all the Plate, the gold, and Jewels,
That the Astrologer, when he had transformed thee
Committed to thy charge? are they safe locked?

ANT. I understand you not.

PAN. The jewels man,
The Plate and gold th'Astrologer that changed thee
Bad thee lay up?

ANT. What plate? what gold? what Jewels.
What transformation? what Astrologer?

CRI. Leave of Antonio now, and speak like Trincalo.

ANT. Leave of your jesting; it neither fits your place
Nor age, Pandoflo, to scoff your ancient friend.
I know not what you mean by gold and jewels,
Nor by th'Astrologer, nor Trincalo.

CRIC. Better and better still. Believe me sir,
He thinke's himself Antonio, and ever shall be,
And so possess your Plate. Art not thou Trincalo
My Masters Farmer?

ANT. I am Antonio
Your Master's friend, if he teach you more manners.

PAN. Humor of wiuing's gone: farewell good Flauia,
Three thousand pound must not be lost so slightly.
Come sir, we will drag you to th'Astrologer,
And turn you to your ragged bark of Yeomanry.

AN. To me these terms!

PAN. Come I Will not loose my Plate.

CRI. Stay, sir, and take my counsel. Let him still
Firmly conceit himself the man he seeme's:
Thus he himself deceived, will far more earnestly
Effect your business, and deceive the rest.
There Is a maine difference twixt a selfe-bred action
And a for'st carriage. Suffer him then to enter
Antonio's house: and wait the event: for him
He cannot escape: What you entend to do,
Do It when 'has served your turn. I see the Maid,
Let Us hence least they suspect our consultations.

PAN. Thy counsel's good: Away.

CR. Look Trincalo
Yonder Is your beauteous Mistress Armellina,
And daughter Flauia. Courage, I warrant thee.

ANT. Blessed be the heavens, that rid me of this trouble.
For with their Farmer and Astrologer,
Plate, and gold, the'aue almost madded me.

ACT. 4. SCEN. 4.
FLAVIA. ARMELLINA. ANTONIO. FLA. ARmellina?

ARM. Mistress.

FLA. Is the door fast?

AR. Yes, as an Usurers purse.

FL. Come hither wench.
Look here, there is Trincalo, Pandolfo's Farmer
Wrapped in my father's shape: prithee come quickly,
And help me to abuse him.

AR. Notorious Clown!

ANT. These are my gates, and that is the Cabinet
That keeps my Jewels, Lelio, and his sister.

FLA. Never was villainy so personate
In seemly properties of gravity.

AN. Tick, tock.

FLA. Who Is he that knock's so boldly?

AR. What want you, sir?

AN. O my fair daughter Flauia! Let all the Stars
Power down full blessings on thee. Open the doors.

FLA. Mark! his fair daughter Flauia ha, ha, ha.
Most shameless villain how he counterfeits!

AN. Know not thy father, old Antonio?
Is all the world grown frantic?

FL. What Antonio?

AN. Thy loving father, Flauia.

FL. My father!
Would thou were in his place. Antonio's dead,
Dead, under water drowned.

AN. That dead and drowned
Am I.

FLA. I love not to converse with dead men.

ANT. Open the door sweet Flauia.

FLA. Sir I am afear'd:
Horror incloses me, my hairs stand up,
I sweat to hear a dead man speak, you smell
Of putrefaction: Fie I feel't hither.

AN. Thou Art much abused, I live: come down, and know me.

AR. Mistress let me have some sport too. Who Is there?

AN. Let me come in.

AR. Soft, soft sir, You Are too hasty.

AN. Quickly, or else --

AR. Good words, good words, I pray sir,
In strangers houses! were the doors your own,
You might be bolder.

AN. I Will beat the doors and windowe's
About your ears.

AR. Are you so hot? we will cool you.
Since your late drowning, your gray and reverent head
Is smeared with Oes, and stuck with Cockle-shels,
This is to wash it.

AN. Impudent whore!

ARM. Out Carter.
Hence durtie whipstocke, hence you foul clown: be gone,
Or all the water I can make, or borrow,
Shall once more drown you.

ACT. 4. SCEN. 5.
LELIO. ANTONIO. ARMELLINA. LE. ARmellina? who^ do you draw your tongue upon so
sharply?

ARM. Sir, it is your fathers ghost, that strives by force
To break the doors and enter.

LE. This his grave looks!
In every lineament himself no liker.
Had I not happily been advertised,
What could have forced me think 'twere Trincalo?
Doubtless, th'Astrologer has raised a ghost
That walks in th'reverend ghost of my dead father.

ANT. These ghosts, these Trincalo's, and Astrologers,
Strike me beside my self. Who will receive me
When mine own son refuses? o Antonio!

LE. Infinite power of Art! who would believe
The planets influence could transform a man
To several shapes! I could now beat him soundly
But that he wears the awful countenance
Of my dead father, whose memory I reverence.

AN. If I be changed beyond thy knowledge, son,
Consider that the excess of heat in Barbary,
The fear of shipwreck, and long tedious iournies,
Have tan'd my skin, and shrunk my eyes and cheeks;
Yet still this face, though altered, may be known.
This skarre bears witness, 'twas the wound thou cur'dst
With thine own hands.

LE. He that changed Trincalo
TO Antonio's figure, omitted not the skarre
As a maine character.

AN. I have no other marks
Or reasons to persuade thee; me thinks, this word
I am thy father, were argument sufficient
To bend my knees, and creep to my embracements.

LE. A sudden coldness strikes me, my tender heart
Beats with compassion of I know not what.
Sir be gone, trusse up your goodly speeches,
Sad shipwracks, and strange transformations.
Your plot's discovered, 'twill not take: thy impudence
For once I pardon. The pious reverence.
I owe to th'graue resemblance of my father
Holds back my angry hands. Hence, if I catch you
Haunting my doors again, I Will bastonado you
Out of Antonio's skin. Away.

ANT. I go sir,
And yield to such cross fortune as thus drives me.

ACT. 4. SCEN. 6.
TRINCALO. and BEVILONA dressing him. TRI. When this transformed substance of
my carcass
Did live imprisoned in a wanton hogshead,
My name was Don Antonio, and that title
Preserved my life, and changed my suit of clothes.
How kindly the good Gentlewoman used me! with what respect and careful
tenderness! Your worship sit had ever a sickly constitution, and I fear much
more now since your long travail* as you love me, off with these wet things,
and put on the suit you left with me before you went to Barbary. Good sir
neglect not your health: for upon my experience there is nothing worse for the
rheum, then to be drench't in a musty hogshead. Pretty soul* such another
speech would have drawn off my legs and arms, as easily as hose and doublet.
Had I been Trincalo I Would have sworn they had cheated. But fie! it is base and
clownish to suspect, and a gentlewomans freeness to part with a cast suit. Now
to the business. I Will in to my own house, and first bestow Armellina upon
Trincalo, then try what can be done for Pandolfo: for it is a rule I wont
t'obserue. First do your own affairs, and next your masters. This word master
makes me doubt I am not changed as I should be. But all is one, I Will venture, and
do something worthy Antonio's name while I have it.


ACT. 2. SCEN. 7.
ANTONIO. TRINCALO. AN. WRetched Antonio, have been preserved so strangely
From foreign miseries to be wronged at home?
Barred from thy house by th'scornes of thine own children?

TRIN. Tick, tock.

ANT. But stay, there is on knockes boldly, may be somefriend.

TRIN. Tick, tock.

ANT. Dwell you here gentleman?

TRI. He calls me gentleman.
See th'vertue of good clothes: all men salute,
Honor, respect and reverence us.

ANT. Young gentleman,
Let me without offense entreat your name,
And why you knock.

TRI. How sir Sawce-boxe, my name?
Or thou some stranger art, or grossly ignorant
That know not me. Ha! what art thou that ask'st it?

ANT. Be not in choler sir.

TRIN. Befits it me,
A gentleman of public reputation,
To stoop so low as satisfy the questions
Of base and earthly pieces like thy self? What art thou? ha?

ANT. Th'vnfortunate possessor of this house.

TRI. Thou lie base Sycophant, my worship owes it.

AN. 'May be my son has sold it in my absence,
Thinking me dead. How long has't called you master?

TRI. 'Long as Antonio possessed it.

AN. Which Antonio?

TRI. Antonio Anastasio.

ANT. That Anastasio
That drowned in Barbary?

TRI. That Anastasio,
That self same man am I: I escaped by swimming,
And now return to keep my former promise
Of Flauia to Pandolfo; and in exchange,
To take Sulpitia to my wife.

ANT. All this
I intended'fore I went; but sir, if I
Can be noother then my self, and you
Are that Antonio, you and I are one.

TR. How? one with thee? speak such another syllable,
And by the terror of this deadly steel,
That nere saw light, but sent to endless darkness
All that durst stand before't: thou die.

AN. Alas
My weakness grown by age, and pains of travel,
Dissarmes my courage to defend my self;
I have no strength but patience.

TR. What art now?

AN. Peter, and Thomas, William, what you please.

TR. What boldness madded thee to steal my name?

AN. Sir, heat of wine.

TR. And sir when you are drunk,
Is there no person to put on, but mine,
To cover your intended villainies?

AN. But good sir, if I be not I, who am I?

TR. An Ox, an Ass, a dog.

AN. Strange negligence
To loose my self! me thinks I live and move,
Remember. Could the fearful apprehension
Of th'vgly fear of drowning so transform me?
Or did I dye, and by Pythagoras rule,
My soul's provided of another lodging?

TRI. Be what thou will, except Antonio,
It Is death to touch that name.

AN. Dangers at sea
Are pleasures, weighed with these home-iniuries.
Was ever man thus skar'd beside himself?
O most unfortunate Antonio!
At sea thou suffredst shipwreck of thy goods,
At land of thine own self. Antonio?
Or what name else they please? fly, fly to Barbary,
And rather there endure the foreign cruelty
Of fetters, whippes, and Moors, then here at home
Be wronged and baffled by thy friends and children.

TRI. How? prating still? why Timothy, be gone,
Or draw, and lay Antonio down betwixt us,
Let fortune of the fight decide the question.
Here Is a brave rogue, that in the Kings highway
Offers to rob me of my good name. Draw.

AN. These wrongs recall my strength* I am resolved.
Better dye once, then suffer always. Draw.

TR. Stay. Vnderstand'st thou well nice points of duel?
Art borne of gentle blood, and pure descent?
Was none of all thy lineage hanged, or cuckold?
Bastard, or bastinado'd? is thy pedigree
As long and wide as mine? For otherwise
Thou were most unworthy; and 'twere loss of honor
In me to fight. More, I have drawn five teeth:
If thine stand sound, the terms are much unequal.
And by strict laws of duel, I am excused
To fight on disadvantage.

AN. This some Ass!

TRI. If we concur in all, write a formal challenge,
And bring thy second: mean while I Will make provision
Of Calais sand to fight upon securely. Ha!

ACT. 4. SCEN. 8.
LELIO. CRICCA. TRINCALO. ANTONIO. LE. AM I awake? or do deceitful dreams
Present to my wild fancy things I see not?

CR. Sir, what amazement's this? why wonder you?

LE. See thou not Trincalo and Antonio?

CR. O strange! they are both here.

LE. Did not thou inform me,
That Trincalo was turned to Antonio?
Which I believing, like a cursed son,
With most reproachful threats, drove mine old father
From his own doors; and yet rest doubtful, whether
This be the true Antonio: 'may be th'Astrologer
Has changed some other, and not Trincalo.

CR. No, feareit not: it is plain: Albumazar
Has cheated my old master of his plate.
For here is the Farmer, as like himself as ever;
Only his clothes excepted. Trincalo!

TRI. Cricca, where is Trincalo? do see him here?

CR. Yes, and as rank an Ass as e're he was.

TRI. You Are much deceived, thou neither see nor know me.
I am transformed, transformed.

CR. Thou Art still thy self.
Lelio, this Farmer's half a fool, half knave.
And as Pandolfo did with much entreaty
Persuade him to transform; so as much labor
Will hardly bring the Coxcombe to himself,
That nere was out on it. Who art, if not he?

TR. My name is Don Antonio, I am now going
To my own house, to give Pandolfo Flauia,
And Armellina to his Farmer Trincalo.
How dare thou Cricca, but a meaner servant,
Resemble me, a man of worth and worship,
To such a clown as Trincalo, a branded fool,
An Ass, a laughing stock to Town and Country?
Art not ashamed to name him with Antonio?

LE. Do not thy actions, with thy rude behavior,
Proclaim thee what thou art?

CR. Notorious clown!

TR. Villain, thou have broke my shoulders.

LE. O did feel him?

TR. I with a pox.

LE. Then thou art still Trincalo.
For had thou been Antonio, he had smarted.

TRI. I feel it as I am Antonio.

CRI. Fool! who loves Armellina?

TR. It Is I, it is I.

CRI. Antonio never loved his kitchin-maid.

TRI. Well, I was taken for Antonio,
And in his name received ten pound in gold,
Was by his mistress entertained; but thou
Enuy'st my happiness: if thou have the ambition
To rise as I have done: Go to Albumazar,
And let him change thee to a Knight, or Lord.

CRI. Note the strange power of strong imagination.

TRI. A world of engines cannot wrest my thoughts,
From being a Gentleman: I am one, and will be:
And though I be not, yet will think my self so:
And scorn thee Cricca, as a slave and servant.

ACT. 4. SCEN. 9.
CRICCA. LELIO. ANTONIO. CR. It Is but lost labor to dissuade his dullness,
Believe me that is your father.

LE. When I drove him thence,
Spite of my blood his reverent countenance
Struck me t'a deep compassion. To clear all,
I Will ask one question. Signior Antonio,
What money took you when you went your voyage?

AN. As I remember, fourscore and fifteen pound
In Barbary gold. Had Lucio kept his word
I had carried just a hundred.

LE. Pardon me, father;
'Twas my blind ignorance, not want of duty,
That wronged you: all was intended for a Farmer,
Whom an Astrologer, they said, transformed.

AN. How an Astrologer?

LE. When you parted hence
It seems you promis d Flauia to Pandolfo.
News of your death arriving, the old Gentleman
Importunes me to second what you purposed.
Consulting therefore with my friends and kindred,
Loath my young sister should be buried quick
In The grave of threescore years: by their advice
I fully did deny him. He chafes and storms,
And finds at length a cunning man, that promised
To turn his Farmer to your shape: and thus
Possess your house, and give him Flauia.
Whereof I warned, wronged you in stead of Trincalo.

AN. Then hence it came they called me Trincalo,
And talked of an Astrologer; which names
Almost enraged me past my self and senses.
It Is true I promised, but have often repented it.
And much more since he goes about to cheat me.
He must not have her, sir.

LE. I am glad you are so resolved.
And since, with us, you find that match unequal,
Let Us all entreat you to bestow your daughter
Upon his son Eugenio.

AN. Son, at your pleasure
Dispose of Flauia, with my full consent.

LE. And as you judge him worthy your daughter Flauia,
Think me no less of his Sulpitia.

AN. I do; and ever had desire to match
Into that family; and now I find my self
Old, weak, unfit for marriage, you shall enjoy her,
If I can work Pandolfo by entreaty:

CR. To deal with him with reason and entreaties,
Is to persuade a madman: for his love
Makes him no less. All speeches opposite
To His fixed desire, and loue-corrupted judgment,
Seem extreme fooleries. Will he consent
To give his daughter to your son, and you
Deny him Flauia? Shall Eugenio
Expect or land or love from old Pandolfo,
Being his open rival? it is impossible.
He sought to cosen you; therefore resolve
To pay him in's own money. Be but advised
By my poor counsel, and one stroke shall cut
The root of his designs, and with his arrows
Strike his own plot so dead, that Albumazar
With all his stars and instruments, shall never
Give it fresh motion.

AN. Cricca, to thy direction
We yield our selves, manage us at thy pleasure.

LE. Speak quickly Cricca.

CR. The ground of all this business,
Is to catch Trincalo, and lock him fast
Till I release him: next, that no man whisper
Th'least word of your return. Then will I home,
And with a cheerful look tell my old master,
That Trincalo -- but stay, look where he comes,
Let Us in, and there at leisure I Will inform you
From point to point. Lelio, detain him here,
Till I send Armellina down to second you.
Cross him in nothing, call him Antonio,
And good enough.

LE. Fear not, let me alone.

ACT. 4. SCEN. 10.
TRINCALO. LELIO. TRI. THis rascal Cricca with his arguments
Of malice, so disturbes my gentle thoughts,
That I half doubt I am not what I seem:
But that will soon be cleared; if they receive me
In at Antonio's house, I am Antonio.

LEL. Signior Antonio my most loving father?
Blessed be the day and hour of your return.

TRIN. Son Lelio? a blessing on my child, I pray thee tell me,
How fares my servant Armellina? well?

LEL. Have you forgot my sister Flauia?

TRIN. What my dear daughter Flauia? no, but first
Call Armellina: for this day we will celebrate
A gleeke of Marriages: Pandolfo and Flauia,
Sulpitia and my self, and Trincalo
With Armellina. Call her, good Lelio, quickly.

LEL. I will sir.

TRI. So: this is well that Lelio
Confesses me his father. Now I am perfect,
Perfect Antonio.

ACT. 4. SCEN. 11.
ARMELLINA. TRINCALO. AR. SIgnior Antonio!
My long expected Master!

TR. O Armellina!
Come let me kiss thy brow like my own daughter.

AR. Sir it is too great a favor. I kiss your foot.
What fallen? Alas! how feeble you are grown,
With your long travel?

TR. True; and being drowned,
Nothing so grieved me as to loose thy company.
But since I am safe returned, for thy good service
I Will help thee to a husband.

ARM. A husband, sir?
Some young and lusty youth, or else I Will none.

TRI. To one that love's thee dearly, dearly wench.
A goodly man, like me in limbs and fashion.

AR. Fie, an old man? how? cast my self away,
And be no nurse but his?

TR. He Is not like me
In years and gravity, but fair proportion.
A hansome well-set man as I.

AR. His name?

TR. It Is Tom Trincalo of Totnam,

ARM. Signior Pandolfo's lusty Farmer?

TRI. That Is he.

ARM. Most unexpected happiness! it is the man,
I more esteem then my own life: sweet Master
Procure that match, and think me satisfied
For all my former service without wages.
But aj I fear you jest. My poor unworthiness
Hopes not so great a fortune as sweet Trincalo.
No, wretched Armellina, in and despair:
Back to thy mournful Dresser; there lament
Thy flesh to Kitchin-stuffe, and bones to ashes,
For love of thy sweet Farmer.

TRI. Alas poor soul,
How prettily she weeps for me! Wilt see him?

AR. My soul waits in my eyes, and leaves my body
Senseless.

TR. Then swear to keep my counsel.

AR. I swear
By th'beauteous eyes of Trincalo.

TR. Why I am Trincalo.

AR. Your worship sir! why do you flout your servant,
Right worshipful Antonio, my reverend Master?

TRI. Pox of Antonio, I am Tom Trincalo.
Why laugh'st thou?

AR. It Is desire and joy,
To see my sweetest.

TR. Look upon me and see him.

ARM. I say I see Antonio, and none other.

TRI. I am within, thy love; without, thy Master.
Th'Astrologer transformed me for a day.

AR. Mock not your poor Maid, pray you sir.

TR. I do not.
Now would I break this head against the stones,
To be unchanged; fie on this Gentry, it stick's
Like Bird-lime, or the Pox. I can not part with it.
Within, I am still thy Farmer Trincalo.

ARM. Then must I wait, till old Antonio
Be brought to bed of a fair Trincalo;
Or flea you, and strip you to yourselfe again.

TRI. Carry me to your chamber. Try me there.

AR. O sir by no means: but with my lovely Farmer
I Would stay all night and thank him.

TRIN. Cross misfortune!
Accursed Albumazar! and mad Pandolfo!
To change me thus, that when I most desire
To be my self, I cannot. Armellina!
Fetch me a looking-glass.

AR. To what end?

TR. Fetch one.
Let my old masters business sink or swim,
This sweet occasion must not be neglected.
Now shall I know th'Astrologers skill: o wonderful!
Admired Albumazar in two transmutations:
Here Is my old Farmers face. How in an instant
I am unchanged that was so long a changing. Here Is my flat nose again, etc.
Now Armellina take thy loved Trincalo
To thy desired embracements, use thy pleasure,
Kiss him thy belly-full.

ARM. Not here in public.
T'enioy too soon what pleases is unpleasant:
The world would envy that my happiness.
Go in, I Will follow you, and in my bedchamber
We Will consummate the match in priuacie.

TRI. Was not the face I wore, far worse then this?
But for thy comfort, Wench, Albumazar
Has died my thoughts so deep in the grain of Gentry,
It Is not a glass can rob me of my good fashion,
And Gentlemanly garb. Follow, my dear.

AR. I Will follow you. So, now you are fast enough.

TR. Help Armellina, help! I am fallen in the cellar:
Bring a fresh Plantane leaf, I have broke my shinne.

ARM. Thus have I caught m'a husband in a trap,
And in good earnest mean to marry him.
It Is a tough Clown and lusty: he works day and night;
And rich enough for me, that have no portion
But my poor service. Well: he is something foolish;
The better can I dominere, and rule him
At pleasure. That Is the mark, and utmost height
We women aim at. I am resolved; I Will have him.

ACT. 4. SCEN. 12.
LELIO. CRICCA. LEL. IN, Armellina, lock up Trincalo.

AR. I will, sir.

LEL. Cricca, for this thy counsel, if it succeed,
Fear not thy masters anger: I Will prefer thee
And count thee as my Genius, or good fortune.

CRI. It can not choose but take. I know his humor;
And can at pleasure feather him with hopes,
Making him fly what pitch I wish, and stoop
When I show foul.

LE. But for the suit of clothes?

CRI. I Will throw them over your garden wall. Away.
Have to Eugenio, and Sulpitia,
Acquaint them with the business.

LE. I go.

ACT. 4. SCEN. 13.
LELIO. SVLPITIA. LE. THe hopeful issue of thy counsel, Cricca,
Brightens this eu'ning, and makes it more excel
The clearest day, then a gray morning does
The blindest midnight: raising my amorous thoughts
To such a pitch of joy, that riches, honor,
And other pleasures, to Sulpitia's love,
Appear like Mole-hils to the Moon.

SVL. Lelio?

LEL. O there is the voice that in one note contains
All cords of Music: How gladly she will embrace
The news I give her, and the messenger!

SVL. Soft, soft, you are much mistaken: for in earnest,
I am angry Lelio; and with you.

LE. Sweetest, those flames
Rise from the sire of love, and soon will quench
In The welcome news I bring you.

SVL. Stand still I charge you
By th'vertue of my lips; speak not a syllable
As you expect a kiss should close my choler.
For I must chide you.

LEL. O my Sulpitia,
Were every speech a Pistol charged with death,
I Would stand them all in hope of that condition.

SVL. First, sir, I hear, you teach Eugenio
Too grave a wariness in your sisters love,
And kill his honest forwardness of affection
With your farre-fet respects, suspicions, fears.
You have your may-bee's; this is dangerous:
That course were better: for if so: and yet:
Who know's? the event is doubtful: be advised:
It Is a young rashness: your father is your father:
Take leisure to consider. Thus y'haue considered
Poor Flauia almost to her grave. Fie Lelio,
Had this my smalnesse undertook the business,
And done no more in four short winter days
Then you in four months, I Would have vowed my maydenhead
To th'liuing Tomb of a sad Nunnery.
Which for your sake I loath.

LEL. Sweet by your favor

SVL. Peace! peace! Now you are so wise as if you had eaten
Nothing but brains, and marrow of Machiauell.
You tip your speeches with Italian Motti,
Spanish Refranes, and English Quoth He Is. Believe me
There Is not a Proverb salt's your tongue, but plants
Whole colonies of white hairs. O what a business
These hands must have when you have married me,
To pick out sentences that ouer-yeare you.

LEL. Give me but leave.

SVL. Have I a lip? and you
Made Sonnets on it? it is your fault, for otherwise,
Your sister and Eugenio had been sure
Long time e're this.

LEL. But --

SVL. Stay, your Qu's not come yet.
I hate as perfectly this gray-greene of yours,
As old Antonio's greene-gray. Fie! Wise lovers,
Are most absurd. Were not I full resolved,
I should begin to cool mine own affection.
For shame consider well your sister's temper.
Her melancholy may much hurt her. Respect her,
Or spite of mine own love, I Will make you stay
Six months, before you marry me. Lelio whispers.

SVL. This your so happy news? returned? and safe?
Antonio yet alive? Lelio whispers.

SVL. And then?

Lelio whispers. SVL. Well. All your business must be compassed
With winding plots, and cunning stratagems.
Look to it: For if we be not married e're next morning,
By the great love that is hid in this small compass,
Flauia and my self will steal you both away
To your eternal shame and foul discredit.

LEL. How pretily this lovely littleness,
In one breath plead's her own cause, and my sister's;
Chides me, and loves. This is that pleasing temper
I more admire, then a continued sweetness
That ouer-satisfie's: It Is salt I love; not sugar.

Finis Act. 4.
Act. 5.
Scoen. 1.
ALBVMAZAR. RONCA. FVRBO. HARPAX. ALB. HOw? not a single share of this great
prize,
That have deserved the whole? was it not my plot,
And pains, and you mere instruments and porters?
Shall I have nothing?

RON. No, not a silver spoone.

FVR. Nor cover of a Trencher-salt.

HAR. Nor Table-napkin*

ALB. Friends; we have kept an honest trust and faith
'Long time amongst us* Break not that sacred league,
By raising civil theft* turn not your fury
Against your own bowels. Rob your careful Master!
Are you not ashamed?

RON. It Is our profession,
As yours Astrology. And in th'daies of old,
Good morrow Thief, as welcome was received,
As now your Worship. It Is your own instruction.

FVR. The Spartans held it lawful, and th'Arabians,
So grew Arabia, Happy: Sparta, Valiant.

HAR. The world's a Theater of Theft: great Rivers
Rob smaller Brooks; and them the Ocean.

AL. Have not I weaned you up from peti-larceny,
Dangerous and poor? and nursed you to full strength
Of safe and gainefull theft? By rules of Art
And principles of cheating, made you as free
From taking, as you went invisible?
And do ye thus requite me? this the reward
For all my watchful care?

TO. We are your scholars,
Made by your help, and our own aptness, able
To instruct others. It Is the Trade we live by.
You that are servant to Divine Astrology,
Do something worth her livery. Cast Figures,
Make Almanackes for all Meridians.

FVR. Sell Perspicils, and Instruments of hearing,
Turn Clownes to Gentlemen, Buzzards to Falcons,
Cur-dogs to Greyhounds, Kitchin-maids to Ladies.

HAR. Discover more new Stars, and unknown Planets:
Vent them by dozens, style them by the names
Of men that buy such ware. Take lawful courses,
Rather then beg.

AL. Not keep your honest promise?

FVR. Believe none, credit none: for in this City
No dwellers are, but Cheaters, and Cheateez.

AL. You promised me the greatest share.

RON. Our promise!
If honest men by Obligations,
And instruments of Law, are hardly constrained
T'obserue their word; Can we, that make profession
Of lawless courses, do it?

AL. Amongst our selves.
Faulcons that tyrannize over weaker foul,
Hold peace with their own feathers.

HA. But when they counter
Upon one quarrey, break that league as we do.

AL. At least restoreth'ten pound in gold I lent you.

RON. 'Twas lent in an ill Second, worser Third,
And lucklesse Fourth: it is lost, Albumazar.

FVR. Saturn was in Ascension. Mercury
Was then Combust when you delivered it.
'Twill never be restored.

RON. Hali, Abenezra,
Hiarcha, Brachman, Budda Babylonicus,
And all the Chaldes and the Cabalists,
Affirm that sad Aspect threat's loss of debts.

HAR. Frame by your Azimut and Almicantarat,
An engine like a Mace, whose quality
Of strange retractiue virtue may recall
Desperate debts, and with that undo Sergeants.

ALB. Was ever man thus baited by's own whelps?
Give me a slender portion for a stock
To begin Trade again.

RON. It Is an ill course
And full of fears. This treasure has inrich't us,
And given us means to purchase, and live quiet
Of th'fruite of dangers past. When I used robbing,
All blocks before me looked like Constables,
And posts appeared in shape of Gallowses.
Therefore good Tutor take your pupils counsel:
It Is better beg then steal: Live in poor clothes,
Then hang in Satin.

AL. Villains, I Will be revenged,
And reveal all the business to a Justice.

RON. Do, if thou long'st to see thy own Anatomy.

AL. This treachery perswade's me to turn honest.

FVR. Search your Nativity: see if the Fortunates
And Luminaries be in a good Aspect.
And thank us for thy life. Had we done well,
We had cut thy throat e're this.

AL. Albumazar,
Trust not these Rogues; hence and revenge.

RON. Fellows away, nere's company. Let Us hence. Exeunt.

ACT. 5. SCEN. 2.
CRICCA. PANDOLFO. CR. NOw Cricca, mask thy countenance in joy,
Speak welcome language of good news, and move
Thy Master, whose desires are credulous,
To believe what thou give him. If thy design
Land at the Haven it is bound for; then Lelio,
Eugenio, and their Mistresses, are obliged
By oath, t'assure a state of forty pounds
Upon thee for thy life.

PAN. I long to know
How my good Farmer speeds; how Trincalo
Has been received by Lelio.

CR. Where shall I find him?
What we most seek, still flies us; what is avoided,
Follows, or meets us full. I am embost
With trotting all the streets to find Pandolfo,
And bless him with good news.

PAN. This haft of Cricca
Abodes some good; doubtless my Trincalo,
Received for Antonio, has given me Flauia.
Cricca?

CRI. Neither in Paul's, at home, nor in The Exchange?
Nor where he uses to converse? he is lost:
And must be cried.

PAN. Turn hither, Cricca: Cricca,
See me not?

CRI. Sir, the news, and have to tell it,
Had almost blinded me. It Is so fortunate,
I dare not power it all at once upon you,
Least you should faint and swound away with joy.
Your transformed Trincalo-

PAN. What news of him?

CR. Entered as owner in Antonio's house-

PAN. On.

CR. Is acknowledged by his daughter Flauia,
And Lelio, for their father.

PAN. Quickly good Cricca!

CR. And has sent me in have to bid you-

PAN. What?

CR. Come with your son Eugenio.-

PAN. And then?

CR. That he may be a witness of your marriage.
But sir, I see no signs of so large gladness
As I expected, and this news deserved.

PAN. It Is here, it is here, within. All outward symtomes
And characters of joy, are poor expressions
Of my great inward happiness: my heart's full,
And cannot vent the passions. Run Cricca, run,
Run, as thou love me, call Eugenio,
And work him to my purpose thou can do it.
Haste, call him instantly.

CR. I fly sir.

ACT. 5. SCEN. 3.
PANDOLFO. HOw shall I recompense this Astrologer?
This great Albumazar? through whose learned hands,
Fortune has powered the effect of my best wishes,
And crowned my hopes. Give him this chain? alas!
It Is a poor thanks, short by a thousand linkes
Of his large merit. No, he must live with me,
And my sweet Flauia, at his ease and pleasure,
Wanting for nothing. And this very night
I Will get a boy, and he erect a figure
To calculate his fortunes. So there is Trincalo
Antoniated, or Antonio Intrinculate.

ACT. 5. SCEN. 4.
ANTONIO. PANDOLFO. LELIO. EVGENIO. AN. SIgnior Pandolfo! welcome.

LE. Your servant sir.

PAN. Well met Antonio, my prayers and wishes
Have waited on you ever.

AN. Thanks, dearest friend.
To speak my dangers past, were to discourse
Of dead men at a feast. Such sad relations
Become not marriages. Sir, I am here
Returned to do you service: where is your son?

PAN. He Will wait upon you presently.

EV. Signior Antonio!
Happily welcome.

AN. Thanks Eugenio.
How think you gentlemen? were it amiss
To call down Flauia and Sulpitia,
That what we do, may with a full consent
Be entertained by all?

PAN. It Is well remembered.
Eugenio, call your sister.

AN. Lelio, call my daughter.

ACT. 5. SCEN. 5.
PANDOLFO. ANTONIO. PA. WIsely considered Trincalo: it is a fair prologue
To the Comoedy ensuing. Now I confess
Albumazar had equal power to change,
And mend thy understanding with thy body.
Let me embrace and hug thee for this service.
It Is a brave onset: ah my sweet Trincalo!

ANT. How like you the beginning?

PAN. It Is o'th further side
All expectation.

AN. Was It not right? and spoken
Like old Antonio?

PAN. It Is most admirable:
Were he himself that spoke, he could not better't.
And for thy sake, I wish Antonio's shape
May ever be thy house, and's wit thy Inne-mate.
But where is my plate, and cloth of silver?

AN. Safe.

PA. They come: keep state, keep state, or all is discovered.

ACT. 5. SCEN. 6.
ANTO. PAND. EVG. LEL. FLA. SVLP. AN. EVgenio, Flauia, Lelio, and Sulpitia*
Marriages once confirmed, and consummate,
Admit of no repentance. Therefore it is fitting
All parties with full freedom speak their pleasure,
Before it be too late.

PAN. Good! excellent!

ANT. Speak boldly therefore: do you willingly
Give full authority, that what I decree
Touching these businesses, you will all perform?

EVG. I rest at your dispose: what you determine,
With my best power I ratify; and Sulpitia,
I dare be bold to promise, says no less.

SVL. What e're my father, brother, and your self
Shall think convenient pleases me.

LE. In this,
As in all other service, I commit my self
To your commands; and so I hope, my sister.

FLA. With all obedience: sir dispose of me
As of a child, that judges nothing good
But what you shall approve.

AN. And you Pandolfo?

PAN. I most of all. And, for I know the minds
Of youth are apt to promise, and as prone
To repent after; it is my advice they swear
T'obserue, without exception, your decree.

FLA. Content.

SVL. Content

PAN. By all the powers that hear
Oaths, and rain vengeance upon broken faith,
I promise to confirm and ratify
Your sentence.

LE. Sir, I swear no less.

EV. Nor I.

FLA. The selfsame oath binds me.

SVL. And me the same.

PAN. Now dear Antonio, all our expectation
Hangs at your mouth: None of us can appeal
From you to higher Courts.

AN. First for preparatiue,
Or slight Praeludium to the greater matches;
I must entreat you that my Armellina
Be matched with Trincalo. Two hundred crowns
I give her for her portion.

PAN. It Is done. Some relics
Of his old Clownery, and dregs o'th Country,
Dwell in him still: how careful he prouides
For himself first! Content. And more, I grant him
A lease of twenty pounds a year.

ANT. I thank you.
Gentlemen, since I feel my self much broken
With age, and my late miseries, and too cold
To entertain new heat; I freely yield
Sulpitia, whom I loved, to my son Lelio.

PAN. How cunningly the Farmer has provided
T'obserue the semblance of Antonio's person,
And keep himself still free for Armellina!

AN. Signior Pandolfo, you are wise, and understand
How ill hot appetites of unbridled youth
Become gray hairs. How grave and honorable
Were for your age to be inamored
With the fair shape of virtue, and the glory
Of your forefathers! Then would you blush to think
How by this dotage, and unequal love,
You stain their honor, and your own. Awake,
Banish those wild affections; and by my example
Turn t'your reposed self.

PAN. To what purpose, pray yo
Serves this long proaeme? on to th'sentence.

AN. Sir,
Conformity of years, likeness of manners,
Are Gordian knots that bind up matrimony.
Now betwixt seventy Winters, and sixteen,
There Is no proportion, nor least hope of love.
Fie, that a gentleman of your discretion,
Crowned with such reputation in your youth,
Should in your Western days, loose th'good opinion
Of all your friends; and run to the open danger
Of closing the weak remnant of your days
With coffeehouse unrecoverable.

PAN. Wrack me no more: pray you let us hear the sentence.
Note how the Ass would fright me, and indeere
His service; intimating, that his power
May ouer-throw my hopes. Proceed to th'sentence.

AN. These things considered, I bestow my daughter
Upon your son Eugenio; whose constant love
With his so modest carriage, has deserved her.
And, that you freeze not for a bedfellow,
I marry you with Patience.

PAN. Treacherous villain!
Accursed Trincalo! I Will -- But this no place,
He Is too well backed. But shortly when the date
Of his Antonioship's expired, revenge
Shall sweeten this disgrace.

AN. Signior Pandolfo,
When you recover your self, lost desperately
In disproportioned dotage, then you will thank me
For this great favor: be not obstinate:
Disquiet not your self.

PAN. I thank you sir.

ACT. 5. SCEN. 7.
PANDOLFO. ANd that you freeze not for a bedfellow,
I marry you with Patience. Traitorous villain!
Is It not enough to wrong me, and betray me,
But 't must be done with scoffs? accursed Trincalo!
And me most miserable! that when I thought
To Embrace young Flauia, see her before my face
Bestowed upon my son! my son my rival!
This is Eugenio's plot, and his friend Lelio's;
Who, with my servant Cricca, have conspired,
And suborned Trincalo to betray his master.
Why do I rage against any but my self,
That have committed such a serious business
To th'hands of a base clown, and ignorant?
I see mine error, but no means to help it.
Only the sweetness of revenge is left me,
Which I must execute: th'houres of's gentry
Are now clean spent. I Will home, and there attend him.

ACT. 5. SCEN. 8.
TRINCALO drunk, but something recovered. WElcome old trusty Trincalo, good
Farmer welcome! give me thy hand, we must not part hereafter. Fie, what a
trouble it is to be out of a man's self! If gentlemen have no pleasure but what
I felt to day; a teame of horses shall not dragge me out of my profession.
There Is nothing amongst them but borrowing, compounding for half their debts,
and have their purse cut for the rest, cosned by whores, frighted with
husbands, washed in wet hogges-heads, cheated of their clothes, and falling in
cellars for conclusion.


ACT. 5. SCEN. 9.
PANDOLFO at the window. TRINCALO. PAN. O Precious piece of villainy! are you
unchanged?
How confident the rogue dares walk the streets!

TRIN. And then such quarrelling: never a suit I wore to day, but has been
soundly basted. Only this faithful Country case escaped fist-free; and be it
spoken in a good hour, was never beaten yet since it came from fulling!


PAN. Tiff. toff. Base treacherous villain! toff. toff. toff.

TRI. Is this the recompense of my days work?

PAN. You marry me to patience? there is patience.
And that you freeze not, there is warm patience,
She Is a good bedfellow; have patience.

TR. You Will beat me out on it sir: how have I wronged you?

PAN. So, as deserves th'expression of my fury
With th'cruelst tortures I can execute.

TRI. You kill me sir.

PAN. Have patience.

TRI. Pray you sir!

PAN. Seek not by humble penitence to appease me.
Nothing can satisfy.

TR. Farewell humility.
Now am I beaten sober. ( takes away Pandolfo's staff)
Shall age and weakness master my youth and strength?
Now speak your pleasure: what is my fault?

PAN. Dare deny
Thy own act done before so many witnesses?
Suborned by others, and betray my confidence
With such a stony impudence?

TR. I have bin faithful
In all you trusted me.

PAN. To them; not me.
O what a Proaeme stuffed with grave advice,
And learned counsel, you could shower upon me
Before the thunder of your deadly sentence!
And give away my Mistress with a scoff!

TR. I give your Mistress?

PA. Did not thou decree
Contrary to our compact, against my marriage?

TR. Why when was I your judge?

PA. Just now, here.

TR. See your error!
Then was I fast locked in Antonio's Cellar:
Where making virtue of necessity,
I drunk stark drunk; and waking, found my self
Clothed in this Farmers suit, as in the morning.

PAN. Did not thou swear t'enter Antonio's house,
And give me Flauia for my wife? and after,
Before my own face, gave her to my son?

TR. Ha, ha, ha!

PA. Can thou deny't?

TR. Ha, ha, ha! Whilst Trincalo laughes, and falls the staff, Pandolfo
recouers it, and beats him.
Have you got mistress Patience? ha, ha, ha!

PAN. Is not this true?

TR. Ha, ha!

PA. Answer me.

TRI. Ha, ha, ha wan!

PAN. Was It not thus?

TRI. I answer. First, I never was transformed,
But gul'd, as you were, by th'Astrologer
And those that called m' Antonio. To prove this true,
The gentleman you spoke with, was Antonio,
The right Antonio, safely returned from Barbary.

PA. Oi me! what is this?

TR. Truth it self.

PA. Was It not thou
That gave the sentence?

TR. Believe me no such matter:
I nere was gentleman, nor otherwise
Then what I am, unless 'twere when I was drunk.

PAN. How have I been deceived! good Trincalo
Pardon me. I have wronged thee.

TR. Pardon you?
When you have beaten me to paste, good Trincalo
Pardon me?

PAN. I am sorry for it; excuse me.

TRI. I am sorry I must excuse you. But I pardon you.

PAN. Now tell me where is the plate and cloth of silver,
The gold and jewels that th'Astrologer
Committed to thy keeping?

TRI. What Plate, what jewels?
He gave me none. But when he went to change me,
After a thousand circles and ceremonies,
He binds me fast upon a form, and blindes me
With a thick Table-napkin. Not long after
Vnbinds my head and feet, and gives me light:
And then I plainly saw, that I saw nothing;
The Parler was clean swep't of all was in it.

PAN. Ojh me? ojh me!

TR. What ailes you? Sir, what ailes you?

PAN. I am undone, I have lost my Love, my plate,
My whole estate, and with the rest my self.

TR. Loose not your patience too. Leave this lamenting,
And lay the Town; you may recover it.

PAN. It Is to small purpose. In, and hold thy peace.

ACT. 5. SCEN. 10.
CRICCA. PANDOLFO. CRI. WHere shall I find my Master to content him
With welcome news? He Is here; news! news!
News of good fortune, joy and happiness!

PAN. Cricca, my sadness is incapable
Of better tidings: I am undone most miserable!

CR. Offend not your good luck, you are now more fortunate
Then when you rose this morning: Be merry, sir,
Cheer up your self, y'haue what you wished, fear nothing.

PAN. May be Antonio newly repents himself,
With purpose to restore my Flauia.
Cricca, what is it? where is all this happiness?

CR. Locked in Antonio's Closet.

PAN. All alone?
Sure that is my Flauia. Is not Eugenio
Suffered to enter?

CR. Antonio keeps the key:
No creature enter's but himself. All Is safe
And shall be so restored.

PAN. O my sweet Cricca!

CR. And they that wronged you, most extremely sorry,
Ready to yield you any satisfaction.

PAN. Is It possible they should so soon repent them?
That injured me so lately? tell me the manner
That caused them see their error.

CR. I Will tell you, sir.
Being just now at old Antonio's house,
One thunder's at th'back door, enters, and presses
To speak in private with young Lelio;
Was instantly admitted: And think you who?
'Twas your Astrologer Albumazar.
When he had spoke a while; Lelio and Antonio
In have command' me fetch a Constable.

PAN. How can this Story touch my happiness?

CR. I up and down throw slimie Alehouses,
Clowdie Tobacco-shops, and vapouring Tauernes:
My mouth full of enquiry; At last found one*

PAN. What of all this? is it possible a Constable
Concerns my good?

CR. And following my directions,
Went to a Tippling-house, where we took drinking
Three hansome fellows with a great Chest; Attach't them,
And brought all to Antonio.

PAN. Well, what then?

CRI. These were th'Astrologers intelligences.
That robbed you through th'South window.

PA. I thought thou had spoken
Of Flauia's restoring.

CRI. I mean your plate
And treasure; pray you, sir, is it not great happiness
To re-obtaine three thousand pounds in value,
Desperately lost? and you still dote and dream
Of Flauia, who by your own consent
And oath is promised to your son Eugeni?

PA, Forward.

CR. Within this Chest Antonio found your Plate,
Gold, Jewels, cloth of silver, nothing perish't,
But all safe locked till you acknowledge it.
And since Albumazar of his own accord
Freely confessed, and safe restored your treasure:
Since it is a day of Iubile and marriage;
Antonio would entreat you to release
And pardon the Astrologer: Thanking your fortune
That has restored you to your wealth, and self.
Both which were lost i'th'foolish love of Flauia.

PA. Reason has cleared my sight, and drawn the veil
Of dotage that so dark't my understanding.
I clearly see the slau'ry of affections;
And how unsuitable my declining years
Are for the dawning youth of Flauia.
Let the best ioies of Hymen compass her,
And her young husband, my Eugenio,
With full content. And since Albumazar
By accident, caused all this happiness;
I freely pardon him, and his companions:
And have t'assist the marriages and feasts.

CRI. Why now you show your self a worthy Gentleman.

ACT. 5. SCEN. vit.
TRINCALO. CRICCA. TRIN. CRicca I ouer-heard your news: all parts are pleased*
Except my self. Is there no news for Trincalo?

CRIC. Know it not? In, and see: Antonio
Has given thee Armellina with a portion,
Two hundredth Crowns: and old Pandolfo bound
By oath t'assure thee twenty pounds a year,
For three lives.

TR. Haj!

CRI. Come in.

TR. I Will follow.

Epilogue.
TWo hundred Crowns? and twenty pound a year
For three good lives? Cargo! Hai Trincalo!
My wife's extremely busy, dressing the supper
For these great marriages; and I not idle,
So that I cannot entertain you here
As I would elsewhere. But if you come to Totnam
Some four days hence, and ask for Trincalo
At th'signe o'th Hogshead; I Will morgage all my lives
To bid you welcome. You that love Trincalo,
And mean to meet, clappe hands and mak't a bargain.

FINIS.

