An Answer to certain Assertions of M. Fecknam, sometime Abbot of Westminster
which he made of late against a godly Sermon of M. John Goughes, preached in
the Tower the xv. of January. 1570.

Seen and allowed.

Imprinted at London, by Henry Bynneman.

CVM PRIVILEGIO.

To the right worshipfuls, Sir Frauncis Iobson Knight, Lieuetenaunt of the
Toure, Sir Henry Neuell Knight, and M. Pellam Lieuetenaunt of the Ordinance,
give these.
YOur worships request was upon Sunday last, as I came from the Church, to
know my lyking of M. Goughes Sermon. Whereunto I answered: that I was very loathe
to find any fault with the sayings or doings of any man, being already in
trouble as you know. You replied and said: that I was not able to find fault,
where no fault was. I had the^ no leisure to make any further answer, you
departing homewardes, and I to my prison. But now considering with my self, yt
I might seem unto you a greater offe^der in holding my peace, than in speaking
my mind: when as saying nothing I might engender an opinion in you, that I am
obstinate, self willed, and have nothing to mislike but mine own proper
fancy. On the other side, to declare my mind, I might signify unto you the
just causes, and true occasions, which I have to find fault withal: not so
much for reprehending other men, as to show the necessary stays of mine own
conscience: I thought good, upon your license granted and obtained, to
express by writing some faulty matter of his sermon, whereby your worships
might perceive in the rest, how much fault he is worthy of for speaking, and
how little I deserve for not lyking of so ungodly points of doctrine. Desiring
you most humbly, favorably to interpret these my notes of reprehending his
Sermon: that is, to proceed of a mind, not desirous of contention, but
desirous of the truth: more seeking to satisfy your request and demand, than
to minister any occasion of further argument.

1 That it is not impossible to keep Gods commandments.
M. Fecknam. MAster Gough in his sermon among other things said: that gods
precepts and commandments given to man, be so burdenous and heavy, as not
possible of man to be observed. So taught long before him the Maniches and the
Valentinians, deenying free will which is the original of that herisie.


M. Goughe. For the proof of his doctrine he brought a familiar example:
likening almighty God and us, to a father and his little son: who being
commanded of his father to go and fetch a great lump of lead, far above
his power, weighing a hundred or two hundred weight, and not able to bring it,
yet making a profer: the father accepts his good will, and so allows the
thing to be done, which otherwise was and is impossible.


M. Fecknam. Math. 11.
Contrary to this doctrine is our savior Christ, where he wills us to take
his yoke upon us, because it is light: Tollite iugu^ meu^ super vos, iugu^ enim
meum suaue est, and onus meu^ leave. Take my yoke upon you, for my yoke is
sweet, and my burden light. If it be a light burden, M. Goughs heavy example
has not a penyworth of good skill.

1. John. 5.
S. John to this effect says: quod ma^data eius graua non sunt: yt his
co^ma^dements be not heavy. If they be not heavy, they be far unlike M.
Goughs lump of lead impossible to be taken up and removed. S. Paul in
rebuking these idle herers of ye law, Romans 2.
which say, they can hear it, but not do it, and fulfill it: writes. No^
auditores legis iusti su^t apud deu^, sed factores legis iustificabu^tur. For
not ye hearers of ye law, be just with god, but y^ doers shall be justified. If
they do ye law, then it may be don, the^ it is possible. Sub esse ad poss^ is a
good argument.

They do the works of the law, therefore they may be done.

Luke 1.
The Evangelist S. Luke of these doers of the law brings a full example,
writing thus of Zachary and Elizabeth.

Erant ambo iusti ante Deu^, incedentes in omnibus ma^datis et
iustificationibus dn^i sine querela: yt is. They were both just before god,
walking in all ye commandments and iustificatio^s of ye lord, without blame. If
s. Luke had ye spirit of truth, when he said yt these two walked in all ye
co^ma^deme^ts: the^ M. Gough by his denial and impossibility put thereof, must
need have the spirit of error and lying. S. John says. Qui dicit se nosse
deu^, et ma^data eius no^ custodit, mendax est. He y^ says he knows God and
keeps not his commandments, 1. John. 2.
is a lier.

S. Jerome writing of these teachers, which say that it is impossible too
keep the law, has these words. Execramur coru^ blaspemia^ q dicu^t, To, 4.
Ieronymus in exposit. Symbo. ad Damas. Et in dialog. Contra Pelag. lib. 1. and.
3. Tom. 2.
impossible aliquid homini a deo p^ceptu^ esse: and ma^data eius no^ a
singulis sed ab omnibus in co^muni posse seruari, yt is. We detest their
blasphemy, which say, yt god has commanded man to do any thing impossible:
and yt the commandments of god may be kept, not of every one in particular,
but of all in general. He witnesses, yt gods commandments may be observed,
of every one in particular: and yt god co^ma^deth nothing impossible: for he
detesteth ye contrary doctrine, and calls it blasphemy, and therefore I have
little cause to like it.

Tom. 10. Augustinus Sermon. 61. de tempore.
S. Austen likewise to the same end says: Deus neque impossibi^e aliquid
potuit imperare quia iustus est: nec da^^aturus est hominem, pro eo quod non
potuit vitare, quia pius est: that is. God neither could command any thing yt
is impossible, because he is not just: neither will he condemn any man, for
that which he could not avoid, because he is merciful.

The contrary whereof to maintain, does blasphemously argue God, both of
injustice and impiety: when he commands us to do that which M. Gough says
is impossible: and condemns us for that which he says we could not avoid.


2 That the holy Angels and Saints of heaven may hear our prayers.
MAster Gough went forward, and took occasion to impugn al prayer,
invocation, and intercession made unto Saints, calling it a devilish Doctrine.
So did long before him Vigilantius the heretic, against whom does write S.
Ierom.

M. Goughe. To mainteyne his error, he made this proposition: that beside God
no Angel, no Spirit, no Saint in heaven, does know what is done here upon
the earth, touching our internal or external petitions. And then says he
what a madness is it to pray unto those, which cannot hear us?


M. Fecknam. To this opinion is clean repugnant the saying of our Savior
Christ, when he teaches that more joy shall be in heaven before the Angels of
God, upon one sinner doing penance, than upon ninety and nine just me^,
which need no penance. But Angels can have no joy of yt thing which they do
not know: neither if they do know our penance, shall they be ignorant of
our petitions. Therefore we be not mad in praying unto them, but they be more
than mad which make the^ so ignorant, as if they in heaven knew no more what
is done in earth: than we in earth know what is done in heaven.

This also is refelled by the saying of the Angel Raphael unto Tobie: Quando
orabas cum lachrimis, and sepeliebas mortuos, and derelinquebas prandium tuum,
^ob. 12.
and mortuos abscondebas per diem in domo tua, and nocte sepeliebas eos, ego
obtuli orationem tuam domino. that is: When thou prayedst with tears, and
buriedst the dead, and forsookest thy dynner, and hiddest by the day dead
folks in thy house, and buriedst the^ in the night, I did offer thy prayer
unto the Lord. All these things the Angel Raphaell did know, when Tobie
thought least thereof. And what? shall we adventure to say, that the same
Angel knew it only? And affirm that no other Angel does know the like? or
shall ye Angels know it and not ye glorified saints of God, Mat. 22.
when he promises of the^ that in the resurrection they shall be like Angels?

Here we may see, yt God does not keep ye secrets of me^ (through distance of
place) only unto himself, as M. Goughe teaches, but does also reuele them
unto his creaturs how far and how much it pleases him. As we read of ye
prophet Eliseus in ye 4. book of the kings, 4. Reg. 6.
which knew al ye secrets of ye king of Siria, done in his privy chamber, and
disclosed the^ to ye king of Israel. For ye king of Siria misdouting lest some
one about him had bewrayed his secrets, a servant of his made answer: Nequaqua^
domine mi rex, sed Eliseus qui propheta est in Israel indicat regi Israel omnia
verba quae lo quutus ^ueris in co^claui tuo: that is, not so my leedge king,
but Eliseus the Prophet which is in Israel does tell ye king of Israel every
word which thou have spoken in thy secret chamber. S. Luke also does make
mention in ye Acts, Act. 5.
how Peter knew ye secret thoughts of Ananias going about to deceive him in ye
prise of ye feeld which he had sold, saying unto him: Anan^a, quare posuisti in
cord tuo ha^c re^? Ananias why have thou put this thing in thy heart? that is,
why have thou thought with thy self, thus to deceive almighty god? Other
examples I could bring, but I leave them for breuities sake, making this a
plain consequent yt if god would reuele unto his servant here upon earth,
such secret intelligence without any derogatio^ of his divine power and
knowledge, much more will he reuele unto his saints in heaven, far more ample
intelligence, both of celestial and terrestrial things without any derogatio^
of his divine power and knowledge.

Tom. 5. Au. de Ciuitate Dei. lib. 20. Cap. 22.
The like Argument S. Austen was wont to make, saying: Si Prophetae, nondum
facta nosse potuerant, per hoc quod erat Deus (quantulumcunque erat) in eorum
more talium mentibus: quomodo immortales sancti, iam facta tunc nescient cum
erit Deus omnia in omnibus: that is: If the Prophets could know things before
they were done, by this that God was, (how much soever he was) in the minds of
the^ as yet being mortal: how shall they not know then, things that be done
already, being immortal Saints, when GOD shall be in them all in all?


M. Goughe. M. Goughe to prove that no Saint being dead ca^ hear us,
alleged the saying of ye Prophet Isai, where he speaks in the person of the
people on this wise: Tu enim pater noster, Abraham nesciuit nos, Esai. 63.
and Israel ignorauit nos: Thou O God art our Father, Abraham has not known
us, and Israel has bin ignorant of us. That is (says M. Goughe) now after
they be dead, they have no manner of knowledge of us, but be clean ignorant of
things done here upon the earth.


M. Fecknam. But S. Jerome has an other interpretation, which I think I may
prefer before M. Goughes saying: Abraham nesciuit nos, id est, Abraham non
agnoint nos pro filijs. Abraham has not known us, that is, Abraham has not
allowed, or acknowledged us for his children. And why? quia te offendimus,
because we have offended thee, says S. Ierom, he says not, quia Abraham and
Israel mortui sunt: because Abraham and Israel be dead: as if thereby they
could have no longer knowledge of them. To this sense of Isaies words, Mat. 7.
our Savior Christ says in Matthew to those that vaunted themselves that
they had cast out Devils in his name and done miracles in his name, Nunquam
noui vos, I never knew you. Likewise too the foolish Uirgines, Mat. 25.
Non noui vos, I know you not. Not that any ignorance should be in Christ, or
lack of knowledge: but he means, that he never knew them for his, he never
accepted them, he never approved them. A common phrase of speech, when the
Father will say unto the leude son: out of my sight I know thee not: that is
I take thee not for mine.

Tom. 4. De cu^a ag^nda pro mo^tuis. Cap. 16.
If this will not satisfye M. Goughe, let him hear Saint Austen, who shows
upon occasion of this place, in what manner the Saints do hear us: Per
diuinam, inquit, potentiam, Martyrs vinorum rebus intersunt: quonia^ defuncti,
per naturam propriam, vinorum rebus interesse non possunt: that is: By divine
power, the Martyrs are here present, in the doings of those that be a live:
For being dead, by their own proper nature, to be present in the doings of
those that be a live, they can not.

Tom. 9. Aug. super Joan. Tract. ^4
To this doctrine he is constant in many places, but I will recite only two,
the one in his Tractes upon John, where he speaks of holy Martyrs and those
that dyed for the name of Christ: Ideo quippe ad ipsam mensam, non sic ^os
commemoramus, quemadmodum alios qui in pace requiescunt: vt etiam pro ^is
oremus, sed magis vt orent ipsi pro nobis: that is, Therefore at the table
(meaning at the Altar) we do not so remember the martyrs, as we do remember
other that do rest in peace: that we should pray likewise for them, but
rather that they should pray for us. A double testimony to confirm both the
invocation of Saints, and praying for the dead.

The other place is in his book De Bapt^smo contra Donatist: Tom. 7. Aug. de
bap. cont. Donat. lib. 7. Cap. 1.
Where he inuocateth the help of S. Cyprian being dead, saying: Beatus
Cyprianus adiuuet nos orationibus suis, vt donante Domino, quantum possumus
bona eius imitemur: that is, Holy Cyprian, let him help us with his prayers,
that our Lord granting, we may follow his good woorks as much as we may.

To this doctrine comes Gregory Nazianzene, Gregor. Nazian. in Monod.
Basilij.
Saint Ieromes Master, where he inuocateth the help of Saint Basil,
saying: Tu o Basili, ex alto nos respice: Et carnis stimulum aut tuis siste
precibus, aut fortiter nos far, ora. Thou O Basil, look upon us from
heaven above: And with thy prayers, either cease this prick of the fleashe: Or
else pray, that we may strongly bear it and overcome it.

Orig. lib. in B. Job. in fin. lib. Ephr. in Ser. de laudibus Marty. Ieron. in
Epith. Paulae. Chrisos. Homil. 66. ad popul. Anti. Tom. 5.
Now, if M. Goughe will term these grave Fathers, and so holy men: like as
other more, Origin calling upon Job, S. Ephrem calling upon the martyrs, S.
Jerome calling upon the famous woman Paula, and S. Chrysostom commending the
Emperor for frequenting the Martyrs tombs, and praying unto them: If he will
call them all mad men, foolish men, popish and superstitious Idolaters: In
Gods name, let him do so: I had lever have a dragm of their superstition, than
a great lump of lead of M. Goughes integrity.


3 That only faith does not justify.
Tom. 6. Au. de Haeres. Haere. 54.
Master Goughe likewise in few words would vehemently have persuaded, like
as other heretofore him, that sole faith, or only faith does justify us. So
did long ago teach Eunomius of that faith which he professed, as S. Austen
recites in his* 6. Tome de Heresi.

M. Goughe. To confirm his opinion out of the scripture, he brought the saying
of the apostle: Arbitramur iustificari per fidem hominem, sine operibus legis.
Romans 3.
We think or determine that a man is justified by faith without the works of
the law: concluding by this testimony of S. Paul, that works do in no manner
of wise justify us: not only those which go before faith, but also those
which do follow faith. For touching any justification by works, he makes the
like condition of them both.


M. Fecknam. First, I marvel that Master Goughe will allow this term only,
when it is not expp^ssed in Canonical Scripture. Next I am sure, that there is
nothing equivalent unto it: for faith without the works of the Law and faith
only, or faith simply without works, be not of one like condition. Saint
Paul excluding works of the law, means works that go before faith, which
do not iustifye. S James in the Example of Abraham, forbidding that faith only
should iustifye, speaks of works that follow faith, which do also
iustifye: that is, give increase of justice: Iac. ^.
Abraham pater noster, nonne ex operibus iustificatus est, offerens Isaac
filium suum super altar? Abraham our father, was he not justified by works,
when he offered his son Isaac upon the altar? To this effect S. Austen
reconcileth these two Apostles, Tom. 4. August. in lib. 83. quaestion. ques.
76.
saying: Non sunt contrariae duorum Apostolorum sententiae, Pauli et Iacobi,
cum dicit vnus iustificari hominem per fidem sine operibus: and alius dicit,
inanem esse fidem sine operibus: quia ille dicit de operibus quae praecedunt
fidem: iste de his, quae sequuntur fidem: that is: These sentences of the two
Apostles, Paul and James, be not contrary unto them selves: when the one
says, that a man is justified by faith without works: the other says that
faith is vain and idle, without works: for Paul speaks of works that go
before faith: James speaks of those that follow faith.


M. Goughe. An other place he brought, to express by Scripture this word
only: That faith only does iustifye: alleging the saying of Christ unto
Iairus prince of the synagoge: Luc. 18.
Creed tantu^, believe only. A place very fitly applied: as if Christ there
had spoken, of the justification of Iairus, and not rather of the corporal
reviving of his dead daughter.


M. Fecknam. First, S. James unto this meaning of M. Goughe, that faith only
should justify, (whereby he means to exclude al manner of justification by
works done in faith) has a place that is clean contradictorie, saying thus
after the example brought of Abraham: Iac. 2.
Videtis quonia^ ex operibus iustificatur homo, and non ex fide tantum. You
see, that a man is justified by works, and not by faith only. By faith only
to be justified, and not by faith only to be justified, be contradictorie.

This place therefore of S. Luke is violently handled of M. Goughe: Luc. 8.
and rather by force wrested to his own peculiar stuff, than naturally
applied to the meaning of Christ. For there is no relation made to ye faith of
Iairus touching justification, as if Christ had willed him only too believe,
and then he should be justified: but to the weakness of that faith of his
which began to faint, and mistrust the power of Christ in reuiuyng his
daughter, after that a messenger came from home, and told him, that his
daughter was dead. This faith Christ erected and confirmed by these words,
Believe only: as if he had said, fear not, misdout not, but put thy only
trust in me as thou have begone, and thy daughter nevertheless shall be restored
both to life and to health agein. This is the final end of those words,
believe only, Creed tantum: which took their effect, not in spiritual
justification of Iairus the father, but in y^ corporal reviving of his
daughter, for any thing yt is there in the scripture expressed.

Tom. 4. Aug. de fide and operibus. C^p. 14.
S. Austen in his book de fide and operibus, showed the beginning and
foundation of this much like heresy, to have bin in ye Apostles times upon the
misconstruing of Paul's Epistles, saying: Quoniam haec opinio tum fuerat
exorta, aliae Apostolicae epistolae, Petri, Ioa^nis, Iacobi, and Iudae co^tra
ea^ maxim dirigunt intentione^: vt vehementer astruant, fidem sine operibus
nihil prodesse: that is: Because this opinion was the^ sprung up, other
Apostolical epistles of Peter, John, James and Jude do bend their drift and
purpose most of all against that opinion that they may boldly and vehemently
affirm, faith without works to avail nothing. If it be faith only, it is
faith without works: if faith only avails nothing, faith only can not
justify.

Likewise he says in his book de Trini. very breefly, Tom. 3. August. de Tri.
lib. 15. Cap. 18.
but pithily. Sine charitate fides quidem potest esse, sed non et prodesse,
that is: without charity faith may be, but without charity it can nothing
avail us.


Of works that be done in faith.
IT is then a preposterous way, and a blasphemous doctrine to extol ye
excellency of faith, by reuyling and extenuating ye worthy fruts thereof:
calling the^ abominable, vile, and stinking in the face of God, as if there
were no difference between works done of infidels and Idolaters, Esaias. 64.
of which Isai speaks, when he likeneth the^ to a filthy cloth: and between
works done of christians, and true believers, of which our savior Christ
speaks in s. Mat. Math. 6.
showing how they shall be acceptable in Gods sight, and rewarded with life
everlasting. For there he makes a distinct conference, and separation,
between the praying, fasting and gyuing alms of the Scribes and Pharisees,
which do it only for vain glories sake: and therefore they have only that
vain reward: and between the praying, fasting, and giving alms of those
which be true members of Christ, which do it only for Gods sake, and
therefore they shall have a reward of him, of life everlasting. If these works
had bin so vile, and so filthy in the sight of God, as M. Gough does filthily
term the^, Christ would never have made for them such a glorious promis: nor
provided for them such a crown of glory: Mat. 25.
nor reserved for them, his final judgment: in the which judgment, not the
faith, but the works of men shall be examined. But M. Goughe does co^temptuously
abuse ye gifts of god, ye works yt himself has wrought in his chosen elect:
and does miserably confound ye good works of idolaters, with the good works of
the^ that be his faithful and elect people: which works he so much esteems,
being done in faith and for his sake, Mat. 10.
as not to suffer a cup of cold water to go unrewarded.

I muse therefore at the sutteltie of this opinion, or rather at the sensible
absurdity of it: faith only, or sole faith to justify. For if he mean by
faith only, faith without penance, faith without baptism, then his doctrine
is against ye counsel of Peter, who answered the Jews, Act. 2.
asking of ye Apostles what they should do to be saved, saying: Poenitentia^
agite, et baptizetur vnusquisque vestru^ in nomine Jesus Christi in remissione^
peccatorum vestroru^. Do ye penance, and let every one of you be baptized in
the name of Jesus Christ, that your sins may be remitted. If he mean by faith
only, faith without hope, then he is against the Apostle saying: Romans 8.
Spe enim salui facti sumus, For by hope we are saved. If he mean by faith
only, faith without fear, then is he against the saying of Jesus the son of
Sirach: Eccle. ^.
Timor Domini expellit peccatu^, na^ qui sine timore est, non poterit
iustificari. The fear of God expels sins, for he that is without fear
can not be justified: if he mean by faith only, faith without charity, he
is then contrary to the mind of S. Paul him self: Gal. ^.
which shows, what kind of faith does justify, fides quae per dilectionem
operatur, that faith which works by charity, that is not sole nor only
faith. Wherefore if Master Goughe will buyld upon this term sole or only,
and yet nevertheless, mean by his sole and only faith, faith with penance,
faith with Baptism, faith with fear, faith with hope, faith with love and
charity: then I say, that the same faith can no more be said to be only or
alone: than a King or Prince being in the midst of his Nobility, may be
said to be there only or alone.

4 That every sin is not mortal.
MAster Gough toward the end of his sermon, did very constantly affirm, that
every sin committed by a Christian man, is a deadly and a mortal sin: and
that no sin is venial, no not an idle thought, as light as men made of it,
much like unto the old heresy of Iouinian, which to make all sins equal,
made every sin likewise a deadly sin, whom S. Austen condemned more than a
thousand year ago, as appears in his.6. Tome. de haeres. Haeres. 82.

M. Fecknam. Let us confer herewithall two sayings of the scripture: the one of
S. John, which says as well of himself and of every just man, as of a sinner.
Si dixerimus, quoniam peccatum no^ habemus, ipsos nos seducimus, and veritas in
nobis non est. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the
truth is not in us. Meaning, that the iustest man a live, is not without
sin: Now if this sin be as M. Goughe teaches, deadly, mortal and damnable
sin, which separateth the soul of man from God, and condemns it to hell
fire: let us see how a man may be called just, which daily commits such
damnable sin.

Nay, let us repeat again that comme^dation of justice, Luke. 1.
which S. Luke gives to Zachary and Elizabeth, saying: Erant autem iusti ambo
ante Deum, incedentes in omnibus mandatis et iustificationibus Domini sine
quaer^la. That is: they were both just before God, walking in all the
commandments and iustifications of our Lord, without blame. He gives three
special notes of their true and perfect righteousness: the one, that they
were just, not in the sight of men, but before God him self: the second that
they kept all the commandments, which M. Gough says is impossible to keep:
the third that they were with out blame, and therefore without mortal and
damnable sin. If M. Goughe nevertheless will say, that S. John speaking of
him self, and of just men, meant by sin, a damnable sin: he must then of
very force make between him and S. Luke the Evangelist a manifest
contradiction: for no man that sins damnably, is without blame, keeps the
commandments, and is just in the sight of God.

To this may be added the saying of S. James where he describes concupiscence
to make a sin in us besides mortal sin: saying: I^c. 1.
Co^cupiscentia cu^ conceperit, parit peccatum, peccatu^ vero cum consummatu^
fuerit, generat morte^: that is: Concupiscence when it has conceived, brings
forth sin: but sin when it is finished, begets death: signifying hereby:
that sin is then mortal and deadly, when a man commits it with full
consent and other circumstances. For if a light passion or carnal thought
steals upon a man by soden delectation, without consent, the same is not a
sin which engendereth death, but a venial sin.

To this place alludeth S. Austen where he speaks of concupiscence that
remains in those which be regenerate, Tom. 7. Aug. lib. 2. cont. Julian. pa.
985. col. 1. littera D.
saying: Ab illo rebellante, and si non letaliter, sed venialiter tamen
vincimur. That is. Of that sin concupiscence rebelling against us, we be
ouercommed, This place is of original sin, and not co^cupisce^ce, and clipped
both in the head and tail.
although not deadly, yet for all ye venially. It follows: Et in his
contrahimus, vnde quotidie dicamus dimitte nobis debita nostra. And in these
(venial sins) we gather, by means whereof we may say daily, forgive us Lord our
trespasses.

Again in his book de spirit. and lit. he writes thus of venial sins: Tom.
3. Aug. de spir. and lit. cap. 28
Sicut non impediunt a vita aeterna iustum quaedam peccata venialia, sine
quibus haec vita non ducitur: sic ad salute^ eternam nihil prosunt impio aliqua
bona opera, sine quibus difficillime vita cuiusque pessimi hominis inuenitur:
that is. Like as some venial sins do not let a just man from life everlasting,
without the which this life is not lead: so some good works do nothing profit
a wicked man unto life everlasting, without the which ye life of every naughty
man is hardly found.

Lutter in assertion. suis.
I might bring here for venial sin, one of Martine Luthers Assertions, whom I
am sure M. Goughe will rather worship than deny, for the pure loves sake which
he bears to his religion: but I will not press him so far: only this I will
say, that Luther did hold there was a sin which was not a mortal and
damnable sin: For he makes every good work of a Christen man to be a sin,
Marie (says he) a sin that is venial. His article was, Quod omne opus
bonum, sit peccatu^ veniale: that every good work is a venial sin.

The severity therefore of M. Goughes doct^in, is in this point very auster,
rather Stoicall than christian like much prejudicial to the liberty of the
Gospel, which otherwise he professes and magnifieth with great solemnity. For
now he makes every light fact, every idle word, every vain thought a heinous
and capital crime, a mortal and damnable sin, a trespass deserving
everlasting pain and perpetual torment.

Proverb. 24
He makes every man at least.vij. times every day, to offend God damnably: For
Solomon writes of the just man, septies in die cadit iustus, the just man does
fall.vij times a day: to deskant no further of the number. That is by M. Goughes
judgment, a just man every day.vij. times does sin mortally, damnably, he
is.vij. times a day the son of perdition, vij. times a day the bondslaue of
Satan: notwithstanding he is just righteous: which is an absurd
contradiction, and a Doctrine fondly grounded upon mere possibilities. If this
be the state of just men, and righteous men, merciful God help us, that be
such pore and miserable sinners.

Upon this opinion must needs follow, that wicked Caine and just Abel: the
elect Isaac and the reprobate Ismael: the well-beloved Jacob, and the hated Esau:
John the rebuker of sin, and the viperous generation of the Pharis^es: Simon
Peter the true co^fessor of Christ, and Simon Magus the malicious denyer: John
the blissed Evangelist, and Judas the curssed traitor: were for the time of
this present life (being all here upon earth sinners, and therefore by M.
Goughes position, all daily in mortal and damnable sin) al in like miserable
case, all in like state of perdition: having their souls by mortal sin,
every day.vij. times at the lest in most wretched wise divided from God, and
separated from him, the only life thereof. As if they had bin al very infidels,
and no more appertaining to the sincerity of faith, and the fruits thereof,
than the Paynimes and the Heathen people. Of whom we can say no more, than
that every sin they do is a mortal and a damnable sin.

But this is the new found way of persuasion to exhort a sinner to repentance,
and to preach that he can not choose but every day sin damnably: to exhort a
man to good works, and to preach that they be all filthy and abominable in the
sight of god: to exhort a man to charity, and to preach ye only faith, or sole
faith does justify: to exhort one man to pray for an other here in earth, and
to forbid ye one man shall desire an other to pray for him in heaven: to exhort
every man to keep Gods commandments, and to say yt it is impossible for any
man to keep them. Would God M. Gough, I wish it with my whole heart, had both ye
grace to preach, and the gift to understand more sou^der doctrine, more to the
glory of god, more to ye edefying of me^, and then more, not to my liking only,
but other men's too: in the mean time, I can not only nothing like it, but
also must find fault with it, in so much as your worships do require and
demand my lyking.

I conclude therefore, having not in ample wise, but co^pendiously, touching
these.iiij. points of controuer^ie truly and sincerely declared unto your
worships y^ just causes which I have to mislike with M. Goughes sermon: which I
could not do at the same time, when you first demanded of me: neither now would
take upon me, but if ye had assured me of free lea^e of license. I refer the
rest of my mind, in confuting the rest of his Sermon, to the discrete wisdom
of your worships al, charitably to be considered. Desiring this, and
requesting, that before the contradiction and absurdity of these propositions,
may better agree together, M. Gough to say that the commandments of God be
over heavy and impossible to be observed: 1. John. 5. Math. 11. Luke. 1.
S. John to say, that they be not heavy: And Christ to say that they be
sweet and light: And S. Luke to say that Zachary and Elizabeth kept all the
commandments. Master Goughe to say, ye faith alone, or only faith does
justify. S. Paul to say, Gala. 5. Jacob. 2.
that faith woorking by charity does justify: and S. James to say that works
also do justify, and not faith only* M. Gough to say, that no saint nor
Angel in heaven can hear our prayers: the Angel Raphaell to say that he
offered up the prayers of Tobie: Tob. 11.
and our savior Christ to say that the Angels do rejoice upon every sinners
repentance, Luke 15.
(which can not rejoice unless they know wherefore.) Master Gough to say, that
every sin is mortal, and that we be every day deadly sinners in the sight of
God. Iac. 1.
S. James to say, yt there is a sin, before it be mortal and damnable sin:
And S. Luke to say that Zachary and Elizabeth were just even in the sight of
God: Luke. 1.
Beside the testimonies of ancient fathers, which do constantly, and uniformly
stand on my side: He having for his opinions the relics of old condemned, and
now revived heresies of the Maniches, Eunomius, Vgilantius and Iouinian,
against whom the said Fathers did many hundred years a go write, as their
Monuments can amply testify.

I desire, I say, to make my humble suit unto your worshippes for my self and
my prison follows both, that hereafter we may not be haled by the arms to the
church in such violent manner against our wills, against al former example,
against the doctrine of your own side ( Luther, Bucer, Bullinger, Zwinglius,
Oecolampadius, Melancthon, and the rest, every one writing and earnestly
persuading, that al violence be taken away in matters of religion) there to
hear such Preachers, as care not what they say, so they somewhat say against
the professed faith of Christ's catholic Church: and there to hear a sermon,
not of persuading us, but of railing upon us. This if your worshippes will
incline unto for charity sake, we shall have too render you most humble
thanks, and whatsoever else we may do, in this our heavy time of
imprisonment.


Here ensues the answer to these Assertions and Objections of M. Fecknam.
Made by L.T.
An Answer to certain Assertions and Objections of M. Fecknam sometime Abbot
of Westminster, which he made of late against a godly Sermon of M. John Goughs,
preched in the Toure the.xv. of January. 1570.
Fecknam.
1 That it is not impossible to keep Gods commandments.

S. Peter. Act. xv. verse x. and.xj. Now therefore, why tempt ye God, to lay a
yoke on the disciples necks, which neither our fathers, nor we were able to
bear? But we believe through the ^^ace of the Lord Jesus Christ to be saved,
^^en as they do.

S. Paul. Romans viij. verse. iij. For (that that was impossible to the law, in
as much as it was weak, because of the flesh) God sending his own son, in
the similitude of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh.

Fecknam.
2 That the holy Angels and Saints of heaven may hear our prayers.

Solomon. Ecclesiastes.ix. verse. v. and.vj. For the living know that they shall
die, but the dead know nothing at al, neither have they any more a reward: for
their remembrance is forgotten. Also their love and their hatred: and their
envy is now perished, and they have no more portion for ever, in all that is
done under the sun.

Fecknam.
3 That only faith does not justify.

S. Paul. Romans iij. verse. xxviij. and.xxx. Therefore we conclude that a man is
justified by faith without the works of the law. For it is one God who shall
justify circumcision of faith, and uncircumcision through faith.

Fecknam.
4 That every sin is not mortal.

S. John. j. Ep. iij. verse. iiij. Whosoever commits sin, transgresses
also the law: for sin is the tra^sgression of the law.

S. Paul. Romans vj. verse. xxiij. For the wages of sin is death* but the gift
of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.

To the right worshipful, Sir Frauncis Iobson Knight, Liuetenaunt of the Tour,
Sir Henry Neuel knight, and M. Pellam Lieuetenaunt of the Ordinance.
THere was delivered unto me upon the.4. of March.1570. by a friend of mine, a
little pamflet written by M. Fecknam sometime Abbot of Westminster, which he
exhibited unto your worshippes, upon demand by you made of his liking of a
godly Sermon preached by M. Goughe in the Toure the.15. of January.1570. Which
when I had red over, I maruayled not a little both at the weakness of his
cauilling Objections, he uses against such godly poincts of Doctrine, as he
laboreth, by forsing of Scriptures and Doctors to his purpose, to overthrow:
and also at his boldness in offering the same unto you. For I thought until I
had perused it, that in so little a treatise, so great ignorance of Scriptures,
of Doctors, of the common Art of Logic, which boys after one or two years
being in the universities, are not ignorant in, could not have been found in
him, who carries so great a name and countenance of learning: Or at the least
if his ignorance had been such, as by this I understand it in deed to be, that
he could by politic silence have concealed it, and not by writing to your
worshippes, (men I doubt not but of perfect knowledge and sound judgment in all points of true religion) revealed both it and the weakness of their common
cause, which so fain he would support. How be it for this latter, in his
Preamble he pretends some cause, as the avoiding with your worships, the
opinion of obstinacy, self wilfulness, want of just matter to mislike in the
foresaid Sermon. etc and this in deed is but a bare pretense. For the
bitterness of his style, and smothe scoffs, which he uses too often in so
short a discourse upon.iiij. point^, shows, he rather by these cauils sought
to rid his stomach of a little choler, than any thing else: or to abuse and
seduce your worships as men altogether ignorant in these questions. But yet I
will think the best, as ye rule of charity teaches me, and conceive hope of
his conversion, for which also I pray with my whole heart. And in case he blame
me as not judging rightly of this his writing, being thereunto requested by you:
let him weigh well his own and last words in his preface unto you, and say
plainly whether a simple and plain meaning may be gathered of them: they be
these. More seking to satisfy your request and demand, than to minister any
occasion of further argument. What means he hereby? Is he rather moved with
satisfying your request tha^ the cause it self he stands in, which he would
make appear to the world to be the truth? Or if the truth of his.iiij.
assertions did more move him, than your requests, why fears he least by his
writing, occasion of further argument touching these questions be ministered?

If he know that he has here by good argument mainteyned a good cause, then
is there no cause why he should fear further debating, but he ought like a
good minister and teacher, stand and offer him self ready prepared to the
defense thereof, yea though it were with danger and loss of his life. But if
he be guilty in his own conscience of the naughtiness of the cause and his
own weak proves, why does he so much abuse your worships with a show of
confutation of the truth? What just causes and true occasions have lead him to
reprehend so godly points of doctrine, taught by M. Gough, I refer to the
judgment of any indifferent and learned Reader. I have used as much brevity
as I could, in aunswering his arguments, that the reading thereof might not be
tediouse to you. And last of all I thought good in mine own behalf, (lest some
might think amiss of me for mainteyning the quarrel, made against an other
man, as one desirous of contention, vain glory. etc.) to proteste unto your
worshippes, that the earnest request of my very friend, who knew me to have a
little spare time and M. Gough too be otherwise more profitably occupied,
forced me to say somewhat in way of an answer to M. Fecknam: that I speak
nothing of the truth of the common cause of religion, which of it self ought to
move any man zealous in Gods religion, to take pen in hand against any that
shall seek to impugn the same. Thus much I thought good to let you understand
of the occasion of my dealing herein, and partly also for a piece of an
answer to such talk, as M. Fecknam in his preface directs, specially too
your worships. The Lord Jesus confirm you in all truth daily increasing his
knowledge and all other good gifts in you, Amen.

1 That it is not impossible to keep Gods commandments.
BEfore I come to your proves and allegations, I must say a word or two of your
colored art and goodly show you make in your first proposition. It is the
fashion of Rhetoricians (as you know) especially when their cause is not all of
the best, and therefore misdoute the event of their action, so to behave them
selves in their Exordium, that they may at the least purchase thus much, yt
they may be heard, some by one means, some by an other, the worst is not by
procuring an evil suspicion too his adverse party. So is your dealing in this
present case, to be better heard peradventure or to make your cause seem to
be better, you give forth that in M. Goughes doctrine of the impossibility of
keeping Gods commandments, he follows the race of the Maniches and the
Valentinians. A grievous accusation if it were true and worthy to cause his
doctrine to be rejected, if all that you speak were a Gospel. But
peradventure you thought you had the sexton of Paul's in hand, when you
presented this your writing to the worships of these in deed worshipful and
godly gentlemen. The matter is thus, not many years since, a good companion
minding to recreate him self with the sexton, charged him self with a
baskette heavy laden as he made the matter appear, directing his way through
Paul's Church, because it was the shorter: where he was met of his mate: and
demanded why in that solemn time he passed thorough that place so charged, a
thing not to be endured, the circumstaunces being considered. This companion
desired him to let him pass, for that he was heavy laden with certain
plate, and therefore the gladder too take the shorter way. The sexton would
not be persuaded, but alleging the Queens profit, caused him to set
down his baskette, and sent immediatlye for such as too whom it appertayned
to have the view of such matters: who thinking to have found some* great
matter, as they had bin informed by the sexton, willed the basket to be opened,
and what found they? for a cupbourde of plate a basket of horns. Thus had he
his jest at the sexton: but you M. Fecknam, thanks be unto God, have not to do
with a sexton: they do well see your horny plate: but because you your self
deceived your self, thinking it to be plate, they have used this charitable
way, that it may be showed unto you, that they are in deed but horns. And
therefore this horn will nothing move them as I trust, Aug. Ep. 95
until you be able to show that the denying of free will, to the
establishing of the grace of God, whereby we are justified from sin, and
saved from infirmity, is the doctrine of Maniche or Valentinian. Epiph. con.
haeret. lib. j To. 2. cap. 31.
This I remember Valentinian and his say, that to us, qui ab Ecclesia sumus,
opera necessaria esse, aliter enim impossible est seruari, which are of the
Church works be necessary, for otherwise it is impossible to be saved,
and that teach you: s^ipsos vero non per opera, sed propterea quod ex natura
spirituales sunt, penitus and omnino saluari doce^t, but they teach that they
them selves are wholly and altogether saved, not by works, but because of
nature they be spiritual: and this teaches not M. Gough. Therefore that gloss
might well have bin left out, if you had more thought upon the truth of the
matter, how well you might have alleged it, than only for a cloak of your
self barely to allege it. For to prove M. Gough a Manichean, or any of his
fellows in his heresies, it will be hard for you, and as impossible as to
fulfill the law: but to prove you a Pelagian, it is easy enough, and as easy
as in Christ Jesus for M. Gough and us to keep the law. But to prove you
such a one is not my cheef purpose: my mind is rather to convince your
heresy, and bring you to the flock of Christ, if it so please God too give
you the eyes of understanding, and a heart to repent. Therefore to do the duty
of good Christians, let us yield our selves unto God to be governed by his
spirit, and submit our selves in hu^blenes to his word, and without al vain
opinion of well or evil defending a question, arrest our selves upon his
Prophets and Apostles, which have and do show us the way to walk in, and
minister unto us the true light, whereby we may chase a way al these
darknesses. This way if we take, no doubt he will show us the truth: if we
reiecte it, why should he not farther punish us with blindness?

So then to come to your first position, That it is not impossible to keep
Gods commandments, I will answer your places of the scripture alleged and
your Doctors, and there withal show out of them both the contrary, that it
is impossible, and so shall I show I trust, that in that article M. Goughe has
taught no ungodly point of doctrine, and so will I do consequently with the
residue. And that it may be more plainly and evidently done, that there may be
no occasion of doubt in any branch of my doctrine, I will first show how
they are impossible, and by what means: and after, how they are possible, and
how they may be fulfilled. This done, I shall sufficiently answer your
places alleged, and if GOD so will, take away this veil from before your
eyes, which is a let unto you that you can not see.

Touching the first, S. Paul dilating and amplifying his probation of the
free justification which we have thorough the tender mercy of GOD in Christ
Jesus, says in this wise: (...). etc. Romans 8. ver. 3.
For that that was impossible to the Law in as much as it was weak because of
the flesh, God sending his son in the similitude of sinful flesh and for
sin, condemned sin in the flesh. The words are but few, and therefore
easy to be remembered, nay therefore better to be considered: God sent his own
son: Why? To condemn sin in the flesh: Why so? Because it was impossible
to the law: wherefore? in as much as it was weak because of the flesh. Why
then we may conclude, Act. 15. verse. 10.
that the Law is a burden, and so grievous a burden, that neither we nor our
Fathers were able to bear, and that because of our weakness. Hereof it is
that he says in an other place, (...). etc. For if there had bin a law given
which could have given life, surely righteousness should have bin by the Law.
It is the work of grace to save and quicken, the receyuers whereof, although
they were extreme enemies to the wholesome doctrine of the holy scriptures
they become friends. It is not the work of the doctrine, which whosoever hear
and read without the grace of GOD, they are made worse enemies. Therefore the
grace of God is not in the nature of free will and in the law and doctrine as
the perverse Pelagian does deceyptfully believe and teach: but at every
moment it is given by his good will and pleasure, Psalm. 68. verse. 9.
of whom it is said: Thou o God sendest a gracious rain upon thine
inheritance. For we lost both free will to love god by the greatness of our
first sin: Romans 7. ver. 12.
and the law also and the doctrine thereof, although it be holy and good and
just, yet it kills if the Spirit do not quicken, by which spirit it comes
to pass that not by hearing, but by obeying, neither by reading, but by
loving, it is observed. For the Law without grace, is but a letter, it
remains to convince sin, but not to give salvation. So says the Apostle. For
if there had bin a law given, Gal. 3. verse. 21.22.
which could have given life, surely righteousness should have bin by the law.
But the Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise by the faith
of Jesus Christ should be given to them that believe. Of this letter he says
in an other place: The letter kills, 2. Cor. 3* verse. 6.
but the spirit quickens. Thou have the letter but thou do not fulfill the
letter. And why do thou not fulfill the letter? Because thou presumest of thy
self, thou extollest thy works, thou know not that the grace of the helper
is necessary, that the precept of the co^maunder may be fulfilled. Behold, God
has commanded thee, do that which be commands: thou beginnest to do, as of
thine own strength, and thou fallest, and so remains the punishing and not
the saving letter. Let us a little more near consider this question, what
these words importe, and what they mean, 2. Cor. 3. verse. 6.
It is not impossible to fulfill the law: The Law and the Spirit are set as
opposite, as killing and quickening, as Moses and Christ, therefore in plain
words the question is this: ^h. 1, verse. 17
Whether it be possible, without Christ: by the works only of the Law which
we can perfectly and absolutely perform in such order and manner as GOD has
commanded, to be saved? And your position is, that we can if we list
perfectlye as he commands in all poinctes fulfill his Law, and so purchase
life unto our selves, without the quickening spirit, without the grace of God.
For if you say not this, you say nothing, as you shall hereafter more
plainly understand. A preventing grace and helping you grant (whereof I will
not defraude you) and after permitted to your own wills you can do what you
list, and keep the commandments, and purchase heaven, and as it follows,
cast Christ away: Now then let us join together: I say that thou O Man what
soever thou art, so setting Christ his death and passion a side, of whose
fullness we have all received, Joh. 1. verse. 16.17.
and setting aside grace and truth which comes by Jesus Christ, I say that
thou can not by any possibility, if thou should live seven hundredth
years, fulfill the law of GOD, and so be saved. For if there had bin a Law
given, which could have quickened, justice had bin by the Law, neither should
a Savior bin sought for, nor Christ have come, nor with his blood have sought
his lost sheep, as the Apostle says in an other place. For if righteousness
be by the Law, then is Christ dead in vain. Let us consider what is the best
of us, Solomon said at the dedicatio^ of his Temple: 2. Reg. 8. verse. 46. Psalm.
143. verse. 2.
There is no man on the earth which sins not. David says, no man living
shall be justified before God. Saint Paul plainly affirms this, The flesh
coueteth against the spirit, Galat. 5.17. Galat. 3.10. Deuteronomy. 27.26
and the spirit against the flesh: and uses no other reason to prove that all
which are under the law are cursed, but this: Because it is written, Cursed
be they that confirm or fulfill not al these words of this law to do them. And
such were me^ not in their time only, but such is our nature at this day: there
is no time nor season, no hour or moment, in which we ought not to say,
forgive us our trespasses, and where forgiveness is requisite, there is no
perfection, there is no law fulfilled, there is no salvation wrought: neither is
it thus to be thought yt these and such like sentences are spoken of men not
regenerate and assisted with ye grace of god: for Paul speaking of himself and
of the contention and strife yt he felt, said: Noui non habitare in me, id est,
Romans 7.18. Beda.
in carne mea, bonu^: na^ velle adest mihi, sed vt quod bonu^ est perficia^,
no^ assequor. Non enim facio bonum quod volo, sed malum quod nolo, hoc ago. For
I know that in me, that is in my flesh, dwells no good thing: for to will is
present with me, but I find no means to perform that which is good. Here
you may see that the Apostle himself was frail in body, and that he had as yet
no righteousness and perfection. That you may know that ye Apostle himself
which would save others, is yet in way of curing, that ye may know that he is
yet a curing, if you esteem his honor, mark what emplaister ye medicine has
laid to the swelling. Hear not me, hear himself confessing, that you may
perceive him teaching. Now may I say to the Apostle Paul: Be not proud thou
holy Apostle: thou must take heed yt thou be not proud. What say thou to me
says he. Hear thou also. Hear what I am, and be not high minded, but fear:
hear how the little Lamb may go in, where the Ram is in such danger. 2.
Cor. 12.7
Ne excellentia reuelationum supra modum efferrer, datus est mihi surculus
infixus carni. etc. Lest I should be exalted, says he, out of measure
thoroughe the abundance of Revelations, there was given unto me a prick in
the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffit me, because I should not be
exalted out of measure. Let us then by this example consider that we are men,
let us acknowledge that the holy Apostles were men, chosen vessels, but yet
frayl, as yet pilgrims in this flesh. No doubt but Paul and David, and the
residue of the most saints that ever were, thought this either the cheifest or
the only perfection, if they knew them selves to be imperfect. And you, says
he, when you have done al, say we are unprofitable servants, Hiero. To. 1. ad
^hesiph. cont Pelag.
we have done but what we ought to do. If he be unprofitable which has
done all things, what shall we say of him which could not fulfill. Therefore
the Apostle said that he had partly received and partly comprehended, and yet
was not perfect, and that he forgate things past, and auanced him self to
things to come. He that always forgets things past and desires things to
come, declares him self not content with things present. But can you show me
any other that was better in this case, than the Apostle? You say the
commandments, of GOD are easy, and yet you can show none that has fulfilled
them al. Answer me are they easy or hard? If they be easy, show me who has
fulfilled them, and why David says in his Psalm etc. You know where I am. I
cut it of because I would be short, and yet must I say something: It follows,
But if they be hard, why dare thou say that the co^mau^dements are easy,
which no man has fulfilled? Mark this by the way, which no man has
fulfilled. And if you think it peradventure faulty to reason Ab esse ad posse
negatiuely, although I might well answer you that in attributo specifico it is
no fault, although it be in indiuiduali: yet have I rather to give you the
answer of him which may prevail more with you than mine, and God grant it
may do so. Dicitis his verbis. etc. You say in this sort: It is an other thing
to be, and an other to may be, or be possible to be. To be consists not in
our power, but to be able to be is spoken universally. That although one be
not, yet he may be that will be. I pray you, what kind of reasoning is this,
ye thing may be which never was? that that may be done, which you witness that
no man has done? to attribute that unto any man, who whither he shall be or
no, you know not, and give I can not tell to whom, that which you ca^ not prove
to have bin in the Patriarchs and Prophets and Apostles. Do not you perceive
that your assertions are contrary within themselves? Either they are easy and
a great number of men have fulfilled them, or they are hard and you have
rashly said, that to be easy which is hard. You are wont to say this also:
either the commandments are possible and well given of God, aut impossibilia
and in his non esse culpam? or impossible, and no fault in the^ which have
received the co^maundeme^ts, but in him yt gave those which were impossible.
Nunquid Deus. etc. Has god commanded me to be that which God is, that there
should be no difference betwixt men and the Lord the Creatoure? that I should
be higher than the Angels? That I should have that which the Angels have not?
Of him it is written as a property, which did not sin, and there was no
guyle found in his mouth. If this be common to me with Christ, what had he
proper? Otherwise your se^te^ce is destroyed of itself. If you think not this
whole tretise which I have alleged, rightly cited against you, show me wherein
you differ. You say that the commandments are possible to be kept, you can
show none that has kept them either of the Patriarchs or of the Prophets, or
Apostles. You say moreover, that if God has commanded things impossible, the
fault is in him and not in us. Seeing then yt you accord in all these points with
them, you must either show some farther reason, why S. Hierome may not be
derived against you, or else give glory to God and confess your error. For to
allege for your self that you there in differ from them, because they only
granted gratiam praeuenuntem, and you both that and adi^^a^tem, it avails
you not. For the patriarks had that, the Prophets had that, ye Apostles had
that and in such sort, that god was unto them semper larguor, semperque
donator, always a liberal giver, and always a free giver, and yet they could
not as you there read. I could here bring in more allegatio^s both out of this
father and other, but for fear of being to long, I leave them. I trust these
few may serve with the help of gods spirit to open your eyes and believe. And
thus have I showed how they are impossible.

Now to come to my second member, and to show you how they are possible and
may be fulfilled, I will not stray far away, neither seek very wide, for that
I need not: I will come home to my first Allegation which suffiseth for
dissoluing of this dout: and therefore I chose it moved thereunto, because I
see S. Jerome use the same order: and in eschuing of prolixitie, our rule is
good: frustra fit per plura quod potest fieri per pauciora: that is vainly
done by a longer way, which may be done by easy and short means. Let us then
see how the Apostle dissolueth this dout. For that that was impossible to the
law in as much as it was weak because of the flesh, Romans 8.3.
(...). GOD sending his own son in the similitude of sinful flesh and for
sin condemned sin in the flesh. Col. 2.13.14
And in an there place (...) etc. and ye which were dead in sins, and in the
uncircumcision of your flesh has he quickened together with him, forgeuing you
al your trespasses, and putting out the hand writing of ordinances that was
against us, which was contrary to us, he even took it out of ye way and fastened
it upon ye cross. etc. Now to co^demn sin in the flesh, to fasten ye hand
writing upon ye cross, to spoil principalities and powers, to triu^ph over
the^ in ye cross, what other thing does it import, than perfect righteousness
gotten, than a performing of ye law? if it be already performed, then was it a
good co^seque^t to say it might be performed, and herein we agree. By who^ ye
Apostle teaches you, by Christ Jesus, and by him only, for so is Paul's
co^seque^t in these words. For that yt was impossible to ye law, in as much as
it was weak because of ye flesh, God sending his son. etc. For ye cause why
God sent his own son, was the weakness of our flesh by reason whereof the law
could not be fulfilled, and his anger appeased. So then this causes us with
confidence to say, O death where is thy sting, O hell where is thy victory?
there is no co^de^nation to the^ which are in Christ Jesus. And in that, ye
Christ is our justification, our sanctification, our peace, we may say yt we
fulfill the law, and yt no one jot passes us nor one prick in yt he forgiueth
what we can not do. Aug. li. j. re^^. cap. 19.
And so you have an other way how the commau^deme^ts are possible. Therefore to
come unto you, I say as you say: yt the commandments are possible, and how
these words are to be understand that elect vessel does most plainly teach us
as I alleged. For that yt was impossible, etc. and again, ^x operibus legis,
by the works of the law no flesh shall be justified. And yt we may not think
it only spoken of the law of Moses, and not of all the commandments which are
comprehended in the name of the law, the same apostle witnesses saying. Romans
7.22.
Consentio legi Dei. I delight in ye law of God concerning ye inner man, but I
see an other law in my members rebelling, etc. O wretched man yt I am, who
shall deliver me from ye body of death. Gratia dei per Jesus Christu^ dn^m
nostru^: it is ye grace of god through Christ Jesus M. Feck. For as we are cast
down by one, Romans 5.17.
so must ye gift of righteousness be by one, yt is by Jesus christ: and why it
ca^ be but by Christ, yt this fulfilling of ye law, Romans 7.14.
this righteousness must be, ye Apostle shows, in an other place (...) for we
know yt the law is spiritual, but I am carnal sold under sin. For I allow not
yt which I do: for what I would that do I not, but what I hate that do I: and
so forth as it follows in the whole text. The nature of the most godly of all
is such, that he can not do as he would. By the spirit he may do much, but
as long as he is compassed with this body of death, he can not do all. So
says the Apostle in this place. Non enim facio bonum quod volo. I do not the
good thing which I would. Hierom. ad Ch^t. aduer. P^lag.
Do not burden us, as you have done in the beginning Master Gough, with the
error of the Manicheans and such like which trouble the Church with their
wicked fantasies, saying, that that nature is naught, which can not be
changed by any means, and impute this not to me but to ye Apostle, who knows
yt God is one, and man another: the frailnesse of the flesh is one, and the
strength of the spirit an other. For the flesh desires against the spirit,
and the spirit against the flesh: and these do so strive and contend each with
other, that we can not do such things as we would do. You shall never hear
of me yt nature is naught, but how the fragilitie of the flesh is to be
reasoned of, let us learn of him which teaches, Ask him why he said, for
that which I would do, Romans 7.19.
that I do not, but the evil which I hate, that do I. What necessity hinders
his will, what force commands him to do things so hateful, so that, not
that which he would, but that which he hated and would not, he is constrained
to do. He will aunswer^ you: O man, what art thou, Romans 9.20.21. Beda.
that so aunswerest God? shall the clay say unto the potter, why have thou made
me so? has not the potter power over his claye, to make of one lump a vessel
to honor, and an other to dishonor? Concerning justice and grace, it may be
well said of the guilty which is absolved, and of the guilty which is
condemned. Take that which is thine, and go thy ways, I will give this man
that which is not due unto him. Is it not lawful for me to do what I list?
Mat. 20. verse. 15.
Is thy eye naught, because I am good? Here if he should say and why not to
me? he shall worthily hear, O man, what art thou that so aunswearest God?
whom thou see toward one of you to be a most bountiful bestower, and
toward thee a most just exactor, and yet in nether of you unjust. Seeing that
he should be just, if he punished either, he which is delivered has to give
thanks, he which is condemned has not to reprehend. Sure it is, that our
flesh is frail, that our nature is corrupt, and so corrupt, that it lets
us, that we can not do our duty, let us not seek how it is so, but as S.
Paul him self did, how ye may be delivered from it, and still cry with our
selves, Quis me liberabit de corpore mortis huius, To. 7.24.
who shall deliver me out of the body of this death? you stand upon the
possibility of the law: there are diversity of gifts as you know, can you
attain to all of them? there are many sciences, as Grammar, Rhetoric,
Logike, etc. Who is he of all us, be he never of so excellent a wit, that can
be a perfect Gramarian, a perfect Logician, a perfect Rhetorician, a perfect
Philosopher, Hie. li. j. c. Pelag.
a perfect lawyer, a perfect Phisician? the excellent orator and lawyer he
says, There are few which attain one, but both no man can. You see, then
that God has commanded a possible thing, and yet that which is possible, no
man can perform by reason of our nature. He has given therefore diverse
precepts and diverse virtues which we can not have all together. To be short
and to make an end of this part, the old saying is true, non omnia possumus
omnes, there is none of us all can do all things: and there is none or very
rare is that rich man, which in all his substance possesses all things
equallye. God has commaun^ed possible things, I grant it. But all these
possible things, we can not every one have, not for the weakness of nature
(that is, as it was first made of God) least you slander God, but for the
weariness of mind which can not have all virtues together, and always. And
thus much touching these two parts, whereby you may understand, how we say
that the keeping of the law is possible. And how it is impossible. This
considered, I come to your arguments.

Your first is taken out of the eleventh of Matthew: and your words are these.
Contrary to this doctrine, is our Savior Christ, where he wills us to take
his yoke upon us, because it is light. Tollite iugum meum super vos, iugum
enim meum suaue est* and onus meum leave. Take my yoke upon you, for my yoke is
sweet, and my burden is light. If it be a light burden, M. Goughs heavy
example, has not a penny worth of good skill.

This is neither contrary to his doctrine, M. Fecknam, neither is his heavy
example void of skill. But that which causes you to think it to be
contrary, is that you deceive your self, and make a Paralogisme as the
Logicians call it, a fallacia accidentis, which I shall be able to show you by
your doctors. For you do not reason with M. Gough in sensu vniuoco, and in
his proposed matter. He taught you in his sermon that to fulfill the law was
impossible, you oppose and lay for an answer, that the yoke of Christ is
easy. S. Jerome upon the same place teaches you that here be subiecta
diuersa, and therefore in your disputation there is no vniuocatio. Your
subjects are Lex and Euangelium, the law and the Gospel, of which two he
says thus. Quo modo leuius lege Euangelium: quum in lege homicidium, in
Euangelio ira damnetur? Qua ratione Euangelij gratia facilior, quu^ in lege
adulterium, in Euangelio concupiscentia puniatur? In lege multa precepta sunt,
quae Apostolus non posse compleri plenissime docet. How is the gospel lighter
than the law, seeing ye murder is condemned in the law, and anger is condemned
in the gospel? How is the grace of the gospel easier, seeing that in the law
adultery, and in the gospel concupiscence is punished? Many things are
commanded in the law, which ye Apostle shows most plainly, that they can not
be accomplished. In ye law works are required, which who soever does, shall live
in the^. In the Gospel ye will is required, which although it have not the
effect, yet it leeseth not the reward. So that by this Doctor, here is a
comparison betwixt the law and the gospel, and as far difference there is
betwixt your two arguments, as is betwixt velle and facere. And mark then, is
this a good argument. Non possum facere, ergo no^ possum velle, I am not able
to do, therefore I am not able to will: or this, Possum velle, ergo possum
facere, I am able to will, therefore I am able to do. Take which you will, these
are your arguments. I am sure you see how little hold there is in them:
therefore confess the truth, give glory to God, and be not ashamed to have
erred, but be ashamed to remain in your error. The gospel sure is easier than
ye law, ye grace of Jesus Christ forpasseth and surmounteth the letter. If you
will consider your heavy burden and come unto Christ, and crave pardon for your
sins, and have a mind to walk in his paths, and where you fall down desire
him to lift you up, to cloth your nakedness with his garmente, you shall find
rest and refreshing. and this is an easy yoke. But if you will needs do,
when he requires the will, you will burden your self with an heavy yoke. I
could allege upon this same place of Matthew Theophilact, and Glossa
ordinaria, which neither of them take the place as you do, but I pass them
over because I would be short. You your self may read them.

1. John. 5.
Your second argument is of like force. Where you say thus. S. John to this
effect says. Quod mandata eius grauia non sunt. That his commandments be not
heavy, if they be not heavy, they be far unlike M. Goughs lump of lead,
impossible to be taken up and removed.

It is I say of like sort, as Nicholas de Lyra interpreting the place of
Matthew does allege out of Augustine, where he says thus. Mandata gra^ia non
sunt, quod exponens Aug. dicit. s. amanti: The commandments are not heavy,
which S. Augustine expounding says, that is, to the loving. S. John says so
him self in effect (...) etc. For all that is borne of God ouercometh the
world. For in deed the commandments being tempered. Au. ^et. 1.1^
with the mercy and goodness of our heavenly father accepting then all done,
when that is pardoned which is not done, Psalm. 130. verse. 4.
and as David says, etc. Chy immecha haselichach. For with thee is pardon that
thou may be feared. Then to the child of God, to him that has the victory
of ye world, that has Emunah, a sure and a stable faith, that believes in
Christ Jesus the son of God, Psalm. 19.1^.
to him the comma^deme^ts are not grievous: nay they are hamnechmadim mizahab
more desirous than gold, vinethukim middebasch* and sweeter tha^ honey, and
this is ye true sense of ye place.

Your third is this. Romans 2.
S. Paul in rebuking these idle hearers of the law, which say that they can
hear it, but not do it, and fulfill it, writes. Non enim auditores legis
iusti sunt apud Deum, sed factores legis iustificabunt^r. For not the hearers
of the law be just with God, but the doers shall be justified. If they do the
law, then it may be done, then it is possible. Ab esse ad posse is a good
argument. They do works of the law, therefore they may be done.

First touching the scope of the Apostle, you are deceived. Pardon me, I speak
it not of malice or to taunt I protest, but for the truth of the matter. The
Apostles purpose is not there to rebuke idle hearers of ye law, and say that
they can hear it, but not fulfill it: But he goes about to conclude al under
sin, and show that every one has need of the glory of God: and therefore
makes this occupation. The Jews can not exempt them selves from this
sentence, because they had the law amongst them. No^ enim qui audiunt legem.
etc. For not they, which hear the law are just with God. etc. And they did not
the law as it appears in the same place. Therefore I marvel how you
conclude out of these words your so strong argument, Ab esse ad posse. If you
will needs follow your own sense and muse upon these words, Factores legis
iustificabuntur, the doers of the law shall be justified: Hear what you have
in Glossa ordinaria. Iustificabuntur.i. iusti deputabuntur: vel iustifient a
Deo, vt sint factores. Non qui ante erant factores, post iustificabuntur: vt si
diceretur, homines creabuntur, quia ipsa creatione sit vt sint homines. Sic
ipsi non qui ante erant factores iustificabuntur quia etiam gentes. They shall
be justified, that is, they shall be accounted just: or they shall be made just of
God: that they may be doers: not which were doers, shall be justified. As if it
should be said, men shall be created: because by the creation they are made men.
So likewise not they which were doers before, shall be justified, because the
gentiles also. This would I repeat unto you, as a thing which you know well
inoughe, because I think you have often read it, for that he says well and
truly, and according to the scriptures, although not very fit to this place,
to the end that you may see how little it serves for you, if you be not minded
to follow my first answer, which I think and hope you will, if you will look
upon the place. And here I beseech you in ye mercies of Christ Jesus to
consider with your self your own state: I think the best of you, I think you
have not the Bible and other books about you: If you had you would never
allege places in such sort, so far from the purpose of the holy ghost, so
little to purpose. I speak it with grief of heart, the Lord knows. I am
sorry to see you in such blindness: right glad would I be to see the glory of
god appear in you to your health and salvation, ^ not to your destru^ction.
Well the Glosa interlinealis goes farther. Non enim auditores legis.i. pro
auditu legis, sed factores.i. gratia iustificat eos vt adimpleant legem, quia
non faciunt vt iustifice^tur, sed iustificantur vt faciant: For not the hearers
of the law, that is, for the hearing of the law: But the dooers, that is, Grace
justifies the^ that they may fulfill ye law, because they do not the law that
they may be justified, but are justified that they may do it. I shall not need
to stand upon these words ( vt adimpleant lege^, that they may fulfill the
Law) for by that which I have said before, I trust you understand how they
are to be taken. Well let us go to your fourth Argument.

The Evangelist Saint Luke of these doers of the Law, Luc. 1.6.
brings a full example, writing thus of Zachary and Elizabeth: Erant ambo
iusti ante Deum. etc. They were both just before God, walking in all the
commandments and iustifications of the Lord without blame. If S. Luke had
the Spirit of truth, when he said that those two walked in all the
commandments, then M. Goughe by his denial and impossibility put thereof,
must needs have the Spirit of error and lying. 1, Ioh. 2. verse. 4.
Saint John says: Qui dicit se nosse Deum, and mandata eius non custodit,
mendax est. He that says he knows God and keeps not his commandments,
is a liar.

No doubt, M. Fecknam, but Saint Luke had the Spirit of truth, and yet has
not M. Goughe the Spirit of error and lying. He teaches no contrary doctrine
why you should so conclude. Well let us examine the words and so shall we
see. Vide Hiero^ lib. 1* cont. Pelag.
They were both just, (...) before God. Not ye god had nothing to lay to their
charges putting Christ's deliverance a side, not that he had nothing in their
lives to find fault withal, his mercy being put a part, No^ est qui faciat
bonum, non est vsque ad vnum: there is not one that does good (in such sort)
not one. I trust you will not so say. Well how then (...).i. Before God? You
know M. Feckna^ which are learned in tongues, that this phrase is borrowed of
ye Hebrewe tongue, biphne Jehovah, and that is so to walk in ye sight of the
Lord, as in the eyes of God. As he said: Si Deos, hominesque celare possum, If
I could or might hyde this from Gods and men. etc. meaning that he and she
walked uprightly, not as dissembling Hipocrites, not in a fair show to the
world as others, but their justice was such as which is done in the sight of
God, plain and sincere, without al dubblnesse. And that is, be leb hatum, and
not* be leb tahur. And this does partly note unto you both Theophilactus and
Lyra, upon this place. I refer you to ye places: I need not to recite the
words. Let us go forward: Walking in all the commandments: Non quod no^
procauerint says your Glossae interlinaris. etc. Not because they sinned not,
but because that they being washed with the grace of God left to sin. I trust
you will not stumble here neither, as though they sinned no more. For if we say
so, veritas Dei non est in nobis, the truth of god is not in us: the last word
is (...) inculpate blameless. How this is to be understood I refer you to
Justinius Martyr, in Solu^q. 141. where he has in effect these words. Iustus ex
lege dicitur, (...). qui cum p^cauerit in ijs quae possunt co^donari,
sacrificioru^ oblatione and delicti redemtione, remissione accepta mundus
efficitur, and a crimine liber. He is said to be just by the law, who after he
has sinned in those things which may be forgiven, having remission by the
offering of sacrifice and redemption of ye offense is made clean and free from
fault, and so are Elizabeth and Zachary said to be (...) blameless. Touching
your last place of s. John. chap. v. I have said sufficient before in the place
of ye.j. John. chap. v. This will I add by the way, yt in deed the knowledge
of God can not be without efficacy, and therefore they that brag them selves to
be the children of God and to have a faith, and walk not in his
commandments, are but liars. Now to your authorities of S. Hierome and
Augustine.

Tom. 4. in ^^pos. Symb* ad Damas. and ^o. 1. in dialog. contra Pel. li. 1.
and. 3.
S. Ierom writing of these teachers which sai that it is impossible to keep the
law, has these words: Execramur eoru^ blasphemia^, qui dicunt impossible
aliquid homini a Deo praeceptum esse, et mandata eius non a singulis sed ab
omnibus in communi posse seruari: That is: we detest their blasphemy which say
that God has commanded man to do any thing impossible: and that the
commandments of God may be kept, not of every one in particular, but of all
in general. He witnesses that Gods commandments may be observed of every
one in particular, and that God commands nothing impossible: for he
detesteth the contrary doctrine, and calls it blasphemy, and therefore I
have little cause to like it.

I will not say as other do, and as I might well, that this is suspect: I have
his mind in the same question, when he was urged with the same argument of the
Pelagian. Possibilia inquit, A Cresiph. adu. Pelag.
mandata dedit Deus: Et quis hoc negat: Sed quomodo haec intelligenda sit
sententia. etc. God gave, says he, commandments which are possible: and who
denies it. But how this sentence is to be understood, the chosen vessel does
plainly declare. Romans 8.3.
That which was impossible to the law in as much as it was weak because of the
flesh, God sending his own son in ye similitude of sinful flesh. etc. and in
an other place he says, Possibilia praecepit Deus. etc. God commanded things
possible, and I grant it: but all these possible things, we can not every man
have. Not for the weakness of nature, least thou slander God, but for the
weariness of ye mind, which can not have al virtues together and always.
Therefore if these be both Ieromes, and Jerome be not contrary to him self,
you must thus understand your place that he is to be detested which says
that God has commanded man to do any thing that was impossible in it self to
be fulfilled, had not ye frailnesse of man's nature other ways bin a let: and
them also that say that every one in particular, being a true believer, can not
fulfill them in him, John. 1.16.
of whose fullness we all receive, and whose Justice is ours by his gift and
grace. And in thus taking of it, I trust you will neither reject my answer,
neither condemn M. Gough as one of that sort. Now to your place of S.
Augustine.

To. 10. ser. 61. de tempore.
S. Augustine likewise to the same end says. Deus neque impossible aliquid
potuit imperare, qui iustus est, nec damnaturus est hominem pro eo, quod non
potuit vitare, qui pius est. That is: God neither could command any thing that
is impossible, who is just: neither will he condemn any man, for that which he
could not avoid, who is merciful. The contrary whereof to mayntaine does
blasphemously argue God, both of injustice and impiety. When he commands
us to do, which M. Gough says is impossible and condemns us. For that, which
he says, we could not avoid.

This place of Augustine is easy enough, and has in it self sufficient to
answer you, not swaruing a whitte from the state which I have made you, and
the true meaning of M. Gough. He exhorts them there unto charity, and
reprehendeth withal the folish tergiuersations and resistances which they made
against ye scriptures. But a man will say, says he, I can by no means love
mine enemies. In all the Scriptures, God says unto thee that thou can: thou
on the contrary part answerest that thou can not. Mark now whether should a
man believe thee or God. And therefore because the truth can not lie, let
man's frailenesse now leave his vain excuses, Quia nec impossible. etc*
Because he could neither command any thing which is impossible, who is just,
neither will condemn man for that that he could not eschew, who is merciful,
it follows. Why do thou resist in vain? Nemo enim quantum possumus. For no
man knows better what we can do or may do, than he that has given us (ipsum
posse) that we may. Therefore if the commandments in themselves are not
impossible, but by reason of our weakness, and God does give us ability in
this our defect in such sort as I have declared before, it must needs follow
that his justice against those that do it not is good and just: and this M.
Goughe teaches. He says also in the beginning of his Epistle. In reliquis
operibus bonis etc. In other good works a man may sometimes pretend some manner
of excuse: but in having charity no man can excuse him self. A man may say
unto me, I can not fast: Can he say, I can not love? A man may say for the
infirmity of my body I can not abstain from wine and flesh: can he say, I
can not love? A man may say, I can not keep my self a virgin: A man may
say, that he can not sell all his substance and give it to the poor, can he
say, I can not love mine enemies and forgive the^ which have offended against
me? Let no man deceive him self (dear brethren) for God deceyueth no man. For
although there be many things, which for the fragilitie of man's nature we can
not corporally fulfill, yet without any doubt we may have charity in our
hearts God so inspiring it if we will in deed. Thus you see by this place, what
we may do, when God gives that which he commands, when he works that in
us that he requires, and yet that we of our selves can not do so much as
keep a virgin, as sell our substance, as give to the poor. And so have I
briefly answered your Objections, without all prolixitie of farther Allegation
of more authorities: desiring you rather to rest your self upon the
scriptures, whereon we may surely ground our selves, than upon the wavering
judgment of men in whom you see verified the common saying, Quot capita, tot
sensus. So many understandings as be heads: and I would it were not so in
every one of them.

2 That the holy Angels and Saints of heaven may hear our prayers.
AS touching this question (M. Fecknam) to say what I think, it is but fond
and curious, as sought forth and invented rather to be some stay and ground to
a scisme, tha^ to edify the church of God. For no doubt had it bin necessary
for us, the holy Ghost would have made some express mention of it in the
canonical scriptures, whereas I am sure you are not able to bring one direct
place. But such is the nature of man, readyer to seek out things of no
profit, and which serve to nothing but to strife and dissension, than to follow
y^ which is left unto them for their profit. The cause of this search has bin
to maintain your prayer to the saints, which how it follows of it, if it be
to be granted, we shall see hereafter. As for that error of Vigilantius I had
rather err with him, than go straight with Hierome, if you can show me no better
proof. To be short in this fond matter, omitting the variety of many
opinions, as Augustines in his book de spiritu and amma, where he says thus:
Ibi siquidem sunt spiritus defunctorum, vbi non vident, neque audi^nt* etc.
There are the spirits of ye dead, where they neither see nor hear etc. and in
diverse other places, and also other men's: also letting pass other questions
which ensue hereof: how far they hear? And what they hear? with such like,
I will lay down this only which I read in Hazzohar, His words in the Syrian
tongue sound thus word for word. Tantum sciunt Angeli de rebus nostris, quantum
illis datu^ est and traditum vt sciant. the angels know so much of our affairs
as is given and delivered to them to know. What that is, and when it is,
neither you can tell, neither any of yours, that you may make your conclusion
available. And for such an uncertainty whereby your consciences can not be
staid to leave a certainty and an vnfallyble anchor, Inuoca me in die
tribulationis, call upon me in the day of trouble. Vnus est mediator dei and
hominum homo Christus Jesus, there is one mediator of God and man, the man
Christ Jesus. Quaecunque petieritis paetrem meum in nomine meo dabit vobis:
What so ever you ask my father in my name he will give it you: To leave I say
these sure holds and such like, for that doutful change, what oversight is it,
what contempt of Gods word? As for the conseque^t you make hereof. The angels
hear us, ergo we may or must pray unto them. I know not how you think in your
own conscience, but to my judgment it is so strange as the Doctrine it self,
yea rather more strange. When you shall be able to make me this a good
co^sequent, I will say as you say: but sooner may you bring heaven and earth
together, sooner may you cause the East and the West to meet, than to bring it
to any rule of a good co^sequent. I am sure M. Fek. yt audire et precari, that
is, to hear and to pray, are two accidents, disparata, yt is unlike and
separated one from ye other, which depend not either of other, vllo aut
praedicationis aut naturae vinculo, either ratione sui, or ratione subiecti.
And as good a co^sequent is this, to say, Craesus est dives, Ergo Philosophus,
yt is, Craesus is rich, therefore he is a Philosopher, as Angeli audiunt, Ergo
angeli sunt inuocandi, that is, Angels hear, therefore they are to be called
upon. And unless this co^sequent be admitted, you have no ground for this
poinct of doctrine. I am loath, I ensure you to s^and in this poincte. For any
man that shall either hear or read this, will think rather I speak it to
triu^phe over you (as God knows I do not, I wish you better) because the
matter is more plain, tha^ that it needs any such demonstration. But less I
could not speak, because you so make the collection in your first allegation.
For my part I do as gladly let pass things not necessary and of small
moment, as other men could be content to have them buried. Well, for
invocation it self either of Angels or saints, let us say a word or two (for
to speak much of it at this present it needs not, for that it has bin
freshly handled by others, and you have seen it or may) and dispatch this
trifling question, which breeds more dissension tha^ it brings profit.
First we have this, that invocation is a piece of Gods service due only to his
honor, inuoca me in die tribulationis, call upon me in the day of trouble,
and of this he is ielous. Honorem meum non dabo alteri, my honor I will give
to none other, and such a piece of Gods service it is, that it carries a belief
with it in him on whom ye call, quo modo inuocabunt, in queas non crediderunt?
To. 10.14.
how shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? in whom you must
believe, you are not I trust to learn in this age, but thus much by the way,
he must be God, in quem credis, in whom you believe. It is not cui, nor de
quo to whom you give credit, nor of whom you believe well. But (...) in quem
that is, in whom If you can find any other invocation but this, I would gladly
see it: non quaero exemplum, quaero* authoritatem, I seek not or demand of
you an example or fact, but authority. I demand no more of you, than you may
justly of me: of our rest and certeyntie, I give you these: Inuoca me in die
tribulationis, call on me in the day of trouble. And our Savior Christ, when
you will pray, pray thus: Our father etc. Not that no other form of prayer
may be used, but showing to whom the prayer must be directed. And again,
whosoever calls be schem Jehovah, upon the name of the Lord, he shall be
saved. And how this is to be taken if we neither learn of Christ nor
Christian, an old Jew will teach us, Rabbi Iodan.
Rabbi Iodan, god give us all this confession. His words recited in Midrasch
tillim be mizmor 4 are these Basar vadam iesch lo pitron higiay lo yeth tzarah
eno nichnas lephanau pithom ella ba veyamad al pethach pitrono ve kore le abdo
vehu omer, peloni al happethah: ve hacchadosch baruch hu eno chen. higia eth
tzara le Israyl lo iehe kore lo le Gabriel, ve lo le Michael, ella kore otho,
veh one otho hare hu daamar, colascher ikra be schem Jehovah immalet. That is,
flesh and blood has a patron in ye time of his necessity, he will not
streightway go into his presence, but comes and stands at the door of his
patron, and calls his servant, and he tells his Master that there is one
at the door. But with God we must not so do. At what time Israel is in
affliction or necessity, he must neither call to Gabriel nor to Michael, but
he must call upon God, and he hears him: and this is if that is said:
whosoever calls on the name of ye Lord, he shall be saved. But as I said, I
will not be long herein because it were but Actum agere, to do that is already
done: my purpose is but to run over your Arguments.

Your first is this: To this opinion is clean repugnant the saying of our
Savior Christ when he teaches that more joy shall be in heaven before the
Angels of God upon one sinner doing penance, than upon nintie and nine just men
which need no penance.

First, not to meddle with the sense of the place, which Christ expresses by
these words of joy, applying his doctrine unto our capacity, I may well answer
you with a simple denial. The co^sequent is naught, Angels shall rejoice upon
the conversion of a sinner, ergo Angels do hear and know whatsoever we ask
and pray: A futuro ad praesens in meris contingentibus, you know non valet
argumentum. And it is not a consequentibus as you take it. For those Arguments
must be in pari tempore. As for Example: Haec mulier pariet, ergo concipiet,
this woman shall bring forth, therefore she shall conceive. And it is naught
to say pariet, Ergo concepi^, she shall bring forth, therefore she has
conceived: unless there be limitatio temporis, a limitation and restrainte to
the certain time in which she conceived: and yt in ijs quae sunt ex
necessitate materiae. But in ^ere co^tingentibus, they must be always ^iusdem
temporis* at one selfsame time, as ^ras pluet, ergo ^ras nubes erunt, to morrow
it shall rain, therefore to morrow there shall be clouds. But to say ^ras
pluet, ergo hodie nubes sunt, to morrow it shall rain, therefore there are clouds
this day, this is no reason. For agreement of time being set posito
antecedente, sequitur co^sequens etiam in continge^tibus. If one rejoice it is
a consequent that he hears or has heard, but to say, he shall rejoice to
morrow, ergo, he hears to day. I can not tell how this consequent hangs
together. What if I answer you, facta reuelat^ Deus, no^ facienda: that is to
say, God reuealeth things done, and not to be done. What ca^ you then say? Your
place imporeth, ye God will make manifest to Angels, how a sinner has repented,
not that he will show to them that they shall repent. And so had your Argument
ben good: He will make them rejoice for the conversion of a sinner, therefore he
will show the^ ye conversion of a sinner. I say unto you, your place does
importe this, yt facta reuelat Deus, non facienda. They shall rejoice for a
sinner returned, not for a sinner that shall return. I know that God has
revealed unto his servant things past and things to come, but when he does
it, or whether he does it always, I say you know not, and therefore your
collection is naught. Where you say, neither if they know our penance, shall
they be ignorant of our petitions: I say your collection is naught, although
I touch not ye false kind of reasoning, which is a conclusione hypothetica ad
categoricam, in materia co^tinge^ti. And therefore you are mad men in praying
unto the^, unless you have some more sure and certain ground than this: and
they are no mad men which make them so ignorant: for unless god does reveal
it unto them, they know in a manner no more than we do: and when he does
reveal it unto them and how much, and in what cases, when you can certify me
and others, we will believe it. In the mean season if we suspend our faith until
we have a better rest for it, I pray you do not call us mad men. But now for
the sense of the place. Does he not in those three parables set forth unto us
ye ^are that he has of his church, in that he of his singular love seeks us
when we go astray from him: He laboreth to find us, when we be lost: and is
ready to receive us when we turn unto him: and thereby also advertise us of
our duty, to seek the help and safety of each other, not to condemn the
wa^derers which go astray but by his example to seek means to bring them unto
Christ, that in so doing being members both of one body, we may rejoice
together and glorif^e God, we may have that consolation and comfort, which
brethren ought to have, and especially those which are the children of God? To
move us to this duty, he sets before us ye doing of that part of the
church which is better, and which is in heaven, he sets before us I say the
doing of the Angels, who as they be members of this body, so do they rejoice,
when they see that consent and conformity in the members, which ought to be in
so precious a body. If then they be joyous and glad that sinners do repent,
what ought we to do, which are present with them, and seeing their infirmities
may consider our own, and by mercy showed to them, be more confirmed in the
graces of God? This I say is the sense of the place. Now then because we are
here instructed of the charity and love, which is and ought to be in ye
church of God and members of Christ's body, because there is a true joy and
gladness each with other, when God bestows his graces, which before seemed
to be shut up: because this (...) that is, natural and mutual agreement, is
not only in the members on the earth, but in those also which are in heaven:
will you therefore conclude that things done here on earth, and words spoken,
are heard and known unto them at all times and seasons, as if they were heads
and not members, Gods and no Angels? For to see our hearts and thoughts, to
hear our sighs and words is a property of Gods nature, given unto no
Angel, but when he reuealeth it unto him: and that not always, but as he
shall think it expedient both for them and us: and as for such revelations,
this place shows it not, this only is here declared, what charity and love
there is in the true members of Christ his body, and the fruict thereof, God
working as well in them as in us a knowledge of things done, and gladness
therefore. And thus much touching this place of Luke.xv. whereof you can
neither conclude that they do continually here us, neither if they did, that
we should pray therefore unto them.

Your next argument is out of Tobie, 12. This also is refelled by the saying of
the Angel Raphaell unto Tobie. Quando orabas cum lachrymis and sepeliebas
mortuos, etc. When thou prayedst with tears, and burriedst the dead, and
forsokest thy dynner, and hiddest by the day dead folks in thy house, and
buriedst them in the night, I did offer thy prayer unto the Lord. All these
things the Angel Raphael did know, when Tobie thought lest hereof: and what?
shall we adventure to say, that the Angel knew it only, and affirm that no
other Angel does know the like, or shall the Angels know it, and not the
glorified saints of God, when he promises of them, that in the resurrection
they shall be like Angels? Matt. 22.

I muse at this kind of dealing (M. Fecknam) I might say unto you, vna hirundo
non facit ver, one swalow makes not so^mer: but that is not the matter: to see
all things that are done of us, or to hear us, is it natura Angelorum, the
nature of the Angels? or is it speciale donum, a special gift. What kind of
reasoning is this, in accidentibus commumbus to reason ab vno indiuiduo ad
speciem, or a specie ad genus. Were this a good argument to say, Socrates
Philosophus vere sentit de summo bono, Ergo, omnes Philosophi vere sentiunt de
summo bono? Socrates the Philosopher judges truly or a right of the cheifest
good, or happiness, therefore all Philosophers judge and think truly thereof.
Yours is the same. Raphaell saw his doing, therefore all ye Angels saw Tobie his
doings, and per consequentiam, consequently, they see ours. I see not (Master
Fecknam) why I may not deny consequentiam and consequens, that is, both your
conclusion and that which you would infer thereof. For neither does it
follow, if Raphaell saw Tobie, therefore all did see him, neither if they saw
his doyngs, therefore they see ours. For as I said, it is neither the nature of
an Angel, neither the property of an angel: of which two there must be one
to make an argument good a specie ad genus, or by an induction. Thus much
touching your kind of reasoning, in grou^ding an article of religion, which
has no other ground of scripture for his warrant. I maruayle that the angel
which appeared to Cornelius made nothing to your purpose. Act. 10. ver. 3
For he saw him in a vision, and declared unto him how his matters went.
Therefore you might have concluded some thing. But will you know, why he is out
of your roll? Because he said, thy prayers and thine alms are come up into
remembrance before God: and did not say, I did carry up thy prayers. And yet I
wisse you might have as well concluded by this, ergo the angels know what we
do. Even both a like, when God sends them, when god opens unto them, I
think they know. And surely to be noted it is, that the angel says not, I
knew, I saw, I carried thy prayers: but, thy prayers are come, to give us to
understand that as they are but messengers, so we can not, nor ought assure
our selves more of the^ than their master willed them to reuele unto us. Now to
your author, who as you allege is Tobie, whose authority cited as scripture
I deny it, I find no such author in my Bible. I mean not the Geneua Bible,
That is, the 5. books of Moses, the first Prophets, the last Prophets, the
little volumes, the holy wrytings.
whereat diverse of you list to jest, but I would you could show a better in
our tongue, or justly correct it: I mean that Bible, which is divided into
these parts, CHAPTER CHAPTER T. NR. NA. MG. Hac: If he were in this number, I would
not, neither could I reject him as not scripture, as not written with the
singer of God: but because I find him not, I dare not be so bold as to make
him fellow with ye holy ghost, to ground my faith upon him as upon the holy
scriptures: and how you ought to read him and such others and use him Hierom
does teach you, I need not repeat it. And this for Tobie. Now touching your
allegatio^s out of ye 4. Reg. 6 of the revelation yt was given to Elizeus,
touching the secrets of the king of Syria, and Act. v. the revelation to Peter
of ye secret thoughts of Ananias, I know not to what purpose they make
touching your question: these places and many mo show unto us how bou^tifully
God has poured his spirit upon his servants the Prophets and Apostles at
diverse and sundry times, for the help and comfort of his church: but to prove
either an intelligence continual yt the Angels have of our affairs, or for us
to pray unto them, they serve nothing at all. I beseech you what will you
conclude: God reveled the secrets of the king of Syria to Elizeus, and of
Ananiss to Peter. Therefore he reuealeth to ye Angels our doings, therefore we
must pray to them and to the Saints? What dealing is this? You heap here an
other place of S. Augustine to as much purpose Si Prophetae, To. 5. de ciuit
Dei, lib. 20. cap. 22.
nondum facta nosse po^uerunt, per hoc quod erat Deus, (quantulucumque erat) in
eorum mortalium mentibus, quo modo immortales sancti, iam f^cta, tum nescient,
cum erit Deus omnia in omnibus? If the Prophets could know things before they
were done, by this that God was (how much so ever he was) in the minds of them
as yet being mortal, how shall they not know then things that be done already
being, immortal saints, when God shall be in them all in all? You see
evidently yt he speaks here how and in what case they shall be in the latter
day, when indeed yt shall be rightly verified, yt he shall be all in all. And
what does this impugn ye saying of M. Gough? who denies not yt in ye latter
day we shall see God face to face, we shall most fully see and know that which
neither eye has seen, neither ear has heard, neither at any time has it
entered into ye heart of man. A more full knowledge, a more ample sight, a better
understanding tha^ this you ca^ not have. This we grant, yours we deny. We
grant this also, yt we may make an end, and come to your arguments) that the
angels which God has commanded to wait upon us, Heb. 1.14. Psalm. 91.11.
Psalm. 34.7
to guide us in all our ways, to be round about us, to admonish us and comfort
us, ^o watch perpetually for our sauegard, these angels see and know what we
do, from the vtmoste action, to the inwardst thought, if God so dispense unto
them, and make them his ministers, who is the sole and only searcher of hearts
and raines, knower of thoughts and minds: and yet follows it not, that we
must pray to them: neither yet, that other Saints do know what we do or
think. I say the dead, the saints, do no more know what we do here while it
is in doing, than we know what they do: and when they know any thing, it is by
after information, or by the ministry of the Angels, as in like case they
minister unto us. So that certainty you can have none to found your prayers
upon: for while you are praying, they do not know.

And although you may allege me some visions which may seem to confirm your
purpose, putting the case I should grant them: yet can you no more prove that
they know and understand our doings, than if in your dream you should have a
thing opened unto you by one which was sleeping when you slept, and nothing
thought of you. What if they have care for us being there, as requisite too,
for that they be members with us, and charity cease not: Do they therefore
know what we do? we have care of them also, and yet we know not what they
do. We love them as when they were here, we laud and magnify God, that he
has dealt so lovingly with the^, we rejoice that they are already partakers of
that, which we look and hope for, running the same race of faith and fear of
God. This care I say we have of them, thus in charity we are affectioned
toward them, and yet know we not what they do: no more do they, what we
do. Well, now let us come to your Arguments of Doctors.

Master Gough, say you, to prove that no Saints being dead can hear us,
alleged the saying of the Prophet Isai. etc. Abraham nesciuit nos. etc. That
is, says M. Goughe, Now after they be dead they have no manner of knowledge of
us, but be clean ignorant of things done here upon the earth. But S. Hierome
has an other interpretation, which I think I may prefer before master Goughs
saying, Abraham nesciuit nos.i. Abraham non agnouit nos pro filijs. Abraham
has not knowue us, that is, Abraham has not allowed or acknowledged us for
his children: and why? Quia te offendimus: because we have offended thee, says
S. Ierom. He says not, quia Abraham and Israel mortui sunt. Because Ahraham
and Israel be dead, as if thereby they could have no longer knowledge of them?

What if S. Hierom have an other, is M. Goughes therefore naught? Nay, but you
had rather prefer S. Ieromes. Do you think that M. Gough has no authority for
his? Do you think that he has not as good as S. Hierome? If you think so, I
will give you to understand the contrary. If you do not think so, why do you
conceal the truth, and stand rather upon man than upon the word of God? This
is the misery that you have, that whilst you will not hearken to the
scriptures, but what this man or that man says, you waver up and down, now
alleging one man, now an other, not knowing well where to stand. Well, I will
bring you two, neither to be misliked in such cases, the one comparable to
Hierome in all respects. First Kimki on this place says: al derech, abi ve
immi. etc. On this sort is it spoken in an other place, Pater meus and matter
mea dereliquerunt me, Dominus autem assumpsit me. Quamuis enim pater noster.
Abraham multis iam preterlapsis seculis mortuus sit, and pater carnalis non
nouerit filium aut nepotem suum nisi dum viuit, tu tamen pater noster viuis and
duras de seculo in seculum, ita vt opus non sit nobis clamare nisi ad te, and
per omnes aetates tam quae preterierunt quam quae futura sunt, tu es pater
noster, tu redemptor noster ex omni afflictione and in perpetuum nome^ ^uum
erit super nos: That is, my father and my mother have forsaken me, but ye Lord
has gathered me up. For although our father Abraham were dead many many years
ago, and a carnal Father does not know his son or his nephew but while he
lives, yet thou O father live and remainest for ever, so that we have no
need to cry unto any other but unto thee, and through out al ages as well
forepassed as to come, thou art our father, thou art our redeemer out of all
trouble, and thy name shall be upon us for ever. The other is S. Augustine,
Cap. 13.
whom you need not to have concealed, if you had minded the truth. But if you
should have alleged them both, you could not have told which way to have
gone. Giving his definite mind and sentence upon these matters and questions,
he says thus: vt volet accipiat quisque quod dicam. etc. Let every man take as
he lists, that which I will say: If the souls of the departed did meddle
with the affairs of the living, and did speak unto us when we see them in
visions, to hold my peace of other, my loving mother would no night forsake me,
which followed me by Sea and by land, that she might live with me. For God
forbid that she should be made with a happy life so cruel, that when any thing
greeueth my heart, she should not comfort her heavy son, whom she would
never see sad. But surely that is true which the godly Psalm says: My father
and my mother have forsaken me, but the Lord has gathered me up. Therefore if
our fathers have forsaken us, how do they communicate with our cares and
affairs? and if our Parents do not communicate or do not meddle, what other are
there of the dead, which know what we do, and what we suffer? Esaias the Prophet
says, for thou art our Father: For Abraham has forgotten us, and Israel
does not know us. If so great Patriarchs did not know what was done to the
people begotten of them, to whom believing God, the people was promised of
their stock, how do the dead know and help the affairs and doings of others?
How say we yt they were well dealt withal, which died before adversity came,
which followed their death, if so be that also after death they feel what so
ever things come to pass in the calamities of man's life? Or peradventure we
err in so saying, and we think those quiet whom the unquiet life of the
living does grieve. And so forth alleging as you know to the same purpose the
promise made to Josias, and so concluding says thus. Ibi ergo sunt spiritus
defunctorum, vbi non vident quaecunque aguntur, aut eueniunt in ista vita
hominibus. Therefore the souls of the dead are there, where they see not
whatsoever things are done or come to men in this life. Thus then you neaded
not have in such sort cast off Master Gough, as though it were a heavy
comparison betwixt him and Hierom. He is as you see, as well to be thought of as
Hierome, in that he has for his part the whole Scriptures, these two learned
men. Other I do not reckon up, you your self acknowledge in your self that I
might bring more: But in this variety of men, what certainty ca^ you have for
your conscience, if you do not at the length come to the Scriptures? Wherein
you can not find one word well taken, whereby you may prove that the dead do
know our doings, unless it be by espetiall Revelation, or work of GOD, which
you can never draw to a rule.

As for the prosecuting of that manner of speech, I do not know you, for, I
do not acknowledge you: I think there is no man so enuyous, but will grant
you that truth. Sed quorsum illa, to what purpose is that? Although it be so
taken in very many places, yet why it should be so taken there I see no reason.
I speak what I think, I know there be interpreters as well one way as other.
But the circumstance of the text in my mind draws that way. You go further.

If this will not satisfy master Gough, To. 4. de cura agend. pro mort. cap.
16.
let him hear Saint Augustine: who shows upon occasion of this place, in
what manner the Saints do hear us. Per diuinam inquit potentiam Martyrs
viuorum rebus intersunt. etc. By divine power the Martyrs are here present
in the doings of those that be alive, for being dead by their own proper
nature to be present in the doings of those that be alive, they can not.

Now you some thing change your state, and make Duo predicata, where before
you made but one. Your first conclusion was, That the Saints and Angels may
or do hear our Prayers: Now you put in may by divine power hear our Prayers:
And so you commit a fault which is called, A secundum quid ad simpliciter.
Again in Accidentibus communibus a specie ad genus, saying thus. The Martirs
do hear us: therefore al Saints. For your Doctor in your own place alleged,
makes a difference betwixt them in this matter and says. Non igitur ideo
putandum est viuorum rebus, quoslibet interesse posse defunctos, quoniam
quibusdam sanandis vel alliunandis martyrs adsunt: sed ideo potius
intelligendu^ est, quod per diuinam etc. Therefore it is not for that cause to
be thought that every one that is dead, can be present in the doings of those
that be alive: because the Martyrs are present in healing and helping of
some. But therefore rather it is to be understood, that by the divine power
the martyrs are present in the doyngs of those that be alive, because the
dead by their own proper nature can not be present in the doyngs of those
that be a live. He concludes a clean contrary position to yours, saying
that the martyrs are present, because the saints can not be. And how the
Martyrs be present he shows in these words, per diuinam potentiam, by
divine power. For this is not orderly, but as he said before, veru^ ista
diuinitus exhibentur, long aliter quam sese habet vsitatus ordo singulis
creaturarum generibus attributus But these are exhibited from God far
otherwise, than the accustomed manner is, which is given to all kind of
creatures. For not because that water was sodaynely turned intoo wine when God
would: therefore we ought not to discern what water is in the proper order of
elements, from the singularity and strangeness of this heavenly work. Take
the best of this for your purpose, yet can you not come to that you would, to
make any certain rule, no not in the very martyrs. And so likewise touching
this matter, he confesses of him self, that it passes his understanding.
Leave therefore these vain speculations, and content your self with that
which God has taught you: you are sure that Christ does and will hear you,
when soever you call on him in truth and verity: you are sure that what so
ever you ask in his name, Ioh. 14.
it shall be given you, that the Father may be glorified: why then, rest upon
this surety, go not a stray when you may go right: differ not your self to
the night, when you may walk in the light.

After this you descend from debating the matter by scripture and reason and
authorities ad factu^, what they did (as though this question betwixt us and
you were facti, what has bin done, and not rather as it is in deed, iuris,
what of right and lawfully may and ought to be done) to which purpose you
allege two places out of Augustine, one out of Gregory Nazianzene, one out
of Origin, one out of Ephrem, one of Hierome, one of Chrisostom, whose doings
because they have no ground in gods word, neither better and more sure reason
than S. Augustine alleges, which are not sufficient for me to rest my
conscience von: Cap. 14.15.16. De cura pro mor. ag.
and yet your promises being granted, ye conclusion is very wide. I wish you
better to consider the case you stand in, and pardon me that I disalowe them.
For this I learn by Augustine, that to speak in genere of the departed,
nescire quidem mortuos quid hic agatur, That the dead can not tell what is done
here, whilst it is doing, and if they know, it is after by relation (says he)
of the^ which go from hence unto them: and yet not all, but such things as they
are suffered to tell, and which they were suffered to remember: and such as
they ought to hear, to whom they tell them, or else by the Angels which are
here present with us, and at our doings, they may hear some thing which he
thinks meet and convenient to whom all things are subject. If therefore he
himself teach us this, that they do not know or they know after, and not all,
but such as are necessary for them to know, and as he thinks expedient that
is master of all: If he do contrary to his doctrine commend his prayers to
the^ which as yet hear him not, and when they shall or whither they shall at
all, he knows not: you must give me leave to follow his doctrine, if I
think it better than his example. His doctrine imports some thing, his
example nothing. Do as they teach you which sit in Moses seat, but do not as
they do. And thus much touching this question. God give us eyes to see, and
hearts to understand, that if you be out of the way (as you show your self
to be) you may come in: If I my self (as I am perfectly persuaded I am not)
that he will give me grace to convert. And so pray I for us both.

3 That only faith does not justify.
MAster Gough likewise in few words, would vehemently have persuaded, like as
others heretofore him, that sole faith or only faith does justify us. So did
long ago teach Eunomius of that faith which he professed, as S. Augustine
recites in his 6. Tom. de Haeresibus. Haeres. 54.


In so doing as others have done before him* as Moses, as Christ, as Paul, as
all the Prophets and Apostles in teaching the Justification of faith only, if
you expound him not amiss, he did the part of a faithful Minister and
preacher of Gods word. But you are disposed in this matter, as in others, to
carpe and cavil, evil construing that which is well spoken. You join your
words in this sort, sole faith or only faith. There is great difference in
these two kinds of speaking: What a sole faith is.
a sole faith is a barren, an unfruitful, a wicked, a devilish faith: which in
deed is no faith, it has but the glistering and show of faith, it is but a
lip faith: and where so ever it is, I warrant you, there is Cord non
creditur, no belief in heart. Faith only is an other manner of thing, it is that
which the Hebrews call Emunah that is, a faith stable and sure, Exodus 17.
as it is said of Moses, (...), and manus eius erant firmae and stabiles vsque
ad occasum solis, and his hands were steady and stable until the going down
of the sun. Hebr. 11.
So does Paul term it vaiehi iadan emunah the common translation has
substantia: it is that quod facit vt extent quae spera^tur, which makes those
things to exist which are hoped for. This faith can be no more without
fruytes, than can the body be without the soul, to be a living body, so that
there be time: for we know that vocation is diverse, some in the morning, some
at noone, some at night are called, and these last because they are so soon
cut of, that they could not but believe, and not glorify God before us, we
must not therefore condemn them. This faith I say most flourishing and decked
with gorgious works, as shining both before God and man as the lilie, does
only justify, does only apprehend the justification of God given in Christ
Jesus our Savior, does truly bring Christ into us, and us into him. So the
faithful man seeing himself purged from all his former sins and offenses,
walks in newness of life in the ways that God has ordained for him: that
before men he may glorify his father which is in heaven. This faith Eunomius
did not teach: he was in his opinion a naughty and wicked man, as were many
more in the time of S. Augustine, and are now: God make them fewer. He writes
of him and others in this wise. I will lay his words before you, that you your
self may judge, whither you do rightly burden us with Eunomius or no.
Apostolus predicans iustificari hominem per fidem sine operibus, non been
intellectus est ab eis, qui sic dictum acceperunt, vt putarent cum semel in
Christu^ credidissent, etia^si male operare^tur, and facinerose, flagitioseque
viuerent, saluos se esse per fidem posse, that is, The Apostle preaching that a
man is justified by faith without works, was not well understood of them
which took his saying in this sort, Lib. ques. 83
that they thought they might be saved by faith, when they had once believed in
christ, although they did wickedly, although they lived most detestably and
villenously. And in an other place, De fide and op. Cap. 16. Tom. 4.
Non cogimur dicere iniustis, non subditis, scelestis, contaminatis,
parricidis; matricidis; homicidis, fornicatoribus, masculorum concubitoribus;
plagiarijs, mendacibus, periuris, and si quid aliud sanae doctrinae aduersatur,
quae est secundum Euangelium gloriae beati Dei, si tantum in Christum credatis
and sacramentum Baptismi eius accipiatis etiamsi vitam istam pessimam non
mutaueritis, salui eritis. We are not constrained to say to the unjust, to the
rebellious, to the wicked, to the defiled, to the murderers of father and
mother, to manslayers, to fornicators, to buggers, to me^ stealers, to liars,
to ye perjured, and if there be any other thing which is contrary to the
wholesome doctrine which is according to the glorious Gospel of the blessed
God, if you believe only in Jesus Christ, and receive his Sacrament of
Baptism, although you change not this wicked life, you shall be saved. This
was Eunomius opinion and his fellows, it is not ours. Our Preachers teach
that faith only justifies, and yet not that a sole faith justifies, therefore
in so expounding his words as you do, you do deceyuablie commit an Eleuche
which we call fallatia accidentis. For whereas we say faith iustifyeth only,
that is, no other thing does apprehend the justice which GOD does give us, but
our faith: you turn it and make this sense, a bare faith void and destitute
of all goodness does attain to the mercies of God. Which in deed is an
heresy. For as the other is good and allowable, according to the scriptures,
There is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, To. 8.1.13.
which walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit: so is this wicked and
naught. For if we live after the flesh, we shall dye. And thus much to show
that we are no Eunomians. Now to your Arguments.

To confirm his opinion out of the scriptures, he brought the saying of the
Apostle: Romans 3.
Arbitramur iustificari hominem per fidem sine operibus Legis. We think or
determine that a man is justified by faith without the works of the Law.
Concluding by this testimony of S. Paul, that works do in no manner of wise
iustifye us, not only those which go before faith, but also those which do
follow faith: for touching any justification of works, he makes the like
condition of them both.

His allegation was good and his argument good. For it follows well, we are
justified by faith: Therefore works done before do not justify, neither works
after. This conseque^t you will not deny simply, for all your allegacio^s you
bring, do prove that works before do confer nothing to justification. Beda.
For the Apostle preaching to the Gentiles, says: When he saw them that came
to the lord justified by faith, that now they which did believe, should work,
and do good deeds, and not because they had done well, they deserved to believe,
he cried out and said boldly, That man may be justified by faith, without the
works of the law. Your sticking is upon works that follow: as in deed, not
knowing what difference is betwixt justification and sanctification, you should
doubt whether sanctification were a piece of justification, or an effect of
justification. Let us then see, whether works that follow do con^erre any
thing to the Justification. Mark I pray you the controversy betwixt you and
master Goughe. The question is not whether good works are necessary to walk
in? Whether we are. bound to walk in the fear of GOD, after that he has
manifested unto us his election, and called us to embrace his free mercy and
Justification? I say, the question is not, whether we ought to do well that GOD
may be glorified by us? But whether a man being already justified, his works
afterward may give increase of Justice? I pray you Sir after that Queen Marie
had made you Abbot of Westminster, did you the office of an Abbot, that you
would be a more Abbot, or to do your duty, to the which the Queen of her
grace had called you. For therefore she bestowed it upon you, that you
should do the duty, and not die doing the duty to become a more Abbot.

So fares it with the children of God: Of this whole lump of earth which he
made of this mass, which we call Adam: he of his free mercy and goodness
has chosen some whereby he will be glorified in this world, by the good
works which they shall do before the face of men. When this election of his
begins to be manifest to every chosen, when he moves the hearts of his
after they have long slept in sin, to remember that they are his, that he
has slain his Son for them, that they are delivered from the whole curse
of the law: Is it not requisite think you, that they walk worthy his
vocation? That they make sure their vocation? Nay do they in this their
course, in any part deliver them selves from the curse of the law? Do they
pay that ransom which was paid before? What is the justice or Justification
of GOD? Redemption and remission of sins in the blood of Christ. Was then the
blood of Christ answearable to all the Law, did there remain no part
unpaid? For whom then did he all this? Not for him self, for there was no
guile found in his mouth: For whom then? For the faithful, to whom God
does give this Faith, Act. 18.17.
not of merit, but of grace. Have they then all the justice of Christ, have
they that, which Christ did in his body, put upon them? May they say, as he
said, Death where is thy sting, Hell where is thy victory? May they say,
death is swallowed up in victory? May they say, there is no condemnation to us
which are in Christ Jesus? what remains then? that they walk according to
the Spirit, not according to the flesh: that they glorify God before men,
which has already made them the children of God. Not to do ageyn y^ which is
done already, for that is impossible: not to join a piece to Christ's, as
though it were not perfect. For he left no piece unpaid. But to receive by
faith that justification that God does give them, without the works of the
law. For works sequuntur iustificatum, non praecedunt iustificandum: they
follow a man justified, and go not before him that is to be justified:
Effectus autem non praeiudicat causae as you know: The effect never
preiudiceth the cause. Thorough all the course of our lives we work, because we
are justified: and we do not work that we may be justified. And this is the
meaning of the Apostle in this place: not as though works were to be joined
with faith, to deserve some thing: For then should we receive reward due, and
not grace. And thus much touching M. Goughe his argument. Now to your Objection.

First, I maruayle that M. Goughe will allow this term, Only: when it is not
expressed in Canonical scripture. Next I am sure that there is nothing
equivalent unto it: for faith without the works of the law and faith only,
or faith simply without works, be not of one like condition.

You need not maruayle much, if you would rightly consider it: Paul's whole
disputation stands upon two Subiecta, and one Praedicatum, as the people are
two to who^ he addresseth his doctrine, and must agree in one. The subiecta
are these, works or the Law, faith or Christ: The Praedicatum is Justification.
If then reasoning a diuisione, the one be put away, what remains? If I reason
thus, Of all living creatures there is one that is risibile, apt to laugh: it
is not Brutum any brute beast: Therefore it is Homo, man. If I reason thus I
say, is not this consequent comprehended in Consequenti: Therefore only man is
risibilis. So likewise Paul reasons: there is one thing which justifies. It
is not works, therefore it is faith. Does it not now follow that being but one,
and that one faith: that we may well conclude that faith only justifies? And so
add we nothing to the scripturs, which you seem to lay to M. Goughes charge,
by a taunte, but find it in ye very letter although not literallie. And in so
doing we make no new invention. So taught before us Theophilact: Theoph. in
Cap. 4. ad Romans
whose words are these, vt autem haberi pro comperto queat, posse hunc deum,
qui impie vixerit, non solum a tormentis eximere, sed iustum reddere, illud
subdit, credenti autem in eum qui iustificat etc. Number igitur est and hic
quippiam allaturus? Fidem duntaxat: that is, But that it may be certaynely
known that God can not only deliver from torments, but also justify him
which lived wickedly, he adds that, but to him that believes in him which
justifies. etc. Must he therefore also bring some thing? Origi. To. 3.
Faith only* And Origenes upon this same place which M. Goughe alleged,
says thus: Nunc tam velut conclusionem suarum assertionum ponens, in hoc loco
dicit: Vbi est ergo gloriatio tua? Exclusa est* per quam legem? operum? Non,
sed per legem fidei: Arbitramur enim iustificari hominem per fidem sine
operibus legis: and dicit sufficere solius fidei iustificationem, ita vt
credens quis tantummodo iustificetur, etiamsi nihil ab eo operis fuerit
expletum. Now, making as it were a conclusion of his assertions says in this
place, where is then thy rejoicing? it is excluded. By what law? of works? No,
but by the law of faith: for we suppose or conclude that man is justified by
faith without the works of the Law: and he says, that the justification of
only faith is sufficient, so that a man believing only may be justified
although that no work be don of him. I will not allege here Hierom on ye 4. of
this Epistle: Hierome.
Conuertentem impium, and agein, vt omnes qui ex Gentibus. Ambrose.
etc nor Amb. j. Cor. xj. hoc constitutum est a Deo. etc. nor Bernard. ser. 22.
super Can. Bernard.
Quamobrem quisquis pro peccati^ ^ in all which you find these words, Sola
fides ad iustitiam reputatur: per solam fidem iustificat* Deus, saluus fit sine
opera, sola fide, et solu^ iustificatus per fidem, that is, only faith is
accounted unto righteousness: By only faith God justifies, that he may be
saved without work, through only faith, and being justified only by faith. As
for the works which follow, as I said before, we condemn them not, we praise
them, as God did in Abraham, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him
for righteousness, and he was called the friend of God. In that he believed God,
within in his heart, it consists in faith only, concerning that he lead his
son to sacrifise him, in that without fear he armed his right hand, in that
he would have stricken had he not bin witholden, surely it was a great faith,
and the work also was great, and God praised the work when he said, because
thou obeyedst my voice. Wherefore then says the Apostle Paul, we conclude
that man is justified by faith without the works of the law: and in an other
place. It is faith which works by charity? how does faith work by
charity? and how is a man justified by faith without the works of the law?
This seems hard that a man shall be justified by faith only, and yet that
faith must work by charity. Not at all: for in that, yt it is said to
justify, it shows what thou haste received of God, in that it is said to
work by charity, it shows what thou owe to God. For so must
justification stand, that it may be applied unto all men, whether they be
called in ye morning, or at noone, or at night? There is one that believes, he
has received the sacrament of faith, and is dead, he had no time to work,
what shall we say? that he is not justified? we say plain that he was
justified, because he believed in him which justifies the wicked. Therefore
this man is justified, and did not work. The sentence of the Apostle is
fulfilled: I conclude that a man is justified by faith without the works of
the law. The thief which was crucified with Christ believed in heart to Justice,
and confessed by mouth to salvation. For faith which works by charity,
although it have not wherein it may work externally, yet is it kept fervent in
the heart. If then faith in these and such like does justify, why shall it not
in others? Because one man lives longer than an other after his vocation,
shall therefore the rightuousenesses of God be changed? shall therefore* man be
made fellow with God in the work of his salvation, because he has bestowed a
greater benefit of longer life upon him? Is this the thank that GOD shall
have at our hands, for giving us space to glorify him, to use it as a means
that we our selves may glory? For surely if we deserve any thing, we have
wherein to glory. But when all is done, it is but an evil favored glory, for
it is not with God. But let us go farther.

S. Paul excluding works of the Law, means works that go before faith;
which do not justify. S. James in the example of Abraham forbidding that faith
only does justify, speaks of works that follow faith, which do also
justify, that is, give increase of justice. Abraham pater noster nonne ex
operibus iustificatus est, offerens Isaac super Altar? Abraham our Father was
he not justified by works, when he offered his son Isaac upon the Altar?

If works before faith do not justify, much less works after faith: before
man had need, and after he has no need: then is a benefit requisite, when a
man is in poverty: but when he is rich, it is not needful. To be short
because I have handled this before, works do never go before justification.
Romans 11.
For the Scripture is plain. If it be grace, then not of works, otherwise
were grace now no grace. And this is as well for your works after as before.
Aug. de spir. and lit. 26. ca. Tom. 3.
As for that that is said often times, and you allege it before, Factores
legis iustificabuntur, the dooers of the law shall be justified. It is so to
be understood, to wit, that they could not otherwise be dooers of the law,
unless they be justified. So that Justification comes not to the dooers, but
justification goes before the dooers of the Law* For what other thing does
this mean, Justified, but made just? that is to say, of him which justifies
ye wicked, that he may become just of wicked. For sanctification goes not
before Justification, but Justification before Sanctification. Touching the
place of S. James, there is no such matter in it as you make. You may see by
the whole course of the chapter, that he speaks not how man is justified
before god, but how they ought to show before men, that they are just before
God. So that he beats down the vain opinion of them, which thought that if
they believed, it belonged not to them to do well, and therefore contemned good
works, as who would say they were not bound to glorify God before men, who
had glorified them with him self. And touching the example of Abraham, if you
confer the scriptures together, as Genesis with James: you shall see that
Abraham was justified before, and this is but the show of his obedience unto
God, yt all the world might know he nothing misdouted the promise of God,
although his only son must go to be offered, and this do your doctors
teach, which you hear recite.

Lib. 83. q. 9.76.
To this effect S. Augustine reconcileth these two Apostles. Non sunt contrariae
duorum Apostolorum sententiae Pauli and Iacobi^cum dicit vnus iustificari
hominem per fidem sine operibus, and alius dicit, inanem esse fidem sine
operibus, quia ille dicit de operibus quae praecedunt fidem, iste de his, que
fidem sequuntur. These sentences of the two Apostles, Paul and James, be not
contrary unto them selves: when the one says, that a man is justified by
faith without works. The other says, that faith is vain and idle without
works, for Paul speaks of works that goes before faith, James speaks of
those that follow faith.

I do not see to what great purpose this place is alleged, be it that this
reconciliation is good, can you conclude that Augustine teaches or James
either, De side and open. cap. 14. De sp. and lit. ad Marcel. cap. 26.
that works justify before God? that can you never prove. The place you
bring, he has in many places, yet in none of them does he conclude as you do.
But in every one he teaches this, yt therefore James writ this Epistle and
likewise, Peter his, to show that after says received, works of
righteousness ought not to be contemned: and that what soever works they do,
they are of a justified man, and not to justify a man. For when it is said
that the doers of the law shall be justified, what other thing is said, than
this? Let (...) that is righteous, be righteous still. For the doers of ye law
are just. And therefore it is as much as if it should be said. The doers of ye
law shall be created, not because they were, but that they may be. You go
foreward against M. Gough.

Luke 8.
An other place he brought to express by scripture this word, Only, that
faith only does justify: alleging the saying of Christ unto Iairus Prince
of the Synagogue. Creed tantum, Believe only. A place very fitly applied: as
if Christ there had spoken of the Justification of Iairus, and not rather of
the corporal reviving of his daughter.

As for M. Goughes alleging of the place, I do not think, but he saw what
was principally done in that place, and that Christ was reviving of his
daughter: yet not withstanding he might note unto you, in what sort we ought
to beehaue our selves toward ye receiving of Christ's benefits and graces,
that although things seem unto us desperate, void of all hope and comfort,
yet we should not cease, but to believe in Christ, that he is able to do
whatsoever we demand in fear and truth. And this hope and faith is
sufficient, and he requires nothing else at our hands. This I say, why might
he not note unto you touching only faith, having two such notable examples
before his face as the woman with the flux, Iairus with his dead daughter. And
so might he make his argument. As faith only is sufficient to the curing of an
incurable sore, and the raising of the dead, so is it sufficient to the
remission of sins. Neither is he void of authority for his interpretation.
Theo. in Luke 8.
Theophilacte says thus: Ne timeas, tantum creed: respice ad mulierem hanc,
quae sanguinis profluuio laborauit, illam si imitatus fueris non aberrabis.
Fear not, only believe: Behold this Woman which was sick of the flux, if
thou follow her, thou shall not do amiss. Neither is James clean
contradictorie (as you say) to Master Gough in this sense, where he says,
Videtis quoniam ex operibus iustificatur homo, non ex fide tantum. You see that
of works man is justified, and not of faith only.

There is you know Oppositio in terminis, opposition in words, and oppositio
realis, opposition in matter. As for the first ye know also it is nothing, and
so may these two be, fides tantum iustificat, fides ta^tum non iustificat,
faith only does justify: ^ayth only does not justify. As for ye other, there
must be vniuocatio in terminis, the Subiectum and the Praedicatum must be taken
in one sense in both. Otherwise there is no opposition, For both may be true.
As in this, faith only justifies, the word (Justifies) is taken in this
sense, Justifies before God. In the other, Faith only does not justify: the
word (Justifies) is taken having respect to men. And so they be not opposite.
Of the sense of the place I spoke before. Likewise of the place of Luke. viij.
I have said my mind what M. Gough his meaning was: I was not at his Sermon, and
I promise you I have not talked with him therein, I skant know the person.

Cap. 14.
S. Augustine in his book de fide and operibus, shows the beginning and
foundation of this much like heresy to have bin in the Apostles time, upon
the misconstruing of Paul's Epistles, saying: Quoniam haec opinio tunc fuerat
exorta, aliae Apostolicae epistolae Petri, Iohannis, Iacobi, and Iudae, co^tra
eam maxim dirigunt intentionem, vt vehementer astruant fidem sine operibus
nihil prodesse. That is because this opinion was then spro^g up, other
Apostolical epistles of Peter, John, James and Jude, do bend their drift and
purpose most of all against that opinion, that they may boldly and vehemently
affirm faith without works to avail nothing. If it be faith only, it is
faith without works: If faith only avails nothing, faith only can not
justify.

What opinion that was (M. Fecknam) and how unlike unto our assertion I showed
you before out of ye same place, and it was this, as you have it in the
beginning of the chapter. Been autem viuere and bonis operibus viam dei tenere
neglexerint, and they contemn to live well, and to keep the way of God in
good works. He says not, and bonis operibus incrementum iustitiae addere, and
with good works to give increase of justice* Which piece you stand for, and
which you shall never be able to show out of Augustine, and so we deny it. As
for your collection, if faith only avails nothing, faith only can not
justify: we deny ye conseque^t. For as I said before, there is not vniuocatio
in terminis. We say true, that nothing else but faith does justify: and yet
say, ye faith which is dead and sole is nothing worth: for it is not that
which we say does justify.

15. cap. 18
Likewise he says in his book de trinitate very briefly and pithily: sine
charitate fides quidem potest esse, sed non and prodesse. Without charity
faith may be, but without charity, it can nothing avail.

This is very well said, we grant all this, he speaks according to ye
scriptures, 2.20.^1.13.
you need not have gone so far. S. James, s. Paul, could have taught you ye
same. But to your purpose it serves very little: yea nothing at al. Now
touching your tretise of works done in faith, whereas you are misgreeued with M.
Gough so far, that you call it a preposterous way, and a blasphemous doctrine, to
say that our works are as filthy cloutes, unto which Christ promises a
reward so great as everlasting life, if you would justly consider with your
self the duty that god requires of us, and the default that is in us, the
integrity, the purity yt we are bound to by his commandment, and the
imperfection, ye impuritie yt is in us, you could not justly condemn him: god
commands us to serve him with all our hearts, with all our soul, with all our
strength: what is he upon the earth, that does employ these wholly, yt has not
always ye flesh pricking against the spirit? then the work yt is done of such,
is it not as a menstruous cloth? could it be acceptable before God, were it not
for his mercy? If it please him of the same mercy, to give me life everlasting
for my half days, nay for my one hours work, does it follow that my work is
worthy of it, when all the works of the world be not worth life everlasting,
Christ's death excepted?

Then touching your other cauil of faith only: How only? without baptism?
without repentance? without fear? without hope? without charity? You may
understand of that I have said before, how all these must follow and an
hundredth more, and yet faith only must justify, what so ever he be that
casts these away in that respect that he is justified by faith, he deceives
him self and he is not justified: He is a dead tree, he is a thorn that
brings forth grapes, he is a thistle that brings forth figs, and when the
Lord comes, he shall cut down this tree, and cast it into the fire that
shall never be put out. But he that has a true faith, has a these fruits,
they follow him as his handmaydes, he serves himself of them, and serves his
leege Lord with them: he is baptized, he is penitent, he stands in awe, he
hops, he loves, and all for the glory of his Master: and yet not without
his own profit. He deserves nothing, yet shall he have great reward: he
meriteth not a myte, yet shall he have thousands: So stands faith amongst
her damsels, and yet she is singular: She walks with great company, and yet
is she alone. And this to your third question.

4 That every sin is not mortal.
Master Goughe toward the end of his sermon, did very constantly affirm,
that every sin committed by a Christian man, is deadly and mortal sin: and
that no sin is venial, no not an idle thought, as light as men made of it.
Much like unto the old heresy of Iouinian, which to make all sins equal,
made every sin likewise a deadly sin. Whom S. Augustine condemned more
than a thousand years ago, as appears in his 6. Tom. de Haeres. Haer. 82.

How S. Augustine condemned Iouinian, and wherefore, it is manifest there in
the place you recite and in his Epistles, for making all sins equal in deed:
But not for saying that all sins deserve death, and therefore are mortal:
That you can not find in S. Augustine or any other: There is great difference
betwixt these two, propositions, Omnia peccata sunt aequalia, and Omnia
peccata sunt mortalia: Al sins are equal, and all sins are mortal. For
you can not conclude, They are all mortal, therefore they are all equal.
Although contrary after a certain manner it may be said they are all equal,
therefore they be mortal. We say, that who soever is angry with his brother
without a cause, shall be culpable of judgment: We say to, whosoever says fool
to his brother, shall be punished with hell fire: We say the like of murder, we
say the like of the sin of Sodom, and yet say we not that these offenses be
a like: that it is all one to say, fool, to thy brother, and all one to be a
Sodomite, a manslayer, an adulterer. Although that ye majesty of God be
offended in them all, yet in some of them, thou sinnest against nature, thou
sinnest against heaven and earth, the son it self is ashamed to behold thy
villainy, and thou ashamed to show thy self in light: in some, thy sin is so
horrible, yt if man do wink, yet ye earth will cry out for vengeance. For
some, Cities and towns, fields, even paradises, for some, ye whole world has
bin destroyed as you read, with other god has more mercifully dealt. And shall
we say, that because the long patience and mercy of God does give us time to
repentance, therefore these sins yt we commit deserve not punishment? That
because he soon pardons them to his, therefore their reward is not death: For
so you and yours say veniale peccatum de sui natura est venia dignum, Raym.
tract. 4 De poeni^.
venial sin of his nature is worthy pardon. A sin it is, an erring and
wandering from the will of God, a deturning from his ways (for so does this
word Chot signify) and yet forsoothe he (...) stand in his own justice with
God? and say unto him, I am worthy to be pardoned? A wound which needs not to
be wrapped, a sore full of corruption yt needs no emplaster: a swelling that
needs not to be mollified with oil, a sick man which needs no Phisitio^?
well we shall have further occasion to speak of these more at large hereafter. We
will now come to your reasons you bring to confirm your doctrine.

Let us confer herewithall two sayings of the Scripture: 1. John. 2.
the one of S. John which says as well of himself and of every just man, as
of the sinner. Si dixerimus. etc. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our
selves, and the truth is not in us: meaning that the iustest man a live is not
without sin. Now, if this sin be as M. Goughe teaches, deadly, mortal and
damnable sin, which separateth the soul of man from God, and condemns it to
hell fire, let us see how a man may be called just, which daily commits such
damnable sin.

This place makes more against you, than with you, you will not say I think yt
S. John was one of ye most grievous sinners, yt he was an adulterer, a
dronkerd. etc. And yet was he a sinner as the iustest man is, yet sinned
he.vij. times, and lacked the glory of God. And of the same sins, he spoke
in that sentence, of the same spoke he in the sentence before, saying: And the
blood of Christ his son cleanses us from all our sins. And in the sentence
after: If we acknowledge our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. He co^prehendeth him self
in the number and says, cleanse us from all, forgive us all our sins. Then
belike the sins of S. John had need of it: If they had need, why was it?
Was it not, because that stipendium peccati mors est? the wages of sin is
death? But peradventure he did not acknowledge these for any sins. Then by
your conclusion he had no sin. Take heed of that, if you say so, he will
answer you straight, you are a lier. But you can not see, how a man may be
called just, which daily commits such deadly sin. You ca^ not see how
David says. Beati quoru^ remissae sunt iniquitates and quorum ^ecta sunt
peccata, blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are
covered? And yet, ne intres ^n iudicium cum seruo tuo, Domine, quia non
iustificabitur, in conspectu tuo omnis viuens, enter not into judgment with
thy servant, O Lord, for in thy sight shall none living be justified. David
tells you in an other place, the just man falls, but he rises up again. He
repents him self, and flies to the mercy of God, and he does forgive him.
After this you come again to the place of Luke concerning Zachary and
Elizabeth: touching which place because I have answered it before, I will say
nothing: but besides I there alleged both out of Glossa ordinaria Theophilact
and Justinius Martyr, I will now also refer you to Ierom aduersus Pelag. ad
Chte. where you shall see, whether any such thing be to be concluded or no, and
take heed you be not a Pelagian in that poinct. As for the contradiction you
there speak of, which follows of these two places conferred together, if M.
Goughs exposition do stand: there is none, more tha^ follows of your words.
For as you say here after, peradventure against your will, because Augustine
enforseth you thither, you must say for the least sin you can devise, forgive
us our trespasses: if you did trespass him, you were not without blame. So you
make a contradiction against your self, for that you say, a just man is without
blame, and yet he must say forgive me. The truth is as I said (M. Fecknam)
there is no contradiction, to say a man sins damnably, and therefore in
consideration of his own doing worthy to be condemned: yet being pardoned by
the free mercy of Christ, he is without blame. Romans 8.33.
As the Apostle says, who can lay any thing to our charge? not respecting
that, that we are, but that, that we receive. And so I trust I have
sufficiently answered you for that place.

Iac. 1.
To this may be added the place of S. James: where he describes concupisce^ce
to make a sin in us beside mortal sin, saying. Concupiscentia cum conceperit,
etc: co^cupisce^ce when it has conceived, brings forth sin, but sin when
it is finished: begets death. Signifying hereby that sin is then mortal
and deadly, when a man commits it with a full consent and other
circu^sta^ces. For if a light passion or a carnal thought steals upon a man
by sodein delectation without consent, the same is not a sin, which
engendereth death, but a venial sin.

S. James his purpose is not as you say, to show how concupiscence makes a
sin besides mortal sin, neither ca^ you prove, by this place, that which
you grant that concupiscence is a sin (although it be true.) S. James goes
not about here to show, when sin begins to be a sin, to be taken and
esteemed so before God: But to show, when it comes forth, and whence it
proceadeth, that he might against the false surmises of others, show, that
their sin and tempting, proceeds not from God. His order is this, The
consummation of sin procures Death everlasting: sin proceeds from
inordinate desires, inordinate desires from concupiscence. Therefore in that,
that men are condemned for their sins, they receive but the fruit which they
brought forth the^ selves: and therefore can they not cast any fault on God.
Can you now the^ prove by this place, that either concupiscence is a sin
which I deny not) either that it is not a mortal sin? Out of this place I
gather, that my condemnation is of my self: I can not gather that
Concupiscence is a Sin, but only by a consequent, because it brings forth
sin. For such as the fruit is, such is the tree, and so may I conclude
again. The fruit is damnable, therefore the tree. But here I do gather it.
Exodus 20.
No^ co^cupisces. Thou shall not covet, and so because it is a sin, I
conclude it is mortal, Eze. 18.20.
Anima quae peccauerit ipsa morietur. The soul that shall offend or err, the
same shall dye. For the word the Prophet there uses hachoteth signifies but a
missing and an erring from that he is directed unto, which is. Thou shall love
the Lord thy GOD with all thy heart, with all thy Soul, etc. so read we in
the scriptures, Iudi. 20.16
all these could fling stones at an hairs breadth, ve lo iachati, Romans 7.
and not fail. And Paul also speaking of him self, and not sinning any other
mortal sin, says. Quis me liberabit de corpore mortis huius, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death? Whether you make your venial sin a
failing or no, Sum. Raymundi tract* 4. de poenitentia.
I refer it to your conscience. Some of you writers say thus. Peccatum
veniale est quod cum voluntatis deliberatione inordinata homo committit,
venial sin is that, which a man commit^eth by an inordinate deliberation of
his will? what they are he rekeneth up there, as when a man eats and drinks
more than he needs if it be by chance, when he speaks more than he ought,
or holds his peace more than is convenient: when he vexes the poor desiring
alms out of time. The use of a man's own wife otherwise than the institution
of God is: drunkenness, if it be not to often. Integra.
For of nature it is no deadly sin, and such like. And as you put in a light
passion or a carnal thought, stealing upon a man by sudden delectation.
These and such others are your venial sins, such sins as are worthy pardon
of their own nature. Is drunkenness but once done worthy of pardon by nature?
Is making whoredom of marriage a sin worthy pardon even of nature? Is vexing
the afflicted, a sin to be pardoned even of nature? is the enimitie of God,
a sin worthy pardon even of nature? Paul says that a drunkerd, an
adulterer shall not inherit the kingdom of Heaven. What Christ answers
them that are such too the poor. Ite maledicti in ignem aeternum, go ye
cursed into everlasting fire, will tell you: That, that is of the flesh
displeases God, the scripture tells you also: what the displeasure of God
is, the whole scriptures teach you. Do not you fail think you in these and
such like, from the will of your heavenly father? S. Augustine says that
these things pertayne ad corruptionem Templi Dei, Ser. 34. de voca. Pau. Ap.
to the corruption of the temple of God: not only the more grievous sins,
but the least, Si qua vobis immoderatio de vsu isto concessarum rerum vitae
humanae infirmitate irrepserit, if any immoderatenes by the use of things
permitted unto you, do creep into you by the frayltie of man's life. Quoniam
pertinet ad corruptionem Templi Dei, 1. Cor. 3.17
Because it pertayneth to the corruption of the Temple of God, tenete, hold
you, etc. And make you a small thing of the marring of the temple of God? Qui
templum Dei corrumperit, corrumpet illum Deus. etc. says he. He that marreth
the temple of God, God will mar him. What means that, corrumpet illum Deus,
God will mar him? I think it be not very far from death. Well let us see
what you bring out of Augustine.

To this place alludeth S. Augustine, To 7. lib. 2. contr. Iulianum. page 985.
col. 1.
where he speaks of concupiscence that remains in those which be
regenerate, saying: Ab illo rebellante, and si non laetaliter, sed venialiter
tamen vincimur. That is, of that sin concupiscence rebelling against us, we
be ouercomed, although not deadly, yet venially. It follows, and in his
contrahimus, vnde quotidie dicamus, dimittae nobis debita nostra. And in these
(venial sins) we gather, by means whereof we may say daily. Forgive us Lord
our trespasses.

S. Augustine in deed speaks of such remnaunts of original sin as remain
in the elect after they be regenerate, whereof S. Paul spoke. Caro
concupiscit aduersus spiritum. The flesh coueteth against the spirit: and
says, that we are overcome of this remnaunt not deadly, but venially. The
reason is in S. Paul. Because there is no condemnation to them which are in
Christ Jesus, and that that relic is not able to bring forth any such
Sin in the elect, whereby he may be condemned, yet notwithstanding, least
we should think ourselves not to be indetted or endaungered by this means unto
God, thus much we get, says he, that we must needs say every day, forgive us
our trespasses. And he shows not in this place, what it is in it self, but
what it is in the elect. S. Augustine in an other place calls these leuia
peccata, light sins, not simply but comparate, by comparison. Of the sins
of this life, says he, Quaedam grauia and mortifera sunt, quae nisi per
vehementissimam molestiam humiliationis cordis, and contritionis spiritus, and
tribulationis poenitentiae non relaxantur. Haec dimittuntur per claues
Ecclesiae. Some are greiuous and deadly which are not released but by most
vehement sorrow of humility of the heart, and contrition of the spirit, and
tribulation of repentance. These are remitted by the keys of the Church. Sunt
autem leuia peccata and minuta, quae deuitari omnino non possunt, quae quidem
vide^tur minora, sed multitudine praemunt: There are light sins and small,
which can be eschewed by no means, which truly seem to be less, but they
ouercharge by reason of the multitude. And mark this by the way, a most plain
contradiction to your first question: Aug. ser. 3^. hoc dicit Moses.
Quae deuita^i non possunt, which ca^ not be eschewed: and sine quibu^ non
potest ista vita duci, without the which this life can not be lead, and yet
you say, the commandments may be fulfilled. Posse implere Legem, to be able
to fulfill the Law: is, Posse non concupiscere, to be able not to covet or
lust. No^ potes non ^oncupiscere, thou art not able not to covet or lust, Ergo,
non po^es Legim implere, therefore thou art not able to fulfill the Law. Luke
18.27.
And so might you have had regard to Christ's words, ^uae apud homines
impossibilia sunt, apud Deum possibili^ sunt, those things which are
impossible with men, with GOD be possible. And a little after: Sic ergo quamuis
minuia sunt is it a peccata, tamen quia multa sunt, vt congregata aceruum
faciant, quo te pr^mant, bonus est Deus qui etiam ipsa dimittat, sine quibus
non potest ista vita duci: So then although these be little sins, yet because
they be many, that they being gathered together make a heap to ouerpresse
thee, God is good who forgiueth the^ also, without which this life can not be
passed. You see by this place, that remission is given to them both, and debtes
they are both. But because he is more ready to forgive the one than the other,
he calls them in this place, grauia and leuia, grievous or weighty, and
light: in other places venalia and laetalia, venial and deadly. I wis you know
that these words be of comparison, and not de simplici existentia, as the
Philosophers call them, that is, to declare what those smaler faults be of
their own simple existence, or proper nature. I can not tell how little you
make of remission of sins. But by his similitude he brings, they would kill
you, if remission came not the sooner. And in the end, (as I alleged before)
of his sermon, he concludes that because they destroy the temple of God, they
should take heed and be ready to cry and call, Forgive us our trespasses.

Again, in his Book de Spiritu and litera, he writes thus of venial sins:
Aug. To. 3. desp. and lit. Cap. 28.
Sicut non impediunt a vita aeterna iustum. etc. Like as some venial sins
do not let a just man from life everlasting, without the which this life is
not led: So some good works, do nothing profit a wicked man unto life
everlasting without the which the life of every naughty man is hardly found.

You may see by this place and by the comparison he makes, that both this
place and the other you alleged before, are so to be expounded and taken as I
have said. For surely no sin is able to cast the child of God, whom he has
elected and chosen, out of the favor of God, out of the kingdom of heaven,
which is his inheritance gotten and given him by Christ. For the counsels of
God are without repentance. So likewise it shall avail the wicked nothing at
all, yt he has some good works. For he is the child of wrath, the son of
perdition. As for the fault of your reasoning, I let it pass: you may think
with your self how well you deal making such Arguments: these sins are not
deadly to the elect and just: Therefore they are not deadly: a secu^do ad^ace^te
ad primu^ negative: Socrates no^ est Ph^losop. academicus, ergo, no^ est
Philosophus: Socrates is no Academical Philosopher, therefore he is no
philosopher, or M. Fekna^ was not Abbo^ of Osne, therefore he was no Abbot, for
you have brought never a place directly proving what they are in themselves.
What you could bring out of Luther, I know not, when I see it, I will answer
it if I ca^. Non iurau^ in verba Lutheri, I have not sworn to credit every
word yt Luther writes. And sure it is, some things he writ exta^t in
print, before he was well persuaded in many points of sound doctrine. Now,
touching ye austeritie of M. Gough, GOD make us all against vice austere, and
not to flatter our selves in our concupiscences: we can not hate sin to much,
nor condemn sin to grievously. I would I might, I, by the word of God
persuade my self that sin were no sin, me^ might live more at liberty. But
yet I think my self blissed that he has called me to the liberty of his
Gospel, What the liberty of the Gospel is, and wherein it consists.
which is free remission of my sins and sinful life in the blood of Christ
Jesus, and a calling to walk after the spirit and not after the flesh. It is
time and high time for us (M. Fecknam) to beat down sin, and not to seek
means how we may cloak sin. Let it appear in his own nature, that we may
be ashamed of him: put not a Lions skin upon an Ass. Call white, white: and
black, black: good, good: and bad, bad. So shall we take heed, that we fall
not to often: and if it can not otherwise be, but we must fall seven times, yet
that we may learn to fear thereby, and not to make a fleabyting of it. If we
do so, we shall be more like to Abell than Cayne: to Isaac, than Ismaell: to
Jacob, than Esau: to John, than to the Pharisees: to Simon Peter than to Simon
Magus: to John than Judas: in no miserable state, in no evil condition, in
state of salvation not perdition, Christ of his mercy releasing our
infirmities. If the just man did fall only, if there were no more but so, that
he sinned and sinned deadly: then were he no just man, thou were he in as evil
case as Paynimes and heathen people. But in that he falls and ryseth up
again, as David teaches us; Ps. 37.24.
he is better than Paynymes, better than the Heathen: as good as Habel, as
Isaac as Jacob, as John, as Simon Peter, and John ageyn: he is, I say,
notwithstanding al these falls, the fellow of Angels, the child of God, and
inheritour of the kingdom of heaven. Why? Because he has spoken by the mouth
of his Prophet: Psalm. 37.24.
Ippol, lo iutall. He shall fall but he shall not be cast away: and as ye wise
man says, Scheba ippol tzaddik vakam* septies cadet iustus, sed surget: the
just man shall fall.vij. times, but he shall rise. As for this word Naphal, to
fall, it caryeth with it a more weightier signification than you allege. All
these things being considered, it is no evil way to preach repentance, and yet
say that all sin of it self is damnable: to exhort to good works, and yet
to teach a man not to presume of his own works as to give part of his
salvation, seeing that the whole is wrought by Christ his death, and applied to
us by only faith: to exhort all men to pray for each other, and yet not to
spoil Christ of the office of his mediatorship, which is taken away by the
prayer to Saints and to exhort men to keep Gods commandments, and yet to
teach yt they be impossible: that seeing our own weakness through our own
sin, we may fly to his mercy, and say: Da quod, iubes, and iube quod vis,
give what thou co^maundest, and commau^d what thou will. So sound Doctrine as
this is, God give grace to all his ministers to preach, and you to embrace:
that they with their preching, and you and I with our following may glorify our
father which is in heaven.

Thus have I in few words answered your cauilling arguments and counterfeit
stuff as time did serve me: if not so amply as I might, yet sufficient for
those you brought, framing my answer shortly to your argument. And as you
unjustly lay to M. Goughs charge contradiction to ye holy scriptures, to the
fathers, and to have nothing to stand upon but old heresies revived, as of the
Maniches, Eunonius, Vigilantius, and Iouinian: I have and do lay to your charge
justly, contradiction to the scriptures, false alleging of doctors to no
purpose, such sle^der, such childishe, so against all art and reason in
forming of your talk, as any Boy might have bin ashamed to have used the like.
I have, and do, I say, lay justly to your charge your false burdning him with
those foresaid heresies, as unfit as unaptly laid against him, as any thing
could be. I can not see why in these cases you might not as well have blamed
him to be an Arrian, a Sabellian, and what you will: as a Mani^hean, an
Eunonian, a Vigilantian, a Iouinian.

Now when you have done all this, as though you had achieved a notable feate,
you require of their worships a thing reasonable (as you would make it) yt you
might not be enforced to come to sermons: a thing as you say, against all
former example, a thing as true as the residue. Did you never read Augustine to
Vincentius, Epist. 48.
against the Donatists concerning this matter? If you did not, I pardon your
ignorance: If you did, I will not spare but tell you of your untruth. Do you not
read in his Epistles, cum haereticis esse v^ age^dum, Epist. 50.
that heretics must be dealt with by force? Do you not remember that he says,
it did good to the Churches in his time. That the Donatists were constrained by
authority to the embrasing of christian religion, and there reheasreth diverse
of their gratulations Do you not remember that he says, not to do it is malum
pro malo reddere, to requite evil for evil? Do you not remember, that he
says, A^elius est cum seueritate diligere quam cum lenitate decipere? Better
it is to love with severity, than to deceive with lenity? And that it
pertains to princes? Do you not remember how he answers that objection,
because there was none in the Apostles time? Do you not remember the example of
Nebuchadnezer, which he says signified the state of the Church in the
Apostles time, and this now? When he constrained to Idolatry, how the
Apostles were persecuted? When being turned to God, decreed in his kingdom that
whosoever blasphemed ye God of Sydrach, Misach and Abednego should be worthily
punished, what princes ought now to do? For then says he, that scripture was
verified, Quare fremuerunt gentes. etc* why did the Gentyles tumultuously rage.
etc. But now is fulfilled that, and principes eru^t nutrices tuae, and Princes
shall be thy nurses. Do you not remember how he says, capitale ^u^icium,
punishment of death was appointed by the law of the Emperors against ye
sacrifices of the Paganes? Do you not remember when he says of that, quis
nostrum quis vestrum non laudat? Which of us, which of you does not praise it?
Do not you remember how he says, that Constantine did decree vt conuictorum
res fis^o vendicarentur? that the goods of the convicted should be challenged to
the common treasure? Do ye not remember, that he was once in that error, that
they should not be constrained until he was convicted by examples of the
profit it did? Do you not read in the same, that in matters of religion:
Mansuetudo quae perdit hominem crudelitas est seueritas quae castigat improbum
charitas est? gentleness which destroys a man is cruelty, severity, which
chastises a wicked man is charity? do you not remember the similitudes he
uses? Do you not remember that he says, Epi. 68. ad Ianuar.
the Church of Christ does persecute, showing it in the example of Sara? do
you not remember, poenam december librarum auri ab Imperatoribus consti^u^am, that
by Emperors was appointed or decreed a punishment or penalty of ten pounds in
gold, against the Donatistes? But if it be a thing so strange, against all
example: why did you so then use it in Queens Mary's time, and so far, that
you contented not your selves to cast them in prison, to hale them to Masses,
but to burn them also? if it had bin no more but your own example, you might
have bin ashamed, to give forth this reason. You in your doings could be
called defensores pacis, prouisores Ecclesiae, defenders of peace, and gardians
of the Church. The Queens grace that now is and her Lieuetenaunts are cruel
vexers and oppressors. But you show your self as you are, a right Donatist
both in profession now, and in dooyngs then. As they, when they accused
Caecilian, the Bishop of Carthage to Constantine, and required to have him
punished, then were they defensores pacis and prouisores Ecclesiae* defenders
of peace and gardianes of the Church: but when they were served with their
own sause, then they could cry out and say: Non esse vt agendum, that there
ought too be no dealing by constrainte. Such were your doings in Queen
Mary's time, this is your demand and talk now* What is this other, than as
Tychonius one of theyrs, and your Master, said of you both? Quod volumus, hoc
sanctum est. That is holy that we will have. As for our own men, you name
Luther, Bucer, Bullinger, etc. (not citing or coting any their words or one
place of their writings,) you might have thus thought. That they were of a more
gentle spirit than you were, and yet would they not have an obstinate hereti
que, mainteyned neither. Their moderation is good as they learned of Augustine
and others, in case their gentleness might be used. But seeing you will not
embrace yt, if you had the smarte you could, not complain of contrariety to
our own men, neither of injury. As for example we have of you. We deal
otherwise with you, than you dealt with us. We follow that good rule that
Augustine gives, you did it not. Si terrerentur, and non docerentur, improba
quasi dominatio videretur, if they should be feared and not taught, it might
seem as a wicked governance. You have bin taught, and are taught. No more with
ours but from prison to fire. Therefore as we do that, so must we do that
follows. Sed rursus si docerentur and non terrerentur, vetustate consuetudinis
obdurarentur. But again if they should be taught and not feared, they would
be hardened with oldnesse of custom. So that what is done is but well done:
and not against example, as you say: if worse were showed, we have example to,
both of Augustine and your own doings. But this do not I wish for, neither
would have it showed, God knows what I speak, yet so much must I say,
because you provoke it, seming unto me rather to scoff at these worshipful
men, than otherwise having just occasion to complain. God give you grace to
enter into your self, that ye may remember how you go a stray, not walking in
such ways as he has appointed for you, that at the last you may seek unto
him, you may repair homeward, after this your peregrination, and he receive
you as a most joyful Father. Amen.


