THE REVENGERS TRAGAEDIE. As it has been sundry times Acted, by the Kings
Majesty's Servants.

AT LONDON Printed by G. ELD, and are to be fold at his house in Fleete-lane at
the sign of the Printers-Presse. 1607.

The Reuengers Tragaedie.
ACT. 1. SCAE. 1.
Enter Vendici, the Duke, Duchess, Lusurioso her son, Spurio the bastard,
with a train, pass over the Stage with Torch-light. Vindi. DVke: royal
letcher; go, gray hayrde adultery,
And thou his son as impious steept as he:
And thou his bastard true-begott in evil:
And thou his Duchess that will do with Diuill,
Four exlent Characters -- O that marrow-lesse age,
Would stuff the hollow Bones with dambd desires,
And stead of heat kindle infernal fires,
Within the spend-thrift veins of a dry Duke,
A parcht and iuicelesse luxur. O God! one
That has scarce blood enough to live upon.
And he to ryct it like a son and heir?
O the thought of that
Turns my abused heart strings into fret.
Thou sallow picture of my poisoned lcue,
My studies ornament, thou shell of Death,
Once the bright face of my betrothed Lady,
When life and beauty naturally filled out
These ragged imperfections;
When two-heauen-pointed Diamonds were set
In those unsightly Rings; -- then 'twas a face
So far beyond the artificial shine
Of any woman's bought complexion
That the vprightest man, (if such there be,
That sin but seven times a day) broke custom
And made up eight with looking after her,
Oh she was able to ha made a Usurers son
Melt all his patrimony in a kiss,
And what his father fifty years told
To have consumde, and yet his suit been cold:
But oh accursed Palace!
Thee when thou were appareld in thy flesh,
The old Duke poisoned,
Because thy purer part would not consent
Unto his palsey-lust, for old men lust-full
Do show like young men angry, eager violent,
Out-bid like their limited performances
O ware an old man hot, and vicious
Age as in gold in lust is covetous.
Vengence thou murders Quit-rent, and whereby
Thou shoust thy self Tennant to Tragedy,
Oh keep thy day, hour, minute, I beseech,
For those thou have determined: hum: who ere knew
Murder unpaid, faith give Revenge her due
Sha's kept touch hitherto -- be merry, merry,
Advance thee, O thou terror to fat folks
To have their Costly three-pilde flesh worn of
As bare as this -- for banquets: ease and laughter,
Can make great men as greatness goes by clay,
But wise men little are more great then they?

Enter her brother Hippolito. Hip. Still sighing ore deaths vizard.

Vind. Brother welcome,
What comfort bringst thou? how go things at Court?

Hip. In silk and silver brother: never brauer.

Vind. Puh,
Thou playst upon my meaning pree-thee say
Has that bald Madam, Opportunity?
Yet thought vpon's, speak are we happy yet?
Thy wrongs and mine are for one scabberd fit.

Hip. It may prove happiness?

Vind. What is it may prove?
Give me to taste.

Hip. Give me your hearing then,
You know my place at Court.

Vind. I; the Dukes Chamber
But it is a marvel thourt not turned out yet!

Hip. Faith I have been shooud at, but it was still my hap
To hold by the Duchess skirt, you guess at that,
Whom such a Coat keeps up can nere fall flat,
But to the purpose.
Last evening predecessor unto this,
The Dukes son warily enquird for me,
Whose pleasure I attended: he began,
By policy to open and vnhuske me
About the time and common rumor:
But I had so much wit to keep my thoughts
Up in their built houses, yet afforded him
An idle satifaction without danger,
But the whole aim, and scope of his intent
Ended in this, coniuring me in private,
To seek some strange digested fellow forth:
Of ill-contented nature, either disgracst
In formertimes, or by new grooms displacst,
Since his Step-mothers nuptials, such a blood
A man that were for evil only good;
To give you the true word some base coynd Pander?

Vind. I reach you, for I know his heat is such,
Were there as many Concubines as Ladies
He would not be contaynd, he must fly out:
I wonder how ill featurde, vilde proportiond.
That one should be: if she were made for woman,
Whom at the Insurrection of his lust
He would refuse for once, heart, I think none,
Next to a skull, tho more unsound then one
Each face he meets he strongly doates upon.

Hip. Brother you have truly spoke him?
He knows not you, but I Will swear you know him.

Vind. And therefore i will put on that knave for once,
And be a right man then, a man a'th Time,
For to be honest is not to be ith world,
Brother i will be that strange composed fellow.

Hip. And i will prefer you brother.

Vind. Go too then,
The smallst advantage fattens wronged men
It may point out, occasion, if I meet her,
I Will hold her by the fore-top fast enough;
Or like the French Moale heave up hair and all,
I have a habit that will fit it quaintly,
Here comes our Mother.

Hip. And Sister.

Vind. We must quoyne.
Women are apt you know to take false money,
But I dare stake my soul for these two creatures
Only excuse excepted that they will swallow,
Because their sex is easy in beleese.

Moth. What news from Cour son Carlo?

Hip. Faith Mother,
It Is whisperd there the Duchess youngest son
Has played a Rape on Lord Antonios wife.

Moth. On that relligious Lady!

Cast. Royal blood: monster he deserves to die,
If Italy had no more hopes but he.

Vin. Sister you have sentenced most direct, and true,
The Laws a woman, and would she were you:
Mother I must take leave of you.

Moth. Leave for what?

Vin. I Intend speedy travail.

Hip. That he does Madam.

Mo. Speedy indeed!

Vind. For since my worthy fathers funeral,
My life's unnaturally to me, even compeld
As if I hu'd now when I should be dead.

Mot. Indeed he was a worthy Gentleman
Had his estate been fellow to his mind.

Vind. The Duke did much deiect him.

Moth. Much?

Vind. To much.
And through disgrace often smotherd in his spirit,
When it would mount, surely I think he dyed
Of discontent: the Noblemans consumption.

Moth. Most sure he did!

Vind. Did he? lack, -- you know all
You were his midnight secretary.

Moth. No.
He was to wise to trust me with his thoughts.

Vind. In Faith then father thou wast wise indeed,
Wives are but made to go to bed and feed.
Come mother, sister: you will bring me onward brother?

Hip. I will.

Vind. I Will quickly turn into another.

Exeunt. Enter the old Duke, Lussiurioso, his son, the Duchess; the Bastard,
the Duchess two sons Ambitioso, and Superuacuo, the third her youngest
brought out with Officers for the Rape two Judges. Duke. Duchess it is your
youngest son, we are sorry,
His violent Act has even drawn blood of honor
And staind ou^ honors,
Thrown inck upon the for-head of our state
Which envious spirits will dip their pens into
After our death; and blot us in our Toombes.
For that which would seem treason in our lives
Is laughter when we are dead, who dares now whisper
That dares not then speak out, and even proclaim,
With loud words and broad pens our closest shame.

Iud. Your grace has spoke like to your silver years
Full of confirmed gravity; -- for what is it to have,
A flattering false insculption on a Toombe:
And in men's hearts reproach, the boweld Corpse,
May be seard in, but with free tongue I speak,
The faults of great men through their fearce clothes break,

Duk. They do, we are sorry for it, it is our fate,
To live in fear and die to live in hate,
I leave him to your sentance dome him Lords
The fact is great; whilst I sit by and sigh.

Duch. My gracious Lord I pray be merciful,
Although his trespass far exceed his years,
Think him to be your own as I am yours,
Call him not son in law: the law I fear
Will fall too soon upon his name and him:
Temper his fault with pity?

Luss. Good my Lord.
Then twill not taste so bitter and unpleasant
Upon the Judges pallat, for offenses
Gilt ore with mercy, show like fairest women,
Good only for their beauties, which washed of: no sin is ouglies Ambitis I
beseech your grace,
Be soft and mild, let not Relentlesse Law,
Look with an iron for-head on our brother.

Spu. He yields small comfort yet, hope he shall die,
And if a bastards wish might stand in force,
Would all the court were turn de into a coarse,

Duc, No pity yet? must I rise fruitless then,
A wonder in a woman; are my knees,
Of such low -- metal -- that without Respect --

1. Judge. Let the offender stand forth,
It Is the Dukes pleasure that Impartial Doom,
Shall take first hold of his unclean attempt,
A Rape! why it is the very core of lust,
Double Adultery.

Iuni. So Sir.

2. Iud. And which was worse,
Committed on the Lord Antonioes wife,
That General honest Lady, confess my Lord!
What moved you toot?

Iuni. why flesh and blood my Lord.
What should move men unto a woman else,

Luss. O do not jest thy doom, trust not an axe
Or sword too far; the Law is a wise serpent
And quickly can beguile thee of thy life,
Tho marriage only has made thee my brother,
I love thee so far, play not with thy Death,

Iuni. I thank you troth, good admonitions faith,
Ifide the grace now to make use of them,

1. Iud. That Ladies name has spread such a fair wing
Over all Italy; that if our Tongs,
Were sparing toward the Fact, Judgment it self,
Would be condemned and suffer in men's thoughts,

Iuni. Well then it is done, and it would please me well
Were it to do again: sure she is a Goddess,
For i would no power to see her, and to live,
It falls out true in this for I must die,
Her beauty was ordaynd to be my scaffold,
And yet my thinks I might be easier ceast,
My fault being sport, let me but die in jest,

1. Iud. This be the sentence,

Dut. O keept upon your Tongue, let it not slip,
Death too soon steals out of a Lawyers lip,
Be not so cruell-wise?

1. Judge. Your Grace must pardon us,
It Is but the Justice of the Law.

Dut. The Law,
Is grown more subtle then a woman should be.

Spu. Now, now he dies, rid 'em away.

Dut. O what it is to have an old-coole Duke,
To be as slack in tongue, as in performance.

1. Judge. Confirmde, this be the doom irreuocable.

Dut. Oh!

1. Judge. Tomorrow early.

Dut. Pray be a bed my Lord.

1. Judge. Your Grace much wrongs your self.

Ambi. No it is that tongue,
Your too much right, dos do us too much wrong.

1. Judge. Let that offender --

Dut. Live, and be in health.

1. Iud Be on a Scaffold

Duk. Hold, hold, my Lord.

Spu. Pax ont,
What makes my Dad speak now?

Duke. We will defer the judgment till next sitting,
In the mean time let him be kept close prisoner:
Guard bear him hence.

Ambi. Brother, this makes for thee,
Fear not, we will have a trick to set thee free.

Iuni. Brother, I will expect it from you both; and in that hope I rest.

Super. Farewell, be mesry.

Exit with a guard. Spu. Delayed, deferd nay then if judgment have cold blood,
Flattery and bribes will kill it.

Duke. About it then my Lords with your best powers,
More serious business calls upon our homes.
Exe. manct Du.
Dut. Wast ever known step-Dutchesse was so mild,
And calm as I? some now would plot his death,
With easy Doctors, those loose living men,
And make his witherd Grace fall to his Grave,
And keep Church better?
Some second wife would do this, and dispatch
Her double loathd Lord at meat and sleep,
Indeed it is true an old man's twice a child,
Mine cannot speak, one of his single words,
Would quite have freed my youngest dearest son
From death or durance, and have made him walk
With a bold foot upon the thornie law,
Whose Prickles should bow under him, but it is not,
And therefore wedlock faith shall be forgot,
I Will kill him in his forehead, hate there feed,
That wound is deepest tho it never bleed:
And here comes he whom my heart points unto,
His bastard son, but my loves true-begot,
Many a wealthy letter have I sent him,
Sweld up with Jewels, and the timorous man
Is yet but coldly kind,
That Iewel's mine that quiuers in his ear,
Mocking his Masters chillness and vain fear,
Has spide me now.

Spu. Madame? your Grace so private.
My duty on your hand.

Dut. Upon my hand sir, troth I think youde fear,
To kiss my hand too if my lip stood there,

Spi. Witness I would not Madam.

Dut. It Is a wonder,
For ceremony has made many fools,
It is as easy way unto a Duchess,
As to a Hatted-dame, (if her love answer)
But that by timorous honors, pale respects,
Idle degrees of fear, men make their ways
Hard of themselves -- what have you thought of me?

Spi. Madam I ever think of you, in duty,
Regard and --

Dut. Puh, upon my love I mean.

Spu. I would 'twere love, but 'tus a fowler name
Then lust; you are my fathers wife, your Grace may guess now,
What I could call it.

Dut. Why thou art his son but falsely,
It Is a hard question whether he begot thee.

Spu. In Faith it is true too; I Am an uncertain man,
Of more uncertain woman; may be his groom 'ath stable begot me, you know I
know not, he could ride a horse well, a shroud suspicion marry -- he was
wondrous tall, he had his length in faith, for peeping over half shut holy day
windows,

Men would desire him light, when he was a foot,
He made a goodly show under a Pent-house,
And when he rid, his Hatt would check the signs, and clatter
Barbers Basins.

Dut. Nay set you a horse back once,
You Will nere light off.

Spu. Indeed I am a beggar.

Dut. That Is more the sign thou'art Great -- but to our love.
Let it stand firm both in thought and mind,
That the Duke was thy Father, as no doubt then
He bid fair fort, thy injury is the more,
For had he cut thee a right Diamond,
Thou had been next set in the Duke-doomes Ring,
When his worn self like Ages easy slave,
Had dropped out of the Collet into the Grave;
What wrong can equal this? can thou be tame
And think vppon't.

Spu. No mad and think upon it.

Dut. Who would not be reuengd of such a father,
Even in the worst way? I would thank that sin,
That could most injury him, and be in league with it,
Oh what a grief it is, that a man should live
But once ith world, and then to live a Bastard,
The curse a'the womb, the thief of Nature,
Begot against the seventh commandment,
Half dambd in the conception, by the justice
Of that vnbribed everlasting law.

Spu. Oh I Would a hot-backt Diuill to my father.

Dut. Would not this mad even patience, make blood rough?
Who but an Eunuch would not sin? his bed
By one false minute disinherited.

Spi. I, there is the vengeance that my birth was wrapped in,
I Will be reuengd for all, now hate begin,
I Will call foul Incest but a Venial sin.

Dut. Cold still: in vain then must a Duchess woo?

Spu. Madam I blush to say what I will do.

Dut. Thence flew sweet comfort, earnest and farewell.

Spu. Oh one incestuous kiss picks open hell.

Dut. Faith now old Duke; my vengeance shall reach high,
I Will arm thy brow with woman's Herauldrie.
Exit.
Spu. Duke, thou did do me wrong, and by thy Act
Adultery is my nature;
Faith if the truth were known, I was begot
After some gluttonous dinner, some stirring dish
Was my first father; when deep healths went round,
And Ladies cheeks were painted red with Wine,
Their tongues as short and nimble as their heels
Uttering words sweet and thick; and when they rise,
Were merrily disposd to fall again,
In such a whispring and withdrawing hour,
When base-male-Bawds kept Centinell at staire-head
Was I stolen softly; oh -- damnation met
The sin of feasts, drunken adultery.
I feel it swell me; my revenge is just,
I was begot in impudent Wine and Lust:
Stepmother I consent to thy desires,
I love thy mischief well, but I hate thee,
And those three Cubs thy sons, wishing confusion
Death and disgrace may be their Epitaphs,
As for my brother the Dukes only son,
Whose birth is more beholding to report
Then mine, and yet perhaps as falsely sown.
(Women must not be trusted with their own)
I Will loose my days upon him hate all I,
Duke on thy browe I Will draw my Bastardie.
For indeed a bastard by nature should make Cuckolds,
Because he is the son of a Cuckold-maker.
Exit.
Enter Vindici and Hippolito, Vindici in disguise to attend L. Lussurioso the
Dukes son. Vind. What brother? am I far enough from my self?

Hip. As if another man had been sent whole
Into the world, and none wist how he came.

Vind. It will confirm me bold: the child a th Court,
Let blushes dwelli'th Country impudence!
Thou Goddess of the palace, Mistrs of Mistesses
To whom the costly perfumd-people pray,
Strike thou my forehead into dauntlesse Marble;
Mine eyes to steady Saphires: turn my visage,
And if I must needs glow, let me blush inward
That this immodest season may not spy,
That scholar in my cheeks, fool bashfullnes.
That Maid in the old time, whose flush of Grace
Would never suffer her to get good clothes;
Our maids are wiser; and are less ashamd,
Save Grace the bawd I seldom hear Grace named!

Hip. Nay brother you reach out a'th Verge now, -- Sfoote the Dukes son,
settle your looks.


Vind. Pray let me not be doubted.

Hip. My Lord --

Luss. Hipolito? -- be absent leave us.

Hip. My Lord after long search, wary inquiryes
And politic siftings, I made choice of yon fellow,
Whom I guess rare for many deep employments;
This our age swims within him: and if Time
Had so much hair, I should take him for Time,
He is so near kin to this present minute?

Luss. It Is enough.
We thank thee: yet words are but great-mens blanckes
Gold tho it be dum does utter the best thanks.

Hip. Your plenteons honor -- an exlent fellow my Lord.

Luss. So, give us leave -- welcome, be not far off, we must be better
acquainted, push, be bold with us, thy hand:


Vind. With all my heart in faith how do sweet Musk-cat.
When shall we lie together?

Luss. Wondrous knave!
Gather him into boldness, Sfoote the slaue's
Already as familiar as an Ague,
And shakes me at his pleasure, friend I can
Forget my self in private, but else where,
I pray do you remember me.

Vind. Oh very well sir -- I conster my self saucy!

Luss. What have been,
Of what profession.

Vind. A bone-setter!

Luss. A bone-setter!

Vind. A bawd my Lord,
One that setts bones together.

Luss. Notable bluntness?
Fit, fit for me, even traynd up to my hand
Thou have been Scriuener to much knavery then.

Vind. Fool, to abundance sir; I have been witness
To the surrenders of a thousand virgins,
And not so little,
I have seen Patrimonyes washed a pieces
Fruit-feilds turned into bastards,
And in a world of Acres,
Not so much dust due to the heir it was left too
As would well gravel a petition

Luss. Fine villain? troth I like him wonderously
He Is even shapt for my purpose, then thou know
Ith world strange lust.

Vind. O Dutch lust! fulsome lust!
Drunken procrearion, which begets, so many drunckards;
Some father dreads not (gonne to bed in wine) to slide from the mother,
And cling the daughter-in-law,
Some Uncles are adulterous with their Neeces,
Brothers with brothers wives, O hour of Incest!
Any kin now next to the Rim ath sister
Is man's meat in these days, and in the morning
When they are up and dressed, and their mask on,
Who can perceive this? save that eternal eye
That see's through flesh and all, well: -- If any thing be dambd?
It will be twelve a clock at night; that twelve
Will never escape;
It is the Judas of the hours; wherein,
Honest salvation is betrayde to sin,

Luss. In Troth it is too? but let this talk glide
It is our blood to err, tho hell gapte loud
Ladies know Lucifer fell, yet still are proud!
Now sir? were thou as secret as you are subtle,
And deeply fadomd into all estates
I would embrace thee for a near employment,
And thou should swell in money, and be able
To make lame beggars crouch to thee.

Vind. My Lord?
Secret? I nere had that disease ath mother
I praise my father: why are men made closse?
But to keep thoughts in best, I grant you this
Tell but some woman a secret over night,
Your doctor may find it in the vrinall ith morning,
But my Lord.

Luss. So, you are confirmd in me
And thus I enter thee.

Vind. This Indian diuill,
Will quickly enter any man: but a Usurer,
He preuents that, by entering the diuill first.

Luss. Attend me, I am past my depht in lust
And I must swim or drown, all my desires
Are leueld at a Virgin not far from Court,
To whom I have conuayde by Messenger
Many waxt Lines, full of my neatest spirit,
And jewels that were able to ^auish her
Without the help of man; all which and more
She foolish chaste sent back, the messengers,
Receiving frowns for answers.

Vind. Possible!
It Is a rare Phaenix who ere she be,
If your desires be such, she so repugnant,
In troth my Lord i would be reuengde and marry her.

Luss. Push; the doury of her blood and of her fortunes,
Are both too mean, -- good enough to be bad withal
I Am one of that number can defend
Marriage is good: yet rather keep a friend,
Give me my bed by stealth -- there is true delight
What breeds a loathing in it, but night by night.

Vind. A very fine relligion?

Luss. Therefore thus,
He trust thee in the business of my heart
Because I see thee well experienc'st
In this Luxurious day wherein we breath,
Go thou, and with a smooth enchaunting tongue
Bewitch her ears, and Cousen her of all Grace
Enter upon the portion of her soul,
Her honor, which she calls her chastity
And bring it into expense, for honesty
Is like a stock of money laid to sleep,
Which nere so little broke, does never keep:

Vind. You have gint the Tang in faith my Lord
Make known the Lady to me, and my brain,
Shall swell with strange Invention: I will move it
Till I expire with speaking, and drop down
Without a word to save me; -- but i will work --

Luss. We thank thee, and will raise thee: -- receive her name, it is the only
daughter, to Madame Gratiana the late widow


Vind. Oh, my sister, my sister? --

Luss. Why do walk aside?

Vind. My Lord, I was thinking how I might begin
As thus, oh Lady -- or twenty hundred devices,
Her very bodkin will put a man in.

Luss. I, or the wagging of her hair.

Vind No, that shall put you in my Lord.

Luss. Shal't? why content, do know the daughter then?

Vind. O exlent well by sight.

Luss. That was her brother
That did prefer thee to us.

Vind. My Lord I think so,
I knew I had seen him some where --

Luss. And therefore pree-thee let thy heart to him,
Be as a Virgin, closse.

Vind. Oh me good Lord.

Luss. We may laugh at that simple age within him;

Vind. Ha, ha, ha.

Luss. Himself being made the subtle instrument,
To wind up a good fellow.

Vind. That Is I my Lord.

Luss. That Is thou.
To entice and work his sister.

Vind. A pure nouice?

Luss. It Was finely managed.

Vind. Gallantly carried;
A prety-perfumde villain.

Luss. I Have bethought me
If she prove chaste still and immovable,
Venture upon the Mother, and with gifts
As I will furnish thee, begin with her.

Vin. Oh fie, fie, that is the wrong end my Lord. It Is mere impossible that a
mother by any gifts should become a bawd to her own Daughter!


Luss. Nay then I see you are but a puny in the subtle Mystery of a woman: --
why it is held now no dainty dish: The name

Is so in league with age, that now adays
It does Eclipse three quarters of a Mother;

Vind. Do so my Lord?
Let me alone then to Eclipse the fourth.

Luss. Why well said, come i will furnish thee, but first swear to be true in all.


Vind. True?

Luss. Nay but swear!

Vind. Swear? -- I hope your honor little doubts my faith.

Luss. Yet for my humors sake cause I love swearing.

Vind. Cause you love swearing, slud I will.

Luss. Why enough,
Erelong look to be made of better stuff.

Vind. That will do well indeed my Lord.

Luss. Attend me?

Vind. Oh.
Now let me burst, I Have eaten Noble poison,
We are made strange fellows, brother, innocent villains,
Wilt not be angry when thou hearst on it, think thou?
Ifayth thou shall; swear me to foul my sister.
Sword I durst make a promise of him to thee,
Thou shall dis-heire him, it shall be thine honor,
And yet now angry froath is down in me,
It would not prove the meanest policy
In this disguize to try the faith of both,
Another might have had the self same office,
Some slave, that would have wrought effectually,
I and perhaps ore-wrought em, therefore I,
Being thought trauayld, will apply my self,
Unto the self same form, forget my nature,
As if no part about me were kin to em,
So touch' em, -- tho I durst a most for good,
Venture my lands in heaven upon their good.
Exit.
Enter the discontented Lord Antonio, whose wife the Duchesses youngest Son
ravished he Discovering the body of her dead to certain Lords: and Hippolito.
L. Ant. Draw nearer Lords and be sad witnesses
Of a fair comely building newly fallen,
Being falsely undermined: violent rape
Has played a glorious act, behold my Lords
A sight that strikes man out of me:

Piero That virtuous Lady

Ant. President for wives?

Hip. The blush of many weomen, whose chaste presence,
Would ene call shame up to their cheeks,
And make pale wanton sinners have good colors. --

L. Ant. Dead!
Her honor first drunk poison, and her life,
Being fellows in one house did pledge her honor,

Pier. O grief of many!

L. Anto. I marked not this before.
A prayer Book the pillow to her cheek,
This was her rich confection, and another
Plast^^d in her right hand, with a leaf tuckt up,
Poynting to these words.
Melius virtute mori, Quam per Dedecus viuere.
True and effectual it is indeed.

Hip. My Lord since you enuite us to your sorrows,
Lets truly tast'em, that with equal comfort,
As to our selves we may releive your wrongs,
We have grief too, that yet walks without Tongue,
Curaeleues l^quuntur, Maiores stupent.

L. Ant. You deal with truth my Lord.
Lend me but your Attentions, and I Will cut
Long grief into short words: last reuelling night.
When Torch-light made an artificial noone
About the Court, some Courtiers in the mask,
Putting on better faces then their own,
Being full of frawde and flattery: amongst whom,
The Ducheses youngest son (that moth to honor)
Filled up a Room; and with long lust to eat,
Into my wearing; amongst all the Ladies,
Singled out that dear form; who ever lived,
As cold in Lust as she is now in death;
(Which that step Duches -- Monster knew to well;)
And therefore in the height of all the reuells,
When Music was hard lowdest, Courtiers busiest,
And Ladies great with laughter; -- O Vicious minute!
Unfit but for relation to be spoke of,
Then with a face more impudent then his vizard
He harried her amidst a throng of Panders,
That live upon damnation of both kinds,
And fed the ravenous vulture of his lust,
(O death to think ont) she her honor forest,
Deemd it a nobler dowry for her name,
To die with poison then to live with shame.

Hip. A wondrous Lady; of rare fire compact,
She Has made her name an Empress by that act,

Pier. My Lord what judgment follows the offender?

L. Ant Faith none my Lord it cooles and is deferd,

Pier. Delay the doom for rape?

L. Ant, O you must note who it is should die,
The Duchess son, she will look to be a sauer,
Judgment in this age is nere kin to favor.

Hip. Nay then step forth thou Bribelesse officer;
I bind you all in steel to bind you surely,
Here let your oths meet, to be kept and paid,
Which else will stick like rust, and shame the blade,
Strengthen my vow, that if at the next sitting,
Judgment speak all in gold, and spare the blood
Of such a serpent, even before their seats,
To let his soul out, which long since was found,
Guilty in heaven.

All. We swear it and will act it,

L. Anto. Kind Gentlemen, I thank you in minelre,

Hip. Twere pity?
The ruins of so fair a Monument,
Sold not be dipped in the defacers blood,

Piero. Her funeral shall be wealthy, for her name,
Merits a toombe of pearl; my Lord Antonio,
For this time wipe your Lady from your eyes,
No doubt our grief and youres may one day court it,
When we are more familiar with Reueng,

L. Anto. That is my comfort Gentlemen, and I ^oy,
In this one happiness above the rest,
Which will be called a miralce at last,
That being an old -- man i would a wife so chaste.

Exeunt. ACTVS. 2. SCAE. 1.
Enter Castiza the sister. Cast. How hardly shall that maiden be beset,
Whose only fortunes, are her constant thoughts,
That has no other childes-part but her honor,
That Keeps her low; and empty in estate.
Maids and their honors are like poor beginners,
Were not sin rich there would be fewer sinners;
Why had not virtue a reuennewe? well,
I know the cause, twold have impouerish'd hell.
How now Dondolo.

Don. Madona, there is one as they say a thing of flesh and blood, a man I take
him by his beard that would very desireously month to mouth with you.


Cast. What Is that?


Don. Show his teeth in your company,


Cast. I understand thee not;


Don. Why speak with you Madona!


Cast. Why say so madman, and cut of a great deal of durty way; had it not
been better spoke in ordinary words that one would speak with me.


Don. Ha, ha, that's as ordinary as two shillings, I would strive alitle to show
my self in my place, a Gentleman-usher scorns to use the Phrase and fanzye of
a seruingman.


Cast. Yours be your one sir, go direct him hither,
I hope some happy tidings from my brother,
That lately trauayld, whom my soul affects.
Here he comes.

Enter Vindice her brother disguised. Vin. Lady the best of wishes to your sex.
Fair skins and new gowns,

Cast. Oh they shall thank you sir,
Whence this,

Vin. Oh from a dear and worthy friend, mighty!

Cast. From whom?

Vin. The Dukes son!

Cast. Receive that!
A box ath ear to her Brother. I swore I Would put anger in my hand,
And pass the Virgin limits of my self,
To him that next appeared in that base office,
To be his sins Attorney, bear to him,
That figure of my hate upon thy check
Whilst it is yet hot, and I Will reward thee fort,
Tell him my honor shall have a rich name,
When several harlots shall share his with shame,
Farewell commend me to him in my hate!
Exit.
Vin. It is the sweetest Box,
That ere my nose came nigh,
The finest drawne-worke cuffe that ere was worn,
I Will love this blow for ever, and this cheek
Shall still hence forward take the wall of this.
Oh I Am a boue my tongue: most constant sister,
In this thou have right honorable shown,
Many are called by their honor that have none,
Thou art approved for ever in my thoughts.
It is not in the power of words to taynt thee,
And yet for the salvation of my oath,
As my resolve in that point; I will lay,
Hard seige unto my Mother, tho I know,
A Sirens tongue could not bewitch her so.
Mass fitly here she comes, thanks my disguize,
Madame good af^ernoone.

Moth. Y' are welcome sir?

Vind. The Next of Italy commends him to you,
Our mighty expectation, the Dukes son.

Moth. I think my self much honored, that he pleases,
To tanck me in his thoughts.

Vind. So may you Lady:
One that is like to be our sudden Duke,
The Crown gapes for him every tide, and then
Commander ore us all, do but think on him,
How blessed were they now that could pleasure him
Even with any thing almost.

Moth. I, save their honor?

Vind. Tut, one would let a little of that go too
And nere be seen in it: nere be seen it, mark you,
I Would winck and let it go --

Moth. Marry but I would not.

Vind. Marry but I would I hope, I know you would too,
If youd that blood now which you gave your daughter,
To her indeed it is, this wheel comes about,
That man that must be all this, perhaps ere morning
(For his white father does but moulde away)
Has long desirde your daughter.

Moth. Desirde?

Vind. Nay but he are me,
He desirs now that will command hereafter,
There fore be wise, I speak as more a friend
To you then him; Madam, I know you are poor,
And lack the day, there are too many poor Ladies already
Why should you vex the number? it is despisd,
Live wealthy, rightly understand the world,
And chide away that foolish -- Country girl
Keeps company with your daughter, chastity,

Moth. Oh fie, fie, the riches of the world cannot hire a mother to such a most
unnatural task.

Vind. No, but a thousand Angels can,
Men have no power, Angels must work you to it,
The world descends into such base-borne evils
That forty Angels can make fourscore diuills,
There will be fools still I perceive, still fool.
Would I be poor dejected, scornd of greatness,
Swept from the Palace, and see other daughters
Spring with the dew ath Court, having mine own
So much desired and loved -- by the Dukes son,
No, I would raise my state upon her breast
And call her eyes my Tennants, I would count
My yearly maintenance upon her cheeks:
Take Coach upon her lip, and all, her parts
Should keep men after men, and I would ride,
In pleasure upon pleasure:
You took great pains for her, once when it was,
Let her requite it now, tho it be but some
You brought her forth, she may well bring you home,

Moth. O heavens! this ouer-comes me?

Vind. Not I hope, already?

Moth. It is too strong for me, men know that know us,
We are so weak their words can overthrow us,
He touched me nearly made my virtues bate
When his tongue struck upon my poor estate.

Vind. Ie'en quake to proceed, my spirit turns edge?
I fear me she is vnmotherd, yet i will venture,
That woman is all male, whom none can Enter?
What think you now Lady, speak are you wiser?
What said advancement to you: thus it said!
The daughters f^l lifts up the mothers head:
Did it not Madame? but i will swear it does
In many places, tut, this age fears no man,
It Is no shame to be bad, because it is common.

Moth. I that is the comfort on it.

Vind. The comfort on it!
I keep the best for last, can these persuade you
To forget heaven -- and --

Moth. I these are they?

Vind. Oh!

Moth. That enchant our sex,
These are the means that govern our affections, -- that woman
Will not be troubled with the mother long,
That sees the comfortable shine of you,
I blush to think what for your sakes I Will do!

Vind. O suffering heaven with thy invisible finger,
Ene at this Instant turn the precious side
Of both mine eye balls inward, not to see my self,

Mot. Look you sir.

Vin. Holla.

Mot. Let this thank your pains.

Vind. O you are a kind Madman;

Mot. I Will see how I can move,

Vind. Your words will sting,

Mot. If she be still chaste I Will nere call her mine,

Vind. Spoke truer then you meant it,

Mot. Daughter Castiza.

Cast. Madam,

Vind. O she is yonder.
Meet her: troops of celestial Soldiers guard her heart.
Yon dam has devils enough to take her part,

Cast. Madam what makes yon evil offic'd man,
In presence of you;

Mot. Why?

Cast. He lately brought
Immodest writing sent from the Dukes son
To tempt me to dishonorable Act,

Mot. Dishonorable Act? -- good honorable fool,
That would be honest cause thou would be so,
Producing no one reason but thy will.
And t'as a good report, pretely commended,
But pray by whom; mean people; ignorant people,
The better sort I Am sure cannot abide it,
And by what rule should we square out our lives,
But by our betters actions? oh if thou knew'st
What it were to loose it, thou would never keep it:
But there is a cold curse laid upon all Maids,
Whilst other clip the Sun they clasp the shades!
Virginity is paradise, locked up.
You cannot come by your selves without fee.
And it was decreed that man should keep the key!
Deny advancement, treasure, the Dukes son,

Cast. I cry you mercy. Lady I mistook you,
Pray did you see my Mother; which way went you?
Pray God I have not lost her.

Vind. Prittily put by.

Moth. Are you as proud to me as coye to him?
Do you not know me now?

Cast. Why are you she?
The worlds so changd, one shape into another,
It is a wise child now that knows her mother?

Vind. Most right in faith.

Mother. I owe your cheek my hand,
For that presumption now, but I Will forget it,
Come you shall leave those childish hauiours,
And understand your Time, Fortunes flow to you,
What will you be a Girl?
If all feared drowning, that spy waves a shore,
Gold would grow rich, and all the Merchants poor.

Cast. It is a pretty saying of a wicked one, but me thinks now
It dos not show so well out of your mouth,
Better in his.

Vind. Faith bad enough in both,
Were I in earnest as I Will seem no less?
I wonder Lady your own mothers words,
Cannot be taken, nor stand in full force.
It Is honestic you urge; what is honesty?
It Is but heavens beggar; and what woman is so foolish to keep honesty,
And be not able to keep her-selfe? No,
Times are grown wiser and will keep less charge,
A Maid that h'as small portion now entends,
To break up house, and live upon her friends
How blessed are you, you have happiness alone,
Others must fall to thousands, you to one,
Sufficient in himself to make your forehead
Dazzle the world with Jewels, and petitionary people
Start at your presence.

Mother. Oh if I were young, I should be ravished.

Cast. I to loose your honor.

Vind. Slid how can you loose your honor?
To deal with my Lords Grace,
Heel add more honor to it by his Title,
Your Mother will tell you how.

Mother. That I will.

Vind. O think upon the pleasure of the Palace,
Secured ease and state; the stirring meats,
Ready to move out of the dishes, that even now quicken when their eaten,
Banquets abroad by Torch-light, Musicks, sports,
Bare-headed vassailes, that had nere the fortune
To keep on their own Hats, but let horns were em,
Nine Coaches waiting -- hurry, hurry, hurry.

Cast. I to the Diuill.

Vind. I to the Diuill, toth' Duke by my faith.

Moth. I to the Duke: daughter youde scorn to think ath'
Diuill and you were there once.

Vin. True, for most there are as proud as he for his heart in faith
Who'de sit at home in a neglected room,
Dealing her short-liu'de beauty to the pictures,
That are as vse-lesse as old men, when those
Poorer in face and fortune then her-selfe,
Walk with a hundred Acres on their backs,
Fair Meadows cut into Green fore-parts -- oh
It was the greatest blessing ever happened to women;
When Farmers sons agreed, and met again,
To wash their hands, and come up Gentlemen;
The commonwealth has flourisht ever since,
Lands that were meat by the Rod, that labors spared,
Tailors ride down, and measure em by the yeard;
Fair trees, those comely fore-tops of the Field,
Are cut to maintain head-tires -- much untold,
All thriues but Chastity, she lies a cold,
nay shall I come nearer to you, mark but this:
Why are there so few honest women, but because it is the poorer profession,
that is accounted best, that's best followed, least in trade, least in fashion,
and that's not honesty believe it, and do but note the love and dejected price
of it: Loose but a Pearl, we search and cannot brook it.
But that once gone, who is so mad to look it.



Mother. Troth he says true.

Cast. False, I defy you both:
I have endured you with an ear of fire,
Your Tongues have struck hot yrons on my face;
Mother, come from that poisonous woman there.

Mother. Where?

Cast. Do you not see her, she is too inward then:
Slave perish in thy office: you heavens please,
Henceforth to make the Mother a disease,
Which first begins with me, yet I Have out-gon you.
Exit.
Vind. O Angels clap your wings upon the skies,
And give this Virgin Crystal plaudities?

Mot. Peevish, coy, foolish, but return this answer,
My Lord shall be most welcome, when his pleasure
Conducts him this way, I will sway mine own,
Women with women can work best alone.
Exit.
Vind. Indeed I Will tell him so;
O more uncivil, more unnatural,
Then those base-titled creatures that look downe-ward,
Why does not heaven tnrne black, or with a frown
Undo the world -- why does not earth start up,
And strike the sins that tread vppon't -- oh;
Were not for gold and women; there would be no damnation,
Hell would look like a Lords Great Kitchen without fire in it;
But 'twas decreed before the world began,
That they should be the hooks to catch, at man.
Exit.
Enter Lussurioso, with Hippolito, Vindicies brother. Luss. I much applaud thy
judgment, thou art well read in a fellow,
And it is the deepest Art to study man;
I know this, which I never learnt in schools,
The world's divided into knaves and fools.

Hip. Knave in your face my Lord, behind your back.

Luss. And I much thank thee, that thou have preferred,
A fellow of discourse -- well mingled,
And whose brain Time has seasond.

Hip. True my Lord,
We shall find season once I hope; -- O villain!
To make such an unnatural slave of me; -- but --

Luss. Mass here he comes.

Hip. And now shall I have free leave to depart.

Luss. Your absence, leave us.

Hip. Are not my thoughts true?
I must remove; but brother you may stay,
Heart, we are both made Bawdes a newfound way?
Exit.
Luss. Now, we are an even number? a third man's dangerous,
Especially her brother, say, be free,
Have I a pleasure toward.

Vind. Oh my Lord.

Luss. Ravish me in thine answer, art thou rare,
Have thou beguilde her of salvation,
And rubd hell ore with hunny; is she a woman?

Vind. In all but in Desire.

Luss. Then she is in nothing, -- I bate in courage now.

Vind. The words I brought,
Might well have made indifferent honest, naught,
A right good woman in these days in changde,
Into white money with less labor far,
Many a Maid has turned to Mahomet,
With easier working; I durst undertake
Upon the pawn and forfeit of my life.
With half those words to flat a Puritanes wife,
But she is closse and good; -- yet it is a doubt by this time; oh the mother,
the mother?

Luss. I never thought their sex had been a wonder,
Until this minute? what fruit from the Mother?

Vind. Now must I blister my soul, be forsworn,
Or shame the woman that received me first,
I will be true, thou live not to proclaim,
Spoke to a dying man, shame has no shame.
My Lord.

Luss. Whose that?

Vind. Here Is none but I my Lord.

Luss. What would thy have utter?

Vind. Comfort.

Luss. Welcome.

Vind. The Maid being dull, having no mind to travel,
Into unknown lands, what did me I straight,
But set spurs to the Mother; golden spurs,
Will put her to a false gallop in a trice,

Luss. Is It possible that in this.
The Mother should be dambd before the daughter?

Vin. Oh, that is good manners my Lord, the Mother for her age must go foremost
you know.


Lu. Thou'st spoke that true but where comes in this comfort.

Vind. In a fine place my Lord -- the unnatural mother,
Did with her tongue so hard be set her honor,
That the poor fool was struck to silent wonder,
Yet still the maid like an vnlighted Taper,
Was cold and chaste, save that her Mothers breath,
Did blow fire on her checkes, the girl departed,
But the good ancient Madam half mad, threw me
These promissing words, which I took deeply note of;
My Lord shall be most welcome,

Luss Faith I thank her,

Vin. When his pleasure conducts him this way.

Luss. That shall be soon ifath,

Vind. I will sway mine own,

Luss. She does the wiser I commend her fort,

Vind. Women with women can work best alone,

Luss. By this light and so they can, give 'em their due, men are not
comparable to 'em.


Vind. No that's true, for you shall have one woman knit more in a hour then
any man can Rauell again in seven and twenty year.


Luss. Now my desires are happy, I Will make 'em freemen now,
Thou art a precious fellow, faith I love thee,
Be wise and make it thy reuennew, beg, leg,
What office could thou be Ambitious for?

Vind. Office my Lord marry if I might have my wish I would have one that was
never begd yet,


Luss. Nay then thou can have none.

Vind. Yes my Lord I could pick out another office yet, nay and keep a horse
and drab vppont,


Luss. Prithee good bluntnes tell me.

Vind. Why I would desire but this my Lord, to have all the fees behind the
Arras; and all the farthingales that fall plumpe about twelve a clock at night
upon the Rushes.


Luss. You Are a mad apprehensiue knave, do think to make any great purchase
of that.


Vind. Oh it is an unknown thing my Lord, I wonder ta's been mist so long?


Luss. Well, this night i will visit her, and it is till then
A year in my desires-farwell, attend,
Trust me with thy preferment.
Exit.
Vind. My loved Lord;
Oh shall I kill him ath wrong-side now, no!
Sword thou wast never a back-biter yet,
I Will pierce him to his face, he shall die, looking upon me,
Thy veins are sweld with lust, this shall vnfill them,
Great men were Gods, if beggars could not kill them,
Forgive me heaven, to call my mother wicked,
Oh lessen not my days upon the earth
I cannot honor her, by this I fear me
Her tongue has turned my sister into use.
I was a villain not to be forsworn:
To this our lecherous hope, the Dukes son,
For Lawiers, Merchants, some divines and all,
Count beneficial perjury a sin small,
It shall go hard yet, butile guard her honor
And keep the ports sure?

Enter Hippol. Hip. Brother how goes the world? I would know news of you
But I have news to tell you.

Vind. What in the name of knavery?

Hipo. Knavery faith,
This vicious old Duke's worthily abusde
The pen of his bastard writes him Cuckold!

Vind. His bastard?

Hip. Pray believe it, he and the Duchess,
By night meet in their linen, they have been seen
By staire-foote pandars!

Vind. Oh sin foul and deep,
Great faults are winckt at when the Duke's a sleep,
See, see, here comes the Spurio.

Hip. Monstrous Luxur?

Vind. Vnbrac'd: two of his valiant bawdes with him.
O There Is a wicked whisper; hell is in his care
Stay let us observe his passage --

Spu. Oh but are you sure on it.

Ser. My Lord most sure on it, for it was spoke by one,
That is most inward with the Dukes sons lust:
That he intends within this hour to steal,
Unto Hippolitoes sister, whose chaste life
The mother has corrupted for his use.

Sp. Sweet word, sweet occasion, faith then brother
I Will disinherit you in as short time,
As I was when I was begot in have:
I Will dam you at your pleasure: precious deed
After your lust, oh twill be fine to bleed,
Come let our passing out be soft and wary.

Exeunt. Vi. Mark, there, there, that step, now to the Duches,
This their second meeting, writes the Duke Cuckold
With new additions, his horns newly revived:
Night! thou that lookst like sunerall Heralds fees
Torn down betimes ith morning, thou hangst fittly
To Grace those sins that have no grace at all,
Now it is full sea a bed over the world,
There Is iugling of all sides, some that were Maids
Even at Sun set are now perhaps ith Toale-booke,
This woman in immodest thin apparel:
Lets in her friend by water, here a Dame
Cunning, nails lether-hindges to a door,
To avoid proclamation,
Now Cuckolds are a quoyning, apace, apace, apace, apace?
And careful sisters spinne that thread ith night,
That does maintain them and their bawdes ith day!

Hip. You flow well brother?

Vind. Puh I Am shallow vet,
Too sparing and too modest, shall I tell thee,
If every trick were told that's dealt by night
There are few here that would not blush out right.

Hip. I am of that belief too.

Vind. Whose this comes,

Vind. The Dukes son up so late, -- brother fall back,
And you shall learn, some mischeife, -- my good Lord.

Luss. Piato, why the man I wished for, come,
I do embrace this season for the fittest
To taste of that young Lady?

Vind. Heart, and hell.

Hip. Dambd villain.

Vind. I ha no way now to cross it, but to kill him.

Luss. Come only thou and I.

Vin. My Lord my Lord.

Luss. Why do thou start us?

Vind. I Would almost forgot -- the bastard!

Lus. What of him?

Vind. This night, this hour -- this minute, now.

Luss. What? what?

Vin. Shadows the Duchess --

Luss. Horrible word.

Vind. And like strong poison eats,
Into the Duke your fathers forehead.

Luss. Oh.

Vind. He makes horn royal.

Lus: Most ignoble slave?

Vind. This is the fruit of two beds.

Luss. I am mad.

Vind. That passage he trod warily:

Luss. He did!

Vind. And hushed his villains every step he took.

Luss. His villains? i will confound them.

Vind. Take them finely, finely, now.

Luss. The Duchess Chamber-doore shall not control me.

Exeunt Hip. Good, happy, swift, there is gunpowder ith Court,
Wild fire at midnight, in this heedlesse fury
He may show violence to cross himself,
I Will follow the Event.
Exit.
Luss. Where is that villain?

Enter again. Vind. Sofly my Lord and you may take them twisted.

Luss. I care not how!

Vind. Oh twill be glorious,
To kill them doubled, when their heapt, be soft my Lord.

Luss. Away my spleen is not so lazy, thus and thus,
I Will shake their eyelids open, and with my sword
Shut them again for ever; -- villain, strumpet --

Duk. You upper Guard defend us.

Duch. Treason, treason.

Duk. Oh take me not in sleep, I have great sins, I must have days,
Nay months dear son, with penitential heaues,
To lift 'em out, and not to die vncleere,
O thou will kill me both in heaven and here.

Luss. I am amazde to death.

Duke. Nay villain traitor,
Worse then the fowlest Epithet, now I Will gripe thee
Even with the Nerves of wrath, and throw thy head
Amongst the Lawyers guard.

Enter Nobles and sons. 1. Noble. How comes the quiet of your Grace disturbd?

Duke. This boy that should be my self after me,
Would be my self before me, and in heat
Of that ambition bloudily rusht in
Intending to depose me in my bed?

2. Noble. Duty and naturall-loyalty for-fend.

Dut. He called his Father villain; and me strumpet,
A word that I abhor to file my lips with.

Ambi. That was not so well done Brother?

Luss. I am abusde -- I know there is no excuse can do me good.

Vind. It Is now good policy to be from sight,
His vicious purpose to our sisters honor,
Is crossed beyond our thought.

Hip. You little dreamt his Father slept here.

Vind. Oh 'twas far beyond me.
But since it fell so; -- without fright-full word,
Would he had killed him, twould have easde our swords.

Duk. Be comforted our Duchess, he shall dye.

dissemble a flight. Luss. Where Is this slaue-pander now? out of mine eye,
Guilty of this abuse.

Enter Spurio with his villains. Spu. You Are villains, Fablers,
You have knaves chins, and harlots tongues, you lie,
And I will dam you with one meal a day.

1. Ser. O good my Lord!

Spu. God's Blood you shall never sup.

2. Ser. O I beseech you sir.

Spu. To let my sword -- Catch cold so long and miss him.

1. Ser. Troth my Lord -- It Was his intent to meet there.

Spu. Heart he is yonder?
Ha? what news here? is the day out ath-socket,
That it is Noone at Midnight; the Court up,
How comes the Guard so saucy with his elbowes?

Luss. The Bastard here?
Nay then the truth of my intent shall out,
My Lord and Father hear me.

Duke. Bear him hence.

Luss. I can with loyalty excuse.

Duke. Excuse? to prison with the Villain,
Death shall not long lag after him.

Spu. Good in faith, then it is not much amiss,

Luss. Brothers, my best release lies on your tongues,
I pray persuade for me.

Ambi. It is our duties: make your self sure of us.

Sup. We Will sweat in pleading.

Luss. And I may live to thank you.

Exeunt. Ambi. No, thy death shall thank me better.

Spu. He Is gone: I Will after him,
And know his trespass, seem to bear a part
In all his ills, but with a Puritan heart.
Exit.
Amb. Now brother, let our hate and love be wouen
So subtly together, that in speaking one word for his life,
We may make three for his death,
The craftiest pleader gets most gold for breath.

Sup. Set on, I Will not be far behind you brother.

Duke. Is It possible a son should be disobedient as far as
the sword: it is the highest he can go no farther.

Ambi. My gracious Lord, take pity, --

Duke. Pity boys?

Amb. Nay weed be loath to move your Grace too much,
We know the tre'passe is unpardonable,
Black, wicked, and unnatural,

Sup. In a Son, oh Monstrous.

Ambi. Yet my Lord,
A Dukes soft hand strokes the rough head of law,
And makes it lie smooth.

Duk. But my hand shall nere doot.

Amb. That as you please my Lord.

Super. We must needs confess,
Some father would have enterd into hate,
So deadly pointed, that before his eyes,
He would ha seen the execution sound,
Without corrupted favor?

Amb. But my Lord,
Your Grace may live the wonder of all times,
In pardning that offense which never yet
Had face to beg a pardon.

Duke. Hunny, how is this?

Amb. Forgive him good my Lord, he s your own son,
And I must needs say 'twas the vildlier done.

Superv. He Is the next heir -- yet this true reason gathers,
None can possess that dispossess their fathers:
Be merciful; --

Duke. Here Is no Step-mothers-wit,
I Will try 'em both upon their love and hate.

Amb. Be merciful -- although --

Duke. You have preuaild,
My wrath like flaming wax has spent it self,
I know 'twas but some peevish Moon in him: go, let him be releasd.

Superv. Sfoote how now Brother?

Amb. Your Grace does please to speak beside your spleen,
I would it were so happy?

Duke. Why go, release him.

Superv. O my good Lord, I know the fault's too weighty,
And full of general loathing; too inhumaine,
Rather by all men's voices worthy death.

Duke. It Is true too; here then, receive this signet, doom shall pass,
Direct it to the Judges, he shall dye
Ere many days, make have.

Amb. All speed that may be,
We could have wished his burden not so sore,
We knew your Grace did but delay before.

Exeunt. Duke. Here Is Envy with a poor thin cover or't,
Like Scarlet hid in lawne, easily spide through,
This their ambition by the Mothers side,
Is dangerous, and for safety must be purgd,
I will prevent their enuies, sure it was
But some mistaken fury in our son,
Which these aspiring boys would climb upon:
He shall be releasde suddenly.

Enter Nobles. 1. Nob. Good morning to your Grace.

Duke. Welcome my Lords.

2. Nob. Our knees shall take away the office of our feet for ever,
Unless your Grace bestow a fathers eye,
Upon the Clouded fortunes of your son,
And in compassionate virtue grant him that,
Which makes even mean men happy; liberty

Duk. How seriously their loves and honors woo
For that, which I am about to pray them do
Which, rise my Lords, your knees sign his release,
We freely pardon him.

1. Nob. We owe your Grace much thanks, and he much duty.

Duk. It well becomes that Judge to nod at crimes,
Exeunt. That dos commit greater himself and lives:
I may forgive a disobedient error,
That expect pardon for adultery
And in my old days am a youth in lust:
Many a beauty have I turned to poison
In the denial, covetous of all,
Age hot, is like a Monster to be seen:
My hairs are white, and yet my sins are Green.

ACT. 3.
Enter Ambitioso, and Superuacuo? Sup. Brother, let my opinion sway you once,
I speak it for the best, to have him die:
Surest and soonest, if the signet come,
Unto the judges hands, why then his doom,
Will be deferd till sittings and Court-daies:
Iuries and further, -- Fayths are bought and sold,
Oths in these days are but the skin of gold.

Amb. In troth it is true too!

Super. Then lets set by the Judges
And fall to the Officers, it is but mistaking
The Duke our fathers meaning, and where he named,
Ere many days, it is but forgetting that
And, have him die in the morning.

Amb. Excellent,
Then am I heir -- Duke in a minute.

Super. Nay,
And he were once puff out, here is a pin.
Should quickly prick your bladder.

Amb. Blast occasion,
He being packt, we will have some trick and wile,
To wind our younger brother out of prison,
That lies in for the Rape, the Ladies dead,
And peoples thoughts will soon be buried.

Super. We may with safty do it, and live and feed,
The Duchesse-sonnes are too proud to bleed,

Am. We are in faith to say true. -- come let us not linger
I Will to the Officers, go you before,
And set an edge upon the Executioner.

Sup. Let me alone to grind him.
Exit.
Amb. Meet; farewell,
I am next now, Irise just in that place,
Where you are cut of, upon thy Neck kind brother,
The falling of one head, lifts up another.
Exit.
Enter with the Nobles, Lussurioso from prison. Luss. My Lords? I am so much
indebted to your loves,
For this, O this delivery.

1. Nob. But our duties, my Lord, unto the hopes that grow in you,

Luss. If ere I live to be my self i will thank you,
O liberty thou sweet and heavenly Dame;
But hell for prison is too mild a name.

Exeunt. Enter Ambitioso, and Superuacuo? with Officers. Am. Officers? here is
the Dukes signet, your firm warrant,
Brings the command of present death a long with it
Unto our brother, the Dukes son; we are sorry,
That we are so unnaturally employde
In such an unkind Office, fitter far
For enemies then brothers.

Super. But you know,
The Dukes command must be obayde.

1. Offi. It must and shall my Lord -- this morning then,
So suddenly?

Am. I alas poore-good-soule,
He must break fast betimes, the executioner
Stands ready to put forth his cowardly valor.

2. Offi. Already?

Sup. Already ifath, O sir, destruction hies,
And that is least Impudent, soonest dies,

1. Off. Troth you say true my Lord we take our leaves,
Our Office shall be sound, we will not delay,
The third part of a minute.

Amb. I herein you show.
Your selves good men, and upright officers,
Pray let him die as private as he may,
Do him that favor, for the gaping people.
Will but trouble him at his prayers,
And make him curse, and swear, and so die black.
Will you be so far Kind?

1. Off. It shall be done my Lord.

Amb. Why we do thank you, if we live to be,
You shall have a better office,

2. Off. Your good Lord-shippe,

Sup. Commend us to the scaffold in our tears.

1. Off We Will weep and do your commendations,

Exeunt. Amb. Fine fools in office!

Sup. Things fall our so fit.

Amb. So happily, come brother ere next clock,
His head will be made serve a bigger block.

Exeunt. Enter in prison lunior Brother, Iuni. Keeper.

Keep. My Lord.

Iuni. No news lately from our brothers?
Are they unmindful of us?

Keep. My Lord a messenger came newly in and brought this from 'em,

Iuni. Nothing but paper comforts?
I looked for my delivery before this,
Had they been worth their oths -- prithee be from us.
Now what say you forsooth, speak out I pray,
Letter. Brother be of good cheer,
Slud it begins like a whore with good cheer,
Thou shall not be long a prisoner.
Not five and thirty year like a banqrout, I think so,
We have thought upon a device to get thee out by a trick!
By a trick, pox a your trick and it be so long a playing.
And so rest comforted, be merry and expect it suddaynely!
Be merry, hang merry, draw and quarter merry, I Will be mad.
Is It not strange that a man should lie in a whole month for a woman, well, we
shall see how sudden our brothers: will be in their promise, I must expect
still a trick! I shall not be long a prisoner, how now, what news?


Keeper. Bad news my Lord I am discharged of you.

Iunio. Slave calst thou that bad news, I thank you brothers.

Keep. My Lord twill prove so, here come the Officers,
Into whose hands I must commit you.

Iunio. Ha, Officers what, why?

1. Offi. You must pardon us my Lord,
Our Office must be sound, here is our warrant
The signet from the Duke, you must straight suffer.

Junior. Suffer? i will suffer you to be gone, i will suffer you,
To come no more, what would you have me suffer?

2. Offi. My Lord those words were better changed to prayers,
The times but breife with you, prepare to die.

Junior. Sure it is not so.

3. Offi. It is too true my Lord.

Junior. I tell you it is not, for the Duke my father,
Defend me till next sitting, and I look
Even every minute threescore times an hour,
For a release, a trick wrought by my brothers.

1. Offi. A trick my Lord? if you expect such comfort,
Your hopes as fruitless as a barren woman:
Your brothers were the unhappy messengers,
That brought this powerful token for your death.

Junior. My brothers, no, no.

2. Offi. It Is most true my Lord.

Junior. My brothers to bring a warrant for my death
How strange this shows?

3. Offi. There Is no delaying time.

Junior. Desire them hither, call them up, my brothers?
They shall deny it to your faces.

1. Offi. My Lord,
They Are far enough by this, at least at Court,
And this most strickt command they left behind them,
When grief swum in their eyes, they showed like brothers,
Brim-full of heavy sorrow: but the Duke
Must have his pleasure.

Iunio. His pleasure?

1. Off. These were their last words which my memory bears,
Commend us to the Scaffold in our tears.

Junior. Pox dry their tears, what should I do with tears?
I hate em worse then any Citizens son
Can hate salt water; here came a letter now,
New-bleeding from their Pens, scarce stinted yet,
Would lde been torn in pieces when I tore it,
Look you officious whoresons words of comfort,
Not long a Prisoner.

1. Off. It says true in that sir, for you must suffer presently.

Junior. A villainous Duns, upon the letter knauish exposition,
Look you then here sir: We Will get thee out by a trick says he.

2. Off. That may hold too sir, for you know a Trick is commonly
four Cards, which was meant by us four officers.

Junior. Worse and worse dealing.

1. Off. The hour beckens us,
The heads-man waits, lift up your eyes to heaven.

Junior. I thank you faith; good pritty-holsome counsel,
I should look up to heaven as you sedd,
Whilst he behind me cozens me of my head,
I that's the Trick.

3. Off. You delay too long my Lord.

Junior. Stay good Authorities Bastards, since I must
Through Brothers perjury dye, O let me venom
Their souls with curses.

1. Off. Come it is no time to curse.

Junior. Must I bleed then, without respect of sign? well --
My fault was sweet sport, which the world approoues,
I dye for that which every woman loves.

Exeunt. Enter Vindict with Hippolito his brother. Vind. O sweet, delectable,
rare, happy, rauishing,

Hip. Why what is the matter brother?

Vin. O it is able, to make a man spring up, and knock his for-head
Against yon siluar seeling.

Hip. Pre-thee tell me,
Why may not I partake with you? you vowde once
To give me share to every tragic thought.

Vind. Byth' Mass I think I did too,
Then I Will divide it to thee, -- the old Duke
Thinking my outward shape, and inward heart
Are cut out of one piece; (for he that prates his secrets,
His heart stands ath out side) hires me by price:
To greet him with a Lady,
In some fit place vaylde from the eyes ath Court,
Some darkened blushlesse Angle, that is guilty
Of his forefathers lusts, and great-folkes riots,
To which (I easily to maintain my shape)
Consented, and did wish his impudent grace
To meet her here in this vn-sunned-lodge,
Where-in it is night at noone, and here the rather,
Because unto the torturing of his soul,
The Bastard and the Duchess have appointed
Their meeting too in this luxurious circle,
Which most afflicting sight will kill his eyes
Before we kill the rest of him.

Hip. Twill in faith, most dreadfully digested,
I see not how you could have mist me brother.

Vind. True, but the violence of my joy forgot it.

Hip. I, but where is that Lady now?

Vind. Oh at that word,
I Am lost again, you cannot find me yet
I Am in a throng of happy Apprehensions.
He Is suited for a Lady, I have took care
For a delitious lip, a sparkling eye,
You shall be witness brother;
Be ready stand with your hat off.
Exit.
Hip. Troth I wonder what Lady it should be?
Yet it is no wonder, now I think again,
To have a Lady stoop to a Duke, that stoopes unto his men,
It Is common to be common, through the world:
And there is more private common shadowing vices,
Then those who are known both by their names and prices
It Is part of my alleagance to stand bare,
To the Dukes Concubine, -- and here she comes.

Enter Vindice, with the skull of his love dressed up in Tires. Vind. Madame his
grace will not be absent long.
Secret? nere doubt us Madame? twill be worth
Three velvet gowns to your Ladyship -- known?
Few Ladies respect that? disgrace, a poor thin shell,
It Is the best grace you have to do it well,
I Will save your hand that labor, i will unmask you?

Hip. Why brother, brother.

Vind. Art thou beguild now? tut, a Lady can,
At such all hid, beguile a wiser man,
Have I not fitted the old surfetter
With a quaint piece of beauty, age and bare bone
Are ere allied in action; here is an eye,
Able to tempt a greatman -- to serve God,
A pretty hanging lip, that has for got now to dissemble
Me thinks this mouth should make a swearer tremble.
A drunckard claspe his teeth, and not undo them,
To suffer wet damnation to run through them.
Here Is a cheek keeps her color let the wind go whistle,
Spout Rain, we fear thee not, be hot or cold
Alls one with us; and is not he absurd,
Whose fortunes are upon their faces set,
That fear no other God but wind and wet.

Hip. Brother you have spoke that right,
Is this the form that living shone so bright?

Vind. The very same,
And now me thinks I cold even chide my self,
For doting on her beauty, tho her death
Shall be reuengd after no common action;
Does the Silke-worme expend her yellow labors
For thee? for thee dos she undo herself?
Are Lord-ships sold to maintain Lady-ships
For the poor benefit of a bewitching minute?
Why dos yon fellow falsify hie-waies
And put his life between the Judges lips,
To refine such a thing keeps horse and men
To beat their valors for her?
Surely wee're all mad people, and they
Whom we think are, are not, we mistake those,
It Is we are mad in scence, they but in clothes.

Hip. Faith and in clothes too we, give us our due.

Vind. Dos every proud and selfe-affecting Dame
Camphire her face for this? an dgrieue her Maker
In sinful baths of milk, -- when many an infant starues,
For her superfluous outside, all for this?
Who now bids twenty pound a night, prepares
Music, perfumes, and sweete-meates, all are hushed,
Thou may lie chaste now! it were fine me thinks:
To have thee seen at Reuells, forgetful feasts,
And unclean Brothells; sure twould fright the sinner
And make him a good coward, put a Reueller,
Out off his Antic amble
And cloye an Epicure with empty dishes?
Here might a scornesull and ambitious woman,
Look through and through her self, -- see Ladies, with false forms,
You deceive men, but cannot deceive worms.
Now to my tragic business, look you brother,
I have not fashiond this only -- for show
And vselesse property, no, it shall bear a part
Even in it own Revenge. This very skull,
Whose Mistress the Duke poisoned, with this drug
The mortal curse of the earth; shall be reuengd
In the like strain, and kiss his lips to death,
As much as the dumb thing can, he shall feel:
What fayles in poison, we will supply in steel.

Hip. Brother I do applaud thy constant vengeance,
The quaintness of thy malice above thought.

Vind. So it is laid on: now come and welcome Duke,
I have her for thee, I protest it brother:
Me thinks she makes almost as fair a sine
As some old gentlewoman in a Periwig?
Hide thy face now for shame, thou had need have a Mask now
It Is vain when beauty flows, but when it fleetes
This would become graves better then the streets.

Hip. You have my voice in that; hark, the Duke's come.

Vind. Peace, let us observe what company he brings,
And how he dos absent them, for you know
Heel wish all private, -- brother fall you back a little,
With the bony Lady.

Hip. That I will.

Vind. So, so, -- now 9. years vengeance crowde into a minute!

Duk. You shall have leave to leave us, with this charge,
Upon your lives, if we be mist by the Duchess
Or any of the Nobles, to give out,
We Are privately rid forth.

Vind Oh happiness!

Duk With some few honorable gentlemen you may say,
You may name those that are away from Court.

Gentle. Your will and pleasure shall be done my Lord.

Vind. Privately rid forth,
He strives to make sure work on it -- your good grace?

Duk. Piato, well done have brought her, what Ladyist?

Vind. Faith my Lord a Country Lady, a little bashful at first as most of them
are, but after the first kiss my Lord the worst is past with them, your grace
knows now what you have to do; sha's somewhat a grave look with her -- but
--


Duk. I love that best, conduct her.

Vind. Have at all.

Duk. In grauest looks the Greatest faults seem less
Give me that sin that's robbed in Holiness.

Vind. Back with the Torch; brother raise the perfumes.

Duk. How sweet can a Duke breath? age has no fault,
Pleasure should meet in a perfumed mist,
Lady sweetly encountered, I came from Court I must be bold with you, oh,
what is this, oh!

Vind. royal villain, white diuill;

Duke. Oh.

Vind. Brother -- place the Torch here, that his affrighted eyeballs
May start into those hollowes, Duke; do know
Yon dreadful vizard, view it well, it is the skull
Of Gloriana, whom thou poysonedst last.

Duk. Oh, tas poisoned me.

Vind. Did not know that till now?

Duk. What are you two?

Vind. Villains all three? -- the very ragged bone,
Has been sufficiently reuengd.

Duk. Oh Hippolito? call treason.

Hip. Yes my good Lord, treason, treason, treason.

stamping on him. Duk. Then I Am betrayde.

Vind. Alas poor Lecher in the hands of knaves,
A slavish Duke is baser then his slaves.

Duke. My teeth are eaten out.

Vind. Had any lest.

Hip. I think but few.

Vin. Then those that did eat are eaten.

Duk. O my tongue.

Vind. Your tongue? twill teach you to kiss closer,
Not like a Flobbering Dutchman, you have eyes still:
Look monster, what a Lady have thou made me,
My once bethrothed wife.

Duk. Is it thou villain, nay then --

Vind. It Is I, it is Vindici, it is I.

Hip. And let this comfort thee: our Lord and Father
Fell sick upon the infection of thy frowns,
And dyed in sadness; be that thy hope of life.

Duke. Oh?

Vind. He had his tongue, yet grief made him die speechless.
Puh, it is but early yet, now i will begin
To stick thy soul with Ulcers, I will make
Thy spirit grievous sore, it shall not rest,
But like some pestilent man toss in thy breast-(mark me duke)
You Are a renowned, high, and mighty Cuckold.

Duke. Oh!

Vind. Thy Bastard, thy bastard rides a hunting in thy browe.

Duke. Millions of deaths.

Vind. Nay to afflict thee more,
Here in this lodge they meet for damned clips,
Those eyes shall see the in cest of their lips.

Duke. Is there a hell besides this, villains?

Vind. Villain?
Nay heaven is just, scorns are the hires of scorns,
I nere knew yet Adulterer without horns.

Hip. Once ere they dye it is quitted.

Vind. Hark the music,
Their banquet is preparde, they are coming --

Duke. Oh, kill me not with that sight.

Vin. Thou shall not loose that sight for all thy Duke-doome.

Duke. Traitors, murderers?

Vin. What? is not thy tongue eaten out yet?
Then we will invent a silence? brother stifle the Torch,

Duke. Treason, murder?

Vind. Nay faith, we will have you hushed now with thy dagger
Nail down his tongue, and mine shall keep possession
About his heart, if he but gasp he dies,
We dread not death to quittance injuries; -- Brother,
If he but winck, not brooking the foul object,
Let our two other hands tear up his lids,
And make his eyes like Comets shine through blood,
When the bad bleedes, then is the Tragedy good,

Hip. Whist, brother, musick's at our ear, they come.

Enter the Bastard meeting the Duchess. Spu. Had not that kiss a taste of
sin 'twere sweet.

Dutch. Why there is no pleasure sweet but it is sinful.

Spu. True, such a bitter sweetness fate has given,
Best side to us, is the worst side to heaven.

Dutch. Push, come: it is the old Duke thy doubtful Father,
The thought of him rubs heaven in thy way,
But I protest by yonder waxen fire,
Forget him, or i will poison him.

Spu. Madam, you urge a thought which nere had life,
So deadly do I loath him for my birth,
That if he took me haspt within his bed,
I would add murder to adultery,
And with my sword give up his years to death.

Dutch. Why now you are sociable, lets in and feast,
Lowdst Music sound: pleasure is Banquests guest.

Exeunt. Duk. I cannot brook --

Vind. The Brook is turned to blood.

Hip. Thanks to loud Music.

Vind. It Was our friend indeed,
It Is state in Music for a Duke to bleed:
The Duke-dome wants a head, tho yet unknown,
As fast as they peep up, lets cut 'em down.

Exeunt. Enter the Duchess two sons, Ambitioso and Supervacuo. Amb. Was not
his execution rarely plotted?
We are the Dukes sons now.

Super. I you may thank my policy for that.

Amb. Your policy, for what?

Super. Why wast not my invention brother,
To slip the Judges, and in lesser compass,
Did not I draw the model of his death,
Aduizing you to sudden officers,
And even extemporall execution.

Amb. Heart, it was a thing I thought on too.

Sup. You thought ont too, ssoote slander not your thoughts
With glorious untruth, I know it was from you.

Amb. Sir I say, it was in my head.

Spu. I, like your brains then,
Nere to come out as long as you lived.

Amb. You Would have the honor on it forsooth, that your wit
Lead him to the scaffold,

Super. Since it is my due,
I Will published, but I Will have it in spite of you.

Amb. Me thinks you are much too bold, you should a little
Remember us brother, next to be honest Duke.

Sup. I, it shall be as easy for you to be Duke,
As to be honest, and that is never in faith.

Amb. Well, cold he is by this time, and because
Wee're both ambitious, be it our amity,
And let the glory be sharde equally.

Sup. I am content to that.

Amb. This night out younger brother shall out of prison,
I have a trick.

Sup. A trick, pre-thee what is it?

Amb. We Will get him out by a wile.

Sup. Pre-thee what wile?

Amb. No sir, you shall not know it, till't be done,
For then you would swear twere yours.

Super. How now, what is he?

Amb. One of the officers.

Super. Desired news.

Amb. How now my friend?

Off. My Lords, under your pardon, I am allotted
To that desertlesse office, to present you
With the yet bleeding head.

Sup. Ha, ha, excellent.

Amb. All Is sure our own: Brother, can weep think thou?
Twould grace our Flattery much; think of some Dame,
Twill teach thee to dissemble.

Sup. I have thought, -- Now for your self.

Amb. Our sorrows are so fluent,
Our eyes ore-flow our toungs, words spoake in tears,
Are like the murmures of the waters, the sound
Is lowdly heard, but cannot be distinguished.

Sup. How dyed he pray?

Off. O full of rage and spleen.

Super. He dyed most valiantly then, we are glad to hear it.

Off. We could not woe him once to pray.

Amb. He showd himself a Gentleman in that: give him his due.

Off. But in the steed of prayer, he drew forth oaths.

Super. Then did he pray dear heart,
Although you understood him not.

Offi. My Lords,
Even at his last, with pardon be it spoake,
He cursed you both.

Sup. He cursed us? less good soul.

Amb. It was not in our powers, but the Dukes pleasure,
Finely dissembled a both-sides, sweet fate,
O happy opportunity.

Enter Lussurioso. Luss. Now my Lords.

Both. Oh! --

Luss. Why do you shun me Brothers?
You may come nearer now;
The savor of the prison has for-sooke me,
I thank such kind Lords as your selves, I Am free.

Amb Alive!

Super. In health!

Amb. Releasd?
We were both even amazd with joy to see it,

Luss. I am much to thank you.

Sup. Faith we spared no tongue, unto my Lord the Duke.

Amb. I know your delivery brother
Had not been half so sudden but for us.

Sup. O how we pleaded.

Luss. Most deserving brothers,
In my best studies I will think of it?
Exit Luss.
Amb. O death and vengeance.

Sup. Hell and torments.

Amb. Slave camst thou to delude us.

Off. Delude you my Lords?

Super. I villain, where is this head now?

Off. Why here my Lord,
Just after his delivery, you both came
With warrant from the Duke to be-head your brother.

Amb. I, our brother, the Dukes son.

Off. The Dukes son my Lord, had his release before you came.

Amb. Whose head's that then?

Off. His whom you left command for, your own brothers?

Amb. Our brothers? oh furies --

Sup. Plagues.

Amb. Confusions.

Sup. Darkness.

Amb. Diuils.

Sup. Fell it out so accursedly?

Amb. So damnedly.

Sup. Villain I Will brain thee with it,

Off. O my good Lord!

Sup. The Diuill ouer-take thee?

Amb. O fatal.

Sup. O prodigious to our bloods.

Amb. Did we dissemble?

Sup. Did we make our tears women for thee?

Amb. Laugh and rejoice for thee.

Sup. Bring warrant for thy death.

Amb. Mock off thy head

Super. You had a trick, you had a wile forsooth.

Amb. A murren meet 'em, there is none of these wiles that ever come to good: I
see now, there is nothing sure in mortality, but mortality, well, no more
words shall be reuengd in faith.

Come, throw off clouds now brother, think of vengeance,
And deeper settled hate, sirrah sit fast,
We Will pull down all, but thou shall down at last.

Exeunt. ACT. 4. SCEN. 1.
Enter Lussurioso with Hippolito. Luss. Hippolito.

Hip. My Lord:
Has your good Lordship ought to command me in?

Luss. I pre-thee leave us.

Hip. How Is this? come and leave us?

Luss. Hippolito.

Hip. Your honor -- I stand ready for any dutious emploiment.

Luss. Heart, what makst thou here?

Hip. A pretty Lordly humor:
He bids me to be present, to depart; something has stung his honor?

Luss. Be nearer, draw nearer:
Ye'are not so good me thinks, I Am angry with you.

Hip. With me my Lord? I Am angry with my self fort.

Luss. You did prefer a goodly fellow to me,
It Was wittily elected, it was, I thought
Had been a villain, and he proves a Knave?
To me a Knave.

Hip. I chose him for the best my Lord,
It Is much my sorrow, if neglect in him, breed discontent in you.

Luss. Neglect, it was will: Judge of it,
Firmly to tell of an incredible Act,
Not to be thought, less to be spoken of,
Twixt my Stepmother and the Bastard, oh,
Incestuous sweetes between 'em.

Hip. Fie my Lord.

Lus. I in kind loyalty to my fathers forehead,
Made this a desperare arm, and in that fury,
Committed treason on the lawful bed,
And with my sword even rac'd my fathers bosom,
For which I was within a stroke of death.

Hip. Alack, I Am sorry; ssoote just upon the stroke,
Iars in my brother, twill be villainous Music.

Vind. My honored Lord.

Enter Vind. Luss. Away pre-thee forsake us, hereafter we will not know thee.

Vind. Not know me my Lord, your Lorship cannot choose.

Lus Begone I say, thou art a false knave.

Vind. Why the easier to be known, my Lord.

Lus. Push, I shall prove too bitter with a word,
Make thee a perpetual prisoner,
And lay this yron-age upon thee,

Vind. Mum, for there is a doom would make a woman dum,
Missing the bastard next him, the winde's comes about,
Now it is my brothers turn to stay mine to go out.
Exit Vin.
Lus. Has greatly moved me.

Hip. Much to blame in faith.

Lus. But i will recover, to his ruin: it was told me lately,
I know not whether falsely, that you would a brother,

Hip. Who I, yes my good Lord, I have a brother

Lus. How chance the Court near saw him? of what nature?
How does he apply his hours?

Hip. Faith to curse Fates,
Who, as he thinks, ordaind him to be poor,
Keeps at home full of want and discontent.

Lus There Is hope in him, sor discontent and want
Is the best clay to mould, a villain off;
Hippolito, wish him repair to us,
If there be ought in him to please our blood,
For thy sake we will advance him, and build fair
His meanest fortunes: for it is in us
To rear up Towers from cottages.

Hip. It is so my Lord, he will attend your honor,
But he is a man, in whom much melancholy dwells.

Lus. Why the better: bring him to Court.

Hip. With willingness and speed,
Whom he cast off even now, must now succeed,
Brother disguise must off,
In thine own shape now, i will prefer thee to him:
How strangely does himself work to undo him.
Exit.
Luss. This fellow will come fitly, he shall kill,
That other slave, that did abuse my spleen,
And made it swell to Treason, I have put
Much of my heart into him, he must dye.
He that knows great men's secrets and proves slight,
That man nere lives to see his Beard turn white:
I he shall speed him: I Will employ thee brother,
Slaves are but Nails, to drive out one another?
He being of black condition, suitable
To want and ill content, hope of preferment
Will grind him to an Edge -- The Nobles enter.

1. Good days unto your honor.

Luss. My kind Lords, I do return the like,

2. Saw you my Lord the Duke?

Luss. My Lord and Father, is he from Court?

1. He Is sure from Court,
But where, which way, his pleasure took we know not,
Nor can we heareont.

Luss. Here come those should tell,
Saw you my Lord and Father?

3. Not since two hours before noone my Lord,
And then he privately rid forth.

Lus. Oh he is rod forth.

1. It Was wondrous privately,

2. There Is none ith Court had any knowledge ont.

Lus. His Grace is old, and sudden, it is no treason
To say, the Duke my Father has a humor,
Or such a Toye about him; what in us
Would appear light, in him seems virtuous.

3. It Is Oracle my Lord.

Exeunt. Enter Vindice and Hippolito, Vind. out of his disguise. Hip. So, so,
all is as it should be, you are your self.

Vind. How that great-villaine puts me to my shifts.

Hip. He that did lately, in disguize reject thee;
Shall now thou art thy self, as much respect thee.

Vind. Twill be the quainter fallacy; but brother,
Sfoote what use will he put me to now think thou?

Hip. Nay you must pardon me in that, I know not:
Has some employment for you: but what it is
He and his Secretary the Devil knows best.

Vind, Well I must suite my tongue to his desires,
What color so ere they be; hoping at last
To pile up all my wishes on his breast,

Hip. Faith Brother he himself shows the way.

Vind. Now the Duke is dead, the realm is clad in claye:
His death being not yet known, under his name
The people still are gouernd; well, thou his son
Art not long-liu'd, thou shall not joy his death:
To kill thee then, I should most honor thee;
For twould stand firm in every man's belief,
Thou'st a kind child, and only dyedst with grief.

Hip. You fetch about well, but lets talk in present,
How will you appear in fashion different,
As well as in apparel, to make all things possible:
If you be but once tript, we fall for ever.
It is not the least policy to be doubtful,
You must change tongue: -- familiar was your first.

Vind. Why I Will bear me in some strain of melancholy,
And string my self with heavy -- sounding Wyre,
Like such an Instrument, that speaks merry things sadly.

Hip. Then it is as I meant,
I gave you out at first in discontent.

Vind. I Will turn my self, and then --

Hip. Sfoote here he comes: have thought vppont.

Vind. Salute him, fear not me.

Luss. Hippolito.

Hip. Your Lordship.

Luss. What Is he yonder?

Hip. It Is Vindici, my discontented Brother,
Whom, cording to your will l'aue brought to Court.

Luss, Is that thy brother? beshrew me, a good presence,
I wonder h'as been from the Court so long?
Come nearer.

Hip. Brother, Lord Lussurioso the Duke son.

Snatches of his hat and makes legs to him. Luss. Be more near to us, welcome,
nearer yet.

Vind. How don you? god you god den.

Luss. We thank thee?
How strangly such a course-homely salute,
Shows in the Palace, where we greet in fire:
Nimble and desperate tongues, should we name,
God in a salutation, twould near be stood on it,-heaven!
Tell me, what has made thee so melancholy.

Vind. Why, going to Law.

Luss. Why will that make a man mellancholy?

Vind. Yes, to look long upon inck and black buckrom -- I went me to law in
Anno Quadragesimo secundo, and I waded out of it, in Anno sextagesimo tertio.


Luss. What, three and twenty years in law?

Vind. I have known those that have been five and fifty and all about Pullin
and Pigges.


Luss. May it be possible such men should breath,
To vex the Terms so much.

Vin. It Is food to some my Lord. There are old men at the present, that are so
poisoned with the affectatio^ of law-words, (having had many suites canuast,)
that their common talk is nothing but Barbery lattin: they cannot so much as
pray, but in law, that their sins may be removed, with a writ of Error, and
their souls fetched up to heaven, with a sasarara.


Hip. It seems most strange to me,
Yet all the world meets round in the same bent:
Where the hearts set, there goes the tongues consent,
How do apply thy studies fellow?

Vind. Study why to think how a great rich man lies a dying, and a poor
Cobbler toales the bell for him? how he cannot depart the world, and see the
great chest-stand before him, when he lies speechless, how he will point you
readily to all the boxes, and when he is past all memory, as the gosseps
guess, then thinks he of forffetures and obligations, nay when to all men's
hearings he whurles and rotles in the throat he is bussie threatening his poor
Tennants? and this would last me now some seven years thinking or there
abouts? but, I have a Conceit a coming in picture upon this, I draw it my
self, which in faith la I Will present to your honor, you shall not chose but like
it for your Lordship shall give me nothing for it,


Luss. Nay you misstake me then,
For I am published bountiful enough,
Lets taste of your conceit.

Vin. In picture my Lord.

Luss. I in picture,

Vin. Marry this it is -- A usuring Father to be boiling in hell, and his son
and Heir with a Whore dancing over him.


Hip. Has pared him to the quick.

Lus. The conceit's pretty in faith,
But take it upon my life twill nere be likt.

Vind. No, why I Am sure the whore will be likt well enough.

Hip. I if she were out ath picture heed like her then himself.

Vin. And as for the son and heir, he shall be an eyefore to no young
Reuellers, for he shall be drawn in cloth of gold breeches.


Luss. And thou have put my meaning in the pock,
And can not draw that out, my thought was this, ets
To see the picture of a usuring father
Boiling in hell, our richmen would nere like it,

Vin. O true I cry you heartly mercy I hnow the reason, for some of them had
rather be dambd indeed, the^ dambd in colors.


Lus. A parlous melancholy, has wit enough,
To murder any man, and I Will give him means,
I think thou art ill monied;

Vin. Money, ho, ho,
Tas been my want so long, it is now my scoff.
Iue ene forgot what color siluers off,

Lus. It hits as I could wish,

Vin. I get good cloths,
Of those that dread my humor, and for table-roome,
I feed on those that cannot be rid of me,

Lus. Somewhat to set thee up withal,

Vin. O mine eyes,

Lus. How now man.

Vin. Almost struck blind,
This bright unusual shine, to me seems proud,
I dare not look till the sun be in a cloud,

Lus. I think I shall afecte his melancholy,
How are they now.

Vin. The better for you rasking.

Lus. You shall be better yet if you but fasten,
Truly on my intent, now yare both present
I will unbrace such a closse private villayne,
Unto your vengfull swords, the like nere heard of,
Who has disgraced you much and injured us,

Hip. Disgraced us my Lord?

Lus. I Hippolito.
I kept it here till now that both your angers,
Might meet him at once,

Vin. I Am couetuous,
To know the villayne,

Lus. You know him that slave Pandar,
Piato whom we threatened last
With irons in perpetual prisonment;

Vin. All this is I.

Hip. Is It he my Lord?

Lus. I Will tell you, you first preferred him to me.

Vin. Did you brother.

Hip. I did indeed?

Lus. And the ingreatfull villayne,
To quit that kindness, strongly wrought with me,
Being as you see a likely man for pleasure,
With jewels to corrupt your virgin sister.

Hip. Oh villain,

Vin. He shall furely die that did it.

Lus. I far from thinking any Virgin harm.
Especially knowing her to be as chaste
As that part which scarce suffers to be touched,
The eye would not endure him,

Vin. Would you not my Lord,
It Was wondrous honorably done,

Lus. But with some five frowns kept him out,

Vin. Out slave.

Lus. What did me he but in revenge of that,
Went of his own free will to make infirm,
Your sisters honor, whom I honor with my soul,
For chaste respect, and not preuayling there,
(As it was but desperate folly to attempt it,)
In mere spleen, by the way, way lays your mother,
Whose honor being a coward as it seems.
Yielded by little force.

Vind. Coward indeed.

Luss. He proud of their advantage, (as he thought)
Brought me these news for happy, but I, heaven forgive me for it.

Vind. What did your honor.

Luss. In rage pusht him from me.
Trampled beneath his throat, spurnd him, and bruizd:
Indeed I was too cruel to say troth.

Hip. Most Nobly managde.

Vind. Has not heaven an ear? Is all the lightning wasted?

Luss. If I now were so impatient in a modest cause,
What should you be?

Vind. Full mad, he shall not live
To see the Moon change.

Luss. He Is about the Palace,
Hippolito entice him this way, that thy brother
May take full mark of him.

Hip. Heart? -- that shall not need my Lord,
I can direct him so far.

Luss. Yet for my hates sake,
Go, wind him this way? i will see him bleed my self.

Hip. What now brother?

Vind. Nay even what you will -- you are put to it brother?

Hip. An impossible task, I Will swear,
To bring him hither, that's already here.
Exit Hippo.
Luss. Thy name, I have forgot it?

Vin. Vindice my Lord.

Luss. It Is a good name that.

Vind. I, a Revenger.

Luss. It dos betoken courage, thon should be valiant,
And kill thine enemies.

Vind. That's my hope my Lord.

Luss. This slave is one.

Vind. I Will doom him.

Luss. Then i will praise thee?
Do thou observe me best, and I Will best raise thee.

Enter. Hip. Vind. Indeed, I thank you.

Luss. Now Hippolito, where is the slave Pandar?

Hip. Your good Lordship,
Would have a loathsome sight of him, much offensive?
He Is not in case now to be seen my Lord,
The worst of all the deadly sins is in him:
That beggarly damnation, drunkenness.

Luss. Then he is a double-slaue.

Vind. It Was well conuaide, upon a sudden wit.

Luss. What, are you both,
Firmly resolud, i will see him dead my self.

Vind. Or else, let not us live.

Luss. You may direct your brother to take note of him.

Hip. I shall.

Luss. Rise but in this, and you shall never fall.

Vind. Your honors Vassayles.

Luss. This was wisely carried,
Deep policy in us, makes fools of such:
Then must a slave die, when he knows too much.
Exi. Luss.
Vind. O thou almighty patience, it is my wonder,
That such a fellow, impudent and wicked,
Should not be cloven as he stood:
Or with a secret wind burst open!
Is there no thunder left, or is it kept up
In stock for heavier vengeance, there it goes!

Hip. Brother we loose our selves?

Vind. But I have found it,
Twill hold, it is sure, thanks, thanks to any spirit,
That mingled it among my inventions.

Hip. What is it?

Vind. It Is sound, and good, thou shall partake it,
I Am hired to kill my self.

Hip. True.

Vind. Pree-thee mark it,
And the old Duke being dead, but not conuaide,
For he is already mist too, and you know:
Murder will peep out of the closest husk.

Hip. Most true?

Vind. What say you then to this device,
If we dressed up the body of the Duke.

Hip. In that disguise of yours.

Vind. You Are quick, y' aue reached it.

Hip. I like it wonderously.

Vind. And being in drinck, as you have published him,
To lean him on his elbowe, as if sleep had caught him:
Which claims most interest in such sluggy men.

Hip. Good yet, but here is a doubt,
Me thought by the Dukes son to kill that pandar,
Shall when he is known be thought to kill the Duke.

Vind. Neither, O thanks, it is substantial
For that disguize being on him, which I wore,
It will be thought I, which he calls the Pandar, did kill the Duke, and fled
away in his apparel, leaving him so disguised, to avoid swift pursuit.


Hip. Firmer, and firmer.

Vind. Nay doubt not it is in grain, I warrant it hold color.

Hip. Lets about it.

Vind. But by the way too, now I think on it, brother,
Let Us conjure that base diuill out of our Mother.

Exeunt. Enter the Duchess arm in arm with the Bastard: he seems
lasciuiously to her, after them, Enter Superuacuo, running with a rapier, his
Brother stops him. Spuri. Madam, unlock your self, should it be seen,
Your arm would be suspected.

Duch. Who its that dares suspect, or this, or these?
May not we deal our favors where we please?

Spu. I Am confident, you may.

Exeunt. Amb. Sfoot brother hold.

Sup. Woult let the Bastard shame us?

Amb. Hold, hold, brother? there is fitter time then now.

Sup. Now when I see it.

Amb. It Is too much seen already.

Sup. Seen and known,
The Nobler she is, the baser is she grown.

Amb. If she were bent lasciuiously, the fault
Of mighty women, that sleep soft, -- O death,
Must she needs choose such an unequal sinner:
To make all worse.

Sup. A Bastard, the Dukes Bastard, Shame heapt on shame.

Amb. O our disgrace.
Most women have small waste the world through-out,
But there desires are thousand miles about.

Exeunt. Sup. Come stay not here, lets after, and prevent,
Or else the i will sin faster then we will repent.

Enter Vindice and Hippolito, bringing out there Mother one by one shoulder,
and the other by the other, with daggers in their hands. Vind. O thou? for whom
no name is bad enough.

Moth. What means my sons what will you murder me?

Vind. Wicked unnatural Parents.

Hip. ^eend of women.

Moth. Ohlare sons turned monsters? help.

Vind. In vain.

Moth. Are you so barbarous to set Iron nipples
Upon the breast that gave you suck.

Vind. That breast,
Is turned to Quarled poison.

Moth. Cut not your days for it, am not I your mother?

Vind. I hou do usurp that title now by fraud
For in that shell of mother breeds a bawd.

Moth. A bawd? O name far oathsomer then hell.

Hip. It should be so knewst thou thy Office well.

Moth I hate it.

Vind. Ah is it possible, Thou only, you powers on hie,
That women should dissemble when they die.

Mot. Dissemble.

Vind. Did not the Dukes son direct
A fellow, of the worlds condition, hither,
That did corrupt all that was good in thee:
Made thee uncivilly forget thy self,
And work our sister to his lust.

Moth. Who I,
That had been monstrous? I defy that man:
For any such intent, none lives so pure,
But shall be soild with slander, -- good son believe it not,

Vind. Oh I Am in doubt,
Whether I Am my self, or no,
Stay, let me look again upon this face.
Who shall be saved when mothers have no grace.

Hip. Twould make one half despair.

Vind. I was the man,
Defy me, now? lets see, do it modestly.

Moth. O hell unto my soul.

Vind. In that disguize, I sent from the Dukes son,
Tried you, and found you base mettell,
As any villain might have done.

Mo. One, no tongue but yours could have bewitched me so.

Vind. O nimble in damnation, quick in tune,
There is no diuill could strike fire so soon:
I am confuted in a word.

Mot. Oh sons, forgive me, to my self i will prove more true,
You that should honor me, I kneel to you.

Vind. A mother to give aim to her own daughter.

Hip. True brother, how far beyond nature it is,
Tho many Mothers do it.

Vind. Nay and you draw tears once, go you to bed,
Wet will make iron blush and change to red:
Brother it raines, twill spoil your dagger, house it.

Hip It Is done.

Vin. In Faith it is a sweet shower, it dos much good,
The fruitful grounds, and meadows of her soul,
Has been long dry: power down thou blessed dew,
Rise Mother, troth this shower has made you higher.

Mot. O you heavens? take this infectious spot out of my soul,
I Will rence it in seven waters of mine eyes?
Make my tears salt enough to taste of grace,
To weep, is to our sex: naturally given:
But to weep truly that's a gift from heaven?

Vind. Nay I Will kiss you now: kiss her brother?
Lets marry her to our souls, wherein's no lust,
And honorably love her.

Hip. Let it be.

Vind. For honest women are so sild and rare,
It Is good to cherish those poor few that are.
Oh you of easy wax, do but imagine
Now the disease has left you, how leprously
That Office would have cling'd unto your forehead,
All mothers that had any graceful hue,
Would have worn maskes to hide their face at you:
It would have grown to this, at your foul name;
Greene-collour'd maids would have turned red with shame?

Hip. And then our sister full of hire, and bassenesse.

Vind. There had been boiling lead again,
The dukes sons great Concubine:
A drab of State, a cloth a silver slut,
To have her train borne up, and her soul traile in the dirt; great.

Hip. To be miserably great, rich to be eternally wretched.

Vind. O common madness:
Ask but the thriuingst harlot in cold blood,
Sheed give the world to make her honor good,
Perhaps you will say but only to the Dukes son,
In private; why, she first begins with one,
Who afterward to thousand proves a whore:
Break Ice in one place, it will crack in more.

Mother. Most certainly applied?

Hip. Oh Brother, you forget our business.

Vind. And well remembered, ioye's a subtle elfe,
I think man's happiest, when he forgets himself:
Farewell once dried, now holy-watred Meade,
Our hearts wear Feathers, that before wore Lead.

Mother. I Will give you this, that one I never knew
Plead better, for, and against the Diuill, then you.

Vind. You make me proud ont.

Hip. Commend us in all virtue to our Sister.

Vind. I for the love of heaven, to that true maid.

Mother. With my best words.

Vind. Why that was motherly said.

Exeunt. Mother. I wonder now what fury did transport me?
I feel good thoughts begin to settle in me.
Oh with what forehead can I look on her?
Whose honor I Have so impiouslie beset,
And here she comes,

Cast. Now mother, you have wrought with me so strongly,
That what for my advancement, as to calm
The trouble of your tongue: I am content.

Mother. Content, to what?

Cast. To do as you have wished me,
To prostitute my breast to the Dukes son:
And put my self to common Usury.

Mother. I hope you will not so.

Cast. Hope you I will not?
That Is not the hope you look to be saved in.

Mother. Truth but it is.

Cast. Do not deceive your self,
I am, as you even out of Marble wrought,
What would you now, are ye not pleased yet with me,
You shall not wish me to be more lascivious
Then I intend to be.

Mother. Strike not me cold,

Cast. How often have you chargd me on your blessing
To be a cursed woman -- when you knew,
Your blessing had no force to make me lewd,
You laid your curse upon me, that did more,
The mothers curse is heavy, where that fights,
Sons set in storm, and daughters loose their lights?

Moth. Good child, dear maid, if there be any spark
Of heavenly intellectual fire within thee, oh let my breath,
Revive it to a flame:
Put not all out, with woman's wilful follyes,
I am recouerd of that foul disease
That haunts too many mothers, kind forgive me,
Make me not sick in health? -- if then
My words preuailde when they were wickedness,
How much more now when they are just and good?

Cast. I wonder what you mean, are not you she
For whose infect persuasions I could scarce
Kneel out my prayers, and had much adoo
In three hours reading, to untwist so much
Of the black serpent, as you wound about me.

Moth. It Is unfruitful, held tedious to repeat what is past,
I Am now your present Mother.

Cast. Push, now it is too late,

Moth. Bethink again, thou know not what thou say.

Cast. No, deny advancement, treasure, the Dukes son.

Moth. O see, I spoke those words, and now they poison me:
What will the deed do then?
Advancement, true: as high as shame can pitch,
For Treasure; who ere knew a harlot rich?
Or could build by the purchase of her sin,
An hospital to keep their bastards in: The Dukes son,
Oh when women are young Courtiers, they are sure to be old beggars,
To know the miseries most harlots taste,
Thoudst wish thy self unborn, when thou art unchaste.

Cast. O mother let me twine about your neck,
And kiss you till my soul melt on your lips,
I did but this to try you.

Mot. O speak truth.

Cast. Indeed I did not, for no tongue has force to alter me from honest
If maidens would, men's words could have no power,
A vergin honor is a crystal Tower.
Which being weak is guarded with good spirits,
Until she basely yields no ill inherits.

Mot. O happy child! faith and thy birth has saved me,
Among thousand daughters happiest of all others,
Buy thou a glass for maids and I for mothers.

Exeunt. Enter Vindice and Hippolito. Vin. So, so, he leanes well, take heed
you wake him not brother

Hip. I warant you my life for yours.

Vin. That's a good lay, for I must kill my self?
Brother that's I: that sits for me: do you mark it,
And I must stand ready here to make away my self yonder -- I must sit to be
killed, and stand to kill my self, I could varry it not so little as thrice over
again, tas some eight returns like Michelmas Term.


Hip. That's enough a conscience.

Vind. But sirrah dos the Dukes son come single?

Hip. No, there is the hell on it, his faith's too feeble to go alone? he brings
flesh-flies after him, that will buzze against supper time, and hum for his
coming out.


Vind. Ah the fly-flop of vengeance beat 'em to pieces? here was the sweetest
occasion, the fittest hour, to have made my reueng familiar with him, show him
the body of the Duke his father, and how quaintly he died like a Politician in
huggermugger, made no man acquainted with it, and in Catastrophe slain him
over his fathers breast, and oh I Am mad to loose such a sweet opportunity.


Hip. Nay push, pree-thee be content! there is no remedy present, may not
hereafter times open in as fair faces as this.


Vind. They may if they can paint so well?

Hip. Come, now to avoid al suspicion, lets forsake this room, and be going
to meet the Dukes son.


Vind. Content, I Am for any wether? heart step closse, here he comes?

Ent. Luff. Hip. My honored Lord?

Lus. Oh me; you both present.

Vin. Even newly my Lord, just as your Lordship enterd now? about this place we
had notice given he should be, but in some


Hip. Came your honor private?

Luss. Private enough for this: only a few
Attend my coming out.

Hip. Death rotte those few.

Luss. Stay yonder is the slave.

Vind. Mass there is the slave indeed my Lord;
It Is a good child, he calls his Father slave.

Luss. I, that's the villain, the dambd villain: softly,
Tread easy.

Vin. Puh, I warrant you my Lord, we will stiflle in our breaths.

Luss. That will do well:
Base rogue, thou sleep thy last, it is policy,
To have him killd in's sleep, for if he wakt
He would betray all to them.

Vind. But my Lord.

Luss. Ha, what say?

Vind. Shall we kill him now he is drunk?

Lus. I best of all.

Vind. Why then he will nere live to be sober?

Lus. No matter, let him reele to hell.

Vind. But being so full of liquor, I fear he will put out all the fire,

Lus. Thou art a mad breast.

Vin. And leave none to warm your Lordships Gols withal; For he that dies
drunk, falls into hell fire like a Bucket a water, qush qush.


Lus. Come be ready, nake your swords, think of your wrongs
This slave has injured you.

Vind. Troth so he has, and he has paid well fort.

Lus. Meet with him now.

Vin. You Will bear us out my Lord?

Lus. Puh, am I a Lord for nothing think you, quickly, now.

Vind. Sa, sa, sa: thumpe, there he lies.

Lus. Nimbly done, ha? oh, villains, murderers,
It Is the old Duke my father.

Vind. That Is a jest.

Lus. What stiff and cold already?
O pardon me to call you from your names:
It Is none of your deed, -- that villain Piato
Whom you thought now to kill, has murderd him,
And left him thus disguizd.

Hip. And no unlikely.

Vind. O ^ascall was he not ashamde,
To put the Duke into a greasy doublet.

Luss. He has been cold and stiff who knows, how long?

Vind. Marry that do I.

Luss. No words I pray, off any thing intended:

Vind. Oh my Lord.

Hip. I would same have your Lordship think that we have small reason to prate.


Lus Faith thou say true? i will forthwith send to Court,
For all the Nobles, Bastard, Duchess, all?
How here by miracle we found him dead,
And in his raiment that foul villain fled.

Vind. That will be the best way my Lord, to clear us all: lets cast about to
be clear.


Luss. Ho, Nencio, Sordido, and the rest.

Enter all. 1. My Lord.

2. My Lord.

Lus. Be witnesses of a strange spectacle:
Choosing for private conference that sad room
We found the Duke my father gealde in blood.

1. My Lord the Duke -- run hiethee Nencio,
Startle the Court by signifying so much.

Vind. Thus much by wit a deep Revenger can:
When murders known to be the cleerest man
We Are fordest off, and with as bold an eye,
Suruay his body as the standers by.

Luss. My royal father, too basely let blood,
By a maleuolent slave.

Hip. Hark? he calls thee slave again.

Vin. Has lost, he may.

Lus. Oh sight, look hither, see, his lips are gnawn with poyso^.

Vin. How -- his lips by the mass they be.

Lus. O villain -- O rogue -- O slave -- O rascal:

Hip. O good deceit, he quits him with like terms.

1. Where.

2. Which way.

Amb. Over what roof hangs this prodigious Comet,
In deadly fire.

Lus. Behold, behold my Lords the Duke my fathers murderd by a vassaile, that
owes this habit, and here left disguisde.


Duch. My Lord and husband.

2. Reverend Majesty.

1. I have seen these cloths, often attending on him.

Vin. That Nobleman, has bin ith Country, for he dos not lie?

Sup. Learn of our mother lets dissemble to,
I am glad he is vanished; so I hope are you?

Amb. I you may take my word fort.

Spur. Old Dad, dead?
I, one of his cast sins will send the Fates
Most hearty commendations by his own son,
I Will tug in the new strcame, till strength be done.

Lus. Where be those two, that did affirm to us?
My Lord the Duke was privately rid forth?

1. O pardon us my Lords, he gave that charge
Upon our lives if he were mist at Court,
To answer so; he rode not any where,
We left him private with that fellow here?

Vind. Confirmde.

Lus. O heavens, that false charge was his death,
Impudent Beggars, durst you to our face,
Maintain such a false answer? bear him straight to execution.

1. My Lord?

Luss. Urge me no more.
In this the excuse, may be called half the murder?

Vind. Yo'ue sentencde well.

Luss. Away see it be done.

Vind. Could you not stick: see what confession does?
Who would not lie when men are hanged for truth?

Hip. Brother how happy is our vengeance.

Vin. Why it hits, past the apprehension of indifferent wits.

Luss, My Lord let post horse be sent,
Into all places to entrap the villain,

Vin. Post-horse ha ha.

Nob. My Lord, we are som-thing bold to know our duty?
Your fathers accidentally departed,
The titles that were due to him, meet you.

Lus. Meet me? I Am not at leisure my good Lord,
I Have many greefes to dispatch out ath way:
Welcome sweet titles, -- talk to me my Lords,
Offepulchers, and mighty Emperors bones,
That's thought for me.

Vind. So, one may see by this,
How foreign markets go:
Courtiers have feet ath nines, and tongues ath twellues,
They flatter Dukes and Dukes flatter themselves.

Nob. My Lord it is your shine must comfort us.

Luss. Alas I shine in tears like the Sun in April.

Nobl. Your now my Lords grace?

Luss. My Lords grace? I perceive you will have it so.

Nobl. It Is but your own.

Luss. Then heavens give me grace to be so?

Vind He prays well for himself.

Nobl. Madame all sorrows,
Must run their circles into joys, no doubt but time,
Will make the murderer bring forth himself.

Vind. He were an Ass then in faith?

Nob. In the mean season,
Let us bethink the latest-funerall honors:
Due to the Dukes cold body, -- and withal,
Calling to memory our new happiness,
Spread in his royal son, -- Lords Gentlemen,
Prepare for Reuells.

Vind. Reuells.

Nobl. Time has seurall falls,
Greefes lift up joys, feasts put down funerals.

Lus. Come then my Lords, my favors to you all,
The Duchess is suspected, fowly bent,
I Will begin Dukedom with her banishment?

Exeunt Duke Hip. Reuells.

Nobles and Duchess. Vind. I, that is the word, we are firm yet,
Strike one strain more, and then we crown our wit.

Exeu. Bro. Spu. Well, have the fairest mark, -- (so said the Duke when he
begot me,)

And if I miss his heart or near about,
Then have at any a Bastard scorns to be out.

Sup. Not'st thou that Spurio brother.

And, Yes I note him to our shame.

Super. He shall not live, his hair shall not grow much longer? in this time
of Reuells tricks may be set a foot, see thou yon new Moon, it shall
out-liue the new Duke by much, this hand shall dispossess him, then we are
mighty.

A mask is treasons license, that build upon?
It Is murders best face when a vizard's on.

Exit Super. Amb. Is It so, 'ts very good,
And do you think to be Duke then, kind brother:
I Will see fair play, drop one, and there lies the other.
Exit Ambi.
Enter Vindice and Hippolito, with Piero and other Lords. Vind. My Lords; be
all of Music, strike old gricfes into other countries
That flow in too much milk, and have faint livers,
Not daring to stab home their discontents:
Let our hid flames break out, as fire, as lightning,
To blast this villainous Dukedom: vexed with sin;
Wind up your souls to their full height again.

Piero. How?

1. Which way?

3. Any way: our wrongs are such,
We cannot justly be reueng de too much.

Vind. You shall have all enough: -- Revels are toward,
And those few Nobles that have long suppressd you,
Are busied to the furnishing of a Mask:
And do affect to make a pleasant tail ont,
The Masking suites are fashioning, now comes in
That which must glad us all -- we to take pattern
Of all those suites, the color, trimming, fashion,
Even to an vndistinguisht hair almost:
Then entering first, observing the true form,
Within a strain or two we shall find leisure,
To steal our swords out handsomely,
And when they think their pleasure sweet and good,
In midst of all their joys, they shall sigh blood.

Pie. Weightily, effectually, 3. before the the other Maskers come.

Vind. We Are gone, all done and past.

Pie. But how for the Dukes guard?

Vind. Let that alone,
By one and one their strengths shall be drunk down,

Hip. There are five hundred Gentlemen in the action,
That will apply themselves, and not stand idle.

Pier. Oh let us hug your bosoms.

Vin. Come my Lords,
Prepare for deeds, let other times have words.

Exeunt. In a dum show, the possessing of the young Duke. with all his Nobles:
Then sounding Music. A furnished Table is brought forth: then enters the Duke
and his Nobles to the banquot. A blasing-star appears. Noble. Many harmonious
hours, and choicest pleasures,
Fill up the royal numbers of your years.

Lus. My Lords we are pleased to thank you? -- tho we know,
It Is but your duty now to wish it so.

Nob. That shine makes us all happy.

3. Nob. His Grace frounes?

2. Nob. Yet we must say he smiles.

1. Nob. I think we must.

Lus. That foule-Incontinent Duchess we have banished,
The Bastard shall not live: after these Reuells
I Will begin strange ones; he and the stepsonnes,
Shall pay their lives for the first subsidies,
We must not frown so soon, else t'ad been now?

1. Nob. My gracious Lord please you prepare for pleasure,
The mask is not far off.

Lus. We are for pleasure,
Beshrew thee, what art thou? madst me start?
Thou have committed treason, -- A blazing star.

1, Nob. A blazing star, O where my Lord.

Lus. Spy out.

2. Nob, See, see, my Lords, a wondrous-dreadful one.

Lus. I am not pleased at that ill-knotted fire,
That bushing-flaring star, -- am not I Duke?
It should not quake me now: had it appeard,
Before it, I might then have justly feared,
But yet they say, whom art and learning Weds:
When stars were locks, they threaten great-mens heads,
Is it so? you are read my Lords.

1. Nob. May it please your Grace,
It shows great anger.

Lus. That dos not please our Grace.

2. Nob. Yet here is the comfort my Lord, many times.
When it seems most it threatnes fardest off.

Lus. Faith and I think so too.

1. Nob. Beside my Lord,
You Are gracefully established with the loves
Of all your subjects: and for natural death,
I hope it will be threescore years a coming.

Lus. True, no more but threescore years.

1. Nob. Fourscore I hope my Lord:

2, Nob. And fiuescore, I,

3, Nob. But it is my hope my Lord, you shall nere die.

Lus. Give me thy hand, these others I rebuke,
He that hopes so, is sit for a Duke:
Thou shall sit next me, take your places Lords,
We Are ready now for sports, let 'em set on.
You thing? we shall forget you quite anon!

3. Nob. I hear 'em coming my Lord.

Enter the Mask of Reuengers the two Brothers, and two Lords more. Lus. Ah it is
well,
Brothers, and Bastard, you dance next in hell?

The Reuengers dance? At the end, steal out their swords, and these four
kill the four at the Table, in their Chaires, It thunders. Vind. Mark,
Thunder?
Do know thy kue, thou big-voyc'st crier?
Dukes groans, are thunders watch-words,

Hip. So my Lords, You have enough.

Vind. Come lets away, no lingering.

Exeunt. Hip. Follow, go?

Vind. No power is angry when the lust-ful die,
When thunderclaps, heaven likes the tragedy.
Exit Vin.
Lus. Oh, oh.

Enter the other Mask of intended murderers? Step-sons; Bastard; and a fourth
man, coming in dancing, the Duke recouers a little in voice, and groans, --
calls a guard, treason. At which they all start out of their measure, and
turning toward the Table, they find them all to be murdered. Spur. Whose
groan was that?

Lus. Treason, a guard.

Amb. How now? all murderd!

Super. Murderd!

4. And those his Nobles?

Amb. Here Is a labor saved,
I thought to have sped him, God's Blood how came this.

Spur. Then I proclaim my self, now I am Duke.

Amb. Thou Duke,! brother thou lie.

Spu. Slave so do thou?

4. Base villayne have thou slain my Lord and Master.

Enter the first men. Vind. Pistolls, treason, murder, help, guard my Lord the
Duke.

Hip. Lay hold upon this Traitors?

Lus. Oh.

Vind. Alas, the Duke is murderd.

Hip. And the Nobles.

Vin. Surgeons, Surgeons, -- heart dos he breath so long.

Ant. A piteous tragaedy, able to wake,
An old-mans eyes bloud-shot;

Luss. Oh.

Vin. Look to my Lord the Duke-a vengeance throttle him.
Confess thou murdrous and vnhollowed man,
Did thou kill all these?

4. None but the Bastard I,

Vin. How came the Duke slain then;

4. We found him so,

Luss. O villain,

Vin, Hark.

Luss. Those in the mask did murder us,

Vin, Law you now sir.
O marble impudence! will you confess now?

4. Sloud it is all false,

Ant. Away with that foul monster,
Dipped in a Princes blood.

4. Heart it is a lie,

Ant. Let him have bitter execution,

Vin. New marrow no I cannot be expressed,
How faires my Lord the Duke.

Luss Farewell to al,
He that climes highest has the greatest fall,
My tongue is out of office.

Vin. Air Gentlemen, air,
Now thoult not prate ont, it was Vindice murdered thee,

Luss. Oh.

Vin. Murdered thy Father.

Luss. Oh.

Vin. And I am he-tell nobody, so so, the Dukes departed,

Ant. It was a deadly hand that wounded him,
The rest, ambitious who should rule and sway,
After his death were so made all away,

Vin. My Lord was unlikely,

Hip. Now the hope,
Of Italy lies in your reverend years?

Vin. Your hair, will make the silver age again,
When there was fewer but more honest men,

Anto. The burdens weighty and will press age down,
May I so rule that heaven nay keep the crown,

Vin. The rape of your good Lady has been quited,
With death on death.

Ant. Just is the Law above
^
^

Ant. It was (...), I not hard of the like,

Hip. It Was all done for the best my Lord,

Vin. All for your graces good ^ we may be bold to speak it now,
It Was somewhat witty carried tho we say it.
It Was we two murdered him,

Ant. You two?

Vin, None else in faith my Lord nay it was well managde,

Ant. Lay hands upon those villains.

Vin. How? on us?

Ant. Bear 'em two speedy execution,

Vin, Heart wast not for your good my Lord?

Ant. My good away with 'em such an old man as he,
You that would murder him would murder me,

Vin. I^t come about;

Hip. Sfoote brother you begun,

Vin. May not we set as well as the Dukes son,
Thou have no conscience, are we not reuengde?
Is there one enemy left alive amongst those?
It Is time to die, when we are our selves our foes.
When murders shut deeds closse, this curse does seal 'em,
If none disclose' em they them selves reveal 'em!
This murder might have slept in tonglesse brass,
But for our selves, and the world dyed an ass;
Now I remember too, here was Piato.
Brought forth a knauish sentance once, no doubt (said he) but time
Will make the murderer bring forth himself?
It Is well he died, he was a witch,
And now my Lord, since we are in for ever:
This work was ours which else might have been slipped,
And if we list we could have Nobles clipped,
And go for (...) beggars, but we hate
(...)we have enough,
(...) Mother turned our Sister true,
(...) after a nest of (...) (...)
Exeunt
Ant. How subtly was that murder elosde, bear up,
These tragic bodies, it is a heavy season:
(...) (...) their blood may wash away all treason.
Exit
FINIS.

