AN EXPOSITION OF A PART OF S. Johannes Gospel made in sondrie readinges in
the English Congregation by Bartho. Traheron, and now published against the
wicked entreprises of new sterte up Arrians in England.

He that believes in me, believes not in me, but in him that sent me. And he
that sees me, sees him that sent me. Johan. 12. Imprinted. Anno. 1557.

TO MY MOST DEAR SISTER ELISABETH P.
THINK not to much, good sister, what you have had, but considre what you
have, remember not what you have been some times in the worlds eyes, but what
you be now in gods eyes. Lamente not that you lost, but joy in that you have
found. When you were high, you were surely low, now that you ar low, you ar
surely high. Let this sincke in to your mind, that if wordlye things had not
ben taken from you, you should shortly have be^ taken from them, and perchance
if they had not ben so drouned, they would have drouned you, before death had
removed you from them. If no aduersite had assailed you, you had been a ded sea,
and the patience, and other singular virtues, which now shine in you, had been
quenched, either in your self utterly, or touching the knowledge of any other,
vnfrutefully. And therefore Seneca truly said, that, that person is very
miserable, who never felt any misery. The world meant to impouerishe you, but
God has enryched you. The world would depresse you, but God has aduau^ced you.
The world thought to ouerwhelme you with heaviness, but God has filled you with
true ioies. The world labored to stain you with infamy, but God has made your
name both clear, and pure, and also to send forth a pleasant odor among his
sai^tes. You have not tha^ lost so much, as you have found. Only beware for the
time to cu^me, for more remains to be laid upon you for a farther trial.
Yea, I know that Circe the sorceresse has al ready, and will more here after
allure you with her enchaunted cup. But let not the swetenes of the cups
lips, and the pleasantnes of the poison begile you. Rather chose to drink
the lords cup, which though it have a bitter taste in the first draught, yet
in the end purging corrupt, and noisome humors, it makes a pure, and clean
body. You know that as gods goodness has made you my natural sister, so his
wrath has given to us both, and to the rest of our brethern, and sistern an
unnatural stepmother. How unmercifully, and cruelly she has dealt with us, and
how sharply she has whipped us, you can remember, and if she begin now to
smile upon you, she means the more mischeife. Take heed good sister, a
stepmother, will ever be a stepmother. Give yourselfe ernestly to readinge of
the holy scriptures.

Hold fast the doctrine that our holy brother, and eldest save one,
religiously maintained, whom our stepdame laboreth to deface, I trust in vain.
Fly as well al idolatrical, as al Anabaptistical strange opinions. To which
end I have dedicated this my little travail unto you, as to my derest sister,
and whom I most desire to be preserved pure, and spotles in every part. I am
not ignorant that the better you shall be, and sincerer in treu religion, the
more you shall anger our stepdames testie heart, and the les favor you shall
find in your just requests. But I have more regard to the wealth of your
soul, tha^ to the wealth of your body. And therefore I have sent you this
preservative which our stepdame, if she were, as she can pretend, should take
in good part. But so that she may live in her babilonical whoredom, and
droncken lusts, and swille in the wine of Aegyptes errors, I perceive she
passes not much, how other things go, Lift you up your minds eyes, and
behold the glorious face of the lord Jesus, while our stepmothers eyes ar
daseld with the glisteringe vain glory of the world, and toteth al day in
the deceaueable painted face of a monstrous man, triple in head, and double in
heart. O that she might be made better, but see that you in the mean while be
nor made worsse by her. Let the fruit of my worste part, that is with you, see
the fruit of my better part. Commend me to him, whom laws permit you to
love, to who^ god grant in heaven, that he seeks in earth. The lord Jesus
guide you ever with his holy spirit, my entierly biloued.

Your Bro. Bartho. Traheron.

THE FIRST READING.
I HAVE chosen this part of the holy scripture, wherein to trauail with you
at this time because thorough gods great wrath against sin, and the most
despiteful malice of Satan against the truth, the old heinous heresy of the
ungodly Arrians, is renewed in our country, and as it were raised up again
from hell. These cankerd old Arrians, that you may undresta^de their heresy,
spoke blasphemously of the godhead of our Lord Jesus. For the first author of
it Arrius uttered erroniously, and ungodly in the scoles of Alexandria, in
Aegypte, that there was a time, wha^ gods son was not. By which words he
meant, that he was not of the same being, and substance that the father is of,
nor of the fame aeternitie and so not the natural son of God, and very God
in deed, but an excellent creature of God, whereby God made al things, as by
a^ instrument, as he him self opened in farther declaration of his mi^de.

For he granted that the Lord Jesus was the first, and chiefest creature, and
the beginning of al other creatures, and gave him also the name of God.
Howbeit he thought not that he had his Godhed by nature, but by borowinge.

For trial of this matter the most noble and godly Emperor Constantine the
great, called a general concile at Nice, of three hundred, and eightene
bishops, of whom many for singular lerninge and eloquence, many for great
holiness of life, were compted worthy of everlasting remembrance. In this
famous co^cile it was concluded out of the holy scriptures, that gods son
is of the same aeternitee, of the same substance, essence, and being, that God
the father is, gods natural son, and coaequal with the father, as it
appears in the Creed, communely called the Nicene Creed. Whereunto the hole
assemble agreed, and subscribed, sauinge these five, Eusebius bishop of
Nicomedia, Theognis bishop of Nice, Maris bishop of Calchedon, Theognis
bishop of Marmarike, and Secundus bishop of Ptolemais. Which five bishops
for their ungodliness, by the emperors commandment, were banished out of their
countries. But sone after their exile, Eusebius, and Theognis repented that
they had don so unadvisedly, and sent a book of repentance to the godly
bishops, wherein they used these words. We have agreed to the faith, and
after we had made inquisition of the meaning of this word co^substantial, we
were thoroughly quieted. And in deed we claue not to the haeresie, yea we
subscribed to the faith, but we subscribed not to the excommunication. Not that
we reprove the faith, but we believed not that he, that is to say, Arrius, was
such one, as he was accused to be. But if the holy councile be so persuaded,
we repugne not, but consent to your decrees, and confirm our consent with
this our present writing, not that we can not bear our banishment, but to
avoid the suspicion of haeresie.

Out of these words Socrates the story writer gesseth, that these two
subscribed to the faith agreed upon in the concile of Nice, but would not allow
the depositio^ of Arrius.

This matter being thus wisely and godly estably shed, began to be trobled
again, by this occasion. Constatine the emperor had a sister called
Constantia, in to whose favor a certain priest crepte so far, that she co^pted
him as one of her own. This priest, whose name the story writer utters not,
as worthy perpetual obliuio^, by thaduise of Eusebius declared to Constantia,
that the co^cile had don Arrius wrong, and that he thought not as the rumor
went. The lady durst not tell the Emperor that his affirmation, and yet she
believed her priest. It happened sone after that she fell sick, and the Emperor
her brother came to visit her, at which time she singularly commended her
priest unto him. Who immediately upon her commendation received him in to his
favor, and familiarity. The priest having gotten boldness, and libertee of
talk, renewed unto him, Arrius his matter, affirminge that he agreed with the
concile. The emperor au^swered that if Arrius would consent to the co^cile, he
would receive him to favor, and send him again to Alexandria, to be restored
to his former place. And there upon he sent Lettres to Arrius to repare spedely
unto him. When Arrius was come, and presented before the Emperor, he demanded
of him, whether he consented to the faith of the Nicene concile.

Arrius answered that he did consent there unto. The Emperor bad hi^ put his
faith in writi^ge, he did so, and this was the confession of hi^ and of Euzoius
that was hta^ there with hi^. We believe in one god, the father almighty, and
in the Lord Jesus Christ his son begotten of him before al worlds god the
word, by who^ al things were made, both things in heaven, and things in
earth. The Emperor forthwith wrote to Athanasius bishop off Alexandria to
receive Arrius, and to restore him to his room. And because Athanasius refused
so to do, he was deposed. Than began Arrius to sow again his enuenimed
seeds.

The Emperor informed of his nawhgtie behauior, sent for him again unto
Constantinople, and asked him once more, whether he consented to the
determination of the Nicene concile. He answered yea, with out any
staggeringe the Emperor meruailinge at the matter, required of him, to confirm
his confession with an oath. And he took his oath incontine^tly, vsinge therein
fond craft, and subtlety. For he had written his own doctrine in a paper, and
carried the same under his arm hole, and so swear that his sentence was, as he
had there written, meaning the paper under his arm hole. Here upon the
Emperor commended him to the bishop of Constantinople, to be received to the
communion of catholic Christian me^. Alexander the bishop knowinge the
malicious wilines of Arrius, stayed at the matter. Eusebius a stout man,
ceased not to threate^ the good bishop, that if he would not willingly admit
Arrius to the communion, he should be compelled thereunto by force.

The bishop perceauinge that he was not able to resist the violence of
Eusebius having the Emperor also on his side, fell to prayer, and continued
therein al night liynge prostrate before the lords table. In the morninge
Eusebius accompanied with a band of men, went to Arrius his lodginge, and
willed him to follow him to the temple.

Every man's mind was occupied with expectation of the end, knowinge the
fiercenes of Eusebius, and the co^stantie, and godliness of Alexander. Arrius by
the way as he was goinge to church in the midst of that route, for man's
necessity desired to go a side to a privy, where his guts barst out, and
he died an horrible vile, stinckinge, and shameful death. And so the good
bishop was by miracle delivered from great fear, and burden of conscience,
and proud Eusebius disapointed of his purpose.

Howbeit afterward by the means of that nawghtie priest, and Constantius
Constantine the Emperors son, whose favor the priest got by delivering to him
the testament that the e^peror left in his hands, the haeresie of vile Arrius
was so revived, and mai^teined, that it cold not be quenched, but with great
trauail of learned me^, and blood of many Martyrs. For heretics if they once
prevail, ar most cruel persequutors, as in old time the true Christians felt,
in the furious rage of the haeretical Arrianes, and we now feel under the most
bloody haeretical Idolatres. Nevertheless the goodness of God was such, that for
the confusion, and ovthrowi^ge of this most horrible haeresie, he raised up
most excellent wits, and me^ of most singular lerninge, and virtue, so that
in process of time, after great trauail, after terrible torments, and most
cruel kinds of death, which the godly suffered, this haeresie was utterly
overthrown, and beaten down to hell.

But now as good me^ report, sondrie phrantike spirits labor to blow life in
to it, and to call it again in to the world, out of Sata^s darcke dongeon. And
if al be true that I have heard, they have patched two, or three pieces of
their own to that ilfauored body, and have made it a fowler mo^ster than it
was before.

But howsoever they have handled their monstrous babie, it shall be good for us,
to know the truth of this matter, and to have ready a perfect rule, to judge
all manner of doctrines. When we have a true rule out of gods word, it shall be
easy to avoid al false inventions. For what so agrees not to that rule is to
be refused, and cast away. Therefore we ought first to labor to know what hte
scripture teaches, and to cleave there to, whatsoever, either learned wits can
subtly devise, or phrantike brains fanatically, and rauingely dream out,
and power forth at adventure, in their trau^ces. If we bring al things to this
touchstone, we shall never be deceived by any new broched doctrine. But because
the matter of al other is most high, and most exceeding our capacitee, we ought
wit al h fear, reverence, sobrenes, and modesty to approach unto it, and in no
wise to enter in to a place, of such majesty, brightness, and glory with foul
fete, and to touch so holy things, with unclean hands. Comme therefore my
brethern with all humilite, and reverent behauior to the gospel of, S. Johan.
For it is evidently true that none of the divine writers have handled this our
present matter, so largely, so plai^ly, and so strongely against al
cauillations. And therefore I have purposely taken in hand, to treat some
part of his most divine work among you that, we may al certai^ly know what
we ought to think of the lord Jesus in this behalf, and that we may be
surely armed against the hissinges of the venomous serpe^tes cloue^ tou^ge. For
in deed it is a communs opinion among the old ecclesiastical writers, that.
S. Ioha^ wrote this treatise purposely against such haeretikes, as in his time
denied the divinity of Christ, namely Carpocrates, Cerinthus, and the
Hebionites, very poor me^ in vndrestanding according to their name, which
taught that the Lord Jesus was a man only, and not God. Certainly the purpose,
and chief mark of the hole work is, to teach that Jesus our Lord was not a
man only, but also God, and so the true Messiah, and very Saueor of the world.

The gospel after, S. Johan) Euangelio^ signifies good tidinges. And in the
holy writers it signifies a public, solemn, and open preachinge of Christ,
who by his death has purged our sins, and being rissen from the deed,
reigns in the hertes of his chosen, and renueth the^ unto godliness thorough
his spirit mortifiynge from time to time their fleshly lusts, and
abolishinge more and more the remnau^tes of their natural corruption. And this
in deed is very good tidinges. For here by we are delivered from the fear of
death and damnation, and from the bondage of sin, and Satan, breifely hereby
we are removed from darcknes to light, from despeare, to good hope from death to
life, from hell to heaven. Now because the office of proclaminge, and
publishinge this most ioiful tidi^ges, was committed to the ministers of the
new testament, the name of Eua^gelistes is most proprely attributed to them,
and specially to those that discribe the natiuitee, conversation, death, and
resurrection of the lord Jesus, wherein this blisfulnes rests, that we so
much advance.

Some writers affirm that as many promises of felicity, and salvation as
therebe, so many gospels there be, and that therefore the prophets ar also
evangelists, when they speak of the redemption, that gods anointed should
accomplish. I think it not good to strive about words, and I deny not that
the hebrew word, Bassar, which signifies to euangelize, and to preach good
tidinges is applied in some place to me^ of the old time. Howbeit I believe
rather, that Eua^gelion is an open publishinge of salvation al ready
perfirmed, and accomplished, than of the same promised. And therefore they
speak more distinctly, and proprely that give the name of Eua^gelistes to
thapostles, and writers of the history of the lord Jesus, and finally to the
ministers of the new testament. And to give place rather to this judgment, the
words of our saueor in the 16. of Luke move me, where he says that the law,
and the prophets were unto Ioha^ the Baptiste, and that from that time the
kingdom of god was eua^gelized. The kingdom of god was in deed taught before,
and the gospel preached in some wise, but it was not so openly, so largely, so
plainly, so far and wide published, and proclaimed.

But herein as I said I will conte^d with no man, nor bind the word to this
propre signification only. For I am not ignorant what a wra^glinge wit may
gather out of the fourth cha. to the Hebr. After S. Johan). The history of the
gospel shows that the Lord Jesus out of the nombre of his disciples chose
twelve principal, whom he called Apostles, because they should be sent as his
special Ambassadors in to all the world to publish, and preach the glad tidinges
of free salvation. And among these twelve there were three yet more special,
and singular furnished with most excellent gifts, and therefore admitted to
certain things, where the other were excluded.

Of these three Johan was one, of who^ it is written singularly and specially,
that he was the lords biloued. To whom also the Lord gave this marvelous
name, that he was called the son of thondre. And surely who so weighs this
present work, shall think that he rather thondreth from heaven, than speaks
man's words.

Numenius an heathen Philosopher, when he had red the beginning of this
gospel, barst out in to these words:

I pray God, I die, if this barbarous fellow have not comprehended in few
words, all that our Plato prosequuteth in so many worckes.

He called him barbarous because he was an hebreu, and in his writing leaves
traces of his mothers tou^ge, and follows not curiously the finenes, and
proprietes of the greek manner of speakinge, but he granted unto him as much
knowledge, as the most famous Philosopher, and father of al learned wits Plato
had, and more shortenes in writi^ge, which is more commendable in a writer of
grave matters. Writers of histories show many wonderful things of this Ioha^,
as that he was put in to boilinge oil, and ca^ out again unhurt etc. But it
shall be sufficient for us to know, and consider that he was one of the most
excellent, singular, and special apostles, and therefore a mete witness of the
Lord Jesus.

In the beginning) King David inspired from above teaches in the third psalm.
that to save pertains to Iehoua. The prophet Esaie moved by the same spirit
in the.45. cha. has these words: Israel is saved i^ Iehoua, whith a perpetual
salvation In which cha. also God speakinge of himself, says thus: A just God
and one that saves there is none beside me. And in the prophet Hosea, he
bears in the same, saiynge, thou shall know no god besides me, and there is
no saueor besides me. And in Hieremie he pronou^ceth hi^ accursed, that shall
trust in man, and make fleeshe his arm, which words co^straine us to seek
salvation no where save in God. But we al seek salvation at the hands of the
lord Jesus, we al acknowledge him to be the saueor of the world. We must tha^
of necessitee know him to be god, onles we will forge, and maintain a faith not
agreynge to gods word. And that undoubtedly gods Messiah, who^ the father
aeternally appointed to be the saueor of the world, is God, the holy scripture
bears witness most plainly, that we should be certain that we swerve not from
god, wha^ we seek salvation in him. For the kingly prophet David in the.45.
psalm. where with a notable song he celebrateth the praises of Messiah, says
thus: Thy throne o God is for ever. In which words he gives him not only the
name of God, but also confesses his throne to be ever lasting. Now noma^nes
throne is established for ever sauinge gods only.

Esaie in the.9. cha. calls him el gibbor a strong god, and in the same cha.
he teaches that there is no measure, nor end of his kingdom. The prophet
Hieremie to take away al cauillations, teaches expressly that he is Jehovah,
which name is never given nor can be given, save to the true God only, the
author and fou^raine of al being. For these be his words: Behold the days
comme says Iehoua, and I will raise up to David a just blosom, and a king
shall reign, and do wisely, and shall exequute judgment, and righteousness in
the earth. In his days Iehuda shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely and
this is his name which they shall call him, Iehoua our righteousness. And this
confirms the prophet Hosea, where god speaks thus: But I will have pity
on the house of Judah, and will save the^ in Iehoua their God.

In the new testament this matter is taught most clearly. For these be. S.
Paul's words in the.9, to the To. whose be the fathers, and of whom is Christ
after the flesch, who is over al god blessed for ever. And in the.2. to the
Philip Let the same mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus, who being
in the form of god thought it not robbery to be equal with god, and yet
emptied him self, taking the form of a servant etc. Thus S Paul teaches
that he is not god by usurpation, but by nature, and that he was, and ever is,
and shall be in the form and state of god, and very god, as when he says that
he took the form of a servant, he means that he entered in to the state of a
servant, and became a very servant. Some wrangli^ge spirits wrest this place
very boldly, and ungodly. For they say that S. Paul reaches no more, but
that the lord Jesus was humble, and content with his state, and aspired not
farther, ne went about to climme up unjustly to an aequalitee with god. But if
that were the meaning, when. S. Paul says, that being in the form of God,
he thought not to make himself equal to god by robbery, he should signify
that being in that state that he was in, he might have so do^, and have
prevailed. Or else what great matter had it be^, that he abstained from that,
which o^ce to have go^ about, or to have thought upon, had been more than mere
madness.

Wherefore it is evident that this their devise, is the very rauinge of sick
brains, beside that they shamelesly wringe these words out of their natural
sense, he thought it no robbery to be aequal with God, and make them signify,
whether they will or no, he me^t no robbery, or he went about no robbery
thinkinge to make him self aequal to god, in such a sense, as they never knew
before, nether will abide, o^les they be haled clean out of iointe. S. Paul's
meaning is this, that the lord Jesus bei^ge very god yet covered his
glorious majesty with the shape and state of a servant, and humbled him self
unto the death of the cross, to do us good, which exe^ple he sets before
us, to follow, and not to be ashamed to abase our selves to the wealth of other.
For we ca^ never cast dou^ne our selves so much, as he did, if we consider his
glory and divine estate, and what a thing it is, for him, that is very god,
to beco^me not only a man, but also a servant, and not that only but more over
to be appointed to a most vile, and shameful death. Now the higher he was, the
more liuelier his exe^ple is to move us, and to make us ashamed of our
disdainfulnes. And therefore, S. Paul speaks of his godhead, which he had
and has naturally, that we may know, that his hu^blinge camme not by force,
but of his own good will. Where I have turned this word (alla) which
signifies but, in to these words, and yet, I have marcked that. S. Paul so
uses the word (alla) in many places. One shall suffice, for this time, in
the.6. to the Cor. he speaks thus. For though you have innumerable leaders in
christ, alla, but not many fathers, that is to say, yet not many fathers. To
return to our purpose. S. Paul in the.14. to the To. applies this sentence
of Esaie: Every knee shall bow unto me etc. to the lord Jesus, with these
words: we must al be presented before the judgment seat of Christ. For it is
written as truly as I live says the lord, every knee shall bow unto me etc.
But it is evident that those words ar spoken of Iehoua, in the prophet, and
so must the lord Jesus be Iehoua. For these be the words of that prophetie in
the 45. cha. Am not I Iehoua, and there is no god besides me, a just God, and
one that saves there is none besides me. Look unto me, and be saved al ye
ends of the earth; for I am god, and there is no more, I have sworn by my
self, the word is gone out of my mouth in righteousness, that every knee shall
bow down unto me etc. Again. S. Paul in the ninth to the To. teaches that
the lord Jesus is the stomblinge block, and the stone where at the lues should
fall, which thing the prophet Esaie speaks of Jehovah.

For thus he writes: you shall sanctify Iehoua the lord of hosts. And he
shall be a sanctuary, and a stone to stomble at, and a rock to sal at, to both
the houses of Israel a snare, and a trappe to the in dweller of Jerusalem. And
many shall stomble in them, or among the^, shall sal, and be bruised, and
snared, and taken.

Now compare Esaie, and Paul together, and you shall see, that the lord Jesus
is Iehoua, as S. Paul cold vndrestande the scriptures, who was sure that he
had gods spirit.

The Angel also in. S. Luke says, that Johan Baptiste should turn many of
the children of Israel to the lord their god, and that he should go before
him in the spirit, and power of Elias. But the lord Jesus him self teaches,
that Iohans office was to go before his face, alleginge the text of the
prophet Malaki, after this sort in the.11. of Matheu: behold I send mine
Angel before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before the. So must the
lord Jesus be the Lord god of the Israelites.

But this matter is no where taught with greater clearnes, light, and grace,
tha^ in this gospel of S. Io. For in the first part of his first cha.
speaki^ge of the true Messiah, namely of the lord Jesus our undoubted saueor,
that our faith might safely rest in him, and that we might know it to be
co^sonant to the truth of gods word, and that we make not flesh our arm wha^
we put our trust in hi^, he says, that he was ever gods word vtue, and
wisedo^, and that he was with god and that he was very god, and that al
things were made by hi^ etc. here indede our wits ar dafeld, and amassed,
here arise many thoughts. For here two be spoken of god I say, and gods
word, and the word is said to be god, and to be with god. It seems tha^ to
man's hasty reason, that there be two gods. But the truth is, that there is
but one god.

Wherefore some have be^ so boide, or rather so mad, as to deny the godhead of
the lord Jesus, and to bring him in to the order of creatures, and to feign
him a made God, lest there should be two natural gods. For they ca^ abide no
more of god, tha^ they ca^ co^prehe^de with their little wits.

But we must consider that god is best known, yea only known to him self,
and we must think him to be such, as he hi^ self has opened unto us, that he
is, and not such as we ca^ imagine him, or co^prehe^de him. Now he has taught
us that there is one god, the father, the son, and the holy ghost. That the
father is god, the son is god, the holy ghost is god, and yet not three
gods, but one god. Three distinctions, three proprietes, and as the good
fathers speak, three persons to be in the godhead, he him self has taught
us, by his special instruments sent by him in to the world, to teach the
assured truth. And it follows not in deed hereupon, that there be three
gods. For these three have one substance, (if it be lawful to use that term
in this matter,) one essence, one being. I grant it should follow, that there
were three gods, if they were three sondrie divided substances. But now the
substance and essence is one, and they differ not therein, they differ only in
proprietes, and persons. This is the proprietee of the father, that he is the
fountain and head spring of al, and begets his son. This is the
propriete of the son, that he shines from the father, issues and springs
out of him, and is begotten of him. This is the proprietee of the holy ghost,
that he proceeds from the father, and the son. If any man will ask how this
trinitee, can bein a^ unity, and a^ unity in a trinitee, the same declares,
that he will not be satisfied, until he have e^tred in to the secrets of god
and know all that is in god, and be as wise as god, and comprehe^d that, that is
infinite, and unmeasurable within the small compass of his frantic head, and
so in deed show him self to rave, and to be more mete, to be placed in
bedleem, than in the company of Christian me^. When god has once clarely and
certai^ly said it, it is our part to think it to be, as he has said it to
be. For surely it may be, and it is, when he has plai^ly said it, though our
reason ca^ nev reach it. And that god has said this with clear words, it
shall most evidently appear out of. S. Ioannes doctrine, wha^ it shall be
weighed. For I doubt not but that we al acknowledge, that what so. S. Io.
says, god says. And wha^ we know that god has certai^ly said it, we will
believe it, though it seem never so much repugnant to reason. For we refuse not
all that is repugnant to reason, but wha^ the same is repugnant to gods word.

And to say the truth this matter is not so much repugnant to reason, as it is
above the reach of reason.

In the beginning was the word

The word was in the beginning. By the word the euangeliste means, the
second person in the holy trinitee, namely our lord Jesus Christ touching
his divine nature, as it appears afterward, wha^ he says, and the word
became flesh. Here we must consider why gods son is called a word.
Auncia^t writers consider a word two ways. For they teach that there is an
outward word, and a^ inward word. The outward word is that sou^deth, and
passes away. The inward word is the co^ceipte of the heart, which remains
still in the heart, wha^ the sound is past. So they say that god has an
outward word, which is sounded, pronounced and written in books, and that he
has an inward word, which remains with in him self where of the outward
word is an image, effect, and fruit. This inward word ever remaininge in
him is called his son, as the co^ceipte of the heart may be called the
engendered fruit of the heart, and the hertes child.

They think also that he is called the word of god, because that as a word
is the image of man's mind, and represents it unto us, so the Lord Jesus
is gods image, and most lively represents unto us his power, his godhed,
and his wisdom.

For what so ever is in the father shines in the son. Some other think
that the word here is taken for a thing, after the hebrew manner of speakinge.

For the hebrews use (DABAR) which signifies a word for a thing.

When Esaie the prophet asked king Ezechias, what the Ambassadors of Babylon
had see^ in his house, he answered thus: They saw all that was in mine house, lo
haiah dabar, there was not a word, that is to say any one thing, that I
showed not unto them in my treasures. The prophet replieth: Behold the days
comme, that what so ever is in thy house shall be taken away, and what so ever
thy fathers have laid up in stoare unto this day, shall be carried to Babylon lo
ijvather dabar, there shall not a word remain says the lord, that is to
say, there shall not one thing be left behind. The angel also in. S. Luke
when the Virgin Marie meruailed how she should conceive a child without man's
help, said unto her, no word shall be impossible unto god, that is, no thing
shall be impossible for him to do. So than after this understandinge S. Ioha^nes
meaning is, that in the beginning there was a divine, and heaue^lie thing
with god.

The greek vocable, logos, which S. Johan. uses, has sondrie significatio^s,
and among other beside co^municatio^, and talk, it signifies reason, and
wisdom which singificacion agrees right well. For Solomon calls that thing
wisdo^e that was with God before the foundation of the world was laid, and
that was Amo^ before him, that is to say, as the Hebreues expoune the word, a
director. For by that wisdom God made all things, and does all things, as
it is there expressed, by me kings reign, and Princes enacte righteousness etc.

Surely in my mind S. John has respect to the first cha. of Genesis, and
opens the same unto us. For Moses says not simply, that God made all things
of naught, but that he spoke, and made things, that is to say, that he made
all things by his word. By the word than I understand Gods virtue, and
power, whereby he has opened, and as it were set abroad himself in making all
things, and in preserving and maintaining the^ in their state, and finally in
repairing, restoring, and renewing them being decayed thorough sin. For as a
word utters, and brings forth that, that is in the heart, so by this
word, this power, and virtue of god, is uttered brought forth, and set
abroad, that lay hydden in god before. So that I think that he is called
gods word, both because he is gods wisdom, and gods image, represe^tyng all
that is in the father, and also because he is the secret virtue, and power of
God, whereby god utters, shewethe out, and sends forth that is in him,
namely his might, and wisdom in making all things, his goodness in preserving
them, and his mercy indeclaring to mortal men his will, and pleasure, and in
recovering and saving them being lost. only let us beware, that we take not
this vocable (word, grossly for a word sounded, pronounced, or written, but for
an essencial person subsisting, and abiding in God, and than whether we
understand the word to be gods image, and brightness, gods virtue and power,
or gods wisdom, we shall not do amysse. For the holy scripture gives al
these things to the second person in the most sacred trinite. In the
beginning) that is before the world was made for so we learn in Solomon.
Iehoua possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works Meaz. from
than, that is to say eternallly. And than he goes forth, meolam, from ever I
was stablyshed, from the head, before the beginninges of the earth. Be in the
homoth in not depes, that is wha^ the depts were not, I was conceived, be ein
maienoth, in not fou^taines, that is wha^ the fountains were not yet laden
with twaters. Before the fou^dacio^ of mountains was laid, before the hills
I was conceived. Yet he had not made the earth and the outward parts of it, and
the head that is the beginning of the dust of the world. When he prepared the
heavens, I was there. etc. hitherto we have rehearsed the holy gostes words out
of Salo. proverbs. And I think more sondrye words can not be devised to
express that gods wisdom, even the Lord Jesus, touching his divine nature,
was with God before any creature had his being. And in deed since the Lord
Jesus, in that he is gods son is gods wisdom, they blaspheme God, that
imagine any time when he was not: For so they imagine a time when GOD was
without wisdom. We have another place of the scripture, that teaches us
thus to understand, in the beginning. For in the.17. cha. of this gospel, the
Lord himself says: glorify me father at thy self, with the glory, which I
had before the world was with thee. he that had glory before the world was
made, was, and had a being before the world was made. For that, that is
nothing, cannot have glory while it is nothing. WAS) It is euidente that S.
John's intent is in this chap. to show what gods son is touching his
substance, essence and being. And if he had been a creature, here had been a
place of necessite, to show that he was made. But he says not that he was
made yea he says that he was already, and had his being before any creature
was made. And so he is exempted out of the number of creatures.

And these two words in the beginning, and was, confound two heretics,
Cerinthus, and Arius. When Cerinthus shall swinishly grunte that the Lord
Jesus was a pure man, and had his begi^ning of Joseph, and Mary, we may stopp
his mouth with this word in the beginning. For he that was in the beginning
was not to be begone in the time of Joseph, and Mary. When Arrius shall
blasphemously iangle, and peuishlye babble, that he is a creature, we shall
put his rude talk to silence, with this word, was. For he that was
already in the beginning, before any thing was made, and had his being
before the creation of things, was never made. And this vocable (the word)
binds both these heretics together in a bondle and throws them down to
hell. For either to say that Gods word was not eternallye, or that Gods
word is a creature, is to say that God was some time without his wisdom, and
power, or to say that God had no wisdom, until he had made it. For it is
manifest out of Solomon, that Gods word is his wisdom For there it is
taught, that all things were made by his wisdom, and here we are taught,
that all things were made by his word. So his wisdom, and his word must
be all one. And than cannot his word be a creature. For GOD was never, nor
never shall be without his wisdom. But the Arrians make an argument whereby they
thynk to overthrow all. That say they, that begets is before that, that is
begotten, but the father begets, ergo he is before the son, that is
begotten. To this first I answer that they, which will show things uncreate,
by things create, shall sometimes show themselves very fools. Secondly I
answer that the argument is not always true, in things create. For light
springs out of the sun, and therefore we may say, that the su^ne begets
light and heat issues out of fire, and yet the sun is not before his
light, nor fire before heat. But as soon as the sun is light is also, and
as soon as fire is, heat is The sun goes before his light, fire before
heat in order, nor in time. And so we may say, that the father is before his
son, god is before his wisdom in order, not in time. In order, because
wisdom springs from the father, not in time, because the father is never
without his wisdom. But yet they blasphemously demand, whether the father
be gatt the son, when he was, or wha^ he was not, thinking whatsoever shall
be answered, to show an absurdyte. Where indede the demand is most absurd,
and peuishe. For we will demand of them again, whether fire begette heat
before heat is in it, or after. If they say before, than they grant that
fire is some time without heat, which is impossible For it is no fire that
has no heat. If they say after, than we will say as they say, that the
begettyng of heat is superfluous, sith heat was there before. Again we might
ask them, whether god wha^ he was became god, or became god before he was.
But we delight not in such vain questions, wherewyth idle wits sport their
follies. But briefly to them we say, that it is no absurdite to affirm that
the father begets his son already being, because the son is ever in him
and springs ever from him, no more than it is an absurdite to say, that ma^s
mind begets reason, because reason is in it and spri^geth from it. And yet
ma^s mi^d is no sooner, tha^ reason is. But these great clerks ca^ imagine none
other begetti^g, but ma^s gross begetti^g of children. And so absurdites follow
not our doctri^e, but their dremi^gs. For our doctri^e of gods son, and of
begetting, is far from the gross imaginacion of man's, or beasts fleshlye
begetting. There is nothing in our doctrine but heavenly, and spiritual. And
these men are altogether drowned in flesh, and speak nothing but flesh,
and fleshly things.

I will rehearse another argument of theirs, that the simple, and unlearned be
not perchance combred, and amassed with their sophistications. Otherwise I think
all their reasons rather to be buried in perpetual silence and darkness, and to
be in deed so many blasphemies, as they be reasons. For they ask whether God
begatte^ his son without consideracyon or consideringe and willinge. If
neither considering, nor wylling, than say they he suffered somewhat, that he
would not If considering, and willing, than his consideracion, and will went
before his generation.

But as before we may discover their extreme folly with another demand. For
we may ask whether God be good and merciful of his own will, or against his
will. For if he be good, and merciful of his own will, and will goes before
all things, that are chosen by will, tha^ there was a time or space, when God
was not yet good, and merciful, but consulted, and took deliberatio^ about
those things. Item we may demand of them, whether the father be God of his
will, or against his will. If of his will, than after these men's high wits,
his will went before his essence, and being. If against his will, who
constrained him* who sees not now the outrageous madness, and extre^e fransie
of these wild spirits For in deed in natural things no will goes before,
which will has place only in those things that be without the substance
of him, that takes deliberacio^. But here we will make an end of this lecture.
Let these words of the Evangelist my brethren which we now have treated sink
depelye into your hearts, which weighe down so great heresies and teach us
so excellent, and so divine things, as the angels can not attain unto. Let us
consider how great goodness of God this is, that he has vouchsafed to open
unto us the most reverend temple of his divine majesty, and let us praise
his holy name therefore, and be thankful.

The second readyng.
ANd the word was with God. Before the world was made, there was nether time,
nor place. And therefore the word being a thing subsistinge in the beginning
before any thing was made, could be no where but with god, and in god. For
than there was nothing but God. And so he must needs be of the same substance
that god is of. For if he were not of the same substance and yet was in the
beginning, that is to say ever a thing subsistinge with God, than the
proprietes of God should be taken away. The proprietes of God ar to be
infinite, and to be omnipotent. But if they were two sondrie divided
substances, neither of them should be infinite, nor omnipotent. For where the
one were the other should not be, nor where the power of the one, the power of
the other. Their substance than of necessite, must be one, and the same, and
yet these words show manifestly a difference in the godhead. For it were a
great absurdite to sal the word was with god, if there were no manner of
difference between god, and the word. For who can say of one thing having no
manner of difference, that that thing has a thing with it. Who can say
without absurdite in such a ringe there is a diamonde, and in the diamo^de or
with the diamonde, there is a diamo^d speaking of one only diamond. Thus we may
say, in such a ring there is a diamo^d and in the diamonde a point, a raze, or
a virtue to take away the power of the adama^t stone for there is some
difference between the point, the raze, and the virtue, and the diamonde it
self. So tha^ wha^ we say a thing is with a thing, there is a difference
between the thing with which it is, and the thing that is with it. These words
therefore forceably overthrow another heresy, namely of Sabellius, who
affirmed, that there was no distinction of persons in the Godhead.

And that these words the father, the son, and the holy ghost were only
sondrie titles, and names given to one person as one and the self same man may
some times be called tall, some times fair, and some times valiant etc. So he
mingled and consounded altogether, teaching that god the father was sometimes
called the father, sometimes the son, and so^e times the holy ghost.

But we hold leaning to the euidente truth of Gods word, these three
disti^ctions, these three sondrie persons, unmingled, and unconfounded, so that
the father is not the son, nor the son the holy ghost, or the father. As in
the sun that shines over us, we see three things unconfounded, and
unmingled. For we consider the sun by it self, the light by it self, and
the heat by it self. The light is not the son, nor the heat the light, but
they be three distinct things. I say nor this as though the material su^n
could sufficiently express the things of the godhead. For no creature can
expres that mystery. Yea no corporal thing can express a spiritual, and
mindly thing. But I speak it to show you some way, for the stayeng of
unquiet heads, that sondrie things may be in one unconfounded, and
unmingled, that is every one abiding still in his propre nature.

Now that these three distinctions be in the godhead I will brieflye show you
out of gods word. And first I will begin with the holy ghost. In the.14. of
this gospel the Lord himself says: I will entreat the father, and he
shall give you another comforter. This word another, notes a difference
between the son, and the holy ghost. For it can not be said of one, and the
same hauige no difference that he is another besides him self. Again speaking
of the holy ghost in the.16. cha. he shall receive, says the Lord Jesus, of
mine, and shall show forth unto you.

These words also declare a plain difference between the son and the holy
ghost. For he could not have said, he shall take of mine, if there had not
been a difference between him that takes, and him from whom he takes.

Now a difference both between the son and the holy ghost, and also between
the father and the holy ghost, may be easily and plai^ly gathered out of these
words: when the comforter shall come, whom I will send unto you from the
father, the spirit of truth, which proceeds from the father, he shall witness
of me. For there is a difference between him that sends and him that is sent,
and there is a difference between him that proceeds, and him from whom he
proceeds. And that there is a difference between the father, and the son
these words of the Lord Jesus teach us sufficiently, I and the father HEN
ESMEN are one. For the plural no^bre notes two. If there had been no
distinction between the father, and the son, he should have said I and the
fatheram one, and not ar one. These words also that we have in hand, the
word was with God, prove the same ineuitably, as I have said.

Here I must warn you of another error, that wha^ you hear that the word is
with god, and springs out of god the father, ye imagine not that he departs
and is divided from the father, and is a substance a part. For our former
example of the sun may teach you that, that is not of necessite. For light
is with the sun, and issues out of the sun, and yet departs not, ne is
divided from the su^ne And though no example could shadow the matter unto us,
yet the truth is, that gods son is so with god, and so begotten of God,
and so springs from God, that he abides still in God. For Gods nature
admytteth no division.

And the word was God. As the sentence before shows a difference between God
the father, and the son in their persons, so this teaches an unity in
substance.

For since there is but one God, the son being God, as S. John clearly
techeth, that we might be sure of the sons divinity, he must needs be of
the same substance, that the father is of. Else either there should be sondri
gods, or the son should not be naturally God. But the words that go
before, and these words, and the words that follow which assign to the son
the making of all things, prove that he is naturally God. For what is eternal
and without beginning, but god? what was with god before the world was made,
that was not god? how could John speaking of the nature of a thing, that was
in the beginning, affirm it to be god, onles it were god? For what substance
could there be before any thing was made, that was nether gods substance, nor a
creature. For what so is not a creature, and yet has a being, is surely god.
And whereby were all things made but by god? For Esaie teaches that god used
no minister in making the world, when he says I alone extended the heavens
by my self. But he made all things by his son, therefore his son must be
himself, that is to say of the same substance, essence, and being. And that
there can not be two gods, we have alreadi proved by gods propretes, and all
the scripture constantly affirms the same. But it is most vehemently taught
in these words of Esaie: is there a God beside me? Before me there was no god
framed, nor shall be after me. The son than being naturally god, must needs be
of the sa^e substance and essence that the father is of and so though the
father be naturally God, the son naturally God etc. yet there be not three
Gods, but one God, because the substance of those three is one. These words
also, the word was God, choke another heresy in my opinion more subtle than
the heresy of Arrius. For Paulus Samosatenus and his scolars grant that the
word was ever with God, but by the word they understand not a substance, a
subsisting essence but only gods purpose which he had eternally to make the
world, and to make him a son out of the virgin Mary, that should be a most
excellent man, and the saueoure of the world. But how can a hare purpose to
do things be called God, when it has no subsisting and abiding nature?
Forther these wretches see not that by their strange and worse than Platonical
imagination, they make trees, and stones and worms equal to Gods son in
eternite. For they were ever in gods purpose. And yet I think they will stick
to call them gods.

But though this sentence of S. John be sufficient to hold their noses to the
grind stone, yet take that with you also that is written in the.17. chap. of
this work, glorify me father with the glory which I had before the world was
with thee.

What glory could an only purpose without substance have before the world
was with God? Yea how could he be, before the world, if he were in Gods purpose
only? For so was the world ever with God. How could he rejoice before him when
nothing was yet made, as Solomon teaches, if he were than but in his purpose?
Nether could this be truly said, before Abraham was, I am, if he were in the
beginning, but only in Gods purpose, for so was Abraham ever in gods purpose.

For God begins not new counsels, and purposes. But his purposes are
eternal, and altogether, and he needs not time to devise and purpose one thing
after another, which is man's weakness. For he sees all that he will do at
once with one sight, which if we could do we would not take one counsel
after another. But our weakness compels us so to do, which is far from
God, and therefore all his purposes be in him together, and at once. But since
his son was in him before Abraham, it must needs be, that he was otherwise
in him, than in purpose.

And in deed he that is ever in substance and beeinge, may well be said to
be before him, that was only ever in purpose, and not in substance, and very
being. Thus this heresye also lays flat upon the ground with out life, or
breathing.

This was in the beginning with GOD.) The Greeks have a proverb that the
thing that is fair, and goodly may be repeted once or twice. Saint John
repeteth the very thing, that he spoke before. And this he does not
superfluouslie, but upon great purpose For he will deeply printe in to us,
that GODS word is eternal, without beginning, and no creature.

As if he would say think not that this fell from me inconsideratly when I
said the word was in the beginning, and said not, that it was made. For,
that you may be assured for ever of my meaning and of the truth of the matter,
I say to you again, that the word was in the beginning, and had his being
before any thing was made. That the word I say was eternallye with God, and is
no creature. For it was ever with God, and had ever his being. This is the
diligence of our holy writers, that when a thing is of great weight, and
importance they will beat it in twice, that it may stick the faster.

Althinges) he has showed us the substance, essence and being of the lord
Jesus, now he teaches us to know hi^ by his works. For he says that al
things ware made by him And if all things were made by him tha^ he must needs
be god. For God himself says in the.44. of Esaias, I am Iehoua the maker of al
things, I only extend the heavens and stretche forth the earth by my self.
But the Prophet David says that the heavens were made, and stablished by
Gods word and this place testifies, that all things were made by it, so
Gods word must needs be God, forasmuch as God made al things alone by
himself, and yet by his word.

Here we must beware of sondrye corrupters of the scripture. For some peuishly,
and dronkenlye affirm, that. S. John speaks of God the father, when he says
that al things were made by him, because the Greek pronowne is indifferent to
be interpreted by it or by hi^, the word (logos) being the masculine ge^der.
But how werishe a thing were this, and how far beside the purpose, if going
about to teach what we should think of gods son and of his nature he should
write thus: Gods son was in the beginning with God, and was God, he was in
the beginning with God and all things were made by him, that is to say by God
the father, what were this to his purpose, which is to show us what Gods
son is, if he should tell us that God the father made al things? But. S.
Paul shall make these dreamers to blushe, and defeat the^ of there miserable
shifte, to the sight of very children. For to the colossia^s, he writes thus:
geuinge thanks to the father, who has made us mete to be partakers of the
lot of the saints in light, who has delivered us out of the power of
darkness, and removed us into the kingdom of his beloved son, by who^ we have
redemption through his blood, remission of sins, which is the image of the
invisible God, the first begotten of every creature. For in him or by him were
all things made, things in heaven and things in earth. Therefore, says
saint Paul, he is the first begotten of all creatures, because all things
were made by him.

These words can not be wrested, but that they shall teach that all things
were made by the divine nature of the Lord Jesus, and so they shall serve to
show plainly. S. John's meaning, beside that the thread of his purpose leads
us there unto.

The Arrians as falsely, but more subtillye say, that God made all things yb
the word in deed, but that he made the^ by it, as by an instrumente, and
minister. But they see not, that so they blaspheme both God the father, and his
son. If God could not make the world but by an instrumente, and minister,
his power is pinched, and cut short. And if the word were but an
instrumente only, and minister of another will, the glory thereof is greatly
diminished. We say therefore that God the father made the world by his word
working equally together with him.

The good fathers have labored to teach us this matter by similitudes, as
heat, say they, works together with the fire, and odor with a flower.
Howbeit they confess that no similitude taken out of things create, can
sufficiently express the thing. But though no earthly thing can express
the matter, of the thing we are sure, namelye that the father works together
equally with the son, and the son equallye with the father, and that GOD
used no mynyster in making of the world. For our Lord says, my father
hitherto works and I work, and whatsoever he does, that does the son
like wise.

And that God used no instrument, or minister in making things, he himself
teaches in Esaye, as I have showed you, by these words (any Ieuadi, I alone
extend the heavens etc. and MEITTI, of my self, or by my self. Thus when we
say God made all things, we exclud not the son, and when we say al things
were made by the son, we exclude not the father, and the holy ghost, but mean
that they wroughte, and ever work equally together.

And where the Arrians bid us mark that when the scriptures speak of the
son in making, and working, they use this word by whom, and not of whom, we
answer that the scriptures speaking of the fathers woorkinge, use also this
word by whom. God is faithful says S. Paul, by whom you are called to the
fellowship of his son. 1. Cor. 1.
And to the. To. for, of him and by him, and into him are all things. Romans 11.
Hebru. 2.
To the. He. also: it besemed him for whom are all things, and by whom are al
things. etc. And (of whom) is also applied to the son, as in the.4. to the
Ephe. That we may grow into hi^ which is the head, of whom the hole body
being coupled, and joined etc. But some will say, that. S. Paul speaks not
there of making of creatures, but of making of his congregation. I answer that
it is no less work of Gods omnipotency to make a spiritual man, and a good
man, than to make a man, yea. S. Augustine says that it is a greater thing.
And if the Lord Jesus be the aurthor of, goodness in man, that is to say of
that, that is best in man, than is he able enough to be the author of that,
that is lower and requires les power to be made. So I conclude that he is the
maker, and worker of things, not as an instrumente, but as an author of whom,
and by whom things proceed. And than I propone this argument to our new
Arrians, that, that makes things, is of another nature, tha^ the things that
be made. But Gods son made al things, so is he of another nature than the
things, which he made. And if he be of another nature, tha^ made things be
of, he is God. For whatsoever is not mad, nor of the nature of things made, is
God. For there be no more in the world nor without the world, but god and
things made. And whatsoever is not made, and yet is, is God.

And with out it nothing was made that was made.) Thus the sentence must holy
go together. For they that knytte the last part to the next sentence thus:
that was made in it was life, they are feign to use a new figure of speech,
and in deed to corrupt the scripture, saying that in it was life, is as much
to say, as it lives in it. But to live in Gods word and to be life in Gods
word, will not so easily be made alone. And as for the repeticion of the same
words, it is no rare thing in Hebrewe writers.

To our purpose, when. S. John says that nothing was made without it, he
says the very same thing that he said, when he said, that al things were
made by it, and yet he does nothing vainly but this repeticion in other
words, is very necessary, and very profitable for us, and gives us a
strong weapon against al cauillacions. For in commun speech this word (all)
comprehends not always every thing particularlye.

When Saint Luke says, they were al filled with anger in the sinagoge of
Nazareth, he means not every one none except. For some loved, and favored
hi^ in that company. Saint John than has done diligently, and wiselye, and
happelye for us, that he was not content, only to say all things were made
by it, namelye the word, but with a repiticion to utter the matter again
with such words, as leave no manner of color to wranglers. Nether would he
use the word (OVDEN) which signifies nothing, but speak more straightlye
in my opinion, saying OVDEHEN, neither one thing as if he would say, not so
much as any one thing, though it be never so little. The like diligence and
wisdom was in. S. Paul speakinge of the same matter For he thought it not
enough to say all things were made by the lord, but comes afterward
exquisitely, and almost scrupulously to diuisio^s, and patticulary tees saying,
whether they be things in earth, or things in heaven, and so forth. Now than
hear my reason: If nothing were made without him, than he himself was not
made, onles you will rave, and say that he is nothing or that he made
himself, since he is some thing. But he that made all things, cannot be
nothing, neither could he make himself before he was. And he that is already,
is not to be made. It is plain than that he was never made. And if he were
never made, but did make all things, than is he certaynlye God.

But let the Arrians go a while, and let us consider another thing in these
words. If al things were made by him than all things are in his power.
Whereof than should we be afraid, while we mai^taine his cause, and labor to
serve hi^? For no tiranne, no creature in the world can hurt us, nor once move
against us otherwise than pleases him. For they are all his, he made the^, and
therefore they are al under his power. Let us than cast away al fear, and be
of good courage, rage the world never so much. For all things must stoop
to him, and fall down flat before him, that made them, who has loved us,
and made us his brethren, and bought us to be gods peculiar people with the
price of his most holy blood. To him therefore give all honor, glory, and
praise. Amen.

The third reading.
Saint John as it were with Aegels wings mounting far above the earth, and
far above the heavens to, and admitted into the most secret closette of the
divine majesty, se^deth forth from thence such lightninges and thonderinges,
as beat down, confound, consume, and utterly wast away all the forces,
imaginations, and devises, of ma^s carnal wit, and yet lighte^, make clear,
and comfort the understanding of the Godly being reformed by Gods sprite. For
first he sounds from heaven that God has a word, signifyinge the divine
nature of the lord Jesus. And here forthwith Arrius sets up his horns, and
because he cannot frame his wit according to the word, he goes about to
frame the word according to his wit, as the men of Lesbos had squires and
rules of lead, and when they could not make their hard stones agree to their
squiers, they would stretche out their squiers, and make them agree to the
stones. I grant, says Arrius that God has a word, that is of most
excellent nature but this word God made, and there was a time when the word
was not. Against this devise of man's peuishe head. S. John thondreth and
lightneth, declaring that the word was in the beginning. Now of a beginning
there is no beginning, for that were not a beginning indede, that had a
beginning. But lest any should say that a beginning so^etimes signifies order,
and not excluding of time, as wha^ Moses says in the beginning God made
heaven, and earth etc. there lies another thonderbolte in the word, was, for
thereby is signified that the word had his being in the beginning, and was
never made.

Sabellius than, and the patripassians, step forth, and they sai that the
word was in the beginning in deed, and had ever his being. For there is no
manner of difference, or distinction between God the father, and the word. But.
S. John co^sumeth these heretics with the lightni^g of this sentence, and the
word was with God Paulus Samosatenus thinks to perce the heavens, and is
lifted up above the clouds with the wings of pride, and says that the word
signifies gods purpose only to do things without any subsisti^g and
abidi^g nature. But. S John with this shot drives him down unto hell, when he
says the word was god. For a bare purpose having no substance cannot be god,
ne said to be god. Tha^ our most divine evangelist, that all the world may learn
the divinity of the word by his works, says, that al things were made by the
word. Here the Arria^s sweet, vex, and torment the^ selves, wrigling in and
out, and at the last they break forth into open blasphemye, and say that God
made the world by the word, as by an instrument.

But. S. John uttering the same sentence again with other words, namely with
these, and without it was made nothing, stops their breath. For if God made
the world by an instrument, and without the word nothing was made, than the
instrument was not made without it if the instrument were any thing. And so he
was not made without himself. But he could not help to make himself before
he was. And he that is already, has no need to be made. But S. John leaves
them not so, but still hurleth fiery flashes against their faces. For with
great grace and power he says, in it was life. From whom proceeds life, but
from the true God only, of whom it is notablye and si^gularly said, with the
is the vein of life. And again, in him we live, move and have our being.

We may than well make these reasons if Gods son being naturallye life,
gives life to all things by participacyon of him self, he is another tha^
the things that live by his presence. And he that is another thing naturally
than a creature, how is not he God? Again if the son be a creature, how
quickneth he al things and how does. S. Paul assign that to God as properly,
and peculiarly pertaini^g unto him, when he says to Timothe, I charge the in
the sight of God, who quikneth all things. If the son be a creature and
gives life to all things, then a creature gives life to it self. And so
there shall no principal, and peculiar thing be in God above a creature. A
creature also shall have no need of God for life, since it gives it self life.
But a creature ever has need of the creator, so the son is not a creature,
since he is life by himself. Nothing is partaker of it self, all things be
partakers of the son as of their life, so is the son no creature.

Now let us return to our text. In it was life says. S. Ihon. For not only
all things were made by Gods word of nothing, but also all things are
preserved in their state by Gods word that they turn not to nothing
again. For undoubtedly al things should decaie and turn again to their first
nothing, if gods son did not inspire in to the^ life, vigor and force of
continuance. And this part of gods work, where by all things continue in
their state, is no less to be wo^dred at, than the making of things. For
where as al things made, and having a beginni^ge te^de to an end, by art,
and conninge, he has given the^ a certain immortalitee, and perpetual
continuance. For he has put in to things such life, vigor, and force of
enge^dringe, that by succession things that seem to be of a very short
co^tinua^ce, have continued many thousand years, and shall continue to the
end, that he has appointed. In the contemplation of this power of gods
son, it is more convenient, and more profitable for us to tarry long, and to
be fixed, than in the conte^plation of his divine substance, essence and
being, which thorough the exceeding brightness of it daseleth our weak eyes,
and is indede unto our measured wits inco^prehe^sible, and therefore rather
to be humbly worshipped, tha^ curiously sought out. And the life was the light
of me^)

This sentence is so^drie wife expou^ned. For some think that the meaning
is, that the life which gods son gives to creatures should be a light to
men to show the^ gods son. Some take the word, life, for gods son
himself, as if. S. Ioha^ should say, that gods son who is very life, is
the light of me^. Some other gather this sentence, that the life that gods
son gives to me^, is adorned with understanding and reason, and aduau^ced
thereunto where by they excelle al other erthlie creatures. And these two later
expositio^s though they vary some what in expressinge the matter, yet come to
this e^de, that gods son is the author of vndresta^dinge, and reason in me^.
Which is a sou^de, and a true sense, and may be most certainly gathered out of
the words folowi^ge, namely these, that was the true light, that lighteneth
every man etc. This much tha^ may easily be drawn out of this se^te^ce, that
gods son bei^ge the author of vndresta^dinge, is very god. For the prophet
Esaie in the 28. cha. speaki^ge of the housba^d man's tilli^ge of the ground,
and of his co^ni^ge in threthi^ge, for he thresheth not out his wheat, cumi^e,
and fetches with one i^strume^t, in the e^de uses these words: eue^ this
proceeded from Iehoua tsebaoth.

And if none other but Iehoua Tsebaoth were author of that co^ninge and
discretion than he that is author of all understanding, and reason must needs be
Iehoua Tsebaoth. And that Gods word that is to say Gods wisdom, is the author
and fountain of understanding, we are also taught in Salomo^, in these words,
with me is counsel ANY BINA, I am understanding etc. that is I am the head
spri^g of counsel, and understanding.

And the light shines in darkness) gods son gives great and ample profes of
his divinity, and sends forth the glorious shining beams of his heavenly
majesty, but they light upon blind eyes, me^ see them not though they be
never so clear, and so bright. Here. S. John calls man's understanding not
only dark, but very darkness, as though there were no manner of light in it.
But how can that be so? Shall we say that there is no manner of light in man's
wit, and understanding, whereby so mani most witty things have been invented?
What can be more witty than the books that heathen men have left us of logike
physic, arithmetike, geometry, astronomy and of the nature of all things?
What can be more wittely devised, than they have found out of the fountain,
head spring, and first causes of virtues, of the division, and description of
them? Was Plato void of al light of understanding, when he said that God made
the world because he is good. Was Aristotle drowned i^ darkness when he said
that forasmuch as the superioure orbs and over bodies do move there must
needs be a first mouer? Was Cicero stark blind when he said that seeing no
one family can continue with out otder and providence, much more the hole
world must be governed maintained, and continued by the providence of some
heavenly mind? What shall we say of that heathen Philosopher, that labors
to prove Gods providence by this argument. If God, says he, govern not the
world by his providence, it is either because he can not, or because he will not.
If you say he can not, you abbrige his power. If you say he will not, you
abbrige his goodness.

To this question than I answer that man has so much licht of understanding,
as is sufficient to make him void of al excuse, but not so much as ca^ direct
him to a profitable knowledge of God. He knows in deed by the light of nature
beside the knowledge that he has of other natural things, that there is a god,
but tha^ that God he forgeth'after his pleasure, and dreameth him to be not
such as he is in deed, but such as it likes him to frame him.

And so sets up his own imagination, his own dreams, his own puppette in
the stead of God. So that wha^ we come to this question, who is the true God
of what sort he is, and will be toward us, wherein consists the true
knowledge, and service of him, man's understanding as S. Ioha^ here truly
writes, is mere darcknes. And S. Paul agrees hereunto, writing to the Cor.
Psychicos anthropos, that is a man endued with a natural soul only, and not
renewed with gods spirit, comprehe^deth not the things, that pertain to
gods spirit. And therefore he prays that God will give the Ephesia^s the
spirit of wisdom, and revelation, and lightined eyes of the mi^de, that they
may know what the hope of their calling is, and the riches of his glorious
inhaeritau^ce in the Saints, and what is the exceeding greatness of his power
toward us, that believe. Now if they cold have attained to those things by
natures force, it had be^ superfluous to have prayed for the^. It is most true
tha^ that we are very darcknes, and have blind eyes of understanding, until
they be lightened, not touching every knowledge of things, nor evie knowledge
of God, but touching the right, true, and profitable knowledge of God. And yet
this is also true that we have more good vndresta^dinge of God, tha^ we have
good will to obeie, and serve him, as God. And if our vndresta^dinge be darcknes
in effect, as it is indede, and yet is more tha^ our will to serve him, how far
are we from God, and godliness? Let this consideration teach us humilitee, and
stir up in us a continual desire of Gods merciful assistau^ce and aid.

And the darcknes co^prehe^ded it not. The darcknes of man's mi^de and
vndersta^di^ge was so thick and gross, that though the beams of Gods son
shined every where, and filled the world with light, yet that was fruttles.

For men seeing saw not. As Moses teaches in these words, thy eyes have see^
great signs, and wonders, and god has not given thee an heart to understand,
nor ears to hear, nor eyes to see. Our seeing then onles God give new eyes to
se is no seeing. This is a plain testimony that man never attaineth to the
right knowledge of God by nature. For being darkness, he beats of the light,
and the light shines upon the outside, and perceth not in. Here we must seek
how this darkness, this blindness of judgment is in man, whether he were first
made dark and blind in heart, or whether darkness, and blindness came afterward
upon him. For if he were first made blind, tha^ there is no fault in him, if he
see not the great light, that God sends forth. For he was not made to see it.
What fault is there in the moale that she sees not the sun beams, or in
stones that they see not the stars, since they were so made as they should
not see. The holy scripture teaches that the first man Adam was made after
the image of God, that is furnished with most excellent gifts knowledge,
understanding, and all manner of virtues. He was not than made blind. But
afterward through the envy, and malice of Satan, and his own fault, he
neglected Gods commandment, and so lost those goodly qualitees, and became
blind, and begatte blind children namely such as he was himself. This is
diligently to be noted, that the fault mal remain where it is in deed, and not
in God, who is the author of good things o^lye, and not of any thing that is
evil, although he dispose in deed, and order all the things that man has
infected and made evil. For nothing comes to pass without him. But he
appoints and ordreth where and when every man shall utter that evil that is
in him: that is in hi^ I say, not by Gods workinge, but by his own procuring.
For God is not the author of an adulterous, theuishe or murtherous mind, and
yet no man shall put in practice the leacherie that boileth within him, nor the
theft, and murder that lurketh in his heart as often, and where and when he
will, but only where and when God will. And therefore. S. Augustyne says that
nothi^ge is do^ in the world, that comes not out of the inner court of the
sovereign Emperor. For this cause we grant not that God wills evil things
to be don, lest he should be thought the author of evil things, which is
impossible, nether grant we that he wills evil things not to be do^, or
that he nilleth the^ to be don, lest he should be thought impote^t, and not able
to order me^nes evils to his glory, which is false. But this matter we will
leave to another occasion, and give God tha^ckes for that he has now permitted
us to speak, who grant unto us al both to acknowledge the darckenes that we
have madly pulled up on our selves, and also to perceive the same insome part
lightened again by the beams of his sons divine spirit.

Ame^.
The Fourth READINGE. THERE was a man sent of God etc.)
IT is manifestly true, that plain traces, and evident signs of the divinity
and Gods wisdom the show the^ selves every where. For if we lift up our
yes, and behold the moui^ges, the due courses, and co^sta^t order of the
stars, we shall be constrained to confess, that there must needs be a^
heaue^lie mi^de, that gave the^ those moui^ges, that appoi^ted to the^ those
limited courses, and certain order. For where things go by chance, there no
order, no du certai^tie is kept. Again if we cast down our eyes, and look
upon things in the earth, and consider how creatures are preserved, and
continued in there certai^e ki^des, we shall be led to God as it were by the
hand. For we see that me^ begette not horses, nor horses me^, lions begette
not wolves, nor wolves bears, birds bri^ge not forth fishes, nor fishes
conies.

But if things went by chance without the government of a mind endued with
strength and wisdom, these things, and many more monsters should be seen daily
and howrely. What need we to straye far? we may remain within our selves and
almost touch God. For we see that every thing in us is made to a certain
end, and use. The mouth besides other uses, is made to receive meat, and
because hard things are sometimes to be taken, the teeth are ready to break
and to grind them, when the meat is well ground and fit to pass, there is
a condure pipe to conueie it to the stomach, where because the meat must be
more sodden, the liver is set under as a fire, to give it heat. When the
meat is well concocte in the stomach, and turned into a iuce it is sent thens
into certain gutts which are small because it shall not pass away to hastily,
and from thence the best and swetest part is drawn up by innumerable little
veins and derived to the liver and there thorough more heat turned into
blood. And the warrishe part of that blood is severed, and sent to the kidneys
and thence strained out, and conveyed to the blader beneth. The hotest part,
and fo^e of it, which we call cholere or gal is receued into a little blader
fastened for that purpose to the liver. The dregs, and earthiest part
commonly called mela^chol. is thrust into the milt. The blood that remains is
sent out by a great vein called the gate vein, to the heart where it is
made hoter, and finer. When that is done, there be arteries to receive the
finest, and purest part of the blood called the vital spirits, which be
twice as thick as the veins, because of the thinnes of the matter that they
must keep, and there be veins also to co^uei the rest of the blood into all
parts of the body, that no part be left without norishme^t, and sustina^ce
The remnaunte of the meat which is gross and unprofitable, has conuenie^te
places, where to be received, and issues also to be voided out of the body. And
because the ill savor, and sent of those things would hurt the noble
parts that be above, as it were a skin called the midriffe parts them a
sonder, and keeps of such noisances.

Now where things be appoi^ted to certain e^des, and uses, chance has no
place, but there must needs be a mi^de to appoi^te the same. For they cold not
be so appoi^ted by chance, yea chance would often set our mouths i^ our
fore heads, and our teeth in our fingers e^des. Chance would often hang our
stomakes at our elbowes, and set our heels upon the top of our heads, and
our eyes in our knees. Chance would iomble al to gether without order, without
al consideration of e^de our use. We need not tha^ to go far for a witness of
the diuinitee. Howbeit though there shine in our selves a thousa^de lamps to
show us God, and a thousa^de thousand i^ al his other worckes, yet our blindness
is such that we are not thereby rightly directed to God.

Therefore it pleased the goodness of the almighty, to add to his worckes the
testimony of his word, to guide us more certainly, and familiarly to a just
knowledge of him. This his word he delivered to our first grau^dfathers, and
afterward in more ample wise to Moses, and the Prophets, until the appoi^ted
time was comme that he would most largely, and fully reuele him self by the in
carnatio^ of his son. To this most glorious, most excellent, most open, and
most clear revelation, our Evangelist hastes, and therefore passes over the
patriarchs, Moses, and the Prophets, and begins with the testimony of
Johan Baptiste, the first, and most excellent preacher of Gods son being
now clothed with man's nature.

THERE WAS A MAN etc.)

In Johan Baptiste al things were wonderful, divine, and above man's nature.
His begettinge, his conversation, his zeal, and manifold virtues showed a
singular power, and miraculous worckinge of Gods spirit.

This is he whom the Prophet Esaie painteth forth, and calls the voice of a
crier in the wilderness.

This is he of whom God says, behold I send mine Angel before my face etc.

And again, behold I send you Elyas the Prophet before that great and
terrible day of the Lord come. This is he who moved all Jury with the
excellency of his virtues, and drue men unto him in to the wilderness, as it
had been with chai^s This is he whose life did so shine, and se^d forth such
glistering beams thoroughe out all the land, that many thought him to be
the promised Messiah as we have in. S. Luke. Which is a plain proof that he
was more than wonderful, who could attain to such estimacion among the
people. For they were taught out of the Prophets, that Messiah should be such
one, as never was before, nor should be afterward. There could not than be
alleged a testimony of greater grauite and auctorite among men then the
testimony of John Baptist. The Euangeliste puts an emphasis and force in
this word, sent, whereby to signify that gods providence did shine in every
part of John's life and also to give us to understand that he was furnished
with heavenly auctorite and had the letters of his commission from gods
majesty to be a witness of the diuinitye of his son, that his testimony
might be unto us of no less weight, and authority, than if an au^gel had
spoken from heaven. But needs gods son the testimony of a man or au^gel,
the beams of whose divinity shine through out all the world, does not he him
self say, I receive not the witness of me^. Know ye therefore that Ioha^ was
appointed to be a witness of the Lord Jesus, not for his sake, but for ours,
not that he needed such a witness, but that we needed soche a witness to help
our weakness. And so ye shall not so much meruel at the thing as strange, and
vnsittinge, as ye shall have in reverent admiration the goodness of god who would
so desce^d to aid our infirmity. A MAN) the hebrews have two words to
signify, a man Adam and ish, Adam signifies a man subject to mortality,
misery, and calamity, ish signifiethe a man of reputation. The prophet David
comprehe^deth both in one verse in the psalm. 49. Hear this al ye people etc.
both children of adam and children of ish, that is to say, hye and low. The
greek word, which the Eua^geliste uses, is, anthropos, and as Plato
teaches, it is made of up lokinge for the state of ma^ns body is upright, and
his face is aduau^ced to heaven, he is not be^te down ward to the ground
after the manner of other beasts, which thing the greeks noted by the name of
a man calli^g him, anthropos, an vploker. They have also another word aner. In
the holy scripture written in greek this word, a^thropos, signifies a man
compassed with misetie. For in the te^the of the acts wha^ Cornelius
worshipped Petre, he said unto him. Arise I also ama^thropos a mortal man. And
again Paul, and Barnabas, wha^ at Listres Iuppiters chapelaine would have
sacrificed unto the^, re^t their clothes, and cried saiynge: me^ why do ye
these things, we also ar anthropoi, men subject to the same passions and
miseries that you be. See than the measure that the Euangeliste keeps. Wha^ he
says that Ioha^ was sent of God, he adorneth him with high autoritee, and
sets him up on high above the commune sort of men, but vsinge to gether
this word, anthropos, he te^pereth the matter with just measure, that no man
should think of Ioha^ more than he was.

For our nature, and custoume is, either to advance men to high, or to abase,
and depresse them to low. The lues extolled Ioha^ Baptiste to high. For some
thought that he was no man, but an angel in a man's body. Some took him for
the promised Messiah. The Evangelist weighs him in a true pear of balance,
nether diminishinge any thing that God had given him, nor addinge more, tha^
was to be found in him.

SENT OF GOD) They are the true, they ar the fruteful preachers, that are sent of
God. For they bring the things, that they have learned of God. Many run
before they are sent, and therefore they bring their own dreams, fantasies,
and homeforged devises, where with they delight the peoples ears, but in the
mean while corrupt their hertes, stuffinge them with vanitees.

WHOSE NAME WAS IO.)

This name was not given him by chance, but appoi^ted by Gods special
providence. And it bears in it a comfortable, and ioiful thing, signifiynge
the acceptatio^, grace, and favor of God.

This came to be a witness.) He teaches the e^de of Ioha^nes commi^ge,
vocation, and office. He came not to get to hi^ self great praife, and honor
thorough the highness of his knowledge, and excelle^tie of his virtues, nor to
bring to the people great erthlie co^moditees, as deliverance from their
bodily bondage under which they groned or to enlarge their e^pire, and
dominion nor to teach the^ strange matters of philosophy, but his great, and
most notable virtues served to this e^de only, to teach and poi^te forth to the
people Gods holy one, Gods son, the fountain af al blisfulnes, the
author of al good, and profitable knowledge, and of vndresta^dinge it self.

THAT ALMIGHT believe)

As the e^de of al preachinge in Gods ministers is to bear witness of the
lord Jesus, that he is the light of me^nes minds, Gods son, and the long
promised Messiah, so the e^de of hearing in the hearers is to believe the same,
that thereby they may enioie the felicitee, that the lord has purchased for
the^. To believe is certai^ly to be persuaded, and assured in mind thorough the
holy ghost, that by the lord Jesus we are purged from our sins, and made the
children of God, that by his man's nature we are made partakers of his
diuinitee, by his mortalitee we have obtained immortalitee, by his curse
everlasting blessinge, by his death life, breifely that by his desce^dinge in
to the earth we asce^de in to heaven.

HE WAS NOT THE LIGHT)

He reproves the error of the Iues, which took Ioha^ Baptist for Christ. Me^
being naturally liers delight in lies, kiss and embrase them most readily.
The Iues were ready to believe that, that was false of Ioha^, namely that he
was Messiah, but they would not believe that, that was true of Ioha^, to wit
that he was sent before to prepare the way of Messiah, and to poi^te him forth
to the people as it were with his finger. And there was none other cause, but
that the one was false and the other was true. A mind embrued with lies catches
lies strait way as pitch catches fire. For it is agreinge to his nature, and
there is a kindred, and consanguinitee between them. It abhors truth because
there is no likeness of nature, no fellowship between truth, and man's corrupt
mi^de.

But to bear witness) The Evangelist repeteth again that Ioha^ Baptistes
office, and highest dignitee was to be a witness of the light, namely of Gods
son, and to teach the people to seek light at his hands, and there to
lighte^ their candeles. And he is not to be advanced above that office, and
dignitee, which is as great in deed as ca^ be given to a man.

That was the true light) Here the Evangelist puts a difference between
light, and light: Johan was a light in deed, as the lord says, he was a
candel burninge and shininge. And Gods ministers ar called the light of the
world. But their light is a borrowed light, a light given unto them, and not
naturally dwellinge in them. The ca^del has no light of it self, but has
light put in to it from another. This place plainly seuereth the lord Jesus
from creatures. For it affirms him to be the true light, and denies them to
be the true light. The lord Jesus is light by nature, creatures by borowinge of
another. He gives light, creatures receive light. They need light, because
they have none by nature. He is full of light, and gives light to them, that
need.

Saying tha^ that there is so great difference between the lords light, and
man's light, the lord must needs be of another nature, than a creature. For
if a creature cold be true light, it cold not be said of the son only, that
he is the true light. But because a creature is not the true light, and Gods
son is the true light, therefore Gods son is anorher thing than a
creature.

No creature can shine, and give light of it selue by nature, Gods son
shines, and gives light of him self naturally, (for he is the truelight) so
he is no creature.

THAT LIGHTNETH every man etc.) The lord Jesus lighteneth two ways. One way
in giuinge commune understanding reason, and knowledge of hi^ self to al me^,
so far as that they may pronounce sentence against themselves, and be
constrained to acknowledge their just da^natio^. For this much light the
reprobate have remaininge, as to know that there is a God, and to discern good
from evil, honest from dishonest, which sparckes thorough their own
nawghtines, and Sata^s malice they daily labor to choke, and que^che. The Other
light is a special light, whereby Gods son gives a full knowledge of him
self to his chosen, to his chosen I say only. S. Augustine thincketh that the
Euangeliste speaks here of this later illuminatinge, and lightninge. And
because the Pelagia^s took hold thereby, and said, that al me^ were thus
fully illuminated, S. Augustine says that it is a phrase and manner of
speakinge, that proves not, that Gods son after that sort lightneth al
me^, but that they which are lightened, ar lightened by him. As wha^ we say, this
scolemaster teaches all the children in the City, we mean not says he, that
he teaches in deed all the children, that be in the City, for in a City a
great meanie go not to scole, but we mean that he teaches as many as go to
scole, and are there taught.

But it shall not be amiss to vndresta^d by this lightninge the general
lightninge, the general knowledge that al me^ have by nature. For as I said the
reprobate have some sparckes of knowledge after the ruin of man's nature, but
they give the^ not light to see the way to heaven. And where the free will me^
would prove by this place, that al me^ have like light given unto them, they are
confuted by the words of the Evangelist that follow. For not withsta^dinge this
light, that Gods son gives to al me^, the world knew him not. This general
light tha^ shines not to heaven, but tarieth upon the earth, I mean it
bri^geth not men to true knowledge, and faith, but comes a great way to
short, and fails a great while before. That other light shines so, as it
shows perfectely and effectually to Gods chose^ the way to heaven, here
note that Gods son lightneth al me^ in all ages. For that proves him
undoubtedly to be the true God.

HE was in the world) Some vndrestande this of his incarnation, and
conversation upon the earth, after he had put on man's nature. Some of his
virtue and power, whereby he has be^ ever in the world, and has ever sent
forth such beams of his diuinitee, as whereby me^ might have seen him, if they
had not blinded their awn eyes.

AND the world was made by him) Of this because it has been largely spoken
before, I will set forth only these reasons, and proceed in the text. He by
whom the world was made, is a creator. A creator is another thing tha^ a
creature. For it is one thing that makes, and creates, and another that is
made, and created. If it were not so, a creature should be advanced to the
name of a creator. And a creator should be abased to the name of a creature,
and God only should not create, but a creature should also have power to create.
But since this ca^ not be so, the lord Jesus bei^ge a creator, must needs be
God, and no creature. AND the world knew him not)

The world in this place signifies al me^. For it ca^ not be taken in a
straiter sense in the sentence goinge before, the world was made by him. In
other places of the scriptures, the world signifies the reprobate only. Here
the world is condemned of vnthancfulnes, and unkindness, that it has not
embtased, but shamefully refused, and rejected his maker. It is unnatural, it
is horrible, and abominable, that me^ should not acknowledge him, by who^ they
have eue^ this that they be me^.

HE came in to his awna) The Iues were called Gods peculiar people, gods
own people, because that though al nations ar his, yet of his only mercy, he
chose the^, to whom he would commit his holy word, and sacraments, and
among who^ he would have an open face of his church. In this place. s. Io.
calls the^ not his own, because they were his chose^, but because they bare
the name of his people, and the title of his church.

AND his own received him not)

This sentence should draw rivers of tears out of al eyes, that the gracious
lord who not only made that nation of nothing, but also adua^ced it above al
other nations with singular benifites, and blessings, was not only neglected
of them, wha^ for their sakes he humbled him self to the state of a mortal
man, but also most shamefully, and most despitefully rejected and as it were
hurled away.

BUT AS many as received etc.)

These words declare what profit the coming of the lord Jesus has brought
in to the world, what treasures God has given us by him, and by what means
the same be applied unto us, and made our own. The coming, and incarnation
of the lord Jesus, has brought this benifite in to the world, that as many
as receive him by faith, whether they be lues or gentiles be made Gods
children. The greatness of which benifite no heart can think, much less any
tongue express. For what a thing is this, that beggars brattes, most
miserable, poor, and wretched caitiues, yea Satan's vgle loathsome, and
detestable misshapen children should be made kings, not over a few lands, but
over all the earth, and heaven to, and garnished with angelike brightness, and
inestimable beauty. Assuredly this can never be thought upon, this can never
be wondered at enough.

AS RECEIVED) They receive him, that acknowledge him to be Gods son, and that
he became man, and in man's nature died for the purgation and satisfaction of
their sins, breifely to receive here signifies to believe, as S. Johan makes
the exposition him self in the words folowinge. HE GAVE them power) The idols
men wringe this place to the maintenance of free will. For they understand that
choice hereby is given us to be the children of God if we will, or to refuse the
same. But S. Johan declares forthwith in the words folowinge, that Gods
children are not made by the will of the flesh, but when they be begotten of
God. Gods begettinge makes us Go^ddes children, and we are not left to our
choice, with a power whereby to make our selves Gods children, but we are
Gods children al ready when he has begotten us. For he begets perfectly,
he begets not mo^sters half children or a lu^pe of matter, where of
children may be made afterward. And the greek word that S. Io. uses, is
not, dynamis, which signifies power, but, exousia, which signifies dignitee,
and auctoritee. Here rises a question if Gods chosen were by predestination
his children before the beginning of the world, how agrees it, that tha^ they are made his children, wha^ they believe. For they were his children before,
being his chosen, and predestinate. It is true that God made those his
children that ever should be his children in his purpose thorough free
election, before the world was made. But this they feel not, until God by his
holy spirit kendle faith in them, and assure them of that, that they were
before.

And here also I will give you an other thing to note. S. Johan says that as
many as believe ar Gods sons. But none ar now Gods sons, that were not
ever Gods sons in his infallible purpose, that is, none ar Gods sons,
but his chosen. So they that believe in deed, ar Gods chosen, and therefore
can never perish. For God can nether be^ deceived in his choosinge, nor is a
chau^gelinge to altre the thing that he has once purposed. Nether hangs he
upon man's behauior suspendinge his determination, but al his purposes ar
stablished to gether sure and certain, and they stand fast for ever, being
o^ce for all decreed. You will grant perchance, that Gods election is sure,
and infallible, but yet you can not be so one persuaded, that all that believe ar
Gods chosen. For Simo^ Magus believed, and in the parable of the sower, the
lord speaks of some, which have faith for a time

I answer that those and such had never the faith of Gods children. But how
shall we know, will you say, that we have the faith of gods children, sei^ge
there is another faith besides, which may begile us. I answer that wha^ we
have such faith as bri^geth forth a feli^ge of the swetenes of gods mercy in
Christ Ies. and an unfeigned love toward God, we have the faith of Gods
Children. And ar and ar sealed up by Gods spirit, and have the sure, and
infallible ernest of everlasting life.

IN HIS NAME) It is more lively, and more ample, and of greater majesty, when
it is said to them that believe in his name, than if it had been said to them
that believe in him. The scole men in deed put a difference between credere
deum, credere deo, and credere in deum. Credere deum with them, is to believe
that there is a God. Credere deo, is to believe Gods sayings. Credere in
deum, is to trust in God, and to love him. And therefore S. Augustine says
that to believe in God, is in beleuinge to love him, and in louinge, to trust in
him. But the scripture observes not this distinction. For in the 14. of Exodus
we have that when the Israhelites saw the Aegyptia^s overthrown by Gods
power, they believed BAIHOVA, ou be Mosheh abdo. i. in Iehoua, and in Moses his
servant. And again in the.19. God says to Moses, I will come dou^ne to the
in a thick cloud, that the people may hear me speakinge with the, and believe
'BECHA, that is, in the etc. But is never said that any believed in the name
of a man. For name to the hebrews signifies power, as when S. Paul says,
that God gave the lord Jesus a name above al names he means plai^ly power
above al power. So to believe in the name of Jesus, imports necessarely that
he is God.

WHICH neither of blood) Some think that this is a figure called in greek,
pleonasmos, whereby many words are heaped together, to signify one thing. For
they say, that these words, of bloudes, of the will of the flesh, and of the
will of man, signify one thing, namely carnal natiuitye and generation, and so
they teach that me^ beget carnal children only, and God begets spiritual
children. And in deed ma^s generation makethe us not Gods children, we must
be rege^dred by God, to be his children. Other think that he numbreth up by
parts all that is excellent in man, and where in he may seem to have some
affiaunce, to atteyne to the dignity of Gods son. And that so he teaches
that by no auncitrie, no privilege of blood, by no holiness of fore fathers,
nor any manner of strength or faculte in mankind, man atcheueth the place of
Gods sons. Both exposition is te^de to this end, that we are not made
holy by any force of nature, but by the grace and mercy of God regeneratinge
and new begettinge us, and that is plainly S. Ioha^s meaning. The will of
man. S. Ioha^ uses for the will of any man for so the hebreus use the word,
ish, man, for every man.

BEGOTTEN) God begets us, wha^ according to his aeternal purpose and
election, he puttethe his spirit into us, and by his force pla^teth faith in
our hearts, to embrace his word, and renews our minds, and frames the^
again unto true holiness and righteousness.

God grant that we may al feel that we are begotten of God, and that
considering the high dignity where unto we are called, we occupy not
ourselves, unseemly in vile offices, but travail all the days of our life in
such things, as advance the glory of our heavenly father. Amen.

The Fifth READING.
With very few, but the same most pithie, semelie, and apt words the
Evangelist has declared unto us the divine nature of the Lord Jesus, and his
power showed forth, and set abroad to the sight af al men, by his most
wondreful worckes. For by this Godhead, and divine nature of the Lord Jesus,
both al things were first made of nothing, and now also al things ar
preserved, and continued in their state that they return not to nothing. By
it al things live, move, and have their being. By it man, wherein he
excels other living creatures, is furnished with the light of reason, and
vndrestandinge which though thorough man's fault, it be now greatly
blemished, and darckned yet the sparckes remaininge suffice to show so much
unto us of gods son, as may justly co^de^ne us of wilful ignorance.

The beams of his glory ever shined in deed, and yet do shine every where to
the sight of al me^, and man was so first made by him, as he might perfectly
see the^.

But he fondly folowinge Sata^s advise would see more tha^ was convenient, and
so lost the sight that he had, or at the lest so blurred, and marred it, that
where before his eyes perced in to the glory of Gods majesty, and cold well
abide the brightness there of, now they be so blu^t that they can not enter, and
so weak that they ar straight way daseld, and blinded with so great
glisteringe light. Yet it has pleased God to help this weakness other ways
tha^ by the sight of his wondreful worckes, but most cheifely, clearly, and
perfectly by clothinge his son, with man's nature, which thing our
Eua^geliste teaches with like compe^diousnes, and shortness of words saiynge,
and the word became flesh. The heathen set forth the marvelous conninge of
Vergil in co^pe^dious, and short speakinge, when he said that Aeneas passed
by the fildes, where Troie was. For with one word, say they, he swalowed up
so many houses, temples, towers, huge buildinges, and walls and left not so
much as the ruins, and rubbish. But if we well consider the matter, we shall se
that our Euangeliste has comprehended more things, maki^ge to the purpose
with as few words. For by these few words, the word became flesh, he
teaches, that Gods natural son, so ioigned unto him man's nature, that of
two natures one person was made, which thing cold not have been uttered with
other words so shortly, and so pithely to the purpose. For if he had said,
that Gods son ioigned unto him man's nature, it had been truly spoken in
deed, but it had not so well expressed the unity of person. For an husband
ioigneth unto him a wife, and yet they grow not in to one person, after such
sort as the soul, and the body make one person in a man.

For the soul is not one person, and the body another person, but they both
make one person namely a man. But an husband not witstandinge his ioigninge of
a wife unto him, remains one person, and the wife another person, and they be
two persons, not one. Therefore the word ioigninge should not have so fully
expressed the matter. For this ioigninge is a special, and singular ioigni^ge.
For Gods nature is so ioigned to man's, that one person is made of both,
namely one Christ, as of the body, and the soul one man is made. And this is
very necessary for us to know. For if we imagine the lords ma^hod, a nature
a part, and his Godhead a nature a part, with out such a singular
conjunction, and union, that of both natures one person is made, as the
haeretike Nestorius did, tha^ the lord Jesus cold not be a mete mediator
betwe^ God and us, nor make a sufficient satisfaction, and redemption for the
sins of the world. For a mediator between God and man must be partaker of
both natures. And a sufficient redemer of all the world he can not be, that is
a man only. For how ca^ a man satisfy the infinite justice of God, ouerco^me
Satan, hell, and death, and give life? Therefore the holy scripture teaches,
that the lord Jesus was not, theophoros, as Nestorius dreamed, a man in who^
god was, whom Good assisted, and with whom God was present, for God is also in
us, but in him the godhead was so knitte, and united to his ma^hod, as those
twain made one person. And so it is well and truly said that God purchased
his, congregation with his blood, and that the lord of glory, that is to
say, God was crucified, not that he suffered in his divine nature, but because
those two natures ioigned unspeakably together make one person, therefore that
the one nature did, and suffered, is attributed to the other, and some times to
both together, that pertai^eth to one only. Which cold not be, if they were
two sondrie persons. As if the soul were a person alone by it self, and the
body a person alone by it self, the soul should not so be said to do, or
suffer that the body did, ot suffered, nor the body, that the soul did de or
suffered, nor the hole man, that one part only did or suffered, which things
yet we now admit, because of the unity of the person. We must know than this
unity of person in the lord Jesus, God and man which the Evangelist
meruailously teaches in these words.

But where he says, the word became flesh, he means that the word abode
still though it became flesh, that the word I say was not changed turned, and
altered from his awn nature in to flesh.

For some auoidinge Nestorius haeresie, who made two persons in Christ, fled
the smoke, and ra^ne i^ to the fire. For either they turned the divine nature in
to man's nature, or man's nature in to the divine, or so confused, and
me^gled the two natures together that nether nature remained perfectly, as when
wine and water ar me^gled to gether there remains nether perfectte wine nor
perfectte water. In our time also some Anabaptists have taught, that the
divine nature was turned in to flesh for a time, and became felcable, and that
now the lords flesh is turned in to his divine nature again, and is no more
flesh. Which dream is to to sonde. For it implies a plain impossibilitee.
For it is as impossible for gods nature to be altered, and changed, as it is
impossible for it to cease to be Gods nature. For what so ever may be
altered, and changed, has an imperfection in it, and is subject to passions.
But Gods nature has no imperfection, nor is subject to passions, for that
were not to be God, so his nature ca^ not be changed. We must therefore so
confess, and believe the ioigninge to gether, and vnitinge of two natures in
Christ, that we me^gle the^ not together, nor turn the one in to the other, but
that each remain still in his own propre nature. The Godhead is not the
ma^hod, nor the ma^hod, the Godhead. The Godhead is a nature by it self, and
the ma^hod a nature by it self, and of those two natures ona Christ
consists. This vnitinge together of two natures, Cyrille labors to teach
weak vndersta^dinges by a similitude, though similitudes in this behalf have
some imperfection. These be his words: Esaie the prophet says, one of the
Seraphins was sent unto me, and he had a coal in his hand, which he took from
the altar, and he said behold I have touched thy lips with this, and it
shall purge thine iniquitee. We say that the fiere coal giue^th unto us a
figure and image of the word made man. Which if it shall touch our lips, that
is to say, if thorough faith we shall confess it, it makes us pure from al
sin. But as it were in an image we may behold in the coal God the word
united to man's nature, and yet that he has not cast away, that he was
before, but has rather tra^sformed the nature which he received, to his glory
and operation.

For as fire fixed in the woodde, and percinge in to it, co^prehe^deth the
wood, and though the wood cease not to be wood still, yet the fire sends his
force in to it, and co^ueieth it self in to it, and is now thought to be one
with it, so vndresta^de of Christ. For God being incomprehe^sibly united to
man's nature, has in that kept the same, that he was, and he remains
stille that he was, but yet being once united, he is compted as it were one
with man's nature, making that, that pertained to it his own, and giuinge it
the operation of his nature. Hitherto Cyrille. He uses also in this matter the
similitude of man's body and soul ioign'd together, which in deed expresses
it of al other most proprely. For the soul is not turned in to the body, nor
the body in to the soul, but each retains his propre nature, and makes one
man.

AND the word) In that he saieh the word became flesh, and not man, he shows
how far Gods son humbled and abased him self. For the scripture calls
man flesh, when it will signify the poverty, vileness, and misery of man. As
when it is said al flesh is grass, and he remembered, that they were but
flesh, and my spirit shall not ever strive in man, for he is flesh. But wha^
the Evangelist says, the word became flesh, we may not imagine, that Gods
son ioigned to his divine nature flesh only, and not man's soul as
Appollinaris thought in his trau^ce, that flesh, and the Godhead made one
person in Christ without man's soul.

For he imagined that the diuinitee was instead of a soul.

But so it should follow, that the lord Jesus was not a very man. For flesh is
not a man. For the soul is the formal part of a man, namely that whereby a
man is a man, and with out which a man can not be. And that the lord had a
man's soul beside his diuinitee, he him self testifies, wha^ he says, my
soul is heavy unto the death. Nether ca^ Apollinaris aid him self with this
place. For wha^ the scripture calls me^ flesh, it means not that they ar
without souls. For tha^ they were no me^ in deed.

Here we must know also from whens Gods son became flesh. For we may not
thi^cke that he brought his flesh from heaven, or made it in the air. For the
holy scripture teaches, that he should come of the sede of Abraham, and
David, and should be the fruit of his loins. For such plain words it uses
to assure us of the truth of so necessary a matter, and utterly to stop the
mouths of dotinge me^. And in the writers of the new testament, it is most
plainly set forth unto us, that he received flesh out of the substance of the
virgin Marie. For. S. Mattheu has these words (to gar en aute gennethen) that
which is engendered in her, and. S. Paul (genomenon ekgynaicos) made of a
woman, and the Angel in S. Luke (ho karpos) the fruit of thy womb. The fruit
of a tree is of the same substance, that the tree is of. That which only
passes thorough a thing, is not the fruit of that thing. For water is not
the fruit of the co^ducte pipe, nor ale the fruit of the spickette, or of the
kinderkinne. Against this most manifest truth wherein the pith of our salvation
lies, the franctike Anabaptists bri^ge two pri^cipal reasons, I wot not
whether more ignora^tly, or more ungodly. For first they say that if the lord
received our flesh, he received unclean flesh. But judge you whether all the
scriptures be they never so plain must give place to this their simple
imagination, or whether their simple imagination should give place to so many
plain scriptures.

But first I ask them whether God cold not make clean our unclean flesh, or
would not. If they say he cold nor, they limitte his power over much. If they
say he would not, we will hiss them out.

For if God of his goodness would make his son to die for us, he would of his
goodness make his flesh clean for us.

Secondly laske them why God would have his son to be borne of a virgin, and
not to be begotten between man, and woman, after the commune course of the
world. Does not that teach us that he me^t to make his sons flesh pure and
holy? Yea does not the angel so signify in Luke, when he says, the holy
ghost shall comme upon the, and the power of the highest shall ouersshadow the,
for which cause the holy thing to gennomeno^, that is engendered, shall be
called Gods son. But this their reason has no weight, because it is only
forged in man's brain. The Other is taken out of the scripture. For S. Paul to
the Cor. writes thus: The first man was of the earth, erthlie. The second man
is the lord from heaven. In which place S. Paul's purpose is not to speak of
the substance of our bodies, or of the substance of the lords body, but of
the qualities, as the words folowinge declare, hoios, of what qualitee the
erthlie was, of that quality ar the erthlie, and of what qualitee the
heaue^lie is, of that qualitee ar the heaue^lie. This tha^ is the sense. The
first man was of the earth, erthlie, that is subject to sin and corrupt
affections, which bring death. The second heaue^lie, that is full of heaue^lie
qualities, which thorough the power of Gods spirit draw with them life, and
immortalitte. As we bare the image of the erthlie, that is were sinful, and
therefore compassed with death, so shall we bear the image of the heavenly,
that is our spirits shall be renewed to true holiness, and our bodies to
immortalitee. Wherefore wha^ he says the second man is the lord from
heaven, he means not that he brought his body from heaven, but that he is
heavenly, as he expouneth himself, that is endued with heaue^lie qualities.

Now to proceed in our former purpose, it shall be good to seek out the causes
why Gods son became flesh, or as Saint Paul speaks why God was
manifested in flesh.

And no man can show us the^ more certainly than S. Paul has don to the
Hebru. For there he teaches us, that the chief, and principal cause was, that
by death he might destroy him that had deaths power, that is Satan. For Satan
had power ov us, to punish us with death, because we were sinners. And sin
cold not be purged but in the flesh of Gods son. If he had remained God
only, purgation, and satisfaction, for sin cold not have be^ made by him.

For the Godhead cold not suffer, nor show obedience. But since thorough
disobedience sin came in to the world, it must be put away thorough
obedience, which required man's nature.

Howbeit if he had been man only, he could not have ouercomme death, nether
should his satisfaction have been sufficient for the sins of all the world, as
we touched before, yea scarcely for the sins of one man. For the majesty of
God that is offended thorough sin, is infinite.

And therefore he must be no less, that shall make satisfaction to that
majesty.

It was than of necessitee that God should becomme man.

Another cause was that he might be made like to his brethern, sin only
except. For as S. Paul writes it was semelie for him, for whom, and by whom
al things ar, wha^ he would bring many children to glory, to make the high
captain of their salvation perfect thorough suffringes. For he that
sanctifies, and they that be sanctifieed ar al of one. For which cause he is
not ashamed to call them brethern, saiynge, I will show forth thy name to my
brethern and again I will trust in him, and again, lo I and the children, whom
God has given me. Saying than that the children were partakers of flesh, and
blood, he likewise became partaker of the same etc.

A third cause S. Paul reherseth, and that is that he might be merciful, and
pity the misery of his people, haui^ge felt te^tations him self, that is to
say, that we might be the better persuaded, and certified that he would pity
us, knowinge that he had experience and felinge of our miseries and griefs in
himself.

For we ca^ not think that any should pity us so well, as he that feleth, or
has felt the same grife and smarte that we do.

To return to S. Io. in these his words, the word became flesh, we have a
si^gular consolation, in that I say Gods son has taken flesh of our
flesh, and bones, of our bones. For so have we a nigh affinitee, and
familiaritee with God. And so that, that was ours, is made Gods, and that,
that was Gods, is made ours. And we ca^ not doubt but that he will do al
things for us, who being God would familiarly be ioigned to us in our nature.
In te^tations, and wrastlinges of conscience, let us fly hereunto, and
consider this great goodness, and exceeding love, and fre^dlines, and we shall be
relieved and preserved from the baleful pit of despeare,

AND dwelt) The greek word escenosen, is as much to say, as he made his
tabernacle. Whereby the Evangelist signifies, that he was co^uersant among
them, as a very man, and that he showed not him self the twincklinge of an
eye, and so vanished away, but had his abode, and continued among the^ long
time, whereby they might have sure, and certain experience of his godly
behauior, of his singular virtues, and of his wondreful worckes. Some think
that by this word is signified, that the lord Jesus had no certain dwellinge
place in this world, but was feign to flitte often, and remove. For so do they
that dwell in tents, and tabernacles.

In us) Chrysostom takes (in us) for in our flesh, and understands, that
the humanitee of Christ was a tabernacle to the diuinitee, and so frames this
argument against the haeretikes, that affirmed the word to be turned in to
flesh.

The word dwelt in flesh, ergo the word was not turned in to flesh, and made
flesh only. For nothing dwells in it self. It is also true that it is taken
for among, in many places of the scripture. One shall suffice for this purpose
Act. 4. There was not one nedie, enautois, in them, that is to say among
them. The word, escenosen, he made his tente or tabernacle, favors some what
Chrysostomes understanding.

AND we have seen) Now the Evangelist bri^geth his own experie^e, and the
experience of the other Apostles, and disciples, which with their own eyes saw
such acts of the lord Jesus, as proved hi^ to be Gods only begotten son.
The Latins have a proverb, that one eyed witness is worth te^ eared. Of those
things which we have seen with our own eyes we may be faithful witnesses.

Thapostles because they saw the things the^ selves, which they witnessed to
the world ar called in the holy scripture, with a marvelous elega^t word,
autoptai, self seers, and, epoptai, inseers, or onbeholders.

WE have seen) Where the Greeks have sondrie words, that signify to see, the
Evangelist uses a special one, etheasametha, which signifies to behold a
thing diligently, and leasurely. We may see things glaunsingly, which sight
is not so perfect, and certain, as wha^ we behold a thing steadfastly, and
leasurely.

The Greeks have propre words for both kinds of saying. The things that
thapostles saw, they so saw, as they cold not be deceived, and therefore they are called, peplerophoremena, fully ascertained.

His glory) The diuinitee of the lord Jesus shined out of his words, and
deeds at al times, and in all places. His uertuous, and innocent life, his
miracles, his resurrection, his ascension, and sendinge of the holy ghost, did
speak, and as it were, cry out that he was Gods son. He gave them also a
taste of his diuinitee, and heaue^lye majesty, wha^ he was most gloriously
transfigured before them in the mount. But how do miracles prove the diuinitee
of Christ, saying that me^ have don the like, as Elias and Elizeus in the old
testament, and thapostles in the new. You shall vndresta^de, that the lord
Jesus did miracles by his own power, which the scripture observes diligently,
and teaches plai^ly, where me^ do the^ by a borrowed power. Of the lord
worcki^ge miracles the scripture says, I say unto the arise, I charge the go
out. Of me^, the lord Jesus make the hole, in the name of the lord Jesus
arise, and walk. Man receaueth power to work miracles, God gives power. But
the scripture witnesses that the lord Jesus gives also power to work
miracles, and that in his own name. Whereby we easily see the difference of
the lords worckinge and of me^nes worckinge of miracles.

The glory as of) We beheld such glory, and magnifice^ce, as besemeth gods
only begotten son, and agrees only to him. The word, as, some times
signifies not the thing to be in deed, but a likeness of it, as wha^ we say,
he speaks holily, as a good man, but he is an hypocrite. Some times it notes
the truth of a matter and a thing truly to be don. Walk as the children of
light says Paul. He bids the^ not cou^trefaite the children of light, but
to show them selves the children of light in deed. After such sort. S. Ioha^
uses the word, as, for he means that such virtue, such power, as he had,
declared him to be verily gods natural son, and that such things, as he
did, belong to Gods son only, nether can be found in any other.

As if we should say of the most noble, holy, and blessed king Edward the
sixte, that he behaved himself, as a kings son, our meaning should not be,
that he was not a kings son, but showed him self as though he had been a
kings son, but our meaning should be, that he showed him self none other
wise, than his birth required, that is none other wise, than a kings son
should do.

To our purpose, Kings, and Princes have their glory, and their majesty
semelie for their state, the Lord Jesus had glory semelie for Gods son.

THE ONLY BEGOTTEN)

This word auanceth the Lord Jesus above al creatures, and teaches him to be
Gods natural son. We are also called Gods sons, but that is by adoption,
by favor, by grace, and not by natural generation. By natural generation God
has one only son, who of his goodness, and mercy has made us partakers of
that, that he is by nature.

This word, only begotten, ought well to be weighed. For it teaches the Lord
Jesus to be of the same substance, that the father is of, and and therefore
very God, and aequal to the father. For these things hang together, and
follow one another. For our Evangelist teaches in the.5. chap. that when the
lord Jesus said, God was his father, he me^t, patera idion, his own father,
that is his natural father, and therefore showed him self aequal to God.

For it follows in deed, that if God be his own father, that is to say, his
father by natural generation, he must needs be aequal to God his father, For in
the Godhead there is nothing greater, or smaller. He that is of Gods
substance must needs be God. And he that is God must needs be infinite, above
al measure, and greatness. So to be Gods, only begotten son, and God to be
his own father, both which words this Evangelist has of the lord Jesus,
ovthroweth all that may be divised by any raui^ge brain against his true, and
natural godhead. Yet the Arrians lille out their blasphemous tounges still, and
francticly allege the scriptures for them. For first they iangle that it is
written in this gospel, the father is greater tha^ I. Whereunto first I say
that one place of this gospel is not to be expouned against the hole purpose of
the book, which is to teach that the lord Jesus is Gods natural son, and
aequal to God. And since the Evangelist has this word aequal plainly and
expressly, they show themselves mad that would make him to encou^tre against
himself. Secondly I say that in that place the lord Jesus compares not his
substance, with the fathers substance, but compares his present humble state,
with the glorious state, that he should have after his asce^sion. And therefore
all the godly old fathers welnigh have taught those words to be spoken of his
man's nature, which should be forth with aduau^ced to immortal, and
incorruptible glory, by the power of the father.

Some greek writers in deed admit, that the father is greater the^ the son,
not because he has greater power, or that there is any difference in their
substance, and essence, but in that he is the father, and begets the son,
and is not begotten of the son, therefore he may be said greater. The
meaning also of those words, the father is greater than I, may be this. The
end why I travail with you is not that you should stay in me, and look no
farther, but to bring you to the father, as to the last marcke, that with me
you may see him, as he is. Whose glory is more dear to me tha^ is mine own
glory, and therefore I seek it more tha^ mine own, and I think that I have
not accomplished mine office until I have brought you to him. But our Arria^s
since they be over the shoues, stick not blindly to press forward, and to go
over the boots to. For they ru^ne to this place written to the Cor. chap. 15.
Wha^ al things shall be made subject to him, tha^ shall the son also him self
be assubiected to him, who has assubiected al things to him. But what if we
answer that, that also is spoken touching his man's nature? For the same
author S. Paul in the.2. to the Philip. teaches that touching his divine
nature, he thought it no robbery, to be aequal with God. Naie say they, for
than he should not have said shall be assubiected, for that nature is al ready
subject.

Will they grant than that the lord Jesus has a nature, that is not now
subject to God, but shall be hereafter? If they will grant that, tha^ will I
say, that what so ever is not now subject to God in the lord Jesus, shall nev
be subject to God.

For that, that is once aequal to God, shall ever be aequal to God. How than is
it said that his man's nature shall be assubiected, if it be al ready
assubiected? I answer because we shall tha^ know it, which now we believe only.
For as. S. Augustine proves in the holy scripture things are said to be
don, wha^ they begin to be known of us. As when we say, hallowed be thy
name, Gods name of it self is holy, but we desire, that it may be so
known to us.

For fuller vndrestandinge of that place of Saint Paul, ye shall considre that
al power is given to Christ, in that he is clothed with man's nature. For God
has exalted him in the same nature, wherein he was humbled. The scripture than
witnesses, that Christ has full dominion, and reigns over heaven, and earth.

God in deed is our governor, but it is in the face of Christ's man's nature.

Now Christ shall surre^dre the kingdom, that was given unto him, that we may
cleave perfectly to God. Howbeit he shall not by that means utterly give up his
kingdom, where of as the scripture teaches there is no end, but he shall as it
were conueie it from his manhod to his godhead. For tha^ we shall have an open
entree, and free access to the divine majesty, where now our weakness will not
suffer us to approach. Christ tha^ shall this way be subjected to the father,
for tha^ the veale shall be taken away, and the office of his mediation shall
some way cease, and we shall se God face to face raigni^ge in his glory
without any coueringe and mean. And where saint Paul says that God may
be al in all, some think he speaks so, because we shall have than without
any mean many commodities, which god now ministers unto us by creatures.
For mainteina^ce of our life we shall than have no need of bread, and drink
etc. nether for aedifyinge shall we have need of the sacraments of the church,
nor the outward word of the scripture, nor ecclesiastical offices. For God by
him selue shall be al in all.

Other teach the meani^ge of those words to be, that the flesh shall covet no
more against the spirit, but God shall possess every part of us, and reign
in us fully, and perfectly, which thing in this life is only begone. Here I
will leave the Arrians stickinge in the mire, and will return to S. Ioha^.

FVL of grace and veritee) Because that afterward he sets grace, and
veritee against the law, there be that think that his meaning is here, that
the Apostles acknowleged him to be Gods son by this, that he accomplisshed
al things that pertain to Gods spiritual kingdom, bringinge perfect
forgiveness of sins, and perfirminge indede all that was shadowed, and figured
in Moses law. Other teach that full of grace and veritee, is as much to say,
as most amiable, and full of true virtues.

And they very lernedly show how these two words, chen, and, aemeth, ar taken
in the scripture. Chen which word to us sounds grace, is taken for favor, as
wha^ Abraham says to God, im mat sathi chen, if I have found grace in thy
sight, it is as much to say as, if thou favor, and love me. And Solomon says,
shaeker hachen, that is grace is deceaueable, whereby he means amiablenes,
and what so ever wins us favor in me^nes eyes. Aemeth, signifies some times
sincerite, and vnfainednes, some times large bountefulnes, and liberalitee,
some times certainty, surenes, firm, and constant abidinge. In the first
signification that is for simple, sincere, and vnco^trefaite dealinge king
Ezechias uses it in the 36. of Esaie. Remember lord that I have walked before
the, be aemeth, in truth, and in a perfect heart. In the second signification
we have it in Genesis, if it please you to show bou^tifulnes and truth toward
my master. In the third Ezechias uses it again. The lords word is good, only
let there be peace, and truth in my days. By truth he vndresta^deth a firm
and assured state of the kingdom. And this much for this time. Give god the
praise.

The Sixte READINGE.
THe Evangelist haui^ge breifely, and sobrely spoken of the Godhead of the
lord Jesus, as the exceeding highness, and incomprehe^sible majesty of the
matter required, made mention forth with of Johan Baptiste the most notable man
in deed for singular holiness, and so than taken also, that ever was in that
nation, where yet had be^ soundrie so plentiously furnished with Gods
spirit, as in all the world the like were never see^. This most excellent man
Johan Baptiste the Evangelist brought in, as a witness of the true light, of the
fountain of al light, of that light, that lightneth al me^ either with general
light, whereby the reprobate know there is a God, to their just damnation, or
with special light, whereby the chosen know God more fully, and perfectly to
their justification, and salvation.

This true, and aeternal light that shines of it self, and boroweth not of
other, is the lord Jesus, to whom the Evangelist shows us, that the wo^dre of
the world Io. Baptist, a very phoenix among me^ re^dred, notable witness. But
what his witness was, and with what words uttered, he has not heretofore told
us, but in the words that follow, repetinge his purpose left for a while, he
teaches us fully. And the sum, and meaning of the words, which he now
sets forth is this, that the lord Iessus though he iogned unto him man's
nature in time, yet he is aeternal before al time, without beginning and the
very author, maker, and prince of al me^ high and low, and the true fountain
of al goodness, righteousness, and holiness, and of all the benefits, and graces
that at any time have been given to me^, since the beginning of the world,
or shall be given hereafter to the end of the world. Finally that he is of
Gods most privy counsel, and that all the knowledge of God that ever any man
had, what so ever that man was, proceeded, and was derived from him. This is the
sum of the testimony of Io. Bap. and these be the words of the Evangelist
declaringe first the manner of Io. witnessinge, which follows straight after.

Ioanne witnesses) Io. was undoubtedly by the confession of al men, eue^ of
his adversaries a man of rare vprightnes of life, of exceeding great grauitee,
and ma^lie co^stantie, and so for from flattery, and me^ pleasinge, that
nether honor, and courtely pleasant intertaineme^t, nor the face of a cruel
tyrant, nor most painful emprisonme^t, nor the presence of horrible death cold
move him to forbear to speak the truth at al times. The testimony therefore
of such a man, ought well to be herke^ned unto, and to have singular force, and
most certain credit among us.

Witnesses) Io. office was not only to propoune, and set forth to the
hearing of me^ the diuinitee of Gods son, but also to testify the same,
and to affirm it by legitime and lawful testimony, being duly called to the
office of a witness. Chrysosto, notheth that the Evangelist uses a verb of the
present time, and thincketh that thereby he teaches, that Io. witness has
continual force, and should move us no less now, tha^ wha^ it was first uttered.

And cried) This word aunciant writters do well note. And partly they teach
that thereby an allusion is made, and a regard had to the words of the
prophet Esaie, the voice of one criynge in the wilderness* partly they say,
that thereby is set forth the plain, ma^lie, and bold behauior of Io. in
witnessinge the truth. For he uttered not the matter with a soft, faint,
tremblinge, waueringe, darcke and doubteful voice, that few might hear it, and
understand it, but he cried with an assured mind, with great confidence and
boldness, with an ernest Zeal, desiringe that his voice might clearly sound
to the ears of al men. Such should all the witnesses of gods truth be, no
whisperers, no dreaners, no faint and darcke speakers, but criers. For this
cause also it is necessary for Gods ministers to cry because me^ be not
only dull and slow, but for the most part deaf to hear the truth.

This is he) Other prophets painted forth, and spoke a sore hand of one that
should be the king, and saueor of Gods people, but none cold point him forth
as it were with the finger, and say this is he, let not your minds be carried
hither and thither, muse no more, doubt no more, where he is, or who he is, by
whom ye shall obtain a quiet and blisful state, for here he is, and this is
very he. In this point Ioha^ Baptist excels al other prophets, that were
before him. For our minds are not stayed, and quieted in the name of a saueor,
until we know certai^ly who it is.

Of whom I spoke) Hereby we vndrestande that Johan had before made many
sermons of the Lord Jesus, and that the end of al his preachinge was, to
bring, men to him. And this should be the end of the preachinge, and teachinge
of al other.

He that comes after me) In these words he teaches us the aeternitee of the
lord Jesus, his divine nature, and god head. For he says, he that came after
me was before me.

But touching the humanitee of the lord Jesus, he was not before Ioha^, but
after him. Touching also the office of preachinge, Ioha^ was before the lord
Jesus. Howbeit touching his divine nature, it is truly said, that the lord
Jesus was before Ioha^. For Ioha^ was not in the beginning with God, Gods
word, Gods brightness, Gods son, and very God. Touching this nature the
lord him self says, before Abraham was, I am.

Was before me) The old latin tra^slatio^ out of the greek had, factus est,
was made before me, which caused much superfluous talk among me^, and vain
torme^tinge of wits, how the lord cold be said to be made before Ioha^. For
his man's nature was not made before Io. And his divine nature was never made.

The ambiguitee, and doubtful signification of the word deceived both the
interpreter, and them. For, genesthai, signifies to be made, and also to be.
And in the later signification it is used in this very chap. egene to
anthropos etc. there was a man sent. For we ca^ not say there was a man made
sent.

Was before) In matters of religion we have great regard what me^ before us
have thought. Wherein this is our fault that we extend not our sight far
enough. For we look to them in deed that were befote us, but we look not to him
that was before them, that were before us, yea that was before al. S. Cyprian
reprouinge this shortness of our sight, says that we ought not to look what
me^ before us thought good to do, but what he did that is before al. It shall be
good therefore for us to know what religion the lord Jesus taught, and
commended, who was before our holy bisshoppes, and 15. hundred years.

For he was my first) The word, for, renders a cause why a thing is don. Io
Bap. tha^ shows a reason why he said, that the lord Jesus was before him,
because, says he, he was my first, that is to say my prince, my head, my
author, my maker. And that in deed proves sufficiently that he was before him.
The latin translation has, quia prior me erat, because he was before me. But
than it should have been according to the grammatical rules of speech in the
comparatiue degree, and not, protos mou, in the positive. More over Io. should
so seem to prove the same by the same, which we use not to do.

Of his fulness) Here we have the fountain, and hedspringe of all the graces,
and gifts that ever any man has had heretofore, were he nev so good, and
holy, or shall have hereafter. Out of this well of living waters, which never
fails, is never dried up or drawn out, all the saints, and prophets from
the beginning, drue all the knowledge, goodness, and holiness, all the spiritual
motions, virtues, and excellent qualities, that ever they had themselves, or
stirred up in other. Out of the same well flows unto us, and shall flow
hereafter unto the end of the world, what so ever is good, and virtuous, what
so ever pertains to the attainment of true felicitee, and of a blisful life.
For he has not only these things, but is full of them. For as S Paul writes
to the Col. in him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead, somaticos, bodily,
that is to say substa^tially, not in image, not in shadow, but in body in
substance, in deed. We learn tha^ by this sentence of Io. Bap. that no knowledge
no goodness, no holiness, no manner of virtue is to be sought any where save in
the lord Jesus. And more over that we need not fear left we shall want any
spiritual thing, if we resort to him, saying that he has the fulness of the
spirit. Lastly that al me^ what so ever they be, ar void of grace, and
godliness by nature, since al receive out of the fulness of Gods son.

We al, says Io. Bap. nombri^ge him self among the rest. And if Io. Bap.
received his holiness, out of the fulness of the lord Jesus, and got it not by
his natural stre^ghth, and godly preparatio^s, as the great idols me^ vainly
ia^gle, I may boldly pronounce that never any man had, or ca^ have any true
virtue and holiness, but by the gift of the lord Ies. that nothi^ge may be lest
to any, where of to bost. For if they have received out of the fulness of
another, why should they bost as though they had not borrowed al of another, but
had possessed some what of themselves. Wherefore these words of Io. Bap. beat
down what so ever idle heads have builded, and raised up to advance man's
stre^ghth, and man's merits. And here we may not pass over, that this place
also proves the Lord Jesus to be very god. For who is the fountain of al
knowledge, goodness, holiness and spiritual graces in all ages, and in all me^, but
God only?

But as we must know hereby that he is God, so we must know that he possesses
not these things to this end, that he may have no manner of want, but to
send them forth to the use of me^. For he keeps not his treasures to him
self enuiously, or niggeshly, but ioieth to distribute them, and to send them
abroad. Nether is he a merchaunt man to make sale of them, but gives them
freely as we are taught in Esaie: O al ye that thirst come to the waters, even
he that has no monei, comme bye for no moneie, and for no price, wine, and
milk. To buyie for no moneie is a very easy buyinge, yea it is no buyinge,
but a free receauinge. Since tha^ the lord Jesus possesses the fulness of al
spititual riches, and possesses the same not to himself only, but also to our
use, and more over calls us freely to enioie his goods, my counsel shall be
that you resort not for aid and comfort, and purchasinge of Gods grace to
Marie or Ioha^, to Petre or to Paul, but to him, who possesses al good
things, not by borowinge, but by nature, not in part, but fully, not to his
own use only, but to the use of me^ in this world, cheifely and proprely of
Gods chosen. For he has also many good things, which he gives eue^ to the
reprobate as beauty, and strenghth of body, eloquence, and knowledge of
liberal sciences, wordlie riches etc. But he has certain special iuels, which
he gives only to his chosen, namely true faith,, true righteousness, and
holiness, true joyfulness, patience, and consta^tie in afflictions, true peace,
and quietness of conscience.

Grace for grace) This sentence is sondrie wise expouned. I will first show you
S. Augustines mind. These be his words upon this place. Tha^ brethern al we
have received out of his fulness, out of the fulness of his mercy have we
received, what? Remission of sins, that we might be justified by faith. And
what more over? Grace for grace, that is to wit, for this grace whereby we live
of faith we shall receive another grace, namely everlasting life. But what else
is it save grace? For if I shall say, that this is due to me, I assign some
what to my self, as to whom it is due. But God crouneth the gifts of his
mercy in us. Thus ye see S. Augustines meaning, to wit, that al Gods good
gifts, and in the end everlasting life, is not a recompe^se of our merits,
but comes of the free liberalitee of God, because it pleases him so to
reward his former graces, and to croune his own gifts in us. And so he
calls faith whereby we are justified one grace, and everlasting life another
grace, very truly and godly, to the confusion of the commune idols souldiars.

Other expouninge grace for grace, grace upon grace, reach that out of this
fulness of his son god gave to our fathers under the old testament the spirit
of fear, whereby as children under a scolemaster they were kept in, and
restrained, that they should not straie abroad after fleshly lusts, but be led
forth, and framed to some godliness. And in the new testament, he gives the
spirit of fredo^, whereby with more fra^cke, and free hertes, and with more
ioiful courage by the motion of the spirit, we do the things, that please
god. Not that our fathers were al together void of this free spirit, but
because of their childlie age they were more kept under by fear, and the
spirit was not so richely, and largely given to the^, as to us, I mean
universally touching gods ordinary dispe^sation. For to some special
persons the spirit was as largely given, and more largely tha^ it is now.

The exposition of other is, that God loves and favors us because of the
love, and favor, that he bears to his son, as S. Paul writes, that he
has made us acceptable in the biloued. For by nature we are the children of
wrath, and the love, and favor that we find i^ gods sight, is for that, that
of his own goodness he has made us, the members of his most derely biloued
son, and so loves us, as a part of his sons body.

Other think that the meaning of these words is, that God powers al his
graces in to the lord Jesus, and by him co^ueieth the same unto us, as by a
conducte pipe. I leave to your choice which of these expostions you will follow.

The law) The nature of me^ is co^munely either to give to little, or to much
reverence to Gods ministers. And to despice them while they live, and when
they be ded, to make them more tha^ saints. In the time of the lords
conversation upon earth, the Iues had Moses in such reverence and estimation,
that they made him very little less than a God. In Moseis person they gloried,
Moseis person they bosted, and extolled above the stars. They had this also
that they so pust up them selves in their knowledge of Gods will, and in their
holy, and perfect worckes wrought according to the rule of the law, as that
they excelled al other me^, and were half gods upon earth and more mete to be
placed in paradise among the heaue^lie spirits, the^ to walk in this vale of
misery among sinful men. Wherefore Io. Baptist to plant Christ Jesus in the
hertes of the^, to who^ he was sent to be a teacher, and the better to advance
his glory, labors to pulle those two great hindrau^ces out of their hertes,
namely their preposterous gloryinge in the person of Gods minister, and
their vain confidence in their own holiness, and righteousness. And first he
sets up the lord Jesus far above Moses, making a comparison between the
office of Moses, and the lords office. For he assigns to Moses, that he
ministered, and gave the law to the people he assigns to the lord Jesus, that
he has brought grace, and truth. Now there is a^ excedi^ge great difference
between these two offices. For the one is the ministration of death, and
condemnation, the other of life, and justification. The law in deed prescribes
unto us true holiness, and certainly shows us what we ought to do, and to
leave undone in every point, but while thereby either it represseth, and
restrains me^nes raginge lusts, or co^uinceth al men, and proves that they
do not the things they ought to do, nor eschew the things, they ought to
eschew, as S. Paul lernedly and truly writes, it increases sin, worcketh
wrath, kills and conde^neth us. It increases sin, because the more our
lusts ar restrained, the more ragingly they burst out. It worcketh wrath,
because that when our lusts ar bridled, we are angry with God for puttinge
that snaffel in to our mouths, and so to our other vices we add disobedience,
stubburnnes, and murmuringe against God. It kills and conde^neth because it
pronounces al me^ accursed, that keep not the things prescribed, and taught
in it, to the uttermost title, where as we perfirme not one jot perfetly, as
we should. But here we must know that the law of her self, and of her own
nature, has not these effects, but by accide^t, that is by the means of our
vicious, nawghtie corrupt nature. For the law is good, holy, and just, and
worcketh not co^de^nation of her own nature, but because our sinful nature can
abide no good thing, therefore of necessitee it must be condemned by that,
that is good, wha^ the same is laid unto it. The propre cause is not in the
sum beams, that they make a carrion to stincke the more, but in the nature of
the carrion. For they shine upon other bodies without such effect. If our
nature were good, the law should be most lively, and comfortable unto it. Now
because it is corrupt, and poisoned, the law worcketh not the things that it
would, and should, but the things that such a nature will only suffer to be
wrought.

Grace and truth) We have now the office of Moses, letre us on the other side
consider the office of the lord Jesus. But first let us vndrestande the
words. By grace some vndrestande that, that makes us amiable, and acceptable,
and gets us favor before God and me^. By truth they vndrestande true,
sincere perfect, sound, and sure righteousness. Other by grace in this place
vndrestande forgiveness of sins, and by truth the fulfillinge of all the
figures, and shadows of Moseis law. In which so ever signification you shall
take the words, the sense shall be good, and godly.

For the lord Jesus makes us amiable and acceptable in Gods sight,
apparellinge us with his own sweet smellinge garments, that is with his own
holiness, and he renueth our minds unto true, sound, and fast abidinge
righteousness, he also has optained for us remission of our sins, and has
perfirmed all that was shadowed in Moseis law. For he has washed, sanctified,
and purged us with his own blood. He has suffered death in our stead, and
offered him self a slain sacrifice upon the cross to be a perpetual
satisfaction for the sins of al Gods chosen, and to appease for ever Gods
wrath kinled against sin. And here we are clearly taught that the law cold
not bring these things to pass.

Wherefore al they that have assigned righteousness and acceptance in Gods
sight to the deeds of the law, or have sought any holiness, any forgiveness of
sins, any sparcke of grace and life other ways, than by the lord Jesus
only, and alone, have miserably begiled them selves to their perpetual
confusion, and perdition. Let us my brethern be no more deluded, but resort to
the true fountain of al heaue^lie graces, and draw from thens thorough faith
sincere holiness, and true righteousness, and what so ever may make us amiable,
and acceptable in Gods sight, that we may glory in no manner of thing, save
in the lord Jesus alone, our only sanctifier, iustifier, saueor, redemptor, and
what so ever our need requires that he should be unto us. For what was
impossible for the law to do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God has
perfirmed having sent his son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and by sin,
that is to say, by a sacrifice for sin has condemned sin in the flesh.

This son of God is made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption. This son of God has raunsomed us from the curse of the law. This
son of god is the end of the law, to justify all that believe. This son of
God had given us the spirit of adoption, the spirit of Gods children, the
spirit of fredom, the spirit of alacritee, and good courage. These things
Io. Baptiste teaches, and so quaileth the Iueis vain gloriynge in Moses, and
their vain gloriynge in their own holiness, and righteousness, to the high
aduanceme^t of him, to whom al glory is due, even Jesus Christ our only lord
and saueor.

No man has seen God etc.) Now to confirm the thing that he had signified
touching Moses, namely that he must sit far beneth the lord Jesus, in this
sentence he gives us to vndresta^de, that the very knowledge of Gods will,
and of the law, that Moses had, he received it from Gods son. For nether
Moses, nor any other man cold attain to any certain knowledge of Gods will,
or shall ever attain hereafter, but by the revelation of him, that is in Gods
bosom. So Moses whose passinge great knowledge they bosted so much, was but the
lord Jesus his scolar, and therefore of duty must give place to his master.

The Iues Indede had ever in their mouths, that Moses had seen God, and spoken
with him mouth to mouth, so that god had no secret, that he had not opened
unto him. But the truth is that no mortal man can attain to a full knowledge of
Gods infinite majesty, and see his face as it is. For when Moses desired to
see Gods glory and majesty, answer was made unto him, thou can not see
my face, for man shall not see me, and live. Wherefore when the scripture
says, that Jacob saw God face to face, and that Moses talked with him mouth
to mouth, the meaning is, that God opened him self more plainly, and talked
with them more familiarly than with other men. How beyt they saw not his own
very face, that is they attained not to a full knowledge of the diuinitee. For
as Tertullian lernedly writes man's mind can not comprehend the things,
that be in God. For God is greater than man's mind, nether can it be thought
how great he is.

For if God cold be comprehended by thought than he should be less than man's
mind, whereby he might be conceived.

He is greater also than al speech, nether can he be uttered with words. For
if he cold be uttered with words; tha^ he should be less then man's speech,
whereby he might be compassed. But what so ever shall be thought of him, shall be
less tha^ he, and what soev shall be spoken of hi^, shall be less tha^ that, that
is about him. For if thou shall call hi^ light, thou shall name a creature of
his, and not express hi^. If thou shall call hi^ vtue, thou shall speak of
his power, and not utter him. If thou shall call him majesty, that shall
describe his honor, and not himself.

Breifely what so ever thou shall say of him, thou shall rather declare a
thing of his, than him self. For what can thou worthily speak, or think
of him, who is greater than al words, and al vndresta^dinge, sainge that one
way we may co^prehende in mind what God is, if we shall thi^cke him to be
that, that ca^ not come in to man's u^dresta^dinge, or thought what manner a
thing, and how great it is. For as our eye sight is dulled in be holdinge the
soume, nether ca^ abide the glisteringe brightness of the sun beams, so our
mind suffers the like thing in thinckinge of God, and the more it is bent to
considre God, so much the more it is dafeld, and blinded with light. For what
can we think worthily of hi^, that is higher than al highness, deper tha^ al
depenes, lighter tha^ al light, brighter than al brightness, stronger than al
strenght, fairer than al fairenes, truer than al truth, greater than al
greatness, richer tha^ al riches, wiser than al wisdom, better than al goodness,
iuster than al justice, more merciful than al mercy, so that it may be truly
said, that God is such a thing, as where unto nothing can be compared. For he
is above all that can be spoken, or thought. And therefore when Moses was
admitted to a singular sight of the divine majesty, God said unto hi^, thou
shall see my hinder parts, my face thou shall not see. The sight of Gods
back was a great knowledge surely of the diuinitee, but not a full knoulege, so
that it might be said, that he saw Gods very face. And yet that knowledge
also which he had of God, he had by the instruction, and revelation of Gods
son. For God inhabiteth light, that no man ca^ approach unto. Gods son
only knows the father, he only gives all the knowledge of the father, that
ever any man had or shall have. For he only is of the fathers privy counsel,
he only is admitted in to his bosom.

GOD) The greek word, theos, which S. Johan uses is made, of thee in, to ru^ne
as Plato teaches, because the rude old me^ saying the over bodies so fast to
move, thought that God ran in the^, and therefore called god a ru^ner We may
think that he is called a ru^ner, because he is spedely present to help in all need. Other derive the word out of deos, fear, because he is most to be
feared, and reuere^ced, The latins call God deu^ as it seems of the greek
word, theos or deos, or as some thi^cke a da^do, of giui^ge, or quod nihil illi
desit, because he wa^teth nothing. But though the names that the heathen used,
whereby to signify the supreme aeternal mi^de, be very good, and taken out of
some proprietes, and effects that they vndrestode in god, yet it shall be most
fruteful and comfortable for us, to know what name the godly have used, and
gods spirit has uttered in the holy scripture. Now the most excellent name
of god expressed by gods spirits is Iehoua, which the greeks call
tetragra^mato^, because it consists of.4. spirital lettres. The hebrews have
it in such reverence that they think, it is not to be uttered with me^nes
lips, and therefore instead thereof they ever read adonai. And to this day
if they hear a christian pronounce it they ar astonished, and sear left the
sky shall fall, or the earth swallow the^ up. Wherei^ though there be ov great
superstition, yet it appears i^ how wo^dreful reverence they have this name.
They call it she^ ha^phorash nome^ appositu^ because it expouneth, and
declares the nature of god, as much as may be co^prehe^ded by man. And if a
man did know it perfectly, the Cabalistes say, that he might work miracles.
It comes of haua which signifies to be. For god is of himself, and not of
another, and he gives bei^ge to al things that be. The greeks have a
marvelous apt word to express this which I think none other tou^ge with
like elega^tie ca^ attain unto, autousios, as you would say, a self beer. And
that god is of himself and the author of al being, and will so be known, he
himself teaches us in the book of Exodus. For when Moses spoke thus unto him:
Lo I shall comme to the children of Israel; and say unto the^, the God of your
fathers has senth me unto you, if they shall say ask what is his name, what
shall I say, God answered, aeheieh asher aeheieh, I will be that will be, or I am
that am. For the hebrews use the time to come instead of the present time.
Which words Gerunde^sis an hebrew thus expouneth: God is that essence, that
has not passed away, ne shall pass away, which never began, and never shall
end, but passes al manner of time, who only ca^ say, I am. For he is the
fountain, and headspringe of al being, and life, of whom al things have this
that they be. This name Iehoua was known eue^ to the heathen Italians, for
they called their high, and principal God loue^. And Pytagoras seems to have
vndrestand the mystery of the name. For of him the heathen writ, that his
most solemn, holy, and inviolable oath was, ne ton tetractyn by the
quaternio^. For he me^t this holy, and reverend name, which because it
consists of four lettres, is called, tetragra^mato^, as you would say four
lettred. And that he me^t this name, it appears by this also, that he used
the word tetractys in the masculine gendre, where after the grammatical rules
of the greek tongue, he should have used it in the feminine, if he had me^t
nothing but the nombre. If you desire to know how this secret name ca^me
among the heathen, I think surely, that Noes son Iapheth, who was the
father of those heathen, that we speak of, taught his children true religion,
and that they from hand to hand delivered the some to their posteritee the
heathen, which though they daily corrupted more, and more the religion, that
they received from their fathers, yet they retained some remnau^tes and among
other things this reverend name, as cheifely co^me^ded unto the^. Other think
that Abraham's name, after the noble, and famous victory, that God gave him
over the 5. kings, was celebrated, and renoumed thorough out all the world, in
so much that the heathen sent ambassadors to him, eue^ out of Italy, and
entered in to a ligue with him, who^ he taught true religion, and this most
holy name. As for Pothagoras I believe he learned of the au^cia^t hebrews in
Jury the mystery, and signification of this name. For Pliny writes, that
the old Philosophers were great trauailers i^ the east parts for lerni^ge, and
it were easy to show that the chiefest part of Platoes divine lerninge, which
the heathen have in so great admiration, is drawn out of the fou^taines of the
hebrews. That Hesiodus, and Ouide write of the creation of the world, is stole^
most plai^ly out of the first cha. of gensis. They stole also the histories of
the holy scripture, and put the^ forth in their writings alteringe certain
things, and chau^ginge the names, that their theft might not be espied. For
haui^ge red the history of Jonas, they mused on their matters, and set forth
in pleasant so^ges, and dities, that Arion wast cast in to the sea, and that a
dolphi^ which had heard his melody before, wha^ he was in the ship came, and
received hi^ on his back, and carried hi^ to land. And after this sort they
usurped many other things and handled as they thought good, addi^ge,
diminishinge, alteri^ge, and chau^gi^ge at their pleasure. But I leave the^,
and will return to my purpose, and show you more of gods names rehearsed by
gods spirit in the scripture, which though they be hebrew, yet I think
good, that al english me^ should know the^, and their significatio^s, as well as
any other e^glish words. For there is great pith, great importance and
liuelines in the^. And it is a shame that either we should be so nice as to
disdain, or so slowthful as to refuse the labor to learn half a douse^
words, bei^ge as it were great with child with so many commodities, and
co^fortes. The scripture has another name of God like to Iehoua in
signification, to wit, Iiah. For it is derived from haiah which also signifies
to be. This name is not al together strange unto us. For we have al heard
halleluia sou^de in temples. David uses it notably in the 68. psalm. Advance
him that rides upon the heavens beiah she mo in his name iah. Upon the which
place the hebrews teach that by the name iah godeds power is signified,
whereby he made, and gave bei^ge to al things. God is also called adonai. For
he is lord of al things visible, and invisible. Al things ar subject to
him, and serve him. His power is mere, and vnmixte. No man puts in foot with
him, he rules and governs alone far, and wide thorough out all the earth, and
heaven to. Again God is called el of stre^ght, for he ca^ do what he will. And
he has another name like unto el to wit, Elohim, which signifies his
presence. For he leaves not his creatures, and servants destitute, but is
present with the^, and nigh at hand to help, succurre, preserve, and mai^teine
the^. Here ye shall note that the scripture speakinge of the true God ever uses
this word in the plural no^bre, and yet ioineth the same with verbes of the
singular no^bre, whereby learned me^ think pluralitee of persons, and unity of
substance to be noted in the godhead. Now you have 5. names of God, Jehovah,
iah, el, elohim, adonai, whereof Asaph uses three together in the beginning
of the 50. psalm. El, Elohim, Iehoua has spoken. There remains now another
name of God Shadai. For God speakinge to Abraham in the.17. of genesis, where
he makes his covenant with him, says: I am El Shadai, which some Iues teach
to signify most strong, some necessary. Rabbi Moses says that it is
compou^d of Sha who, and dai sufficient as you would say, God who is
sufficient, because he wa^teth no thing, needs no thing, but has al in him
self, and gives to other all that they need. These two words, Iehoua and
Shadai, ar notably mentioned together in the 6. of exodus where God speaks thus
to Moses: I am Iehoua, and I appeared to Abraham, to Isaac and to Jacob in El
Shadai and in my name Iehoua I was not known to the^. Upon this place Aben
Ezra says that the virtue of this holy name was known to Moses, who wrought
so wondreful thinhes in Aegypte. And that the majesty of God was known to the
au^ciant fathers before in the name El Shadai but they know not the power and
virtue of the name Iehoua, al though they had the name in use. For it is
written in the 4. of genesis that in the time of Seth me^ began to call on the
name Iehoua. But our me^ have a better exposition of that place. For they teach
that the sense is as if god should say thus: I opened my self to your fathers,
as el Shadai, that cold fill the^ with all good things, and therefore promised
them a land flowinge with miike, and honey. But in my name Iehoua I was not
made known unto the^, that is to say, I have not yet perfirmed that I
promised. Now I will fulfill my promise in deed, and declare that I am not only
El Shadai, but also Iehoua an aeternal essence, and being co^sta^t, true, and
like my self in all poi^tes perfirminge that I have showed my self to be. For
the being of al things is in me, and I am the author of al things. But now we
will return to our text. No man has see^) S. Io. meani^ge is nor to show,
that no man has see^ god with bodily eyes. For though that me^nes eyes ca^
not attain to the sight of god, and wha^ the prophets ar said that they saw
the lord of hosts, that was do^ in image, and in some bodily shape, which it
pleased god to take for a time, yet S. Io. has another purpose namely to
teach that no man has now, or has had heretofore any knowledge of god, but
by the openinge of the lord Jesus, as appears by these words, he has showed
forth. The only begotten) Having spoken before sufficiently of this, I
forbear to speak any more. Only I will give you S. August. witty short
se^te^ce. In that he is only begotten, says he he has no brethern, in that
he is first begotten, he vouche safeth to call al them his brethern, that are
new begotten.

In the bosom) This is a speech borrowed out of the custoume of men.

For when we will signify that we will commit our secrets to any man, we
say that we will admit him to our bosom. So the meaning is that he is
privy to al gods secrets, and therefore ca^ show us such heaue^lie
mysteries, as no man else ca^ declare. And this exposition S. August. follows.
Cyrille thincketh that in the bosom, is as much to say, as in the father, and
of the father, and you would say, vsinge man's words in the inward parts of
the father. For he is not a piece cut of, and divided from the substance of
the father, as it fares in man's begetti^ge, but he is so begotten, as he is
still in the father. Has shewetht forth) Exegeisthai in greek is to make a
plain, and open declaration of darcke things. And thereby we learn to glory
in no man's lerninge, wisdom, or knowledge, and since Gods son only
shows forth divine mysteries and al godly wisedo^, to addicte and wedde our
selves to no mortal man's doctrine. Finally we learn that what so ever is
affirmed and taught of god with out the spirit of Christ is uncertain, and
therefore to be rejected. Now tha^ my brethern let us no more set one eye
upon gods son, and another upon our selves, or upon any man in earth or in
heaven, liui^ge half under gods true anointed and half under man's false
anoi^ted, but let us fix both the eyes of our mi^de upon him, who bei^ge in
gods bosom is the full fountain of al true knowledge, and al true felicitee,
and let us now at the last spedely travail forth from Babylon to Jerusalem
from the ki^gdu^ of darcknes, to the kingdom of light, from superstition to
sou^de religion, from haeresie to truth, from me^ to god from hell to, heaven,
that having renou^ced the whores company, and cast up her sweet venimie, we
may be received in to the kings palace, and see the beauty of his horse, and
be filled full of heaue^lie ioies with god the father, the son, and the holy
go^^ to who^ in the mean while see that yo^ re^dre due thanckes, and immortal
praises.

AMEN.

