THE HOLY SALVTATION OF THE BLESSED APOSTLE Saint Jude, to the Saints and
servants of God. PREACHED AT PAVLS Cross the seventeenth of November. Anno
Dom. 1611. By FRANCIS TOMLINSON, Preacher of the Word, and Chaplain to the
Right Honorable, the Lord Ellesmere, Lord High Chancellor of England, and
Chancellor of Oxford.

Quibus parum vel quibus nimium mihi ignoscant; quibus autem satis est, non
mihi sed domino mecum gratias agant. AT LONDON Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON for
George Norton, dwelling near Temple bar. 1612.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, RELIGIOUS, AND VERTVous Knight, Sir THOMAS LVCIE,
high Sheriff of Warwickshire, mercy, peace, and love be multiplied.
RIght Worshipful, when I was called by my Lord of London to preach at Paul's
Cross, I resolved with my self to answer with Moses, Exodus 5.10.
I am not eloquent but slow of speech, slow of tongue; with Jeremy, Ier. 1.6.
I cannot speak for I am a child in understanding; with John Baptist, non sum
dignus, Matthew. 3.11.
I am not worthy; and with Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 15.9.
I am the least of the Apostles, not worthy to be called an Apostle;
nevertheless being commanded I did obey, obeying spoke, speaking, feared
rather a reproving then an approving of that I spoke; howbeit (beyond all
desert and desire) it pleased some of friendship and affection to commend,
others of favor and good conceit even then conceived, instantly to urge that
my poor pains might be printed, which I utterly refused as unworthy to see
the light; since I understand by some, that some have given out, that if I will
not give a true and perfect copy, they will put it out in parts, pieces, and
imperfect as they took it: of two evils therefore I have chosen the less,
choosing rather to undergo the hard censures of such, as are more ready to
censure others then do any good themselves, then to suffer this simple Sermon
without my knowledge and consent to be thrust forth in imperfect notes. I
affect not popular praise, nam quis ego sum, aut quae est in me facultas?
Neither do I respect the uncharitable censures of Papists, ^usten.
Atheists, Schismatickes; for, qui volens detrahit famae meae, nolens addit
mercedi meae: He which with his will impaires my name, against his will
augments my reward. But my desire is only that my poor talent may be
employed to Gods glory; let God be glorified by me, and let me still be
vilified for Gods sake. Not unto me O Lord, not unto me, but to thy holy name
give the glory.

That I am bold to shroud these first fruits of my simple labors under your
Right Worshipful patronage (besides private causes) your Zeal of Gods glory,
delight in Gods sacred word, great love to learning and religion, good favors
toward Gods Ministers have deservedly invited me; macte virtute esto: go
forward I beseech you in godliness, increase in grace, grow from strength to
strength, from virtue to virtue, be constant in the faith, stoutly defend the
truth, earnestly contend for the truth, let not the cunning Papist seduce you,
nor the malecontent Schismaticke insinuate himself into you, nor the godless
Atheist ring and sing in your ears devilish charms; but honor him sincerely
which will honor you, love him fervently which loves you, delight in him
chiefly which delights in you, cleave to him inseparably which will never
forsake you: sed quid verbis opus, vbi nihil opus? I know you do it, Phil.
1.3.4.5
and I thank my God having you in perfect memory always in all my prayers,
praying with gladness because of the fellowship which you have in the Gospel,
from the first day I knew you till now; yet as Paul, Syluanus, and Timotheus
gave hearty thanks to God for the Thessalonians, that they had received the
Gospel, in such sort that they were examples not only to them of Macedonia
and Achaia, 1. These. 1.2.7.
but also to the Christians in all quarters; so do they earnestly desire them
to continue according to their good beginnings; cap. 4.1.
we beseech you brethren (say they) and exhort you in the Lord Jesus that ye
increase more and more, as ye have received of us, how ye ought to walk and
please God; as if they should have said, we do not command you as Lords over you
(as now the Pope does) sic volo sic iuiubeo, stat pro ratione volu^tas; and as
Co^stantius that Arian Emperor, quod ego volopro canone sit; but we beseech,
entreat and exhort you by the Lord Jesus, that if you respect and reverence
Christ, if you fear him as a Lord, and love him as Jesus, suffer the words of
exhortation; for we speak from him and for him: In like manner I beseech you
(Right worshipful) give me leave, currenti addere calcar; Seneca.
habet hoc proprium generosus animus vt excitetur ad honesta; It is proper to a
noble mind to be excited to honest actions; and seeing I know that you know
in religione vera virtus, in virtute vera nobilitas; and that nulla vera
religio sine sapientia, Lactantius.
nec vlla vera sapientia fine religione. Pardon my Zealous affection and tender
care of your everlasting good, enforceing me to beseech you to go forward in
good things, and increase more and more in godliness, for declining in
religion brings a stain of honor, and a decay even of temporal portion: I
fear it not in you; for as it is no small comfort to me often to call to mind
the tractablenesse, willingness, readiness, I found in you to drink in
thirstingly the principles of religion, when I taught you also the rudiments of
Grammar; so is it, and ever shall be my great comfort, not only to hear of
it, but often to be an eye and ear witness of your zeal for the truth of
God, I mean your resolute constancy, and constant resolution to defend the
truth against malicious Papists, malecontent Schismatics, and miscreant
Atheists: continue in the same, fight the good fight, stir up that gift of God
which is in you, be faithful unto the end, and in the end you shall receive
the end of your faith even the salvation of your soul: In the mean time I
humbly beseech you to pardon my importunate boldness, and accept of this poor
widows mite, as an undoubted testimony of my unfeigned affection toward you
in the Lord.

Now the Lord of Lords enlarge his mercies more and more toward you,
perpetuate to you an honorable name and memory amongst his faithful servants
in this present life, and crown you with an endless crown of glory in the
life to come.

Your worships in all dutiful affection, FRANCIS TOMLINSON.

THE HOLY SALVTATION OF the blessed Apostle S. Jude.
IVDE 1.2. 1 Jude a servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of James, to them that
are called and sanctified of God the Father, and reserved to Jesus Christ:

2 Mercy unto you, and peace and love be multiplied.


THis holy Epistle of the blessed Apostle Jude, though short, yet sententious;
though little yet not lightly to be regarded, for albeit it contain not
argument and matters of sundry sorts, as the sacred Epistles of other Apostles
do, yet as it were in one general exhortation, the Apostle exhorts the
Saints and servants of God to constancy and perseverance in their profession
of the Gospel; inueighing sharply against carnal profession and gross
abusing of Christian religion: and also admonishes them to beware of
impostors, seducers, false teachers, cunning deceauers, which were craftily
crept in amongst them, drawing men from purity of religion to impuritie of the
flesh, whom the Apostle lively painteth out in their several colors, and
against whom he justly denounces the fearful judgments of God to be
inflicted upon them; for plain and evident demonstration whereof he sets
down manifold examples and manifest testimonies out of the sacred scriptures.
The maine scope then, and general drift of The Apostle, in this Epistle is,
partly to set down the duty of every Christian, and partly to set out the
corruptions of those and these times. The occasion of writing this Epistle was
this; It is affirmed by the most learned of all times, and agreed upon by the
best writers, that this Apostle Jude out-liued many (yea most) of the Apostles;
continuing, and preaching in Mesopotamia, Pontus, Persis and other parts of the
world, till the reign of Domitian the Emperor, in whose reign iniquity
reigned, impiety abounded, corruption of manners and dissolution of life raged
in every place; Yea even some which made an outward show of religion waxed
wanton, abusing the free favor grace and mercy of God promised and published
in the Gospel. Which when this holy man of God saw, (and seeing grieved at it)
he wrote this Epistle, admonishing the Saints of God to take heed to
themselves, lest they also should be carried away with the errors of the wicked
and so fall from their own stedfastnes, and not only so, but that in so
dangerous times they should earnestly contend against seducers, and constantly
defend the faith, truth, and religion of Jesus Christ once received. These
words are the holy and religious salutation of the blessed Apostle S. Jude,
wherein, (as usually in every salutation) it may please you to observe

three circumstances 1. The person saluting. 2. The persons saluted. 3. The
form or manner of salutation.


The person saluting, is described three ways 1. By his name: Jude. 2. By his
calling: A servant of Jesus Christ. 3. By his kindred: The brother of James.


The persons saluted are adorned and beautified with 3. excellent titles.

1. They are called of God. 2. They are sanctified by God. 3. They are reserved
to Jesus Christ.
The form of salutation is a prayer; wherein the Apostle

wishes three blessing 1. Mercy. 2. Peace. 3. Love.


Mercy, the fountain of Salvation.

Peace, the fruit of Mercy.

Love, the fruit of peace.

Of these in order, by Gods assistance, and your christian patience.

(...).
Jude, or Judas: of this name our Savior had two Apostles; the one called
Judas Iscariot, who for thirty pieces of silver betrayed and basely sold his
Lord and Master. Seruus Dominum, Discipulus magistrum, homo Deum, creatura
creatorem tradidit, vendidit, vilissime vendidit: The servant betrayed, sold,
most basely sold his Lord, the Disciple his Master, man God, the creature the
Creator. Infoelix mercator Judas; Oh unhappy, wretched, accursed merchant
Judas. The other called Judas, the son of Alphaeus, called also Thaddaeus and
Lebbaeus, which variety of names was given him (as some think) not only to
distinguish him from Judas the traitor, but that the very name of Judas, as
odious to all, might utterly be forgotten; howbeit this Apostle not ashamed of
this and his name, in the very forefront of his Epistle calls himself Judas:
I rather think then that these names, Thaddaeus and Lebbaeus were given unto
this Apostle neither to distinguish him from Judas the traitor, nor utterly to
extinguish the name of Judas; but because Judas, Thaddaeus, and Lebbaeus
signify all one thing, to wit, praising or confessing. The occasion of which
name with the reason thereof is set down in the 29. chapter of Genesis the 35.
verse: For when Leah had borne three sons to Jacob, she conceived and bare a
fourth son, saying; Now will I praise or confess the Lord, and she called
his name Judah. The author then of this Epistle could not be Judas the
traitor, for he had hanged himself long before, Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 5.
nor Jude the fifteenth Bishop of Jerusalem, for he was long after; but Jude
the son of Alphaeus, and servant of Jesus Christ.

Serui a seruando; Augustine, de ciuitate Dei, lib. 19. cap. 15.
because such as by right of war and law of Arms might have been slain and
put to death, being reserved and kept alive by the Emperors and conquerors
were sold and made servants.

Of servants there are three sorts. 1. some by slavish voluntary subjection.
2. some by condition. 3. some by profession.


The first, the servants of sin, the second of men, the third of God. The
first service, sinful, the second civil, the third Christian.

Servants of sin they are which with greediness commit sin. 1 Facere
peccatum non est simpliciter peccare, sed toto anima in peccatum in cumbere.
Qui facit peccatum sernus est peccati: He which commits sin (says our
Savior) he is the servant of sin. Ioh. 8.34. That is, Quisquis indulget
peccatis, secure peccat, peccata peccatis addit, non potest non peccare.
Whosoever does give himself over to commit sin with greediness, does sin
with security, without remorse, does add sins unto sins without
repentance; cannot but sin, he is rightly termed the servant of sin. Know
ye not says the Apostle, that to whomsoever ye give your selves as servants
to obey, Romans 6.16.
his servants ye are to whom ye obey, whether it be of sin unto death, or
of obedience unto righteousness? Duram seruiunt seruitutem: They which serve
sin serve a hard service. Stipendium peccati mors; The wages of sin is
death: Faciunt peccatum (says Augustine) vt aliquam corporalem capere^t
voluptatem; In euangel. Iohannis tract. 41.
voluptas transit, peccatum manet; praeterit quod delectabat, remanet quod
pungat. They commit sin, that by sin they may take some corporal pleasure;
the pleasure passes away, Nocet empta dolor voluptas.
the sin remains. That which once delighted is gone, that which may still
sting abides.

Paul gives grave counsel: Servants obey those, Ephesians. 6.5.6.
which are your Masters according to the flesh with fear, trembling and
simplicity of heart, not with eye service as men pleasers, but as the servants
of Christ. Nomen istud culpa meruit, non natura. De ciuitate Dei. lib. 19. cap.
15.
This name of servant (says S. Augustine) not nature but sin deserved: for the
name of servant was never heard of, till Noah cursed Canaan the son of Cham
who discovered his fathers nakedness. Genes 9.25.
Cursed be Canaan a servant of servants shall he be.

Hence it may be that the Pope is styled Seruus seruorum a servant of
servants, for he is a servant of servants, that serves not Christ.

Jesus; these are of two sorts; for men are either the servants of God
generally or particularly; generally they are all the servants of God which
acknowledge him for their Lord, dedicate themselves wholly to his service,
endeavor to do his will, and for his sake patiently, yea gladly suffer
afflictions, James 1.2.
persecutions, crosses, losses, derisions, death it self; hi very serui very
Dei: these are true servants of the true God; Such servants bond and free, male
and female, rich and poor, noble and ignoble, learned and unlearned, Prince
and people must be and will be, if they will be saved: particularly and
specially they are the servants of God, and of Christ, who in some several and
chief calling do service to God, advance his glory; promote Christ's kingdom;
Thus magistrates supreme and subordinate in common wealths, thus Arshbishops,
Bishops, ministers of the word (...) in a special service are the servants of
God and of Jesus Christ; both these latter ways as well by condition as by
vocation, the Apostle Jude professes himself the servant of Jesus Christ; by
condition, because by Christ he was freed, redeemed and delivered from the
slavery of sin and tyranny of Satan; by office and calling because not only
in his general calling, but chiefly in his particular, the Apostleship, he
carefully and faithfully performed his service, to his Lord and Master Jesus
Christ.

James; not the brother of James the son of Zebedaeus and brother of John,
which James was killed by Herod; Acts 12.2.
but the brother of James the son of Alphaeus and Mary Claephas, the sister
of the blessed Virgin Mary, and so the cosen german of Jesus Christ.

He calls himself the brother of James for two respects, the one to
distinguish himself from Judas Iscariot the son of Simon, John 6.70.
whom our Savior calls a devil, Nonne vos duodecim elegi? Have I not chosen
you twelve, and one of you is a devil? the other to win more credit (not to
his person) but to his doctrine, that all men might know that this Epistle was
penned, not by Judas the traitor, but by Judas the brother of James the just,
Dictum clari hominis facile admittitur.
and therefore might more reverently receive it, and more religiously regard
it. Thus much for explication; now to application.

Judas was given to Iscariot the traitor, as well as this holy Apostle
Thaddaeus, both having a like outward calling; both a like office, both
Apostles of Jesus Christ; yet this man good and godly, that wicked and
ungodly; We clearly see that it is not the name, title, or office that makes
a good man; but the grace and mercy of God; Job. 32.9.
for as the learned clarks have not always bin the wisest men, so the
greatest in place either in Church or Common wealth, have not always bin the
best men: If outward titles and high places, Freno indorato non fa megliora il
cauallo.
could make men virtuous, religious, holy, godly, the servants of Jesus Christ.
Judas Iscariot might have bin as good, godly, holy as this Apostle, yea before
him, for Iscariot was Christ's steward, his pursebearer, disburser of all things
for Christ and his company, and yet behold, a thief, a traitor, a devil: the
like may be said of Saul, Ahab, Jeroboam, Rehoboam, Absolon, Achitophel.
Haman, Herod: what need we go so far for examples? Dominobis ista nascuntur;
we have plenty of these near home; passing over some which have bin Kings,
Counselors, Archbishops, Bishops, Judges, Magistrates, Ministers of the word
in this land: I pass to Rome, and demand whether high places (the highest on
earth as papists affirm) has made Pope Siluester the second, a sorcerer,
negromancer, magus diabolicus, a deuilish magitian, one that gave himself to
the devil; Pope Alexander the sixth, a most prodigious filthy fellow, cuius
auaritiae totus non sufficit orbis; cuius luxuriae meretrix non sufficit omnis;
whose covetousness a whole world could not satisfy, whose filthiness all the
whores in the world could not satisfy; Pope Hildebrand reipub: et ecclesiae
pestis and perturbator, the very plague and disturber of Church and common
wealth, good, godly, holy men; yet the Pope cannot err either in life or
doctrine; Christ has prayed for Peter and Peter's successors, that their faith
should never fail. So that though Siluerster the second, Alexander the sixth,
and Hildebrand became firebrands in hell: yet all the Popes that have bin or
shall be, shall be saved Bernard.
hanc misericordiam nole; I desire no such mercy at Gods hand. But ex fructibus
eorum cognoscetis eos, by their fruits (says our Savior) you shall know them.
Ierem. Non locus homines, sed homines locum sanctificant.
Non omnes filij sanctorum qui loca sancta tenent: they are not all the sons
of Saints, nor Saints themselves which hold the places of Saints. God
oftentimes bestows upon wicked and ungodly men high titles and great places,
partly to their greater condemnation, Celsae grauiore casu decidunt turres.
Seneca. S^ mons sublimis, profundior est tibi vallis.
feriuntque summos fulmina montes; The mighty shall be mightily tormented, and
partly for the punishment of ungrateful people, as to Saul over the Israelites.

Jude pleads his calling; partly that his doctrine might with more attention
and reverence be received, and partly to comfort himself in his calling;
assuring himself that he which called him and sent him, would bless him,
prosper him, and be with him; we which are the messengers of God, ministers of
Christ, and Christ's mouth, must not be ashamed of our calling, but boldly
profess, and openly plead our calling, though scornefully by scorners of
religion we are termed priests. The Jews thought they mocked Christ, when
bowing their knees they cried (...), Hail King of the Jews; Matthew. 27.29.
against their wills they honored him, for indeed he was the King of the
Jews, and Gentiles. Qui volens detrabit famae meae, nolens addit mercedi meae.
Augustine.
So when these graceless contemners of our glorious calling think to vilify
us by tearming us priests, (against their wills) they magnify us, for indeed we
are the Lords priests to serve in his house, and attend at his table; the
scornful behavior (then) and reproachful scoffs of godless atheists, and
worthless miscreants shall not daunt and discourage us in our calling,
assuring our selves, that he which has called and sent us will be with us, as
he was with Moses: Exodus 3.12. Ierem. 1.8.
certainly I will be with thee, with Jeremy: Be not afraid of their faces, I
will be with thee to deliver thee; with the Disciples: Behold I send you forth
as lambs among wolves. He that hears not you hears not me, he that
receives not you receives not me, Matthew. 28.20.
he that despises you despises me; but behold I am with you always unto the
end of the world.

Jude does not first entitle himself the brother of James, and then the
servant of Jesus Christ, but first the servant of Jesus Christ, and then the
brother of James, we learn to esteem it a greater privilege, honor and
dignity to be the servants of Jesus Christ, Non refert quibus parentibus quis
ortus sit, si sit virtute praelitus.
then to be allied to the greatest princes, potentates and personages in the
world; for if the servants of Jesus Christ (though never so poor, base,
beggarly, ignoble, contemptible) yet happy and blessed: If not the servants of
Jesus Christ, though never so rich, noble, honorable, great in this world; yet
miserable and wretched. Witness Dives and Lazarus. Postridie sum ^atus ego
quam ^upiter.
Ajax boasted that he was (a Jove tertius) the third from Jupiter) and yet a
Pagan, infidel, one that never knew, served, truly worshipped Jehovah the true
God. Infoelicissimus Ajax, most wretched and unhappy Ajax, E meglio viuer
^virtuosa-mente the nascer nobilimente.
thy royal alliance could not keep thee from murdering thy self and
tumbling into hell. Jude professes himself the servant of Jesus Christ:
foelicissimus Judas, most happy and blessed Judas, thy service made thee truly
blessed in this life; and perfectly blessed after this life. If then with this
Apostle we profess our selves, and desire to show our selves indeed the
servants of Jesus Christ, we must do three things: 1. First, we must imitate
our masters virtues. 2. Secondly, we must attend his pleasure. 3. Thirdly, we
must addict our selves wholly to his service.


In our Lord and Master Christ Jesus shined many excellent virtues, yea all
virtues; love, patience, humility, meeknes, mildnes, mercy, clemency, purity,
piety, (...), John 1.14.
the fullness of grace and truth; these must shine in us, love, patience,
humility, mildness, meekness, gentleness, goodness, clemency, purity,
piety: else falsely are we called the servants of Christ. Christiani nomen
frustra ille sortitur, qui Christu^ minime imitatur, quid tibi prodest vocari
quod non es? De vita Christiana.
In vain (says S. Augustine) has he gotten the name of a Christian, which
does not imitate Christ; what does it profit thee to be called that which thou
art not? To be called a Christian, and not to be indeed a Christian; a saint,
and not to be a saint, the servant of Jesus Christ, and not to be his servant?
If thou take delight to be called a Christian, do those things which beseem
and belong to a Christian, and then deservedly thou shall be called a
Christian.

Matthew. 28.18.
Herein then we rest, and hereon we must rely; if we want, he is our Lord and
master, he can, he will supply our wants. If in troubles, he is our Lord and
master, he can, he will rid us out of troubles. If hated, persecuted,
wrongfully imprisoned, he is our Lord and master, he can, he will deliver us.
If in sorrows and heaviness of heart, he is our Lord and master, he can, he
will comfort us: If in sickness, he is our Lord and master, he can, he will
either restore us to our former health, or receive us into his everlasting
kingdom.

ne illecti, lest allured with the vain pleasures and lying vanities thereof:
not the flesh, ne infecti, lest stained, polluted, defiled therewith; not the
devil, ne interfecti, O quam multo dom nos habet qui vnum non habet.

O how many masters has he which hat not Christ for his only master.


lest destroyed and devoured by him. Not Antichrist, ne decepti, lest seduced
and misled by him. He that serves the flesh serves his fellow: he that serves
the world serves his servant: he that serves the devil serves his enemy. He
that serves Antichrist serves Christ's enemy, but he that serves Christ Jesus,
serves the greatest and best Lord: the greatest, as best able, the best, as
most willing to reward his servants. As then they only are actually in Jesus
Christ, which walk not after the flesh but after the spirit; Romans 8.1.
so they only are the servants of Jesus Christ, which in their spiritual
service serve no master but Jesus Christ. Hence is it that the Apostle Paul
protests, that if in the preaching of the Gospel he should serve or please
men, he could not be the servant of Jesus Christ: The reason is, because
Christ's pleasure and men's pleasures; Christ's doctrine and men's humors; Christ's
verity, and men's vanities, Christ's wisdom and men's follies cannot stand,
cannot accord together. Turks, Pagans, Infidels which plainly deny Christ,
do not so much derogate from Christ as profane professors of Christ. For
Turks and Pagans deny Christ in profession, Heretics in doctrine; but
profane professors in life and conversation. Austen.
Tolerabilius lingua quam vita mentitur. The lie that is made by the tongue is
more tolerable then that which is made by the life. For when the tongue
professes Christ, and yet the heart full of impuritie, and the life full of
impiety, this is not professio, sed abnegatio Christi, not a professing but an
open denying of Christ.

Lastly whereas this Apostle does not call himself the brother of Christ, as
elsewhere the scripture does, but the servant of Jesus Christ, we see his
wonderful humility: he suppresseth his most worthy stock and glories not in
his greatest kindred, but contents himself to be called the servant of Jesus
Christ. It is not so in these days. (Si verbis audacia detur) if I may speak
boldly and plainly it is clean contrary: Salust objected to Tully that he was
no gentleman, and herefore unworthy to bear office. Indeed says Tully my
nobility begins in me, and thine ends in thee.
for some, which have neither learning, nor living, nor wisdom, nor ciuility,
nor honesty, nor piety at all, yet if they can fetch their pedigree from some
noble or worshipful house, they boast thereof, hold themselves worthy of
reverence, and think themselves wronged, if they be not regarded. What did the
Jews gain, by glorying that Abraham was their father? semen Abrahae sumus,
pater noster Abraham: we are the seed of Abraham: Abraham is our father, when
our savior told them; John 8.44.
vos estis ex patre Diabolo, you are of your father the devil, and his works
you do. Indeed they were the seed of Abraham with Ismael, but not the sons of
Abraham with Izaak. Grant them to be sons, yet they were sons according to
the flesh, not according to the promise. For, Non habent hae reditatem Petriqui
fidem Petri non habent. Ambr. d paeniten. lib. 1. cap. 6.
Non sunt filij Abrahae qui non sequuntur fidem Abrahae, they are not the
sons of Abraham which follow not the faithful steps of Abraham. Outward
titles (then) without inward virtues avail us nothing, for what shall it
profit us to be entitled Christians, and yet live as profanely as infidells?
to be called the Church of God, and yet in conversation resemble the Synagogue
of Satan. To be counted the children of God, Qualis haberi velis, talis fias.
and yet spend our times like the sons of Belial to be reputed the servants
of Christ Jesus, and yet serve the world the flesh and the devil? to descend
of noble, godly parents, and yet degenerate from their noble godly ways? God
is not pleased with shadows, but with substance: not with outward titles, but
with truth in the inward parts. Therefore Theodosius the Emperor held it a
more noble thing to be Membru^ ecclesiae, then caput imperij, A member of the
Church then head of the Empire. If then thou will boast of thine honorable
kindred, labor, strive, endeavor that thou may truly glory, and say that
God is thy father, La virtu e argume to a^ nobilita.
the Church thy mother, Christ Jesus thy elder brother, this is most high,
holy, honorable kindred. Thus much of the person saluting, his name, his
calling, his kindred.

The persons saluted are beautified with three excellent Titles. 1. called. 2.
sanctified. 3. reserved to Jesus Christ.


Calling is twofold. 1. to some office and duty. 2. to the knowledge of God and
salvation.


To some office and duty either private or public, private and oeconomical;
as masters of families, artificers, husbandmen. Public is either civil, or
ecclesiastical: Civil is either in peace as Magistrates, or in war as
military Governors. Ecclesiastical is either immediate by God and Christ, as
prophets and Apostles, or mediate by men, as Archbishops, Bishops, Ministers of
the word. Calling to the knowledge of God and salvation is either external or
internal: External is either common to all, by the instinct of Nature and
works of creation; Psalm.
or not common to all, by the word preached. The Lord has not dealt so with
every nation. Internal and effectual is a work of the whole Trinity,
whereby God the father, through the son, by ye holy Ghost, not only offers
grace, but gives it to the elect. Vocantur electi, vel foris, per externam
praedicationem, vel intus efficaci operatione speritus sancti. The elect are
called either without by the outward preaching of the word, or within by the
inward effectual operation of the holy Ghost. This has two parts, the one
inuitement, the other admission. Inuitement is when God offers remission and
life everlasting to all that believe, and this outwardly by the preaching of
the word: and inwardly by inspiration of heavenly desires. Admission is when
men are entered into the kingdom of grace; and this outwardly, by Baptism, and
inwardly, by the spirit: engraffing them into Christ, and making them real
members of Gods kingdom. This is diverse in respect of time and in respect of
place. In respect of time, for God calls in diverse hours of the day, that is
in diverse ages of the world, and in diverse years of our age: some before the
law, as Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, some under the law, as Moses, David,
Josias, Isay with other kings and Prophets: some after the law; as the blessed
Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors. Some in the first hour, (their childhood,) as
Samuel, Jeremy, John Baptist. Some in the third hour (their youth) as Daniel,
and John the Evangelist. Some in the sixth hour (their middle age) as Peter
and Andrew. Some in the eleventh hour (their old age (as Gamaliel, and Joseph
of Arimathea; some in the last hour of the day (the last hour of their life)
as the thief upon the cross. In respect of place, for God calls some from
their ships, and some from their shops, some from the market, and some from
under the hedges. This diverse calling at diverse times and in diverse places,
intimates a caveat and a comfort. ^em dicat, ^eo me voca^t, quia colat ^eum:
quoma^ co^u^sses si ^catus n^n fu^es? Austen de ^erb. Apost.
A caveat, for such as are called, that they magnify not themselves, and
vilify others. A comfort for them that feel not themselves sufficiently
called, that they rest in hope God can and will call, when, where, and whom he
will, either at the last hour with the thief upon the gallows, or out of
oppressing Egypt with the Israelites, or persecuting Paul breathing out
slaughter against the Saints of God.

The uses hereof are three.

First, seeing we are called of God, we must walk worthy of our calling; that
as he which has called us, is in himself most holy; so should we not only
begin well, but continue in holiness and righteousness all the days of our
lives. For to this end has the grace, goodness, bountifulness of our Lord
appeared, vt abnegata omni impietate, that denying and renouncing all impiety
of life, and impurity of heart, we should live in this present life, Sobrie.
^uste. ^ie. Haec tria perpe^uo meditare aduerbia Pauli. Haec tria sunt vitae
regula sancta tuae.
soberly, justly, godly: Soberly toward our selves, justly toward others,
godly toward God: because, sancta conuersatio confundit inimicum, aedificat
proximum, glorificat Deum. A holy life, and godly conversation, does confound
and stop the mouths of our enemies, does edify and build up our brethren,
does glorify God.

ought to have a particular calling to walk in) we must join the practice of
our particular calling with the practice of our general calling. For it is not
sufficient for a man to be a Christian in the congregation and in common
conversation, unless he show himself so in his particular calling. A
magistrate must not only be a Christian in general, but a Christian
magistrate in bearing the sword. A Minister must not only be a Christian in
general, but he must be a Christian Minister in feeding the flock, verbo
praedicationis, fructu orationis, exemplo conuersationis, with the word of
preaching, with the fruit of prayer, with the example of holy conversation. A
master of a family must not only be a Christian abroad in common
conversation, but a Christian in the regiment and government of his particular
family. Thus must every man behave himself in his particular calling. The
reason is, because the practice of our particular calling severed from the
general, is nothing else but the practice of injustice and profaneness, and
our general calling without the practice of some particular, is nothing else
but the show of godliness without the power thereof.

precious then the gold of Ophir, sweeter then the honey and the honey comb. For
albeit God can only by the inward motion of his blessed spirit work out, make
sure and perfect our salvation; yet it pleases him in his eternal wisdom to
use the word as the ordinary means of our vocation and salvation. As then, God
gives learning by study, wisdom by experience, riches by travel, and like
things by like means; so he makes perfect the calling of his Saints by the
preaching of the word, Cor. 2.15.
which is the power of God to salvation, (...). the savor of life unto life.

The second title of honor given here to the Saints is sanctification,
sanctified of God the father. Here may it please you to observe two
circumstances; the one what sanctification is, the other whence it is. To be
sanctified, is to be separated, consecrated and set apart from common uses,
and reserved to sacred and holy uses. Thus in the law, those things were called
holy and sanctified, which were taken from the common use of the people, and
set apart for the use and service of God; as the oil, shewbread, first fruits,
vessels of the tabernacle. In this sense the Priests were called holy, because
they were separate from the common life of men to serve in the tabernacle, and
offer holy sacrifices. Thus the people of Israel separated from the rest of the
nations, were called by Moses a sanctified people to the Lord, 2.3.
by Jeremy a thing hallowed to the Lord. Now of them that are said to be
Saints, there are three sorts, Confitemur rogati profitemur vliro.
such as confess and profess Christian religion in word only, but in works
deny the power thereof.



Zanch. Miscellan. lib. 3. cap. 1. tract. de sanctis.
The first are saints neither before God nor the Church. The second are saints
before the Church but not before God: the third are saints before God and the
Church. These are sanctified by a threefold sanctification. 1. Imputed unto
the^. 2. wrought in them. 3. wrought by them.

1. Cor. 1.30.
who is made to us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption: by
this we are said to be sanctified, when the virtue of Christ's passion, the
fruit of his death, the power of his resurrection is applied to us, and Christ's
sanctification made ours by imputation. Therefore the Apostle says, Heb. 13.12.
that Jesus Christ to the end that he might sanctify his people with his own
blood, suffered without the gate.

the image of God is restored in him: a change, not a non esse ad esse, from a
not being to a being, for the faculties of the soul were before: nor, ab esse
ad non esse, from a being to a not being, for the faculties of the soul
remain still: but ab esse ad esse, from an ill being to a good being; not
abolishing the will, mind and affections, but rectifying and renewing them. A
change of a man justified; for we are justified before we are sanctified.
Justification is, actus indiuiduus, sanctification is, actus diuiduus: we are
justified at once, we are sanctified by degrees: we are justified when our sins
are not imputed unto us, we are sanctified when a clean heart is created, and
a right spirit renewed in us. Lastly by this inward change the image of God
consisting in righteousness and true holiness is restored within us.

estote sancti, quia ego sanctus. Be ye holy, Leuit. 11.14.
for I the Lord your God am holy. To this Saint Paul exhorts. Let us cleanse
our selves from all filthiness of the flesh, 2. Cor. 7.^.
and of the spirit, and grow up to full holiness in the fear of God. Of this
Saint John speaks, (speaking also of that hope which we have of the glory to
come) he which has this hope (...), 1. John 3.3.
sanctifies or purifieth himself as he is pure. The righteousness of
justification is by faith without works: the righteousness of sanctification
is by works and by faith. Justifying righteousness is perfect, but not
inherent: sanctifying righteousness is imperfect, but inherent. Glorifying
righteousness is perfect and inherent. Nevertheless we must confess that all
our sanctification is from the Lord. Sanctified (says the Apostle) of God the
father.

Albeit, opera dei ad extra sunt indiuisa, the outward works of God be common
to the whole trinity, and so we are sanctified by the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost, yet sanctification is here ascribed to the Father as being the ground
and first author thereof. For the Son sanctifies by meriting sanctification,
the holy Ghost sanctifies by working it, but the Father sanctifies both by
sending his Son to merit it, and also by giving his holy spirit to work it.

The uses are two.

be heavenly; Ephesians. 1.4.
partly because we are chosen in Christ that we should be holy and without
blame before him, and partly because the heavenly court receives none, Revel.
21.27.
but such as are pure, holy, innocent.

Nouos homines ^ouae vitae acti^nes edere o^ortet.
To this two things are required, holiness and constancy: holiness of the
worker, and holiness of the work. Of the worker, partly because the person
must first please God, before the work of the person can please him: and
partly because we can look for no success and blessing upon our labors
unless we be sanctified. Holiness of the work, because even lawful actions
(unless they be sanctified) are sins, as appears in one and the same action
done by the Pharisie and the Publican; the Pharisie prayed in the pride of his
heart; the Publican in the humility of his mind. To this two things are
required, the one, the word of God which gives direction to eschew vices, as
covetousness and injustice; and to practice virtues, as faith and love: the
other, prayer not only for the supply of graces, but for a blessing upon the
labors of our calling. The second thing required in doing the works of our
calling in a good manner is constancy, a constant perseuering in good duties.
For it is no commendation to begin well, unless we continue in well doing.
Incassum bonum agitur, Libro 1. medi.
si ante vitae terminum descratur: quia frustra velociter currit, qui priusquam
ad metas venerit, deficit: In vain (says Gregory) is good done, if a man give
over doing good before he die, because he runs in vain swiftly which
faints before he come at the mark. Therefore all impediments and lets laid
aside, we must go on with courage and constancy, passing through good report
and evil report, through shame and rebuke.

The third title of honor given here to the saints is, that they are reserved
to Jesus Christ. That is (as Saint Peter says) They are kept by the power of
God through faith to salvation. 1. Pet. 1.5.
Herba, Spica, Frumentum in spica.
Behold here the Apostles gradation: God calls us, having called us
sanctifies us, having sanctified us, reserueth us as a special portion,
peculiar part, and chief treasure to and for his son Christ Jesus. By this
is the promise of God the father performed to his son: Psalm. 2.8.
Ask of me and I will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. Ephesians. 1.22.
Hence it is that Saint Paul says, God has made all things subject under his
feet, and has appointed him over all things to be the head to the Church.
Hence is the glory, honor, dignity of the saints and servants of God, that God
lays them up as a chief treasure in the treasury of his Almighty power and
watchful providence, reserueth them to Jesus Christ the true heir of the world
and lord of the Church, and makes them coheires with him in his everlasting
kingdom.

The uses hereof are three.

Hodie mecum eris in Paradiso. This day shall thou be with me in Paradise.
And in the last day of the world, to them all, venite benedicti, come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you. Therefore they may
now wish (with Paul) to be dissolved and to be with Christ: sing (with old
Simeon,) Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace; and cry out (with
the saints under the Altar) Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Thou which art our
Lord by right of creation, by right of redemption, by right of gubernation, by
right of preservation; Thou which art Jesus our Savior, saving us from the
slavery of sin, the tyranny of Satan, the torments of hell, come in glory, to
crown us with perfect glory, come quickly, make no long tarying.

our souls to Christ by says, and partly by beautifying them with holy
virtues and godly qualities, that having our lamps full of oil, we may enter
with the bridegroom into the bridechamber, where is Gaudium fine fine, sine
metu finis, Joy without end, without fear of end.











Talis ac tantus erit timor meus, Ier. 32.40.
quem dabo in cor eorum, vt mihi perseuerenter adhaereant: Such and so great
shall my fear be, which I will put into their hearts that they shall with
perseverance cleave unto me. Austen Tom. 7. de bono perseu. Cap. 2.
Therefore says Saint Austen, ipse facit perseuerare in bono, qui facit bonos:
qui autem cadunt and pereunt, in predestinatorum numero non fuerunt. He makes
them to persevere in good, which makes them good, but they which fall away and
perish were never in the number of those that are predestinate to eternal
life. Thus much of the persons saluted, their vocation, sanctification, and
reservation to Jesus Christ.

The form of salutatio^ follows, wherein the Apostle wishes and prays for
three blessings. 1. mercy. 2. peace. 3. love.


Mercy be unto you. Mercy in God is not passive but active; non quoad
affectum, sed quoad effectum, not suffering with us in our wants, but
succouring us in them.

The mercy of God toward his creatures is fourefold: 1. general. 2. special.
3. temporary. 4 sempiternall.


as health, wealth, riches, honor, strength, beauty, comeliness of
personage, wife, children, learning, etc. There are some good things which God
gives to the godly and not to the ungodly; as saving faith, saving grace, a
new heart, a right spirit, peace of conscience, eternal life. There are some
evil things, which God lays upon the godly as well as the ungodly, as
weakness of body, sickness, sorrows, loss of friends, famine, sword,
imprisonment: There are some evil things which God inflicteth upon the
ungodly, and not upon the godly; as intolerable horror of conscience, incurable
desperatio^, unmeasurable torments in hell. Finally, this general mercy of God
feeds the fowls of the heaven, the fishes of the sea, the beasts of the
field. His mercy is over all his works, Psalm. 145.9.

David from the bloody rage of furious Saul. This preserved righteous Lot from
the unquenchable burning of Sodom and Gomorrah. This delivered holy Daniel
from the tearing laws of hungry devouring Lions, and Shadrach, Mesach and
Abednago from the consuming flames of a fiery furnace. Si dic as, salus mea,
intelligo quia dat salutem: on 58. Psalm.
Si dic as, refugium meum, intelligo quia confugis ad eum: If thou (says
Austen) say, The Lord is my health and salvation, I understand thee, because
he gives thee health and salvation. If thou say, the Lord is my refuge, I
understand thee, because in all thy miseries and necessities thou fliest unto
him. If thou say the Lord is my strength, I understand thee, because he gives
thee strength. But if thou say, the Lord is my mercy, what is this, but that
all that I am, is only of thy mercy. God looks upon the reprobate as an
angry judge, with a cloudie countenance; but he beholds his adopted children
in Christ Jesus as a merciful father, with a gracious loving countenance. This
is that blessing which the godly man above all blessings requires. Lord lift
thou up the light of thy countenance upon us.

errors his mercy reclaimeth us: out of troubles his mercy delivers us: In
sorrows and heaviness of heart his mercy comfort us; he that asks
obtains; he that seeks finds; he that knocks, Austen on the^ 144. Psalm.
has the door of Gods mercy opened unto him. Dat veniam peccatori, spem
iustificationis, charitatem in qua omnia bona facias, dabit vitam aeternam, and
societatem Angelorum. Gods mercy gives pardon to thee a sinner, hope of
justification, love wherein thou may do all good, and Gods mercy will give
thee eternal life, and the company of holy Angels.

The sempiternall mercy of God is that, which concerns our eternal salvation,
election, creation, redemption, glorification. This mercy of God is speciosa,
spaciosa, praetiosa. Beautiful in creating us after his own image and likeness,
bountiful in redeeming us with the precious blood of his Son; and precious in
glorifying us in the kingdom of glory. Elegit in omnibus, assumpsit ex
omnibus, amauit prae omnibus. He chose us amongst all, he took us out of all,
he loved us above all. Hence is it, that the Apostle says, the Lord is (...),
Ephesians. 2.4.
rich in mercy. Rich in mercy, because the treasury of his mercy is never
exhausted, the fountain never dried up: Rich in mercy because he never cease
to communicate the riches of his mercies to us. Rich in mercy, because he
pardons all our sins upon our true repentance, our great, Maxima, media,
minuta.
middle, smallest sins. Rich in mercy, because he not only pardons all
our sins upon our true repentance; but gives us repentance, and faith to
believe the remission of our sins. Rich in mercy, because he gives us
privative grace to escape evils, and positive, enabling us to do good. Finally,
rich in mercy, because he preuenteth us with mercy before we seek him, and
follows us with mercy, when we have found him. In a word, the mercy of God
signifies three things. First, (...), Vim miserendi, a power, ability,
pronenes of the divine nature, to show mercy. The second (...), actum miserendi
miserationem, the very act of showing mercy; even as a father shows mercy to
his children, Psalm. 103.13.
so does the Lord show mercy to them that fear him. The third (...), effectum
and opus misericordiae, the very effects and works of mercy. Psalm. 17.7.
Show thy marvelous mercies, thou that art the savior of all them that put
their trust in thee. Tantas audis Dei misericordias? Do thou hear so many
and so great mercies of God, and do thou doubt of thy safeguard in this life,
of thy salvation in the life to come? Dicat anima mea, dicat secura, tu domine
Deus meus, qui dicit animae meae, ego salus tua. Let my soul (says Austen)
say boldly, securely, confidently, Thou O Lord art my God, which says unto my
soul, I am thy salvation. By this it appears how great a blessing the
Apostle wishes in wishing mercy. Mercy be unto you.

Pax apparens vera.

the latter true and sincere peace. Bad peace is threefold: pax inquinata, pax
simulata, pax inordinata: defiled, dissembled, inordinate peace. Defiled and
polluted peace, is when wicked men conspire, combine and band themselves
together to do evil and mischief to the good and godly. In league, either to
do all the mischiefs, villainies, and outrages they can, having respect of
neither friends nor foes; as robbers, rebels, traitors. Est daemonum legio
concors, Austen.
there is an agreement among the devils: in Mary Magdalen, of seven, in an
other of a whole legion. Such a devilish agreement was amongst those inhumane,
barbarous, bloody gunpowder traitors. Indigni vita, indigni luce fuerunt,
unworthy of life, unworthy of the light. Perierunt ipsi, and eorum pereat
memoria: They have justly perished, and let their memories utterly perish with
them. Or else in league against the godly in some things, though at wars
among themselves. Psalm 9.21.
Ephraim against Manasseh, Manasseh against Ephraim, both against Judah. Herod
against Pilate, Pilate against Herod, both against Jesus. The Pharisees against
ye Sadduces, the Sadduces against ye Pharisees, both against Christ. The
Pelagians against the Maniches, the Maniches against the Pelagians, both
against true Catholics. The Turk against the Pope, the Pope against the
Turk, both against the truth: The Priests against the Jesuits, the Jesuits
against the Priests, both against Protestants. Psalm. 71.10.
These are like David's enemies, they laid wait for his soul, and took
counsel together against him.

Dissembled and counterfeit peace, is when men pretend peace and intend
mischief. So Absalom prepared a feast for his brother Ammon, 2. Sam. 13.28.
but caused him to be murdered in the midst of the banquet. So Ioab spoke
peaceably to Abner, 2. Sam. 3.27.
but slew him with his sword. So Judas kissed Jesus, Matthew. 26 49.
but betrayed him. So the Spaniards in 88. treated of peace, but prepared
themselves to war. Mel in ore, verba lactis: fell in cord, fraus in factis.
Ex fraud, fallacijs, mendacijs toti constare videntur: They seem to be
compounded of nothing else but frauds, deceits, dissemblings, lyings.

Adam obeyed Eve, when Eve should have obeyed Adam. So reason obeys sense,
when sense should always reason: so grace sometimes yields to nature, when
nature should always obey grace. These kinds of peace (says our Savior) I
came not to bring into the world, but a sword. Melior est talis pugna quae
proximum facit Deo, quam illa pax, quae separat a Deo: Better is that fight and
conflict (says Gregory Nazianzene) which makes a man near to God, then that
peace which does separate a man from God. For vbi non est bellum ibi pax
peruersa, where this kind of war is not, there is perverse and inordinate
peace.

Good peace is four fold: 1. With God. 2. With the good Angels. 3. With our
selves. 4. With men.


Romans 5 1. Philip. 1.4.
we have the favor of God and fellowship in the Gospel: this is properly
called reconciliation wrought and brought to us by Jesus Christ, who is our
peace. Pacem euangelizauit ijs qui prope, Ephesians. 2.17.
ijs qui procul: He preached peace to them that are near, and to them that are
a far off. A prioribus p^^fidem iustific^^ praesentia rem^tuntur, futur^ non
imputab^tur.
Being now reconciled to God by Christ, we are justified by faith from our
former sins: our present sins are pardoned, our future for Christ's sake
shall not be imputed.

of his good Angels for the good of the elect, ^on ex necessi^e, non ex me^is
Angeloru^, (...) pro sua gra^ and bonitate. (...) totius ^iuersi.
not of necessity, not because the Angels have deserved so great dignity; but
of his mere grace and goodness, partly for his own glory, partly for the good
of the Angels, partly for the order of the whole universal, partly for the
greater comfort of the elect, and partly for the conservation and augmentation
of love between the godly and the good Angels: ^uche. de open. creationis, ^.
3. cap. 14.
that as their love toward us is showed and increased, multis, magnis,
diuturnis officijs and beneficijs; by many, great, continual offices and
benefits, so our love and reverence toward them may increase daily more and
more.

Bernard) that is good, ^. de consci^tia, sect. 2. ^. 1784.
but not quiet; there is a conscience yt is quiet, but not good; there is a
conscience that is neither quiet, nor good; and there is a conscience that is
both quiet and good. This peace passes all peace, all understanding, I mean
all created understanding. For, Quid prodest si omnes laudent, and conscientia
accusat? aut poterit obesse si omnes derogent, and sola conscientia defendat?
What profit or comfort shall it be to thee, Gregor. super Ezech. hom. 9.
if all men applaud thee, and thy own conscience accuse thee? or what shall it
hurt and grieve thee, if al derogate from thee, and thine own conscience
defend thee?

Abraham and Abimelech. Genes. 21.27.
1. Sam. 27.5.6. Joshua 9.15.
Such peace was between David and Achis. Such peace was between Joshua and the
Gibeonites. To this peace the Apostle exhorts: Follow peace with all men.
Romans 12.18.
If it be possible, as much as in you lies have peace with all me^.

Christian peace is a sweet harmony, mutual consent and holy concord, among the
saints and servants of God. This David commends. O quam bonum and quam
iucundum. O how good and pleasant a thing is it for brethren to dwell together
in unity. It is not bonum and non iucundum, but bonum and iucundum, not only
good, but pleasant, not only pleasant but good. Bona sed non iucunda; Iucunda
sed non bona; nec bon^ nec iucunda; et bona et iucunda.
There are some things which are good but not pleasant, as Patience and
Discipline. Some things are pleasant, but not good, as carnal pleasures and
curiosity; some things are neither good nor pleasant; as envy and worldly
sorrows; and there are some things which are both good and pleasant, as
honesty and charity. This peace Christ commends to his Disciples: Be at
peace among your selves. To this S. Peter exhorts: Be ye all of one mind,
love as brethren; be at unity among your selves. This peace is so necessary
and profitable to Christian kingdoms and commonwealths, that without this
they can not well continue. For as to every well ordered kingdom three things
necessarily concur and are required; true piety, honest discipline, and holy
concord: so where the last of these is wanting, the other two can hardly, can
never be found. Holy concord then is the sweetest harmony that ever sounded,
the strongest bond that ever united political bodies together, the chiefest
prop, pillar and preservative of Commonwealths, cum alij sunt pacem
recipientes, alij retinentes, alij facientes; when some embrace peace, others
retain it, others make it. ^. Pacati. ^. Patientes. ^. Pacifici.
The first are peaceable, the second patient, the third peacemakers: to
procure peace where it is not, and to preserve it where it is. It is somewhat,
with clemency to spare and forbear our inferiors, more with courtesy to
entertain our equals, most with humility to submit our selves to our
superiors. It is somewhat, not to molest others in our deeds; more, not to
traduce our neighbor with our tongues, most to avoid all occasions of doing
either. It is somewhat not to publish the defects and infirmities of others:
more, not to extenuate their gifts and good parts; most, to grieve at their
defects, and be glad of their gifts and graces. Nemini nocet, non reddit mala
pro malis, reddit bona pro malis.
Therefore sacred peace hurts no man, rendereth not evil for evil,
rendereth good for evil. It makes weak things strong, poor things rich,
small things great; Dulce nomen pacis, res ipsa tum iucunda, tum salutaris. The
very name of peace is sweet and comfortable, the fruit and effect thereof
pleasant and profitable. Innumeris potior triumphis: Gloria in excelsis Deo, in
terra pax, in homines beneuolentia.
more to be desired then innumerable triumphs. This blessed peace is the
language of heaven, the Angels brought it from heaven. Glory in the highest
heavens to God, in earth peace, toward men good will. This is the legacy which
Christ bequeathed to his Disciples. Pace^ mea^ do vobis: My peace I give unto
you: my peace I leave with you. This was the usual salutation of the Jews
Shenim vhenim: Pax vobis, Peace be unto you. This is one of those special
blessings which all the Apostles in all their salutatio^s pray for. Grace be
with you and peace. Tale bonum, (says Austen) est bonum pacis, vt in rebus
creatis nil gratiosius soleat audiri, nil delectabilius concupisci, nil vtilius
possideri. Such and so great a good is ye good of peace, that among all the
things created, nothing is heard of more acceptable, nothing desired with more
delight, nothing possessed with more profit. Which thing our Savior well
considering, Matthew. 5.9.
pronounces the peacemakers blessed, for they shall be called the children
of God. Si Dei vocantur filij qui pacem faciunt, procul dubio, satanae sunt
filij qui pacem confundunt: If they be called the children of God (says
Gregory) which make peace, doubtless they are the children of the devil which
disturb and destroy peace. Seeing then that God is the God of peace, Christ
the prince of peace, the Angels the messengers of peace, the Ministers the
preachers of peace, the Magistrates defenders of peace; the peacemakers
blessed, and the children of the God of peace: let us have peace amongst our
selves, and pray without ceasing for the continuance of the peace of Jerusalem,
the peace of Great Britain. Let them prosper (surely they shall prosper) that
wish it, love it, keep it. By this we see in some sort, how great a blessing
the Apostle wishes in wishing peace. Peace be unto you.

The third and last blessing which the Apostle here prays for, is Love: Love
be unto you. Love is threefold, the first wherewith God loves us: the second
wherewith we love God: the third whetewith we love one another. In the love
wherewith God loves us, three things are implied: aeterna beneuolentia,
actualis beneficentia, paterna complacentia. The first is eternal good will,
and the eternal good purpose of God toward the elect to show mercy on them,
do good unto them, save and glorify them: God (says the Apostle) has saved
and called us, with an holy calling, 2. Tim. 1.9.
not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace,
which was given to us through Jesus Christ before the world was. The second is
actual beneficence and this either temporary, sustentando, regendo,
conseruando: by sustaining, ruling, preserving us: or sempiternall, Gloriam
dando, In giving us eternal glory. I have sworn by my holiness I will not
fail David my servant, neither in life nor in death. Magnum est loqui dominum,
maius iurare: It is a great thing that the Lord vouchsafes to speak, a
greater that he swears. The third is fatherly approving, liking, delighting
in the elect; that as we take pleasure in God to be our father, so does God
take pleasure in us, to be his children. Ier. 32.41.
Gaudebo de ipsis, benefaciendo ipsis: I will delight in them to do them good.
This love of God toward us is gratuitall, unmeasurable, immutable.

Gratuitall and free, partly because it flows only from his grace and
goodness, and partly because he loves us, not for his good, but for our good.

Unmeasurable, for God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son
to save the world: greater love could not the father show then to send his Son
out of his own bosom, greater love could not the Son show then to die for
his enemies.

Immutable and unconstant, for whom he loves, he loves to the end, (...):
The gifts of God are without repentance; as love, grace, faith, vocation,
Justification, sanctification and the like.

Causa diligendi Deum, Bernard.
Deus est; modus sine modo: The cause that we love God is God himself, the
measure without measure. Secondary causes of our love toward God are four.
the first is because God is in himself the fountain of all goodness of all
good things: summum and supremum bonum, the chiefest and the greatest good.
Inuenito si potes aliquid pretiosius Deo, and dabitur tibi: find out if thou
can any thing more excellent, goodly, glorious, precious then God himself,
and it shall be given unto thee. Pulchrum caelum, pulchra terra, sed pulchrior
ille qui fecit illa: Goodly, glorious, beautiful is the heaven, so is the
earth, but he is much more goodly and glorious which made them both. Inuenimus
eum, sed non praeuenimus: Deus prior in amore, posterior in odio.
We sought him, but he first sought us; we found him, but he first found us;
we came unto him, but he first came unto us; we loved him, but he first loved
us. Communia, specialia, singularia: Common to all creatures, special to men,
singular and peculiar to good men. Totum mundum dedit, he has given us the
whole world to be used by all. Vnicum silium dedit, he has given us his only
Son to be believed in by all. Spiritum sanctum dedit, he has given us his
holy spirit to be received by all. Quid maius, quid melius daret? What should
he give greater or better? Howbeit we must not love God, only for temporal
good things, for such love is reproachful and injurious to God: The reason is;
Propter quod vnum quodque amatur, illud ipsum magis amatur: If we love God for
temporal things only, we love them more then God. For, cessante beneficio,
cessat amor: If God cease to be good to us, we will cease to love him. Mali
(says Austen) vtuntur Deo, vt fruantur mundo: Vtimur mundo fruimur Deo.
Boni vtuntur mundo vt fruantur Deo: The wicked and ungodly use God, that they
may enjoy the world: the good and godly use the world, that they may enjoy God.
Totus homo implebitur gaudio: The whole man shall be filled with joy, and for
ever freed from iniquity, necessity, calamity, mortality; enjoying secure
quietness, quiet ioyfulnesse, joyful blessedness, blessed euerlastingnesse,
and everlasting happiness. Non de his quae condidit sed de seipso: Austen.
Not of these things which God has made, but of himself. The manner of our
love toward God is set down by our Savior in the Gospel of S. Matthew: cap.
22. 37.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, with all thy soul,
andd with all thy mind. With all thine heart, that is fervently; with all thy
soul, that is, wisely; with all thy mind, that is, constantly. Peter loved
Christ fervently. Though all men be offended at thee, yet will I never be
offended: not wisely: Master pity thy self: not constantly: Non noui
hominem: I know not the man. But after Christ had looked back upon him he
loved Christ fervently, wisely, constantly: For the love of his heart so
inflamed his zeal, the knowledge of his soul so guided it, and the constancy
of his mind so confirmed it, Eusebius. lib. 2. Cap. 25.
that without fear of the cross he was crucified for his Master Christ.

Paul wrote to the Thessalonians: ^. These. 4, 9.
Concerning brotherly love I need not speak unto you, for ye your selves are
already taught of God to love one another. Yet the love of Christ constrains
me to entreat you that your love one toward an other may increase more and
more.

This love is commanded by our Savior: Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self: not prescribing the quantity but the quality of our love; that as we
love our selves truly, Omnia bona nobis cupimus, quaerimus, sectamur: omnia
mala fugimus, cauemus repellimus.
sincerely, continually; so should we love our neighbors truly, sincerely,
continually. Not that we should love all alike: for as we must do good to
all, but especially to them that are of the household of Faith; so must we love
all, but specially them that love God. Meliori mayor affectus, indigentiori,
mayor effectus tribuendus: Melius est amare quam amari.
To the better we must bear greater affection, to the poorer we must yield
greater relief: Nor commanding us to love none more then our selves, for in
some cases we are bound to love another more then our selves: as the subject is
bound to love his Sovereign more then himself, being an excellent instrument
of much good to the Church and Commonwealth. So the Galathians loving Paul
more then themselves, would have pulled out their eyes to have given them to
Paul, because he was the trumpet of Gods glory and so worthy an instrument of
Gods grace.

This love wherewith we love one another, our Savior commends to his
Disciples as a sure badge, whereby they shall be distinguished from others, and
known to be his Disciples. By this shall men know that ye are my Disciples,
if ye love one another. To this Saint Peter exhorts: Above all things have
fervent love among your selves. To this S. John exhorts: Let us not love in
word and tongue, but in deed and in truth. To this Saint Paul exhorts: Be ye
followers of God, as dear children, and walk in love. And in the former
Epistle to the Corinthians the 13. chapter, reckoning up diverse excellent
gifts, peremptorily avouches, that without love they are all as nothing: where
also setting down the properties of love amongst the rest, as not the least,
says that love suffers all things: pro fratribus, enduring any cost, labor,
travel for their good; propter fratres, bearing all crosses, afflictions,
persecutions for their sakes: a fratribus, suffering wrongs, and putting up
injuries at their hands.

The reasons why we should love one another are chiefly these:



Homo homini Deus.





Nefas est, It is a wicked rebellious thing.



Tymon hates man. He is unworthy the name of a Christian an which with Julian
persecuteth a Christian: What persuasion more effectual can I use, then that
of the Apostle? What example more excellent can you follow then that of our
Savior? Collossians the third chapter, the twelfth and thirteenth verses: vt
sancti, electi, dilecti: As the saints of God, elect of God, beloved of God; if
you have any part in these graces, election, sanctification, and the love of
God, Put on the bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekenes, long
suffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, even as Christ
freely and bountifully forgave you, even so do ye.

Lastly, the Apostle wishes an increase of love, Love be multiplied unto you.
Because love is the fulfilling of the law, the badge of Christ his Disciples,
the bond of perfection, the bond of the Church, the bond of the commonwealth,
the bond of all good societies: it joins God unto man, man unto God, and man
to man. It enuieth not, disdaineth not, seeks not her own, thinks not
evil, but suffers long, suffers all things, endures all things, covers
the multitude of sins and offenses: non expiando, non veniam promerendo, sed
fraterne condonando; non vindicando, non diffamando: Not by purging or
satisfying for sins, not by deserving pardon, and binding God to forgive
sins, but by brotherly forgiving trespasses, not revenging our selves, not
defaming others. Per amorem Dei, amor proximi gignitur; per amorem proximi,
amor Dei nutritur. By loving of God our love toward our neighbor is bred in
us, by loving our neighbor, our love to-towards God is nourished in us. Qui
proximum amare negligit, Deum diligere nescit. He that neglects to love his
neighbor, does not yet know how to love God: For, ^iligi no^ potest ^eus sine
proxi^o: nec proxi^us sine Deo. Augustine. de ^uitat. Dei. ^b. 14. cap. 7.
charitas est motus animi ad fruendum Deo propter ipsum, and se atque proximo
propter Deum.

I conclude with the blessed prayer of the blessed Apostle: Mercy, peace and
love be unto you: Mercy from God the Father, the Father of mercies; Peace from
God the Son the Prince of peace; Love from God the holy Ghost, the love of the
Father and the Son. Mercy the fountain of salvation, Peace the fruit of
mercy, Love the fruit of peace. Mercy unto you releasing your sins; Peace
unto you quieting your consciences; Love unto you, joining you unto God, and
one unto another. Now the very God of Mercy, Peace and Love give you mercy,
peace and love. To whom be ascribed all glory, honor, power, wisdom, might
and majesty, now and for ever more. Amen.

FINIS.

