THREE SEVERAL TREATISES CONCERNING THE TRVCE AT THIS PRESENT propounded.

The first, laying open diverse Considerations and Reasons, why a Truce ought
not to be Contracted: Propounded unto the High and Mighty Lords the States
General of the United Provinces: By the right Honble the Commissioners and
Deputies of the most Hon: authorized Company of West India. In their own
behalf.

The second, discusseth this question very pithily and at large, whether or no
it be lawful to make Truce with the King of Spain, with diverse fitting
Considerations.

Lastly, here is added a Remonstrance, represented to the States their
Excellencies, In the behalf of the King of Bohemia, which has a respect unto
the Affairs in Germany.

All truly and faithfully Translated out of the Low Dutch Copy.

LONDON. Printed for Nathaniel Butter and Nicholas Bourne. 1630.

Three several Treatises concerning the Truce at this present propounded.
High and Mighty Lords.
ALthough we assure our selves and are confident, that your Excellencies and
Lordships both according to your wonted wisdom can, and according to your
special benevolence and favor toward us, will take into Consideration; that
an especial duty does us all generally bind, both to the conservation and
increasing of our Company, and to the safety and welfare of our well-beloved
Country. Yet nevertheless, we cannot but esteem our selves particularly
obliged, to show to your Excellencies in all submissiue manner briefly, the
chiefest matters which in this particular are to be considered of.

1 First, ought to be taken into consideration, with what desire and
expectation, the erecting of this Company has both by all good Patriots
amongst our selves, as also by all welwilling Neighbors and others without our
State, been earnestly looked and hoped for. And how at last notwithstanding
much opposed, with the Contradictions and gainstanding of some, the same though
slowly is brought to good effect.

Secondly, that your Excellencies out of your own voluntary motions, have
freely afforded aid and assistance to your Subjects And by form of mutual
contract, and reciprocal engagement, have promised in case of War to yield
them all help and furtherance and by Contract with foreign Nations, to
maintain them in their Corporation.

3. Thirdly, that hereupon, the Capital of this Company, by the inducements of
the Directors thereunto appointed by your Excellencies, has been wholly
furnished and made complete, even by such as your Excellencies your selves may
judge and perceive to stand, for the maintenance of the true reformed
Religion, and Liberties of our own Country. Insomuch, that diverse even from a
poor stock, have largely Contributed.

4. Fourthly, that by reason of this Company, from the first beginning, diverse
ships have both been built, and bought, and diverse employed, which otherwise
had lain still out of Service, for want of Commerce, Trafique, and employment.

5. Fifthly, that by this Company, many and great Ships have been built, to
the manifest and apparent increase, of the Navy and Navigations. And
especially, many fair and swift Pinaces.

6. Sixthly, that the number of our Ships has from time to time so increased,
that for the present we can make above an hundredth sail of very fair well
rigged Ships, fit for warlike employment, being of several bigness, and now
at Sea, ready for service.

7. Seauenthly, that we have entertained upon the same Ships a great number
both of Mariners and Soldiers continually; so that the precedent year, we
employed in our service about nine thousand men, and now at this present do
employ near upon fifteen thousand. Now by this means our men are wonderfully
trained up to Navigations.

By this means are made diverse expert Pilots, and a great number so well
exercised, that our Country may now continually find some fit and able men,
both to serve for Master and other inferior offices in their Navy.

8 Eighthly, that we have victualed the same ships, some for twelve, some
fifteen, some for eighteen, and some for more Months.

9. Ninthly, that we have so furnished our ships with great shot, that the last
year we had in our Navy 264. brass Pieces, among the which were many
Demiculuerins, and near upon 1400. great Falcons; which number this year is
palpably increased so that now, we have above four hundred brass Pieces, and
above 2000. Falcons, besides 600. Pieces for stone shot.

10. Lastly, that we have provided and furnished the same Navy, with a great
quantity of Powder, which was most made here. So that this last year, we
have bestowed upon our Navy, above an hundred thousand pounds of Gunpowder. Out
of all which premises does plainly appear, what traffic and trading our
Equipage has caused amongst us how many men we have employed: With what
admirable forces we have enriched your Excellencies Navy. Whereby great help
and furtherance is administered to your Excellencies in time of need and danger.
As experience has taught of late (without pride be it spoken) when our Company
stood this Country in great stead, in their late Broils and Inconueniencies.

And now stands farther to be considered: What riches and treasure their Ships
have brought into these Countries.

First passing by and omitting, whatsoever has come in former years, as Gold,
Elephants teeth, Greines, Hides, Skins, Wood, Salt, and the like; (by way of
Commerce and Traffic) the Silver, Coined and Vncoined, which has been
obtained, by ouercomming the Fleet of Noua H^spania, does amount to such an
infinite treasure, that never the like Prize has been brought in, either
here, or elsewhere.

Secondly, we have these late ensuing years deprived our Enemies, and
enriched our own Country, with a great deal of Indigo. Insomuch, that toward
the latter end of the last, and beginning of this year, above four thousand
Cases have been brought in.

Thirdly, a very great quantity of Sugar; insomuch* that this present year
only has been brought in by us, some three thousand Chests.

Fourthly, a wonderful great number of raw Hides; especially this year, above
six and thirty thousands wrested from the Enemy.

Fifthly, such a worthy deal of Cochineel, as never came in these Countries
before.

Sixthly, an unspeakable deal of Tobacco, which now is become great
Merchandise.

Lastly, great riches and treasure in all manner of costly lapida^^^ silk,
silk Wares, Ma^k^, Amber, all kind of Drugs, B^sill Wood, Camperie Wood, and
other wares, (which were tedious to relate) so that we have already brought
into these Countries many millions. All the which Wares, are bought and
dispearsed amongst the Inhabitants here; some used, others transported, and
howsoever thereby are your Excellencies Subjects enriched, the decayed
traffic increased, and the Convoy strengthened.

It may soon be perceived what loss our enemies have hereby sustained.
Moreover we have surprised many Galleons from the King of Spain, which
formerly were esteemed as invincible Vessels; besides many other Warlike ships;
passing over with silence, above two hundredth ships, as also Barques Which we
have afforced to our selves, appropriated to our own use, and in part
destroyed.

The same our Ships have ouermastred the rich and mighty City St. Salvador in
Bra^ll, and possessed for a while, ransacked Portorico, and explained the way,
to command the most enclosed Havens, and have destroyed and demolished the
Castle of Saint Margarita.

By which manner of doing, we have not only impouerished the King of Spain,
and emptyed his Cash, but also exposed him to excessive expenses.

We say, wasted his banckes or Cash.

First, withdrawing from him so much silver, as so much blood out of a vein.

Secondly, in diminishing his Custom and poundage, as well in Portugal as
Spain. But hitherto, especially in Portugal; because, there at the Egresse
and return, thirty per Cento are to be paid.

Thirdly, also in respect of the forenamed poundage, for want of return
thence, his Subjects are disanimated and discouraged, either to ship goods, or
send ships, so that the Commerce and Trafique of Portugal and Spain daily
decreaseth, and their Sugar remains upon their hands in extreme quantity. In
Brasill for want of ships, and fear of our Navy, so driven to great charges.

Fourthly, because we do hinder the transposition of Blackmoores* from the
which he does not only receive great Custom, but also by them all things are
furthered, and so he is put to more expenses.

First, because he must fortify and secure his Navy, for whereas he durst
permit his Treasure to pass with 6. 7. or 8. Galleons* he is compelled to
procure thrice as many, and yet dare hardly proceed for fear of our Ships.

Secondly, because he was driven to surprise and regaine the City of Saluador,
with a Navy of 60 sail of Ships, in the which were fifteen thousand men;
Which enterprise, although to small success, cost him according to the
computation of all discreet Judgments, a hundredth and fifty tun of treasure:
and yet was so frustrated, that he got an empty place, instead of a Mountain,
a Mouse.

Thirdly, because he is forced to entertain Fortifications upon all his Coasts
and Havens (for he knows not where to expect us) his Garrisons increase
continually, and he sends ammunition continually, and in lieu he did receive now
he deburseth money, where it comes to pass, that his revenues wax small.
And by the way might so be opposed that he should have but a small remainder of
the same. And this also might come to pass that we might hinder their Spanish
Navy of Terra firma, Hondacus, and Noua Hispania, From arriving in their due
and appointed time, and from wintering in their desired ports (as lately has
been experienced by our Fleet, under the command of the Admiral Adriaem
I^^ss. Pater) to their inexpressible expenses and dangerous passage, in an
unaccustomed season, so that his enterprise may be altogether frustrated.

Out of all which appears, that the Kings Chests are empty, that his credit
fails, and all his adhaerents are forced to break, and stoop low, his
Mariners here are unsatisfied; insomuch, that every one that looks with an
indifferent eye, may perceive that this our East India Company has afforded
the King of Spain an irreparable opposition and damage, and is like to make
this breach greater, if her proceedings be but continued, and seasonably
seconded.

Unto which premises serve these subsequent occasions which never yet were
incident, nor ever are like to be; to wit, that diverse of his Countries of
greatest importance are sore divided. For the di^^^^on is among the Spaniards
themselves, and there is no small jealousy among the Negroes and ouerm^stered
Barbarians. Unto which inconveniences, he cannot administer a remedy, by
reason of the want of money, yet he wants the benevolence of all m^n there.
Which iumpe of occasion we can wait on, and beat him at his own weapons.

We have now also by our own loss, and at our own cost learned this slight,
to touch him boldest where he is weakest. If now the current of this our
stream should be stopped, he will recover his strength, and restore all
things to a new form unknown to us.

We will not expect now that your Excellen: will hereafter, either sl^ght or
forget the service of our Company performed for our Countries. For otherwise as
we have declared and propounded to your Excel: the benefit and commodity. Which
this Country has enjoyed by the proceeding and good success of our Company:
so could we likewise make known unto your Excellen: diverse most evident
damages and losses which we are like to sustain, and consequently would
ensue, if the kno^ of this united Company should once be untied. For as the
ben^fit of this work has been great in the success, which wo^ke we have
brought to perfection with excessive charges, with great hazard and danger; so
all the world may soon perceive, and all men do already foresee, that if the
strength and power of this company should be restrained by the dissoluing of
the same, there would ineuitably follow the d^^^ct contrary, unto whatsoever
we have de^ucted for the prosperity of these Countries.

As first. We shall not be able to employ our ships, and therefore he
constrained to sell and put off many of them* nay the most part at small under
rates: build no more, hyre no more but whereas now and than, some false knave
or other, does secretly convey some ship furniture, ammunition, or sh^p unto the
Enemy* we should see our best ships fittest for War, and Navigations,
transported th^ther before every man's eyes, without fear or parting back*

Secondly, We should not be able to yield service and employment to our
Mariners, which would cause them to fly to the Enemy, and tender him their
service.

Thirdly, it is to be feared that the same our seamen having tasted the
sweetness of our booty and Prizes would betake themselves to Pirates, and so
over throw the safety of our Navigations.

Fourthly, that (as ^^ the former Truce) men will study and end^auour to sa^l^
with less charges, and so own shot and amunit^on, or at leastw^se take that
which ^s bu^ slight and of no value, and so in time of need and common danger,
we* shall be to seek, and found unprovided.

(...), we (...) not procure such abundance of (...) into our Countries, or at
leastwise not so che^^^ and at so small charges, considering that all must
pass^ under the ^eauie burden of our enemies Toll and Custom, so that the
Cream will be skimmed off before the milk come to our hands, whence must of
necessity ensue a decrease in Trading, and all manner of Trafique.

Contrariwise, the K. of Spain shall by this means obtain and recover his
Gold and Silver springs and veins at liberty, get forward again, wax strong,
redress and rectify the great disorder in yonder parts. Reedifie his decayed
Fortresses, build new, in stead that now he finds them laid open. He will also
then either allure the Savages to himself, or otherwise extirpate them, who
now do much incline to us, In a word, he will so reestablish all things there,
that it will be in vain for us to endeavor that way in future time.

That all this is truth, we shall need no other witnesses to testify, then
common voices, for the most part even of those that are afar off, or of your
Excellencies subjects, who do unanimously acknowledge that they have ever been
of that opinion, that nothing can be enterprized more prejudicial to our common
Enemy, then to assault him in those parts, whence he does obtain with what he
does curb all Christendom, and whereby he has now many years aspired to the
universal Monarchy. And that therefore according to the beginnings, they do
perceive themselves not deceived in their opinion and judgment. We do
appeal to our Enemy himself, who cannot Conceal that there is nothing
presses them so sore, nor urges more to desire a Truce then the weapons of
our Company and that if this Thorn were but out of their foot, they will then
give us what-soeuer advantage.

Insomuch then, the Intrest of a common harm is greater then that of
particular copartners, who (as they say concerning the most part) have
adventured their moneys more for love, then greediness of gain, they could
easily endure that loss which should befall them by the dissolution of the
Company, if thereby the common good and public weal were furthered. Because
by this means the party will recover his strength, take breath, get new blood
and vigonr, and to the contrary these Countries will decay and faint, and
strain one of their best points, and (if we might be so bold to say) lame an
arm.

Also it might come to pass, that this business might be undertaken by some
other, and we stand and be spectators only, and so never come to be our
selves again in this matter. The most we might expect should be a
Competencie, and Dependancie on others.

In Conclusion then. We do most submissiuely request and entreat, that your
Excel: (according to your wonted wisdom) would be pleased to prevent these
forenamed Inconueniencies and losses: and not suffer our Company (as we have
deducted before) to be ruinated by a Truce, and the Spaniard to take breath and
gather strength. But rather that it would please) our Excellen: to maintain
our Company in their former right, and encourage, and strengthen them in their
good purpose and resolution, and to suffer them to enjoy and reap the fruits
of so many dangers, hazards, pains and troubles as their Capitals and Services
have undergone and sustained, and the good respect which they have descrued
from this State. Not shuffing and putting from v^, that great blessing which
the Lord has begun to bestow upon their Countries, by the means of this
Company.

And so we trust that the same blessing will continue amongst us, to the
propagation of his name, and honor and inlighting of our own Country. Unto
the which, according to out mean endeavors we are and will be still willing
to Contribute. And will always be ready to declare further reasons of this
our backwardness to your Excellencies, and will ever remain, etc.

Your Excellencies, most humble Servants. The Deputies of the authorized West
India Company. At their Meeting the 19. Was thus Subscribed. REYNIER REAEL.
JOHAN DE ZAET. A PIETERSONS. SIMON VERDOES. DIDRICH SCHERF. ALBERT WYFFERINCK.
ANTHONY GODU^. MARCUS VAN VALIKENBVRCH GERRIT. VAN NYBVRG^. JOHAN DE MOOR.
ABRAHAM OYENS.


Diverse Conscionable Considerations upon this Question: Whether in Conscience
men may contract a Truce with the King of Spain.
BEfore any thing be undertaken, it is necessary, that in the first place this
question be made, Whether or no it be agreeable to Gods most holy will, and may
be performed with a safe conscience.

The Prince of Orange, of blessed and happy memory, When as there was to be
treated at Bourborgh in Flanders, concerning a Peace with the King of Spain,
as well in the behalf of the the Queen of England, as on the behalf of these
Countries, did then chiefly pause upon this point, and to this end called
together an Assembly or Synod of Clergy men, to consult of that matter. It
were very requisire that our high and mighty Superiors followed the same
steps, and in this Treaty of Truce, did consult with the Ministers of God, and
so take Counsel from his own Word. But notwithstanding this is unlikely at
this time, yet will not these few considerations prove unnecessary and
unprofitable, even to the satisfying and informing the consciences of those who
shall hereafter read and peruse them. My desire therefore is, that they may be
considered and thought upon, with unfeigned love toward God, in his fear, and
for his Truths sake.

The Question here is not, Whether or no we may with a safe Conscience make
war against the King of Spain, and while he continues war, proceed and
continue ours against him. We hold this affirmative, and lay it as a ground of
truth: For we know that true Maxim received of all true Christians, and the
higher Powers of these Countries, and indeed is grounded upon the sacred
Scriptures, That the Magistrates do not bear the Sword in vain; but for the
suppressing and punishing of the bad, and for the defense of the good; for the
good of their Subjects; and consequently, not only against private offenders,
who have damaged and wronged this and that particular person, but also against
general and Public offenders, who labor to disturb and overthrow the state
of the Land, and the Publickeweale: But the Question is this, Whether or no we
may cease making war; or (to be plainer) Whether we may for a time, or for
certain years, shut up and stop our proceedings in war.

This Question being thus propounded in general in the Thesis or Position, it
unfolds it self: For who dares doubt but we may cease warring with mutual
agreement, when the contrary party either requires, or is willing to do the
same? Therefore the Question propounded in the Thesis is without difficulty,
except it be among such as either are blood-thirsty, or reuengefull, or intend
either to enrich or advance themselves by the booty and prey; such I mean, as
would not deal in this matter according to conscience, but their own beastly
and fleshly lusts.

Here lies the point in the Hypothesis, or conditional Proposition: that is,
when this Question is applied to our common Enemy, and his state and condition;
whether then it may consist with safety of Conscience to contract a Truce with
the King of Sptine.

And here two things offer themselves to be considered:

First, the Condition of the King of Spain.

Secondly, our state and present condition, and occasions.

For the first, it is certain, and beyond doubt, that the King of Spain, our
enemy, does not now enter into Treaty with us concerning a Truce, either out
of love to peace, or love to our persons.

This is manifest and evident in the proceedings of all his wars from time to
time, also in his wars continued against us. It does appear that he aims
only to erect his supposed and imagined universal Monarchy, and absolute
Dominion. Remember the wars, whereby he did help the Emperor, for the
suppressing and subduing of those that were united with us in religion and
love, even while he entertained a Truce with us. Consider the wars which he
even now undergoes in Italy against the French King, and other parts of the
world; and will treat with us, not concerning Peace, but a Truce. He esteems
us his Rebels, he hates us as such, wherefore he would never acknowledge us for
free Countries, nor never will as long as the World stands. He only
dissembles, and conceales his malice for a while, against a better and fitter
opportunity. How he has continued in his hatred and malice against us, has
sufficiently been manifested since our Truce with him has been expired. What
moves him then, and induces him to this? Nothing but his love to his own
State, and presupposed and imaginary universal Monarchy. For seeing that it is
impossible for him to attain to that height, through his wars against us,
and that God affords us in our proceedings of War, sufficient means, to
confirm our State, and debilitate his; he labors by his Truce to wrest the
means out of our hands; and so to fortify and confirm his State against
ours, to the end that he may with more ease and profitable success, to the
increase of our loss, recollect himself, and make his war the stronger.

If any one oppose thus; How-euer things are, yet in the time of Truce we
shall possess and enjoy rest and tranquillity, without War and combustion;
then ought this to be considered of;

Whether or no this can undoubtedly be affirmed. For if we can be assured of
rest and peace, what need so many Soldiers be kept in service, laid in
Garrison upon all the Frontiers? Why do we not save these Charges, and
decrease our cost? Hence appears then, that we cannot be secure, and
certain of the fidelity of our Enemy, or of any rest and peace, even in time
of the Truce.

This must needs be so; for we deal with an Enemy, who neither stands to his
word nor promise, although confirmed with his own hand, seal, and Oath.

Those Maxims of your Popish Counsels, that no faith is to be kept with
Heretics, is known throughout the whole World, and the practice of the same
is made manifest in all Countries. These Netherlands have by woeful experience
tried and tasted of Spanish infidelity: do but read those passages that are
past, turn over our Histories, and they will abundantly testify the same.

Shall we say that the Spaniard is by former experience better taught, and is
now of another mind and condition? Who shall assure us of this? It cannot so
soon be said, but may as soon be denied. And the Negative is more probable
then the Affirmative. For this you must grant, that he is still bound in
conscience to the Pope of Rome; and you know that he ascribes to himself this
authority, that he can and will free the consciences of men, from their
obligation by Oath, that he can discharge Subjects from their Oath of
Allegiance, made to their Prince and Superiors; that he has power to stir
up and incense Subjects against their Kings and Magistrates, to depose Kings,
etc.

When now the Pope shall see this to further and prove beneficial to the
Church of Rome, will he not far rather have the power to free the King of
Spain from his promise made either by subscription or Oath, to such which he
holds for Heretics and rebellious Subjects?

Nay, will he not rather ordain that for the good and benefit of the Church of
Rome, the King of Spain do unawares and suddenly intercept, and fall avpon
them. Shall we say, this can be prevented, by entertaining and keeping our
Weapons, guarding our frontiers, and being vigilant that they do not suddenly
fall on us, and so keep him from his enterprise, and be out of danger? What
then will the Truce signify? which we shall be feign to entertain in lieu of
a defensive war? and in the mean while barring our selves from all
opportunity of aduantaging our selves against our enemy?

Concerning the second point, namely our state and present occasion: The Lords
the States of these Countries do profess to maintain the true reformed
Christian Religion; Thus they declare in their ordaining of their Fasts, they
show in their Demonstrations to Kings, Princes, and States, they publish the
same in their Proclamations and Ordinances, and they do well; so that one of
the chiefest Maxims of our State, is the managing of the true Christian
Religion. Now let us examine whether the Truce is intended to that end; it is
certain that the Spaniard does hate us for nothing more, and for no other
cause but this Religion; he also uses the same for a pretense to justify his
wars against us, and to declare and show that we have forfeited our
Privileges.

He perceiues now, that he cannot attain unto all this by open War, he
therefore labors to bring it to pass by the Truce. And in very deed he can
(...) no better means: For he knows how many ^^ctaries here are amongst us,
all enemies to the same Religion, how many inhabitants in these countries yet
clean and adhere to Popery* how the Priests and Jesuits swarm here, aiming
and endeavoring to incense the hearts of the Subjects against our State and
Religion: nay more, even to seduce and envelop the very hearts of the
Magistrates and Governors. Consider again, that two sorts of people chiefly
do bend and oppose themselves against our State and Religion; the Papists, and
Remonstrants; the Papists pleading and holding, that the Sat of these
Countries is an usurped State, and that the King of Spain is lawful Heir of
these Countries. The Remonstrants, because their design and purpose is
dismissed, and their Faction repressed, even out of a bitter hatred and malice
against the Religion and government of these Countries, expressing themselves
most vilely and violently, yea many times uttering these and the like speeches,
That they do acknowledge the King of Spain to be the natural Lord of these
Countries. Now he knows how the other Sectaries do uphold and animate these
two sorts of people, and that consequently the true Religion has as many
internal as external enemies. And that these youths are now compelled to be
still, or at least cannot so well and co^uenie^tly lift up their heads in time
of war as they would do in time of truce. Experience has sufficiently taught
in the former Truce, how they did endeavor and strive to suppress the
Religion amongst us, what power and subtilty thereunto has been used, how
those factious people and enemies of true Religion, did all at once eleuate and
bestirre themselves, to work out their malice and hatred against the Religion.
And had not the Lord himself wonderfully provided for us, in what woeful
estate had we found our selves? Hence it comes to pass that those that were
united unto us in the same Religion, were in the former Truce thus miserably
and earnestly persecuted in Germany, and woefully subdued. This is an undoubted
truth, if our Religion be lost, our Countries are lost: now, how near it was
come to this point with our Religion, in the former Truce, cannot but be
palpable, to him who is either of understanding or judgment.

Who doubts, but this proffer of Truce tends to the same scope? Now that the
Spaniard hates the Religion, and therefore imployes all means, and directs all
his actions to extirpate the same, is without and beyond dispute. That all
Sectaries within these Countries hate Religion, and do but wait for an
opportunity to expel the same, needs no proof. The Spaniard he propounds a
Truce, all the Papists amongst us, all Sectaries, Remonstrants,
Bastad-Lutherians, Anabaptists, people without any religion, and such we call
Libertines, commend it, call for it, are ready to embrace it. Now consider
whether this Truce can possibly serve for the managing, maintenance and defense
of the forenamed true Religion. The Spaniard expects and hopes that the
Sectaries will lift up their heads, and take an opportunity to suppress this
Region. The Sectaries they long and desire to obtain such an opportunity:
especially that known and noted Faction, who do travel, as it were, in
labor, with a bitter hatred, till they can by such an opportunity revenge
themselves. This it is that causes all faithful Patriots, and true lovers of
the forenamed Religion, to be sensible of the danger, and to apprehe^d of
this Truce so grievously.

Now let it be duly pondered in the fear of GOD, whether it may consist with
a safe conscience, to endanger the Countries, to be deceived, and suddenly and
unexpectedly to be surprised of our enemy; to give into the hands of our
enemies, those means which they themselves deem and judge to serve for the
restoration of their State, and weakening of ours. To yield an opportunity to
our external and internal enemies, which they desire and long for, even to
the end they may suppress the true Religion: To forsake and abandon those that
are united with us in the true Religion, in Germany and elsewhere, and cast
off such means as God has yielded unto us for their restitution: To grieve
our Friends, joy and animate our enemies, and all this at such a time, when God
does palpably bless us, does establish our State, and confound our enemies;
and so ungratefully reject Gods mercies and blessings, and trample them under
our feet. These considerations ought we to take to heart, for no reasons with
any ground can prevail against them, unless we could aforehand be assured,
that the Truce is required, with love to the welfare of these Countries, and
that the Spaniard will firmly keep his word: And that by General Council,
with consent and approbation of the Pope, that Decree shall be revoked, That no
faith is to be kept with Heretics; and unless he do resign the power of
dispensing with Oaths. That also the Sectaries shall be quiet and still,
without turbulency, or endeavoring to suppress Religion; and that all
Governors, as well in general as particular, shall unanimously, with all
diligence and integrity, labor and strive to maintain and f^rther the
reformed Religion. For as long as we have not this assurance, the former
considerations remain in full force.

If question be made, what assurance we have against this in time of war, the
answer is at hand. Experience (we know) teaches us, that those Arms, which
through Gods blessing we bear against our enemies, as it is confessed, in time
of Truce we must still bear for farther assurance: and whereas by reason of
war we are as it were united and joined together, so that we shall not, like
unto loose brooms, fall asunder: whence will come to pass, that those that are
enemies to Religion, shall not have opportunity to put in practice their
malicious enterprises.

The principal thing that can here be objected in case of conscience, is,
that war is a cruel beast, and this beast will rest at leastwise in time of
Truce. But in this case consider, how much the more furious and cruel she will
be, after she shall be rouzed out of her sleep, and how this has bin already
experienced by those grand Armies which the Enemy did produce after the last
Truce, as also his power at Sea. This is a lamentable thing, and a matter of
conscience, when so much blood is spilt: But what will it be, when the Enemy,
by reason of the Truce, shall, having recovered his strength, devour us and
our children, according to his tyranous and bloody nature, and cruel
disposition? Shall we then think no humane blood be spilt? And to what end I
pray' tends the Truce, but to this design? When the internal enemies of the
Countries, unto true Religion, shall oppose themselves against the defenders
and professors of true Religion, and then these suppose themselves to have just
cause to defend them, shall within our selves fall together by the ears? Will
not this be a woeful spectacle for us, and pleasing unto them our enemies? Oh
how near was it come to this push by the former Truce? and had prevailed, if
God had not wonderfully provided. Was it not come to the very height of this
spectacle.

But who are those that speak in this wise? are they not Papists, whose
qualities we cannot be unacquainted with? who, as long as the Arms in these
Countries take good success, they make a fair show of being on our side; but
as soon as ever the case does alter, they cannot conceal their villainous
malice. Did it not lately appear, when the enemy was in the Velewe, and when
Amersfort was lost?

Are they not Remonstrants, whose partial minds and intentions do manifest
themselves in all their speeches, writings, and actions? Are they not other
Sectaries, who all alike are linked together, to subvert the true Religion, the
safety and glory of our State? Notwithstanding they make a fair show of Peace,
and sparing of humane blood, it is to spare the Enemy, and favor them, and to
suppress the true Patriots of the Countries. This is Saul's mercy to Agag the
King of the Amalechites, who in the mean while used all diligence to destroy
the upright King David. Achab the King or Israel favored Benhadad the King of
Syria, when he being in the utmost extremity, trusted to this, that the Kings
of Israel were merciful Kings.

Such mercy did the Kings of Israel show unto the Idolatrous Kings, enemies
unto Israel, and notwithstanding they for their parts, cruelly persecuted the
Prophets of the Lord, because they did not speak pleasing to their palates.
This is the quality of all Hypocrites, and enemies of true Religion; they cry
all for mercy, when as we have to do with Idolaters, and enemies of God and
his Church: But when they have to do with the faithful servants of God,
protectors of his true Religion, then they have abandoned and cast off all
mercy. Lay down therefore this sinister mercy, lest that punishment which
was threatened and befell the merciful Kings of Israel, befall you also. Show
your mercy to the Israel of God, who are persecuted by the Idolater and
falseworshippers: Look upon God, and the justice of our Cause: Labor to
further Gods Honor, and to defend the true Religion, to protect our own
Country against our Common sworn Enemy. Do this in holy zeal, in Gods
fear, with a confident boldness and Courage; and the Lord of Hosts be with
you.

Amen.
Remonstrance To be showed and presented, in behalf of the King of Bohemia,
unto the High and Mighty Lords, the Lords the States General of the United
Low-Countrie Provinces.
Concerning this present Treaty of ceasing Arms, or Truce.
High and Mighty Lords:
WHereas it has pleased Almighty GOD to give so good a success unto the wars
of the high and mighty Lords the States of the United Provinces, as well by Sea
as by Land, so that the Enemy finding himself in great extremity, is
constrained to seek after a Truce and ceasing of Arms, thereby to breathe
himself: His Majesty of Bohemia, who also is partaker of this happiness, and
herein does congratulate your Excellencies, cannot but (through and for the
inseparable love, which from old time has bin between His Majesty's House, and
is yet maintained in this State, as also in respect of the common interest)
earnestly entreat and request your Excellencies, that in case they should
find and deem it necessary, profitable, and for the best of their Provinces,
to assent unto a Treaty of Truce: That they would be pleased not to draw a
conclusion, unless the restitution of his Majesty be therein expressly set
down, agreed, and comprehended.

Considering, first, that these united Provinces cannot promise to themselves,
much less expect any security, rest, or peace, as long as Germany, and
especially the Palatinate, do remain under the suppression of the House of
Austria, and Spain: Considering that by how much more the forementioned House
of Austria shall hence-forward chance to eleuate and establish her fortune and
dignity, in the ruin, loss, and destruction of the most Illustrious Houses
and kindred of Germany; and above all, of the Prince Elector Palatine; by so
much the more, means and opportunity will be yielded unto them, for the
joining of the forces together of the whole body of the Empire, and for the
bending of all their power against the State of these Countries, in all
accidental occasions whatsoever, being proffered and presented unto them,
without taking notice of any treaty or agreement. Whereas secondly, to the
contrary, the forementioned house of Austria and Spain, with their adherents,
(who hitherto, by their unjust and ouerchargeable proceedings, have stirred
against them the displeasure and ill will of all the Evangelical Princes of
the Empire) begin now to fear some evil event, and fearful alteration,
disturbance, and subversion in their affairs. which fear is much accrewed,
through the evident and manifest Victories of the high and mighty Lords the
States general of these United Provinces.

Thirdly, this being very evident and apparent, that the malice and hatred that
the House of Austria and Spain do bear to the House of the Prince Elector
Palatine, principally does hence proceed, Because the same House has ever
been well addicted and affectioned, and has ever as much as in her lay,
furthered and favored the welfare, profit and increase of whatsoever did
concern the State of these Low Countries. For which causes, the Emperor
formerly has showed and declared unto the King of Spain, in his Letters,
dated the 14. of October. 1621. (which Letters are now in the hands of his
Majesty of Bohemia, and are truly the very original Letters) that this State
of the United Provinces can never be brought under the obedience and power of
Spain, as long as the House of the Elector Palatine is not wholly extirpated,
and cut off from the Empire.

Fourthly, May it please your Excellencies, the high and mighty States
general, to be mindful, that the Articles of the forbearance, which they
contracted with the King of Great Britain, the 7 of September. 1625. do
comprehend the Palatinate, and whatsoever concerns the same, confirmed with
very powerful and express words and terms against the House of Spain and
her adherents. His Majesty confidently reposing, that your Excellencies would
carefully be mindful of all this, and take into consideration the faithful
Services, which his Majesty's Predecessors, as namely his Father and
Grandfathers, have done unto this State.

Fifthly, this also is to be held for a certain, that if the Palatinate be
wholly excluded in this Treaty of a Truce, which is now propounded and
proffered unto your Excellencies, this would enforce an irreparable loss and
hinderance to the restitution of his Majesty, and consequently to all the
affairs of whole Germany, which have their relation and re^lexe unto the
united Provinces. But above all and in conclusion, herein is not only handled
the particular of his Majesty, but also the repairing, as also the liberty and
main^ of the reformed Churches, which at this day so ^eaui^y groan under the
burden and yoke of (...); and the which do incessantly and (...) entreat the
Lord for the welfare and prosperity of these united Provinces. Insomuch, that
whatsoever your Excellencies shall do in this particular, will serve much for
the magnifying of Gods glory, and (which is the only scope or mark to which
all our actions ought to be directed) to the refreshing and easing of many
oppressed and distressed hearts; and hereby allure Gods blessing upon your
Countries, and gain immortal praise to your Excellencies, and more and more
increase the obliegement of His Majesty and his Successors to your
Excellencies. And your Excellencies may be assured, that His Majesty and His,
being restored to the Inheritance of their Fathers, shall ever be careful to
tender your Excellencies all bounden duty and service of sincere love, and
everlasting acknowledgment, as often as time, means, and opportunity shall be
afforded.

FINIS.

