THE TRIAL OF TRVETH OR A TREATISE WHEREIN is declared who should be Judge
between the Reformed Churches, and the Romish: IN WHICH IS SHOWED, THAT
NEIther Pope, nor Councels, nor Fathers, nor Traditions, nor Succession, nor
consent, nor antiquity of Custom: But the only written word of God, ought
to determine the controversies of religion: wherein also is declared which is
the true Religion, and Catholic Church.

WRITTEN FOR THE PLEASVRE OF THE Popes, Cardinals, Prelates, Abbots, Monks:
and specially the Jesuits, which of late were driven out of Transyluania, by
the States there.

Published in Latin by a certain Hungarian, a favorer of the trueth^ and
translated into English by RICHARD SMITH.



Imprinted at London for Robert Dexter, and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard,
at the sign of the Brazen Serpent. 1591.

VIRO OPTIMO ACINTEGERRIMO, GVILIELMO PERIAM ARMIGERO, TRIBVNALIS, SIVE BANCI,
COMMVNIS, AC COMITIORVMIVDICIALIVM, VVL GO ASSISARVM, IVSTICIARIO REGIO,
RICHARDVS SMITHVS GRATI ANIMI TESTIFICANDI CAVSA, HANCSVAM QVALEMCVMQVE OPELLAM
DICAT CONSECRATQVE.

A TREATISE CONCERNING THE APPOINTING OF A IVDGE OF THE CONTROVERSIES both of
the Popish, and Reformed Religion.
HOw not only odious and disdainful, The entrance.
but also dangerous a matter it is, in these days, to meddle with the
controversies of religion (Gentle Reader) both the cruelty of many mighty
ones, and also the broiles and stirs between man and man, do too too much
declare. For such is the blindenes of men, and so great is their rashness, to
run and rush on to their own destruction, that as there was never any nation
so rude, but would have taken it in evil part to be instructed in religion: So
at this day a man shall find many which have so hardened themselves in that
religion wherein they were borne, which their forefathers have observed, which
they see to make for their dignities and advancement, and which they perceive
to be mainteyned by the greater part of men: that they will not endure once to
hear the judgment and doctrine of the contrary side, but contrary to all
law, both of God and man, do condemn shun, and abhore it, being neither
heard, nor understood by them.

Moreover, certain Epicures and graceles men also, do not a little trouble the
godly, which grow to such outrage, that they think they deserve great
commendation, if they can conceal and hide their own judgment, in the matter
of salvation, and scoff and frumpe at all religion of other men.

Hereunto is added the presumption of the Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, and other
Prelates, who although they see that many corruptions, both of doctrine, and
also of ceremonies and discipline, are crept in, yet they accounte it an
heinous offense, if any man, not content with their general and confused
faith, dares to examine the doctrine of men by the rule of the Prophets and
Apostles writings, and by searching the Scriptures, to seek out the way of
salvation in them.

Which things although they thus stand, yet ought all the godly to be
strengthened in mind, and encouraged against so many offenses, to yield a
reason of their belief, to the end that both the wicked may be made
inexcusable before Gods judgment seat, and that those, which not so much upon
froward malice, as by reason of their first trayning up, or following of their
forfathers, or finally through love of preferments, have condemned sincere
doctrine, that such (I say) may not stick to let themselves be overcome with
the mighty word of God. For Ezechias, (a most religious prince) is commended,
because neither by the example of his father Achas, professing a contrary
religion, neither by that bringing up which he had from his cradle, nor by the
highness of his Royal state, nor finally, by the president of other kings, and
multitude of men following an other contrary religion, he could be withdrawn
and discouraged from learning himself the sincere religion, out of the
wel-springs of Israel: that is to say, out of the word of God, contained in the
writings of the Prophets: or from enioyning his Subjects to observe and
practice the same, when he had learned it himself, and caused it to be purged
from all corruptions. For he had learned the commandment of the Lord, wherein
he gives in charge, that all the faithful be bound not to walk in the
commandementes of their fathers, nor to do their judgments, but to walk in
the precepts of the Lord only, and to keep and do his judgments. Neither
ought the credit either of traditions, or of Councels, or Fathers, or
miracles, or succession, no nor of an Angel from heaven, to withdraw any man
from this searching, and perusing of the word of God: for it was no less
wisely then rightly said, More credit is to be given to one skilful in the
Scriptures, and alleging the catholic Panormitane, and Gerson.
authority of the Canonical Scripture, then either to the exposition of the
Pope, or to a general Council. By all this therefore it is manifest, how, not
only hard, but also dangerous a thing it is, to deal in the matter of
religion.

Which charge if I had taken upon me, being not forced with any necessity to
speak, but moved thereunto either with vainglory, or foolish rashness:
doubtless I could not avoid just reproof. But now since I have stepped forth
to speak, not voluntarily, but by constraint, addressed thereunto not with
ambition, but with love of the truth, not unadvisedly, but upon good
deliberation, not with slanders, and cauilles, but with authority of the word
of God: Truly I nothing fear, that this my honest meaning to maintain the
truth, should be imputed to me as a fault, Only this I request you (gentle
Readers) whosoever are desirous of eternal life, that you bring not hither any
prejudice, or forestalled opinion, that you condemn not a cause unheard,
contrary to all law, both of God and man, and that you lean not to any
authority or excellency of men: but compare matter with matter, reason with
reason, argument with argument, by the rule of the word of God: neither do
you consider the person that speaks, but the matter that is spoken, with a
godly desire to learn out the truth. And then I will not stick to abide the
courteous censures of the good, that if it be proved, that these things are
agreeable to the truth of God, ye may yield unto the Lord: if not, ye may
refuse them, as things contrary to the heavenly oracles or testimonies of the
word. But that I may not seem to roue from the matter: I will prescribe
certain bounds, which neither I, in speaking, nor you in reading, may
ouer-passe. But before this be done, I will first set down the whole state of
the matter. Hearken ye kings and Princes, and all ye inhabitants of the world.
There is a great controversy in hand: For almighty God, the most gracious
father of all the faithful, has promised to all men that believe, as to his
children, beloved in his only begotten son, he has promised to them, I say,
the kingdom of heaven. This promise of a heavenly inheritance has he
enrolled in the public records of the old and new testament, and committed
it to his heirs, being sealed with the seal of the Sacraments.

Now he has annexed to these letters of his will, certain conditions, as a
father: to the performance whereof, his heirs should be bound. Now the
children falling at variance, are divided (to omit the rest) into two sides,
extremely disagreeing among themselves. The one acknowledges the Pope for
their head, and as it were, the Executor of the will maker, God: the other
acknowledges it not. They strive for the possession of the kingdom of heaven,
and for the right of the true church, which each side chalengeth as their due.
The Plaintiff in this case is the Bishop of Rome, with all those which take
part with the Sea of Rome. The Defendantes are those which receive not the
Bishop of Rome, but profess themselves Gospellers, and men of the reformed
religion.

Both of them bring their allegations, their writings, sealed with the kings
seal, and also their witnesses: but both sides keep great stir for the
assigning of a Judge. For both desire that he should be appointed Judge, whom
they hope would be more favorable to their cause. The Romish See would stand
to the judgment of the Popes, The pleading and exception of both sides, for
the assignning of a Judge.
traditions, councels, fathers, and miracles, and says that yet nevertheless,
she does not shut out the word of God.

The Gospellers on the other side refuse these Judges: for they allege that
the Pope cannot have the place both of a party, and a Judge too, especially
since he is charged with so many crimes. Traditions they reject as suspected
Judges, and not of sufficient credit. And as for Councels, Fathers, Miracles,
and succession of persons, they say that they admit them not as Judges, but
as sworn witnesses: wherein notwithstanding, they protest, that they will so
far forth only receive the authority of these witnesses, as their evidence
shall agree with the public deed.

The Sea of Rome accuses the Gospellers, (for let me with good leave of both
sides, use these terms that are now made common) that they have revolted from
the true church, invented a new doctrine, and new ceremonies, and have but a
few years since, picked this quarrel with her, and that therefore the
kingdom, and claim of heaven does belong, not to them, but to her, by the
law of God.

The Gospellers reply that they have departed, not from the true Church, but
from the Sinagogue of the malignant, and that they have not coined a new
doctrine, or new ceremonies, but that they hold that Religion, by the which
the faithful, ever since the beginning of the world, have been saved.

That they were in deed of later years oppressed by their tyranny, as Abell
was by Cain, Isaak by Ismaell, and Jacob by Esau: so that they were compelled
to hide themselves, but that now they have (like the Moon) recovered their
light, and that they will by law recover their birthright

In this Court of sons going to law one with another, there is great
concourse and throng of people, a great hurly burly and stir arises, they
grow from words to blows, to murders, to burnings, to wars, to bloodshed,
and in a word, to all kind of torments. Sometimes this side seems to have
the better hand, sometimes that, and the more that the Gospellers are
suppressed, tormented and burned, the more do they boast that they grow,
increase, prevail and triumph. In the mean season they protest, that the
matter ought to be tried, not by violence, but by course of law. They appeal
to God himself, besides who^ (they say) that they admit none for chief and
judge. That the Will maker himself may determine this controversy by his holy
word. And that this may be the better done, they appeal to a General
Council, wherein it may be lawful freely to read and scanne the deed of
the will, and therehence to find out the mind of the Will maker. The Sea of
Rome on the other side, pleads that she has not a few times assembled
General Councels, wherein the writings have been examined, and found to have
given judgment on her side, for the title of the true Church. The Gospellers
deny that those Councels were general, and free, because the Papists would
not permit them freely to give an account of their faith, neither would hear
their defense, but contrary to all law, either of God or man, were themselves
both parties and Judges, and con(...) their brethrens cause before they heard
it, or understood it: and therefore they protest that they have not been cast
in their suite, but will so long be heirs of the possession bequeathed unto
them, while they perform the covenants contained in the public deed of the
will, according to the appointment of the will-maker. And in the mean space
they say, that they are ready to wait for the righteous Judge, even the Lord
Christ, who shall come to judge both the quick and the dead: and to end these
long contentions in such sort, that he will render to those ye shall overcome,
the reward of eternal life, but to those ye shall be overcome, everlasting
condemnation.

Thus far only have both sides proceeded in judgment. The matter lying in
question.
Now then the question is, to which party the inheritance of everlasting life,
and the name of the true church is to be adjudged. Surely, the judgment here
of peremptorily belongs only unto Christ, which he will do in that last
judgment and court, whereunto a thousand, five hundred, four score and eleven
years since, he has summoned all the world, and which doubtless shall be held
before it be long. But take heed O ye Kings and Princes, and inhabitants of
the whole earth, that in the mean time ye take part with the better cause,
least if you be careless to decide this controversy, Christ hereafter do
mightilye judge you in the last judgment. And that this may be done by due
form of law, go to I pray you, show your selves indifferent Judges, and
condemn not a cause being not heard, but if you have heard the cause of the Sea of Rome with the right ear, (as was meet) do you likewise hear the
doctrine of the Gospellers with the lest, least ye be found far unlike ye
great Alexander, Alexander.
who heard yt speech of the accuser with the right ear, but kept the left ear
stopped for the defense of the accused.

First therefore I will rehearce the judgment of both parties, out of the
writings of them both, word for word: The setting down and division of this
Treatise.
neither (trust me) will I add or diminish any thing, which is not to be found
in the same form of words, in the books of both sides. Next I will show the
reasons wherefore the Gospellers do refuse to admit for Judges, the popes
themselves, the Councels, fathers, traditions, and other such like witnesses,
but would have all the controversies of the Church to be discussed by the
written word of God. And then, if you shall understand these things with
conscience, and without partiality, I will not be against it, but that you may
embrace and follow that which is better of these two. As for the first point
then of our discourse, the contro^ersies of each side, concerning the chief
articles of ^aith, The judgment of the Gospellers, and of the Catholics,
concerning the chief points of faith. Ioh. 5. 10. 20. 1. Tim. 3. Aug. tract.
49. cap. 2. in Johan, P. a Sot. in Sch. descrip. Pig. de Ec. Hier. l. 1. cap.
14. Cens. Col. page 19.
do stand thus.

1. Of the Scripture.
The reformed Church professes that there is nothing necessary to salvation,
which is not contained in the canonical Scriptures.

But the Church of Rome says, that the scripture is maimed, uncertain, like
to a nose of war, to a leaden rule: that without the authority of the Church
it has no more strength then Aesops fables, that it is the cause of heresies
applyable to time, and that therefore the common people are to be restrained
from it.

2. Of Traditions.
The reformed Church believes, that neither a council, Col. 2 Esai. 1.
Chrisost. hom. 49. in Mat. Aug. lib. 3. de. Trin.
nor any of the Fathers, no, nor a company of Angels, must be credited, if they
teach any thing contrary to the written doctrine of Christ.

The Church of Rome professes, that Traditions not Trid. ^ons. sec. 4. decr.
1. Lind. li. 1. c. 4. hom. de verb. S^t. in co^f. cathol. Ecc. page 138.
written, are to be received with the same reverence that the holy scriptures
be, as the ground of faith, without the which the authority of the scriptures
would vanishe into smoke, and were not worth a straw.

3. Of the Law.
The reformed Church affirms, that men cannot perform the law of God, but by
the imputation of the righteousness 1. John. 1. Aug. lib. 2. cont. Jul. and Hom.
41. in Johan.
of Christ, and that all things are sins, which are committed against the
said Law.

But the Church of Rome teaches, that the law may be so fulfilled, that men
may also do superfluous and undue Lind. lib. 3. e. 19. And^. li. 5. R^ar.
Tapart. 2.
works, and that all which is against this law, is not sin, as concupiscence.

4. Of Sin.
The reformed Church believes, that both the want of (...). (...). 3. Romans
(...). Aug. l. 2. con. ^^l. and ^om. 41 in (...).
original righteousness, and concupiscence, and whatsoever is contrary to the
law of God, is sin, and makes men guilty of the wrath of God.

The church of Rome says, that concupiscence and original Col. cens. pa. 46.
Ru. Tap. de pec. orig. con Bass. sess. 36.
sin, is not properly sin, neither deserves the hatred of God, or any
smarting punishment and penance.

5 Of free will.
The reformed church believes, that men have no free 1. Co^. 2. Romans 8. Ioh.
3. Ephesians. 2. Aug. de spirit^ and lit. cap. 30.
will left them in those things which belong to obtain salvation, except God
by his holy spirit do again stir, and quicken it.

The church of Rome says, that a man may by the pure Con. trid. ses. 6. cap.
1. Gab. By. 3. sent. did. 37. Aul. li. 3. pa. 92
powers of nature, love God above all, and that also being in mortal sin,
he may by proportion deserve to have grace powered into him.

6 Of Justification.
The reformed Church believes, that the elect are iusti^^ed Romans 3. 4. 5.
(...). 3 Act 10. Aug. de trin. ser. 114. Ber s^pr. can. ser. 61.
by faith only in Christ, without the works of the law, yet so, that that
faith be not naked and dead, but lively and effectual by the works of
charity.

The church of Rome denies that men are justified by Con. trid. ses. 6. c. 2.
And. l. (...). p 447 So^. in Sch. de purg. Cens. col. page 156.
grace alone, and by the imputation of Christ's righteousness, but that there is
required thereunto, as a necessary means to obtain salvation, the keeping of
the law.

7 Of the Mediator Jesus Christ.
The reformed church believes that there is one mediator Ioh 3. 1. Tim. 1. 1.
Io. 2. Mat. 20.
between God and man, even Jesus Christ, God and Isa. 53. 1. Tim. 2. Aug. li.
10. co^fes. c. 42. in Io. ho. 84. Amb. de Is. and Iac. Hort. any. cap. art 6.
de sali. pa. 239. Lom. li. 4. did. 45. Ron. did. 45. art. 2
man, who by his death blotteth out the sins of the faithful, and by his
resurrection purchases for them everlasting life.

The Church of Rome affirms, that Christ died only for original sin, and
that Christ alone is not the mediator, but other he-saints, and she-saints also.

8 Of the sacrifice of Christ.
The reformed Church believes, that the faithful ar^ reconciled to GOD the
Father, by the only Sacrifice of Heb. 10. (...). Io. 2. Heb. 9. Isa. 53. and
63. 43. ro^. 3. act. 4
Christ.

The Church of Rome says, that the death of Christ, is Con. Trid. ses. 6. c 2.
cat. romans pa. 11. Gab, By. did. 12. Lind. l. (...). p. 375.
not the alone propitiatory Sacrifice, but the mass also is one, which
blotteth out the sins, and takes away the punishments both of quick and
dead, and is profitable to procure all spiritual and temporal blessings.

9 Of Penance, and repentance.
The reformed Church believes, that such repentance is Ephesians. 4. Romans (...).
Io. 1. Psalm. 19. Esaias 53. Psalm. 5.
accepted of God, wherein there is the mortifying of the old man, and the
quickening of the new man, proceeding from a lively faith.

The church of Rome teaches, that for the obteining of salvation, there is
such a repentance or penance requisite, ^om. li. 4. did. 16. ^at. to. pa. 442.
comp. th^^l. 6. cap. 24. co^. trid. ses. 4. And. (...). 19. (...). 28.
wherein there is a sufficient contrition of heart, confession of mouth, and
satisfaction of work, by the which, salvation may be gotten.

10 Of the Church.
The Gospellers say, that there is the true church where the word is purely
taught, the sacraments rightly administered, Ioh. 10. Ephesians. 2. 1. Cor. 3. Mar.
28
and obedience yielded to the outward Discipline.

The Romanists teach, that the certain marks of the Sot. def. cat. de ^ccle.
page 291. ius Can. di. 4. Trid. con. ses. 5. cap. 2.
Church, are: First, agreement in public doctrine, and outward service:
secondly, the personal succession of Bishops: Thirdly, the acknowledging of
the Pope.

11 Of Councels.
The reformed Church denies, that she is bound unto Mat. 18. Gal. 1. (...)
Luke 11. 1. Cor. 2. Psalm. 116. 12. 6
Counsels, but unto the written word of God, from which, if Counsels and
Fathers do swerve, they may be deceived.

But the Church of Rome tieth her self to general counsels, Tap. art. (...).
p. (...). So^ ass. cat. de consil. (...)
as to those which can never err.

12. Of the Sacraments.
The ref^^med Church acknowledges but two Sacraments, Mat. 28. Mar. 16 1. Cor.
11. Aug. ^p. 218. ad ianuar. lib. 3. de doct. chri. cap. 9. Trid. confess. 7.
cap 1. ses. 7. cap. 8. Lind. li. 4. cap. 57.
ordained by Christ: namely Baptism, and the Lords Supper.

But the Church of Rome teaches, that there are seven Sacraments, which
minister salvation by the bare performance of the outward action, without any
good affection in the receiver, and also patcheth unto them, Ceremonies
unknown to the scriptures.

13 Of Martyrdom.
The reformed church teaches, that the afflictions of the Romans 8. Psalm, 111 1.
Tim. 2.
Godly, are either corrections for certain sins, or troubles of trial, or
testimonies for confirmation of the truth.

But the Church of Rome teaches, that the martirdoms Lind. li. (...). cap. 73.
con. trid. ses. 4. cap 9. Th. Aqui. li. 4. did. (...). art. 3. soc. ass. cat.
de e^ch.
of the Saints, are a sacrifice for sin, and that they deserve an easing of
eternal pains, and life everlasting.

14 Of the Magistrates.
The reformed Church techeth, that the civil magistrate ought to procure, not
only outward benefits, but also the Psalm. 32. Romans 18
salvation of his Subjects by true religion.

But the church of Rome teaches, that Civil Magistrates are to be with held
from the care of religion, as Lay Sot. in Cath. Sch. idem in ass^r. Cath.
men, and that they are underlings to the Pope, and Prelates.

15. Of Marriage.
The reformed Church teaches, that marriage is honorable Heb. 12. 1. Cor. 7
1. Tim. 4. Chrisost. hom. 1. in Titum.
amongst all men, the forbidding whereof is a doctrine of devils.

But the church of Rome teaches, that married persons Ius. Can. did. 28. Pig.
Cat. Romans page 552.
live in the flesh, and that marriage is not lawful for Ministers, but that it
is more to be borne with, if that a Priest (as they speak) keep whores, then
for to enter into lawful marriage.

16. Of men's constitutions.
The reformed Church denies, that confirmation, extreme unction, and such
other constitutions of men, are agreeable Col. 2. Mat. 11. 1. Io. 1. Ephesians. 2
Gal. 3. Mat. 15.
to the word of God.

The Church of Rome says, that more grace is conveyed Con. Trid. ses. 7. can.
1. cat. Romans pa. 319. 499. Con. Trid ses. 4. can. 1 174. Great. ca. 1. did. 5.
to the faithful by confirmation, then by baptism, and that extreme unction
does minister spiritual grace.

17. Of vows.
The reformed religion affirms, that a man is justified John 1. Heb. 10.
by no other means but by faith in Christ.

The Romish religion says, that the vows of chastity, poverty, and
obedience, do deserve everlasting life. Sot. ass. Cath. And. pa. 11. Extrauag.
Aqui, li. 44. 4 3. Col. 2. Galat. 5.


18. Of holy days.
The reformed church teaches, that she is not bound to holy days, and is
satisfied with those days that God has 1. Cor. 7.
appointed.

The church of Rome teaches, that the keeping of holy Lind. l. 3. c. 27. Con.
Trid. ses. 3. con. 6. In B^l. cap. may. 1548. edita.
days, (even without the case of offense) may not be omitted without sin,
and that many holy days are to be celebrated for the praying unto, and
worshipping of Saints.

19. Of holy water.
The Gospellers believe that their sins are wiped away Romans 3. Act. 4. 6.
only with the blood of the Messiah.

The Romanistes believe, that there is not only a divine And. li. 3. page 326.
324.
force in their holy water, but also that it works health, briueth out
devils, and preserves all things.

20. Of prayer.
The reformed Church believes, that God the father Ex. 20. Mat. 4. Acts 14.
Apo. 22 1. John 4.
with the son, and the holy Ghost, is alone to be called upon in spirit and
truth.

The church of Rome says, that all angels and Saints Ecchius in Ench Lom. li.
4. did. 46. Con. Trid. ses. 6. cap. 3. Lind. li. 3. cap. 32. Bon. did. 459. 3.
are to be prayed unto, and assigns them several offices, that Saint Leonard
should deliver captives, Saint Valentine should give health, that Rome should
have Peter and Paul, Hungary Saint Marie, Compostella Saint James, for their
patrones and protectors.

21. Of relics and images.
God commands that none should be worshipped, and Deuteronomy. 4.
called upon, but himself.

The Pope commands the worshipping of the relics Con. Trid. ses. 4. 1.
Tim. 4. Col. 4. Romans 14. Mat. 15
and pictures of Saints.

22. Of fasting.
The reformed church says, that the forbidding of meats used upon certain
days, is a doctrine of Devils.

The church of Rome teaches, that fasting is a work that makes satisfaction
for sins, whereby the merit of Sot. ass^r. Cath. de^eiun.
Christ is applied unto men.

23. Of pardons.
The reformed church believes, that the blood of Christ 1. Jo. 2.
alone, is a propitiation for our sins.

The church of Rome teaches, that men by the Popes Tetzel. prop. 11. 46. 64.
62. extrauag. leg. tit. 9. ^l^m. 6.
pardons may obtain, not only for geuenes of temporal and eternal
punishments, but also salvation.

24. Of the Popes supremacy.
The reformed church acknowledges but one head, Epbes. 4. Col. 1.
namely, Jesus Christ crucified, and now reigning in glory.

But the church of Rome acknowledges Christ for the invisible head, and the
Pope for the visible: who also excels Cont. Flor. Io. de tur. crem. l. 3. c.
64. F^l. l. 1. cent. Ro^.
the Emperors, as far as the sun does the moon, or gold lead: who is
greater then Moises, and Paul, equal to Peter, who is a God, and not a man:
who may dispense against the four first Councels, and against the words of the
Gospel, etc.

25. Of Spiritual assurance.
The reformed church believes, that the faithful should not doubt of their
salvation. Psalm. 26. Mar. 9. Romans 8.


The church of Rome says, that they must alwais dout. Ant. Page 4. tit. 6.
cap. 267.


26. Of Antichrist.
The reformed church believes that Antichrist is come 1. Io. 2. Mat. 24. Dan.
12. Apo. 17. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
already, and is he that denies that Christ is come in the flesh, or he that
judges erroniouslie of the nature and office of the Messiah, whose seat is in
the City situated upon seven hills.

The church of Rome looks for Antichrist out of Babylon, Comp. The. lib. 7.
cap. 8. and 14.
of the tribe of Dan, who shall reign three years, and shall be killed in the
mount O liuet.

27, Of Purgatory.
The Gospellers believe, they shall pass presently, from Ioh. 5. Apoc. 14.
death, to life everlasting.

The Romanists teach that there is a fire of Purgatory, so that there are five
distinct rooms for souls, to wit, hell Cat. Romans pa. 127 comp. The. lib. 7.
ca. 3. Ingel. Stad. Propes.
for the damned: the second place for children dying unbaptized: the third
Purgatory: the fourth Limbus patrum: and the fifth, the chiefest heaven.

This is the doctrine of both parties, the deciding of which controversy the Sea of Rome would submit to Popes, counsels, fathers, the Church, and
traditions. But the Gospellers refuse these judges, and allege their reasons
why they reject each of them, the which that you would patiently hears, I
entreat and beseech you, as you will be saved (good Readers) whosoever of you,
in this private and domestical war of disagreeing brethren, are desirous to
take part with the better cause. And as for the first forte The Popes can not
be judges of religion, for eight reasons.
of Judges: The defendants say, that they cannot admit the Popes for judges
of this controversy for most weighty causes, for they say that they have
been not only long since accused, but also proved guilty by the greatest part
of Christendom, namely, England, Scotland, Denmark, Swethlande, the greater
part of Germany, Heluetia, France Transiluania, yea and of those Churches
and countries also which in Africa, Egypt, Syria, Greece, the East, and other
coasts of the world do reckon themselves amongst the Christian Churches, they
have, I say, by all these, been convicted of eight most heinous crimes, that is
to say, of impiety, or profane irreligiousnes, of usurped Tyranny, of
corrupting Religion, of Sacri^edge, or Church-pillage, of vnreuerent and vile
abusing of Princely Majesty, of Rebellion and conspiracy, of
Antichristianitie: and of eight notorious and abominable vices in manners.

As for the Impiety or prophanenes of the Popes, they 1. Proof of the
impiety of Popes.
say that they will prove it by three reasons. First in that they plainly
arrogate, and challenge unto themselves a Did. 96. (...). satis. ca quonia^.
de, imminut. 6. Did. 30. 4. c. si. Papam. Phi. Dex. co^s. ^37. No 3. vol. 1.
Jason. cons. 145. No. 2. vol. 1. Bal. lib. ult. c. sen. F^l. ca. ^go. No. de
Iure.
certain Deity or Godhead. For there are express writings of theirs, wherein
it is affirmed, that they are Gods, that they are subject to no man, that they
are the husbands of the Church, that they can dispense against the Apostles,
and their rules, that they may be against, above, and without law, that they
are invisible Gods: and finally that none ought to demand why they do so,
although they daily hurl, and draw whole heaps of souls to hell.

Secondly they prove the impiety of Popes by this, that 2. proof of impiety.
Benon Caridinalis.
they have often times made a mock even of their own Religion. For Gregory
the seventh brought one to this resolution by promising him money, that by
letting down a beam upon the head of the Emperor Henry the third, while he
was praying in the Church, he should crush him to pieces. Which while the
executioner of this mischief made have to do, the board breaking under the
beams, both the stone, and the Popes man fell down. The same Pope Hildebrand
asking council at the Devils against the Emperor, was not afraid to cast the
Sacrament of the Lords body into ye fire: the Cardinals speaking against it:
which thing the Bishop of Parme did openly publish. Raphael. volatterranus.
Siluester the second obtained the Popedom by the magical arts of the
Devils: upon this condition, that after his death he would give him self wholly
to them. Sixtus the fourth caused Bandinus Iulianus to be murdered by
treacherous persons in the Church giving them a watchword Io. Mont. li de
Relig. pa. 101.
by the host. For, that the Popes set nothing by their host, is evident by
this, that they cause it to be borne before them as a messenger of their
coming, being put upon a hackenay, and committed to a horse-grome.

Thirdly they say, that the impiety of the Popes is declared by this also,
that they have set up above three score and five Religious orders, each of
which have their several fashions of hooded attires, and their distinct rules
and rites of Religion. The number of ^riers in these orders is thought to
amount to five hundred thousand in Europe only: which may easily be gathered
by this, that the General of the Franciscanes did often times promise the Pope
Sabellius E^^ead. 9. li. 6.
thirty thousand men of war, that might do service in the field, without
any hinderance to their church-seruice.

But amongst other orders, the Franciscans and Domicanes are taken to excel,
whereof the former (beside other fables contained in the book of conformities)
are not ashamed See the book of conformities, fol. 288. col 4. and 231. col. 1.
to call upon their Captain with this verse,

O Frances, Jesus typical, or second Christ, the guide
Of Minorites, who rulest them, that they g^e not aside:
Grant us in heaven evermore, with thee still to abide.
And the later do not stick, not only to compare their Dominick with our
savior Christ, but also to prefer him Anton. in hist. par. 3. tit. 23. and 24.
before him in many points. There be published the legends of the Saints, and
sundry other books, of the lying and counterfette miracles of Stanislaus,
Adelbert, and other men. Which books because the popes have authorized, and
exhibited Anton. tit. 23.. 17. fol. 197.
them to all Christendom, to be embraced with as great reverence as the
Scriptures, hereby they also judge them to be guilty of impiety.

The second cause for which the Gospellers deny that they will acknowledge the
popes for their Judges, they allege to be the sin of tirannie usurped over
the Church. For first he seeks to be entitled the head, husband, and
universal Bishop of the Church, which, it is most certain, agrees to none but
Christ. The first proof, of tyranny vsu^ped. The second proof of tyranny. The
donation of Constantine is proved counterfeit by ten reasons. 1. part. hist.
ti^. 8. cap. 1. l. de con. Cath. 3. In dialogo quodam. See Socrat. The E^ag.
Ruffin Or^s. Bedam. Zozin, hist. par. 2 Vol. li. Geor. 3. Alber. Kran. in Sax.
li. 2. ca. 1. Marcil. in defe. p^c. cap. 1^. Mant. li. 1. de p 1. cap. 30. Eus.
de vit. Con. Ruf. l. 1. c. 11. Socr. l. 1. ca. 39. Vincen. l 24. hist. The
exposition of Christ's words. Barnard. l. 2. de Cons. Ni^. l. 8. c. 4 Aug. in
Io. tract. 10. and 124 and de ver. Dei ser. 20. Cy^il in di^l. de Trin. l. 4.
^mb in epist ad Ephe. c. 2. Chrisost. ho^ 5^. in Mat. Bar. Epist. 230.


Secondly, in that they have challenged unto themselves dominion over the whole
world, and all civil magistrates: for as for the donation of Constantine,
whereby they co^firm their soueraign authority, besides that Antoninus bishop
of Florence, N. Cusanus, L. Valla, Volateranus, AEneas Siluius, and other
writers more, which in other points were great proctors for the papacy, were
not afraid some late hundred years since, to disprove it, the Gospellers
avouch, that they can also convince it of forgerie, by these reasons: For since
no approved writer makes mention of this donation, since Eusebius and others,
do witness that Constantine did divide the three coasts of the world to his
three sons, since the instruments or deeds of grant set forth by Volateranus,
and in the decretals, do far differ, and their style is much unlike, since it
is ridiculous that Peter and Paul should appear to Constantine in a dream,
and that he should worship the^ for gods, since Constantine never had the
leprosy, neither was he baptized at Rome by Siluester, but at Hicomedia by
^usebius, since it is wicked to say, that the hand of god was seen of
Constantine, since he could not give greater jurisdiction to the pope, then he
had himself, neither could give him authority over the patriarck of
Constantinople, there being then no such city: and finally, since those gifts
which in that evidence are said to be given to the pope by Constantine, are
the badges of Antichrist: By all these several, and those most forcible
demonstrations it is concluded, that ye same donation was not granted by
Constantine, but forged by the popes.

Now in those words which Christ spoke to Peter, and other ministers of the
word, that they should feed his sheep, he appoints to them, not a civil
jurisdiction, but a church-ministerie: for in another place he nippeth, and
beats back the pride and ambition of the apostles, desiring superiority, when
he says; The kings of the natious bear rule, but it shall not be so with you.

Yea and the Canons also have expressly forbidden the Bishop ^^si quis decre. de
petit. Hared. L. 1. c. de furt. L. Titus D. 99.
of Rome to be called The chief Bishop, or the universal head of the church.
Wherefore they say yt they are conquered with their own weapons, since they
claim to the^ selves this dominion by diverse, and those also contrary titles.

The third cause why the Gospellers refuse to stand to The third reas^n of
insu^ficiencie. Di^^. 96. satis euidenter. Can. 9. Quast. 3. Did. 34. Can.
Lec. in Did. 82. Can. Presbyter. Lib. 1 Decret. Greg. tit. 7. Can. 5. Io. 14.
2. Tim 3. Mat. 15. Ier. 7. Ir^n. Epist. 4. Athon in prin. Lib. 2. Co^. Grec.
Con. Trid. ses. 4. c. 1. Li. 1. Cor. Pon. suc. 7. See the complaints of
Maximilia^ of the cup of the Lords Supper Lib. 3. Decret. Greg. tit. 41. Ca^.
sa^. ^u^ Did. 2. de consec. can. presb. When and by whom the Popish ceremonies
were ordained. Of the reservation of the Sacrament. Of the Mass^ in Latin.
the judgments of the popes, they allege to be this, that they have corrupted
Religion, and have most grossly erred not only in mane^s, but also in
doctrine. For there are decrees extant concerning the popes, that they are not
men, but Gods, that they may not be judged by any mortal man, yt they may
dispense against the Apostle, change the nature of things, make some what of
nothing, make righteousness of unrighteousness: But in the mean space how true
these things are, the matter it self does show. For the Lord himself
witnesses yt there is but one form of Religion, namely that which is
recorded in the writings of the Prophets, and Apostles, whereunto nothing may
be added or taken away, no not by an Angel. But the pope teaches that ye
order of the church consists in the traditions of our forefathers, of the
which sort are Agnus Deis, christening of belles, prayers of Saints, single
life of priests (as they call them) the taking away of the cup in the Lords
Supper, the using of a strange tongue, the Mass, pardons and other such
stuff: the which although they affirm to have been conuayed over to them from
the Apostles by tradition: yet that most of them were invented by them selves,
the records of ancient stories do plainly prove. For pope Innocent forbad
the cup in the Lords Supper by the decree of the Counsel of Laterane, and
instituted the Easter-Communion. But Eugenius the fourth decreed the contrary.
Innocentius the third, and Honorius the third, ordained that the Sacramental
bread should be curiously kept in the church for sundry uses: But pope
Clement would not suffer it to be reserved to the next day. Vitellianus the
second, and Agatho the first, appointed the Mass to be said in Latin: Nicolaus
the first suffered the Slauonians and Polonians to have Mass said in their own
tongues. Alexander the second decreed that Mass said by a Of the Mass of such
as kept concubines. Did. 32. praeter hoc, ite^ Nullus. Of the life of
Ministers.
priest that kept a co^cubine should not be heard: But Lucius the third allowed
it. Siricius, Pelagius the second, and diverse others condemned the marriage of
priests: But Pius the second has left in writing to this effect: that it
seemed there was great reason to debar the priests from marriage, but there
was greater reason for the restoring of it again.

Leo the first, Gregory the second, and third, and many others Of Images.
allowed the worshipping of Images: But John the 22. did mortallie hate Images
and Pictures. Boniface the 4. granted the Monckes authority to preach,
baptize, and absolve: Of Monckes. Cause. 16. Quaest. 1. adijcimus.
Gregory took it from them. John the 24. held for sound articles of faith,
that the Apostles never vowed poverty, and single life. Pius the second said
that Friars were the devils bondslaues, in this double verse.

The devil of hell himself dare not that thing to enterprise,
Which shameless Moncke, and beldame old, with craft fraught, will devise
Pelagius ye first ordained that clerks should bestow every day seven hours
in Canonical prayers. Gregory ye first Did. 92. can. in sancto. Of
Canonical hours.
commanded that they should give themselves not to chau^tings, but to
preaching. Calixtus decreed yt it was not lawful to dissent from the church of
Rome: Fabianus affirmed the contrary.

Bonifacius the 8. commanded that the year of Jubilee Of the year of
Jubilee. Can. 11. Quaest. 3. qui omnipotem. Decret. Sym cap 8. Quaest. 4.
should be kept the hundredth year: Clemens the 6. brought it to the fiftith,
Boniface the ninth to the three and thirtith, Sixtus the fourth to the five and
twentieth year. Hadrian and Leo the third granted Charles the right to choose
the Popes: but Stephen the fourth, Hadrian the fourth, and Sergius the second
gave it to the Clergy, Senate and people of Rome: Leo the 8. granted it
again to the Emperor. Of the election of the Pope.
Alexander the 2. gave it to the Cardinals only: And at length Maud the whore
promoted Victor the third, and Whores chose the Popes. Tici^ensis. Lib. 2. cap
13.
Vrbane the 2. to the popedom, as also Theodora the who rish Lady of Rome did
John the eleventh, and Marozia the strumpet, Sergius the third. Antheus decreed
that none should be made Pope, except he had first been Bishop.

Constantinus the second, and Benet the eight, were lay Unlearned and laym^n
Popes
men: Benet the ninth, John the one and twentieth and many others did not so
much as know their letters. Gregory Of auriculat confession. Lib. 5. decret.
tit. 38. can. omnibus vtriusque. Of the elevation of the Sacrament. De consec.
Did. 1 cau. vasa. Did. 95. canubinam. Of the hatred between pope and pope.
Platina de vitis pontificum. The heresies of the popes. Flauius Blo^d. li. 3.
Romans inst. Eu. 6. Breuiarij postulat. Iud. 12. art. 72. Abba^ vrsper. in vit.
Philip. nuper page 321. Theod. Nihem. tract 6. c. 37. Alberic. lib. been a
Zeno. 18. and quad. praes^^pt. Alphon co^t. her. Lib. 11. cap. 4. Hiere. Mar.
Ecc. John Gerson.
the first forbad on fasting days the use of flesh, milk, cheese, butter,
and eggs: But Eleutherius decreed that no man should superstitiouslie refuse
any meats. Innocentius the third enjoined men auricula: confession: But
Nectarius the Patriarch of Constantinople, for adultery committed under color
thereof, did utterly abolish it.

Honorius the third decreed that the Sacrament should be lifted up: Gregory
the ninth that at the time of elevation the bell should ring, Innocentius the
fourth, that men should then kneel down. Zephirus ordained glasses in steed
of wooden vessels: Vrbanus golden and siluercuppes in steed of glasses.
Nicolaus the first barreth Emperors and kings from the Counsels as laymen: But
Marcellus, Damasus the second, and Julius do admit them.

Stephanus the third did solemnly repeal and disanull the Acts of
Constantine the second: so Stephen the sixth abrogated the decrees of Formosus,
Romanus the first the deeds of the said Stephanus: Theodorus the Acts of
Romanus: Damasus the decrees of Liberius: Paulus the second, the constitutions
of Pius the second: Behold the goodly traditions of the Apostles: behold the
Christian Religion kept pure by the Bishop of Rome. And what shall we say to
this, that Honorius was an heretic of the sect of the Monothelites: Liberius
was an Arrian: Marcellinus sacrificed to Idols: Anastasius was a Ph^tinian,
John the two and twentieth held that the souls of the wicked did sleep till
the day of judgment. The fourth cause of refusal, the Gospellers allege to
be The fourth cause of insufficiency.
Sacrilege and Simony: for the which they cannot admit the Popes for Judges:
for it is apparent that for void livings, preuentions, surrenders upon favor,
commendations, dispensations for age, order, regularitie and bodilye blemishes:
for Aduousons, reuersions, benefices when they shall be next void, for discharge
from visitations, for making Apostolical chief Notaries, and Registers, for
the clause non obstantibus, for dispensations with secular Clerks, for
repeales, for tollerations of Concubines, and six hundred other such choppings
and merchandise: it is apparent I say, that by these tricks the Popes do rake
more money yearly to Rome, then while the Romain Empire stood, the Monarcks of
the whole world did exact of all the coasts of the whole earth.

There is to be seen in writing, the complaint of the The complaint of the
French King. The complaint of Princes.
French King, that out of that Kingdom alone, the Popes did yearly fish
forth 28. Tons of Gold. There are also extant the most grievous complaints
of many Emperors, Kings, and Clergy men also, wherein they cry out upon the
Church-pillage of Popes, the truth whereof appears by the example of John
the 22. who after his discease The wonderful treasure of John. 22.
left behind him 200. and 50. Tons of Gold in his private Treasury: as
Frauncis Petrarke, a very sufficient witness surely, testifies. Boniface the 7.
when he saw that he could no longer abide at Rome in safety, he carried away
the cheifest treasures out of Peter's Church to Constantinople by theft.

Clemens the eight, and sundry others, were many times convinced and proved
guilty of the said Sacrilege or church robbing, by their own fauourours.
Gregory the 9. sold the Emperor his absolution, for an hundredth thousand
ounces of Gold. Bennet the 9. mistrusting his state, sold the Popedom to
Gregory the 6. for one thousand and five hundred pounds of Silver. The Symony
of Alexder the 6. is manifest by that Epitaph which is yet common in eyery man's
mouth. Pope Alexander sets to sale, heavens, altars, Christ, for fee:
He bought them first, therefore by right, sell them again may he.


And now moreover, how Leo the 10. by Tetzelius, and Pardons the occasion of
reformation.
others by other Brokers, have sold their pardons throughout the whole world,
is better known the^ they could wish.

The first cause of insufficiency, the Gospellers affirm The first cause of
insufficiency, namely the sin of treason. C. Un. san^. extrauag. de maiorib.
and obed. Ca. 1. extrauata consuit C. solit. extr. dema and ob. Helmold. Chron.
5. Cla. 8. Naucler. Lib. 1. Geu. 79. Barnus in vi^is Pontificum.
to be the crime of despitefull abusing of Princely majesty. For they prove by
most faithful Stories, that the Popes have always used the emperors, not
only as vassails and tenants, but also as most vile and base slaves.

When Pope Hadrian alighted from his horse, and the Emperor Frederick called
Aeneobarbus or Yellow beard standing by his horse side, for honors sake held
his right stirrope, the Pope cha^ing thereat, all to berated him. But the
Emperor being drenched in superstition, excused himself, that he had done it
for want of skill to hold stirrops, since that was the first time that ever he
had that office to hold the stirrope. And when the Popes choler was more
kindled by his excuse. I would know says the Emperor, whether this kind of
service be of courtesy, or of duty, and if it be of courtesy, who will find
fault with negligence in him, that does it of his own accord? if it be not of
duetye, I think it makes small matter on what side a man come, so he come with
devotion.

The next day the Emperor met him again, and having The Emperor the Popes
horseman. Nauclerus. Ger. 39. Barnus de vit. Romans pont. Funceus in Chronol.
learned better manners by the check that he had the day before, holding the
left stirrup of the Saddle, brought him into the Tents. This no doubt is a
great proof of the vile abusing of Princes: but yet the Protestants say that
they will bring a greater. Alexander the successor of that Hadrian, had
excommunicated ye same Frederick, from the which curse when Frederick desired
to be discharged and absolved, the Pope assigned him a day wherein he should
make his appearance in the great Church of Venice, when they were come thither
in ye presence of a great number of Cardinals and Bishops, the Pope denied that
he would absolve him, except first he falling down at his feet would crave
pardon, which when Frederick had done, the Pope lifting up one of his feet, and
putting it upon the Emperors neck, commanded his Priests to sing that verse
out of the Psalm; Thou shall walk upon the Adder and the Serpent, The
wonderful pride of the Pope.
and upon the Lion and Dragon shall thou tread. The Emperor taking this
reproach in very evil part, answered, I do not this to thee, but to Peter:
but the Pope again Platina.
crushing the Emperors neck said, nay, both to me and Peter. Neither is the
story of Phillip the fair, King of The cronicles of Fr^un^e.
France, much unlike hereunto, whom when Boniface the eight had cursed with
bell, book and candle, as a Schismatic, and an heretic: yet the King ceased
not from his enterprise, but when he had by manifest proofs proved him
guilty of horrible villainies, he caused him to be apprehended at Rome and cast
into Prison, who when he had entered as a Fox, and reigned as a Lion, he died as
a Dog. The same Boniface in the year of our Lord one thousand three hundred,
when there was great floking of people out of diverse Countries to Rome, because
of the year of Iubily, the first festival day showed himself to the people
attired in his Bishoplike ornaments: and the next day flaunting The Pope
usurps both Swoords.
it in his Princelike robes, commanded a naked sword to be borne before him,
crying with a loud voice, I am both Pope and Emperor, I have both temporal
and spiritual jurisdiction and dominion. And when as a few Cuspinianus in
vita Alberti.
days after Albert being made Emperor by the Germain electours, required his
confirmation of him: at first he refused it denying that an election made
without his authority Abba^ vrsper gensis in parali^omenis.
ought to be of force, but yet a little while after he agreede to the emperor
upon this condition, that he should with all speed by force set upon the
Kingdom of France.

Innocentius the third did so boil in rancour, against Annals Gallie^.
Phillippe the Emperor, because he had been chosen against his will, that he
often times said, Either the Pope Marius in eusebio. cap.
shall take from Phillipe his crown and Kingdom, or else he, the Apostolical
ornament, and dignity from the pope. Abbas vrsperge^sis.
Clemens the sixth told the Ambassa^^rs, that he wo^ld nener pardon Lewis,
unless he first ^^rrendred his Empire, and yielded both him self, his sons
and all that he had into his hands, and would promise that he would take none
of them again, without the Popes leave and favor. See for these things
Platina. Marius. the Cronicles of France, and of the Empire.


Besides this they further charge them, that where as Constantine the first,
was the first that held soorth his feet for the Emperor to kiss: Martine the
first compelled the Emperor Sigismund: John the two and twentieth Crescentius
the Consul of Rome, and Bennet the third, Emperors excommunicated
the Emperor to do like wise. Neither, do they say, that this is to be
passed over in silence, that Innocentius, the third excommunicated Otho the
fourth, Gregory the seventh did the same to Henry the fourth, Pascalis the
second to Henry the first, Hadrian the fourth, and Alexander the third to
Fridericke the first, Innocentius the third to Phillippe the son of
Fridericke, Gregory the ninth to Fridericke the second three time^,
Innocentius the fourth to Conradus the fourth, and that specially for this
cause, All kings the Popes servants Augstench. lib. 2. dedonat. Constable. page 138.
that they did not in all points satisfy the Popes lusts. And now moreover,
there is no King, no Kingdom, no Prince whom the Romish papacy has no^
challenged to be her vassal, and tenant.

Sixthly the Gospellers accuse the Popes of treachery, The sixte cause of
insufficiency.
and conspiracy, and prove both by most ancient, and also most weighty
Histories, that the Popes in all ages have wholly bent their might to this,
that when they knew The cuning practies of popes.
that there was any debate grown between Princes, they might by certain
breed-bates of theirs, help forwards and increase the quarrel, and might also
bargain with one of the s^des: that if they gotthe kingdom of yt contrary
faction by their furtherance, they should then acknowledge the Sea of Rome for
the author of so great a benefit, and pay her / an yearly rent. This
legeerdemaine being once contrived, presently the Prince of the contrary side,
was proclaimed an Heretic by the Pope, and his kingdom granted to him that
could first invade it.

This matter will be more evident by examples. For although Lewis the twelfth
king of France had given certain Cities to Pope Julius the second, yet not
withstanding Arnobius Ferro.
he not satisfied with the gift, vexed him with the terrible thunderbolts of
excommunications, as a schismaticke and an Heretic, and laid open his
kingdom to the spoil: But when he for sundry kind of abominable vices, which
Guilie^nus Budaeus de Ass. lib. 5.
anon shall be handled, by a counsel called at Pisum, but interrupted by him,
and translated to Lions, was suspended from his Popelike function, he so raged
with fury, that spedily leuying an Army, he hastened into France, and as The
Pope ^lingeth away Peter's keys, and draws out Paul's sword.
he led his hoaste out of the City, by the bridge of Tibris in his harness,
he spoke these words in the hearing of many thousand men, Since Peter's keys
stand us in no stead, go to, let us draw fourth Paul's rustie sword: And
therewithal casting Peter's Keys into the river of Tybris, and drawing his
sword out of his sheath, threatened all cruelty to the French men, with a
mighty hacking and gnashing of his teeth together.

Neither is the example of Phillip the french King, much unlike hereunto, who
when he had recovered no small part of his possessions out of the English men's
hands: Innocentius the third, first sent two ambassadors into France, which
might there raise Rebellion: and afterward so incensed the Emperor Otho the
fourth, and Ferdinand Earl of flaunders, against the Frenchmen, that except
with great stomach and valor they had withstoode the Popes practizes, they
had even then lost their kingdom.

But what need we old examples, when fresh matters are in the mouths of all
men. For in the year one thousand The br^^tish thunderbolt of Six^^s the
fi^th, against Henry king of France, and Navarre.
five hundred, four score and five, Sixtus, the sifte bishop of Rome, sent out
his brutish thunderbolts against Henry Bourbon, king of France and Navarre,
and Henry Bourbon Prince of Condie, and their heirs and successors, whom he
banneth as heretics, and commits their kingdoms to the spoil.

Neither is that matter close, or unknown, which fell out very lately: For the
same Sixtus the fifth, in the year of our Lord one thousand, five hundred,
fourscore and nine, The story of the Spaniards viage into England. 10.
Morellius in lide eccles ab Ab. Antichristo per eius excidiu^ liberand. The
preparation of the Spanish flecte.
did solemnlie give unto Philip king of Spain, the realm of England, having
condemned it for heresy. The Spaniard had furnished such a Fleet, as might
terrify the Emperor of the Turks himself, and the savage Princes of Africa.
For they had (besides vessels of carriage) one hundred and thirty ships,
whereof threescore were of such ^^genes, that there scarce pass any in the
Ocean, to match them: and whereof four, are thought to have gotten the victory
at the Gulf of Arta. There were in them of most choice Soldiers, of Italians,
Spaniards, and Germans, to the number of three and twenty thousand at the
least, even by the testimony of the Spaniardes themselves: six thousand
Bernardinus ^endoza, Ambassador of Spain with the French king.
brass pieces. Besides this so great an army, the King of Spain had in
Flaunders, forty thousand choice footmen, and twelve thousand horsemen: the
monthly charges of which army, came to fifteen hundred thousand crowns. But
what did this so well stored a Fleet prevail? what The success of the
Spanish viage.
did this so great an host boot? Of these hundred and thirty ships of war,
scarce thirty went home again, and those of the lesser sort: and of men of
all sorts, scarce three thousand, and those scarce having life or soul.

Now if we please to allege their church-rebellion, nnd conspiracy, out of
the records of histories, it will be apparent The Popes choose themselves.
how the popes have been together by ye ears amongst themselves also for the
Papal preeminence. John the twenty and fourth when he was Ambassador at
Bononia with the army, threatened the Cardinals greatly, Stella Venetus.
except they should choose such a Pope as might like him. And when as many had
been presented, and he would allow none of them, being requested that he
would vouchsafe to signify whom he would have, give me, says he Saint Peter's
cloak, and I will give it unto him that shall be Pope: which being done, he
putting the cloak about his shoulders said, I am pope. Which although it
offended the Cardinals, yet they were forced to agree to it. In like manner
John the two and twentieth also, when Plat. Lintpran dus Massaeus. Vspergensis.
the election was referred to him, made him self pope.

Yea moreover they say, that they can make evident proof that sometimes there
have been four popes together, Three Popes together.
sometime three, sometime two. For Victor, Alexander the third, Calixtus the
third, and Pascalis held the popedom altogether in the reign of Fridericke
Barbarossa. And Benet the eight, Siluester the third, and Gregory the fifth,
were popes at once, so long till at length the Emperor Henry the third
deposed them all. Likewise Gregory the twelfth, Benet the thirtenth, and
Alexander the fifth, by their thunderboltes of excommunications challenged to
them the papacy, and let fly their thunderclaps of cursings and banninges
together.

Now how Stephanus the third strove for the triple crown with Constantine,
Sergius the third, with Christopher, Vrbanus the fifth with Clement the 7.
Eugenius the 4. with Clement the 8. and many more, whom it were Two heads at
once in Rome
to tedious to rehearse, is made most evident out of their own stories. All
which, whether they may not be rightly called by the name of conspiracy and
rebellion, all men may judge.

Seue^thlie the pores are said to be insufficient judges The seue^tenth cause
of insufficie^cie, namely Antichristianitie.
in the controversies of Religion, because they are that Antichrist, who^ the
holy Scriptures do witness to be the man of sin, the son of perdition,
setting himself against, and 2. These 2. The whole Chapter. Johan. Apoc. 17. 1.
Cor. 1. 6. 2. Cor. 6. Ephesians. 2. These. 4. The Pope proved Antichrist. The criers
proclaim before the Pope, Bow down, bow down fall on your knees. Did. 19. 22.
96. Bald. l. vlt. c. rescin. sent. Deciu. c. 1. de Constit. Felinus c. ego r.
de iure. Eberhardus Saelisb. Arch. lib. 7. Ann. Io Auenti.
extolling himself above all that is called God, sitting in the temple of God,
and bearing himself as God: The whore that is drunken with the blood of the
Saints, sitting upon the Beast on seven hills, that commits fornication
with the Kings of the earth fights with the Lamb, and is overcome by him,
and whom the ten horns or Kings shall at length forsake. For since they
challenge to themselves greater honors then Christ, and the civil
Maiestrates, and even therein do extol themselves above God, since they
dispense against the Law of nature, and the commandments of the Apostles,
since they exempt their dealings from the judgment of any mortal man, since
they match their decrees with Gods ordinances, since they usurp unto
themselves power to translate, and establishe Kingdoms, since they entitle
themselves the head, the husband, the chief Priest of the Church, the cause of
causes, and Lord of Lords: since they sit in the Temple of God, being drunken
with the blood of Saints, and dwell in that City situated on seven hills,
which had dominion over the kings of the earth, and since all things which were
foretold concerning Antichrist, agree to the Popes, neither shall there ever
any other Antichrist come out of Babylon: by all these several demonstrations,
the Gospellers conclude, that the Popes are the very Antichrists.

Eightlye and lastly, the Gospellers will not admit the The eight cause of
insufficiency: a heap of eight de testable viccs.
Popes for Judges, as being whoremongers, tyrants, sorcerers, Atheists,
Murderers, Traitors, Poisoners and Bastards, and that they prove even out of
those popish writers, whose works, long before our time, being published at
that very present when the things themselves were done, are now extant in all
Countries.

And first they prove, that most Popes have been Eaudes, Popes have been
whoremongers and Buggerers,
whorehunters, incestuous persons, and Buggerers. For Sergius the 3. was a
continual haunter both of other whores, and specially of that notorious whore
Marozia, and begot Luitprandus Ticinencis. li. 3. cap. 12 de gest. Imperat.
by this latter, Pope John the eleventh, by abominable fornication. John the
11. the Son of Lando the first, was promoted, as heir by the law of
whoordom, to the Papacy, by Theodora the whorish mistres of Rome, so that
oftentimes (I would spare chaste cares but that I would willingly Petrus
Premonstraten. and Platina.
use the precise words of Luitprandus) she boiling in lust, would not only
solicit him, but also enforce him to lie with her. John the 13. at a counsel
before the Emperor Ticinens. lib. 2. cap. 13.
Otto the first, was convicted of many abominations, among which his beastly
lust was the chief, namely, that he had committed incest with two sisters:
that he had made Luitprandus l. 6. Mantuau.
his Lateran Palace, a Stews and brothel-house: that he had defiled Stephana
his Fathers Minion, Rayneta a Widow, and Anna, and her Niece also. When he had
been proved guilty of these villainies by the Emperor himself, he was indeed
deposed, but the whores making a strong head of the Romain Nobility, restored
him again.

Alexander the 6. gave leave to Peter Mendoza the Cardinal Valor volaterr.
Hier Marius in Eusebio cap^.
of Valentia, that he should use his Bastard the Marquess of Zaneten, in steed
of a pretty Minion. And what filthy whoredom this Pope himself used, is
manifest by that Epitaph of his daughter Lucretia. Here lies by name Lucretia,
but in truth a whore past shame,
Pope Alexanders daughter, wife, and Sons wife too, o shame. Joan Iouianus
Pon. Actius Sanazarius.



Joan the 8. who was before called Gilbert, being begot with child by a
certain Cardinal in going a solemn procession to the Church of Laterane,
between the great Pillar, In Alphons. li. 3. Platina Functius.
and Saint Clements Church, was delivered of a manchilde before all the people,
and there dyed of her travail: Whereupon Baptist Mantuan has these verses.

Here hanged the woman which did feign, her self a man to be:
Who was both whore and Pope at once, set up in Romish See.
And therefore as an other says. Ianus Pannontus Episcopus quinqus Ecilesiensis
te^pore D. Matthiae Regis nostri. Vide Cemment. Magist. Barisiensi. Grebellium.
Georgium Lilium. Vergerius Episcopus, Lustinop^litan (...). The book was
Printed at Venice, by Trea nus Zanius.


By means here of to Peter's keys, not any may attain,
Except that first to have his ware, by proof it be made plain.
Why then in these our days see we, this custom so neglected.
Because each one a man to be before is now detected.
Julius the second is reported to have committed buggrie with two noble young
men, whom Anne Queen of France had committed to the government and educatio^
of Robert the Cardinal of Nauata, and with many others. Innocentius the 3. was
such a filthy beast, that he did not for bear ye Cardinals themselves: whose
buggry also John de Casa a Florentine, Archbishop of Beneuentu^, imitating (for
fear of whose cruelty Francis Spire denying the truth, dyed in horrible
desperatio^) this man I say, writ a Poem in Italian verse in the commendation
of buggrie, which he calls a heavenly exercise, and says, that he was
marvelously delighted there with, and that he used no other loue-recreation.

Sixtus the fourth, set up a stews at Rome, and appointed Johannes Riuius,
Joha^nes Rasis. Baptist Ma^t. l. b. 4. Alphonsi: Volater in declarat ad Lou.
it for both kinds of harlots, as well boys, as queanes, and granted free
use of buggrie to the Cardinal of Saint Lucie for the three hoater months of
the year, adding the clause, Let him have his suite. John the twentieth four,
for buggerie, fornications, and such other his abominable vices, being deposed
from his Popedom at the Counsel of Constance, was kept in prison three years
at Heydelberge. Clement the eight was accused in a Treatise upon the articles
of the masters of Paris, that he was a Bastard, a poysoner, a buggerer, a
whoremonger, and a worker of all mischief. Paulus the third gave Iulia
Farnesia, one of his sisters, Valor. Anselmus. Vergerius. Agripa.
to Alexander the sixth, to'de defiled, that he might be made the Cardinal of
Hostia: and poisoned the other sister, which himself haunted, because he saw
that she loved others better then him. The same man committed incest with his
daughter Constantia, and his Niece Laura Farnesia, and had forty and five
thousand Marius. Eusebius capit. Paulus Verger.
whores set down in his note-booke, that he might have a monthly tribute for
their fornications. There might many moore examples of filthiness be alleged,
but that it is to be feared least the ears of the Godly, and honest-minded
should be offended with such detestable abominations.

It follows therefore to be proved, that the Popes The admirable cruelty of
the Popes. Luitprandus. in his whole sixth book. P^at. and Val. Ansel. Stella.
Granzius. Vicelius. V^le. Ansel. Vo(...). Marul.
have been outrageous Tyraunts. John the thirtenth, bereaved some of his
Cardinals of their eyes, some of their tongues, some of their hands, some of
their noses, and some of their preeuities. Boniface the seventh took John the
fifteenth by treachery, plucked out his eyes, and shutting him up in prison,
famished him to death, and so got the Popedom. Vrbanus the sixth ordayning
new Cardinals, cast seven of the old in prison, and putting five of them into
a sack, drowned them in the water. Innocentius the eight, sent by collusion
and secret agreement, the Citizens of Rome that exhorted him to peace, unto his
Nephewe Lewis at the hospital of the holy Ghost, who presently slew two of
them and tumbled them out at the window, saying, that there was no way but
this to end schisms.

Sergius the third, caused the body of Formosus, 8. years after his burial,
to be taken out of the grave again, and Luitprand. lib. 3. cap. 12.
being placed in the Papal Throne, to have the head stroke^ of, and the three
fingers that were left, (for two were cut away before by Stephen the first) to
be cut of, and together with these, the whole body to be cast into the river
of Tybris. O monstrous outrage and fury.

Thirdly they prove that the Popes were Coniurours, The popes Magicians. Hier.
Mar. in Eusebius. Val. Pan. ^^ing.
or practicers of magic. For Alexander the sixth made a bargain with the
Devil, that be might have the Popedom. Paul the third, was a chief doctor
amongst the Sorcerers or necromancers. Bennet the ninth in certain woods used
to call upon certain wicked spirits by necromancie, and by his magical
practices brought women to his bed. John the thirteenth called upon the devils
for good Benno Card. The Popes, Atheists. Vitae Pontificum Exempla Huldrici,
and August. Pet. Pre, Ben. Card.
luck, when he plaide at dice, and used to drink to them.

Fourthly, it is proved that the Popes have been profane, and irreligious. For
Leo the tenth, when upon a time Peter Bembus alleged a certain matter out
of the Gospel, answered; what good that fable of Christ has done to us, and
our order, all the world knows well enough.

Nicolaus the first said, that it was more honest for a man to keep many
whoores secretly, then to live openly in the knowledge of men, with one wife.
Siluester the second, while he was saying mass, being, at the noise of devils,
suddenly taken with an ague, and understanding that he must now perform his
promise to the devil, at the very pangs of death, requested that his hands,
tongue, and priuities Benno Cardinalis.
might be cut of. Gregory the seventh, at his very last gasp, calling a
Cardinal unto him, pronounced himself damned, because he had bredde bate and
dissension between many people, and had unjustly persecuted the Emperor Pant.
Paul. Verger.
Henry. Julius the third, because his Physician forbade him porke, brake out
into this blasphemy; In despite of God. The same Julius, because a cold
peacock was eaten, which he had commanded to be kept, fiercely raging, belched
forth horrible blasphemy against God. And when one Vergerius.
of the Cardinals that sat at the table, said, Let not your Holiness be so
much offended for so small a matter: The Pope answered, if God were so angry
for one apple, that he drove our first parents out of paradise therefore, is it
not lawful for me, that am his vicar, to be angry for a peacock, which is far
better then an apple? The Popes murderers. Mat. Patis. Huld. Hutten. Grebel.
Gil. Duchinius. Eras. Colet.


The fifth crime of most cruel murder remains to be proved. Julius the
second, within seven years space, caused above two hundred thousand
Christians to be slain. Gregory the ninth, commanded the Emperors
Ambassadors, who brought him word of the recovery of Jerusalem, to be killed,
against the law of Nations. Clemens ye fourth, commanded Conradinus, the king
of Scicils son, to be openly See the Acts of the ma(...)s of England,
France, Germany, etc.
beheaded, without any right, or reason. Now what needs it to rehearce the
infinite thousands of men, whom the Popes have (for religions sake) with most
cruel kind of torments put to death in all countries of the world.

Sixthly, they do by a few examples prove, that ye Popes The Popes, traitors,
or betrayers. See in the stories how the Emperor was taken, and let go
again, by the Souldan. Nauclerus. Bernus.
have been traitors: for it would fill up a whole volume, to repeat all.
Friderick the Emperor, at the general assembly of the States at Norimberge,
complained openly before the Princes of the Empire, of the treachery of
Alexander the third, and read his traitorous letter, which he had sent to the
Souldan, the Emperor of the Turks. Gregory the second forbade, that the
accustomed tribute should be paid to the Emperor Leo. Alexander the sixth did
send to the Turks for help against the Frenchmen. Gregory the ninth
requested the Souldane, Emperor of ye Turks, that he should not surre^der the
holy land, nay, that he should do his endeavor to kill the Emperor.

The seventh crime, of poisoning, comes now to be proved. For Paul the third
made away his mother, and his 7. The Popes, poysoners. Vergerius and Agrippa.
Niece, by poison, that the whole inheritance of the Farnesij might fall to
him. Alexander the sixth, did most Turkishlie, against the law of Nations,
destroy, by poison, the brother of Gemenus Baiazetes, the Emperor of the Turks,
who was indeed taken, but redeemed again by the Turk, for two hundred
thousand crowns of gold. The same man also, Contarenus, Vergerius, and such
others.
while he purposed to poison certain Cardinals, and the Cup-bearers, by
giving him of the wrong Uessell, had also reached him poison, he died together
with the senators and Cardinals. Innocentius the fourth, caused poison to be
given to the Emperor in the host or sacramental bread, by a Mass Priest.
Petrus de vineis. li. 6. Epist.


Eighthlie they say they be Bastardes. For Martine The popes bastardes and
whores children.
the second, was the son of Palumbus a coniuring Priest, by a queen: John
the eleventh, was the son of Lando the first, by an harlot: Sergius the
third, begat John the twelfth by Marozia that notorious whore: John the twelfth
had John the fourteenth by a strumpet: Leo a Priest begat John the sixteenth:
Gregory a Bishop, begat Benet the eight, and John the two and twentieth:
Laurence an Archpriest begat Siluester the third: Robert a Moncke begat Hadrian
the fourth: Gregory the twelfth begat Eugenius the fourth: Leo the tenth,
begat Clement the eighth: Innocentius the third, begat Gregory the ninth, and
Innoce^tius the fourth begat Hadrian the fifth, by filthy fornications.

And should almighty God have left such horrible Sigebertus and Vincentius.
Monsters sent of God for the abominations of the Popes.
villainies unpunished? Nay surely, the Gospellers allege both strange
monsters, and special punishments, whereby the Lord declared, that these
monstrous abominations of the Popes did greeuouslie displease him. For as for
the first, namely monsters: in the days of Benet the third, at Ments, a
devil hidden under a priests cappe while he was sprincling holy water,
accused him in the hearing of many men, that he the night before had layen
with the Deputies daughter. In the days of Paul the 1. according to the
prophecy of the holy Ghost, stars were seen to fall from heaven. While
John the twelfth held Petrus Praemonstrat.
ye See, there sprung up a well of blood issuing forth in great abundance.
When Sergius the fourth dyed, a certain Benno Card.
well was turned into blood. Benet the 9. was stifled by a devil, to who^ he
had given himself in his life time, in whose Abbas Vsper.
days there were seen great beams burning in the sky. Under Paschalis, both
many other strange things fell out, and also blood dropped out of loaves of
bread at Spira. In the time of Lucius the third, which allowed service said by
those that kept whores, there was a mighty earthquake, which destroyed an
hundred famous Cities in Asia, and five and twenty thousand men in Sicilia.

In the year of our Lord one thousand two hundred twenty Mattheus Parisius.
and four, in the which the Dominican Friars passed over into England out of
Italy, there arose great tempests, which ouerturned churches, houses, and
trees, and there fell haylestones as big as eggs. In the days of Vrbane the
1260
fourth, who at the motion of a certain woman ordained the feast of Corpus
Christi, there appeared a mighty Comet for three months space, which the
very same night that Vrbane dyed in, vanished away and was seen no more.
Nicolaus the third, begat of his concubine a child that had 135 Joannes
Nouiomagus in illust. Batauiae.
hayres and nails like a bear. While John the four and twentieth assembling a
Council at Rome, went about to crown Sigismund king of Hungary, Emperor, and
after Mass of the holy Ghost, was set in his throne, upon a sodeine an ouglie
owl, settled upon a beam of the church, over against him, and staring upon
the pope with his eyes, kept a howling there, until the pope breaking up the
Counsel, arose, and went his way. And at the next sitting, when as the Owl
flying thither again and schriching, could be driven away neither with
crying, nor flinging of cudgels, the Council was feign to be dismissed
without doing of any thing. On the day that Leo the tenth made thirty
Cardinals, 1517
a mighty tempest of lightning and thunder arose, so that a thunderbolt
smoate the Chapel where the ceremonies of their ordination had been
solemnized, and stroke the picture of the babe Christ out of our Ladies lap,
and the keys out of Peter's hands.

There were many other miracles also, if we listed to rehearse The miraculous
punishments, whereby God has showed his detestatio^ of the Popes villainies.
See for these things the lives of the Popes in the authors above mentioned.
the^: but it is better that we allege some of those punishments that have
light vpo^so detestable villainies. Siluestrius Campanus was banished by
Theodora the whorish Lady of Rome. Constantine the 2. being deprived both of
his eyes and of the Popedom at a Council, was thrust into an Abbay. Hadrian
the third, flying from Rome in a cooks apparel, came to Uenice, where lurking
in an Abbay, he was made ouer-seer of a garden. Hadrian the fourth, being
choakt with a fly that flewe into his mouth, gave up the Ghost. John the two
and twentieth being crushed with the fall of his feasting chamber, dyed. John
the 11. being taken by Guies soldiers, was stifled with a pillow thrust into
his mouth. Benet the sixth by one Cynthius a Citizen of Rome was thrust into
Hadrian-Tower, and there strangled, for his notorious misdemeanors. The
carkase of Boniface the seventh, who dyed sodenlie, having a rope tied to his
feet, was stabbed through with iauelins, dragged a long through the streets,
and buried in the ordinary and simple manner. Lucius the second, while he
went about to enter upon the Capitole being full of Senators, was so pelted
with stones, that he dyed shortly after those blows. When Innocentius the
fourth had unjustly condemned Robert Bishop of Lincoln, and the said Rob. had
cited him to answer before the judge Christ: there was a voice heard in the
Popes Court, crying, Come thou wretch to Gods Iugdement. Wherefore the next
day he was found dead and black in his bed, as if he had dyed of beating
with clubbes. Nicholaus the third, was taken with a palsy, and dyed thereof.
Benet the ninth, dyed of poison given him in a fig by an Abbatisse. Paulus
the second, having been very iocond at supper, dyed strait of a palsy.

Leo the tenth, gave up the Ghost as he was merry, and laughing in the myds
of his cups. Clemens the eighth conspiryng with Francis king of France
against Charles the fifth, when Rome was taken by the Captains of the said
Charles, was by them apprehended and most spitefully handled, but afterward
being again restored to his former place, at the length in the year one
thousand five hundred thirty and four, was stifled with the smoke of
Torches, together with other Cardinals.

These therefore are the causes wherefore the Gospellers The definitive and
summarie causes of rejecting the Popes. Distinct 40. Canon. li. Papa.
refuse to admit the Popes for Judges.

For first, they say that it is against the laws of God and man, that the
Popes should be both parties and Judges. For even by the common judgment of
the Canonists the Pope is not sufficient judge, no although he were guilty of
the crime of heresy only, but must be judged by others.

But heereunto, they say, they have joined all these so many horrible and
abominable vices, whereof although they had not as yet been condemned, but
only charged with them, yet they might not only not be Judges, but also not so
much as accuse the meanest man that is, of any crime, until L. Item si v(...)
17.. vlt.
they had suffictentlye cleared themselves of all those faults.

Finally, since it is manifest that this is the Law of al nations, that in
consultation of hard matters, sentence should be given according to ye
judgment of the greater part (especially when the greater part is esteemed
and measured not only by the number of persons, but also according to the
degree and proportion of the whole state) and the Kingdoms before mentioned,
which have condemned the Popes, do easily make two of the three parts of
Christendom: they say very justly, that they may refuse the Popes. Wherefore
either let them first clear themselves of those most heinous accusations, or
if they cannot so do, let them not thrust in themselves, for judges of the
controversies of the Church. For otherwise the Gospellers say, that they will
make the Popes that answer, which long since Pope John the 23. received from
the Grecians, unto whom when he had written that he alone was the head of the
Church and Christ's Uickar, they replied thus breefely.

We do thoroughly believe thy power to be sovereign over thy Subjects: Thy
great pride we cannot brook, thy insatiable greedines we are not able to
satisfy: The Devil Why the counsels are rejected as judges in religion, and
how far forth they are not refused. The first cause.
be with thee, because God is with us.

It remains that the gospellers show why, and how far forth they
acknowledge not the councels for judges. And they say that they do this, moved
thereunto with most weighty causes. For first, there have been many councels
which have wonderfully erred, not only in manners, but also in points of
doctrine. And thereof it came, that not afewe times provincial councels were
amended by general councels, and contrary wise, General councels corrected
by national councels. Moreover, even the best councels The second cause.
that have been, have not handled all the articles of the faith, but only a
few controversies, which specially were tossed and beaten in their days.
Besides this, it is manifest The third cause.
out of stories, that even in those golden times, such was partlye the pride,
partlye the wiliness, partlye the ignorance, and partly the wickedness of some
Bishops, that not the spirit of God, but the spirit of discord, may seem to
have been president in their councels.

Finallye we read that in these last times such councels The fourth cause.
have been held, wherein wicked opinions, and either unprofitable, or hurtful
ceremonies have been brought in, established not by reasons, or authority of
the word of God, but by force and arms. The which things, least any man might
say, to be spoken slanderously and falsely, it may be showed by a brief
bedroule of the councels. For if a man shall peruse the stories of old times,
he shall find this to be most true, that even as according to the old tradition
of the house os Elias, the whole time of the vistble world is divided by The
tradition of the house of Elias.
two thousands. (For there shall be six thousand years and then the burning
of all things, two thousand void, two thousand under the Law, two thousand
the days of Messiah, and for our sins which are many and great, there shall
be wanting, the years that shall be wanting) So likewise is the time of
Messiah divided into three Circuits Three circles or divisions of time in the
new Testament. The Church like to the Moon. Apoc. 12. The circle of the first
two hundred years Acts. 1. 6. 15. The four several counsels The council of
Nice. 328. Of Constantinople. 385. Of Ephesus 435. Of Chalcedon 455.
or portions, within the which also almost all Kingdoms do feel an alteration.
Within these three circles, the true religion and Catholic Church is found to
wear and wax like to the Moon. For, for the space of five hundredth years
after Christ, although there fell out great contentions about the Son of God,
and other weighty matters, by Ebion, Cerinthus and others, yet did the truth
prevail, and for the space of whole five hundred years, the Church,
flourished and continued, as it were, at the full moon. For within this
compass there fell the four first Sinodes or assemblies of the Apostles, and
afterward the four general councelles. Whereof the first being called
together by Constantine the great, condemned Arius. The second held at
Constantinople assembled by Theodosius, confuted the Macedonians. The third
kept at Ephesus, summoned by Theodosius the second, the Son of Archadius,
condemned Nestorius. The fourth celebrated at Chalcedon, commanded by
Martianus, condemned Eutiches. The creedes of these four general councels, as
expositions of the faith, the reformed Church does willingly embrace. For they
are grounded upon the foundation of the holy The second circle of five hundred
years.
Scriptures themselves. But in the five hundred years next following, error
did so wrestle with truth, that as soon as men had once stepped somewhat aside
from the path of the Scriptures, by and by many buddes of false opinions and
hurtful ceremonies sprung up, and grew more and more.

For in the first general council held at Constantinople, assembled by the
Emperor Justinian, they were confuted, that said that the body of Christ was
incorruptible. In the sixth, which Constantine the first, surnamed Barbatus,
called together in the same place, the Monothelites were condemned. But the
councels that afterward followed, almost all of them decreee matters, either
childish, or else flat contrary to the word of God. For in the seventh general
788
council, which at the commandment of the Empress was adiourned from
Constantinople to Nice, it was decreed, not by the word of God, but by main
force of an army levied out of Thracia, that images should be honored, and
worshipped. And in they eighth general council, which when Basilius was
Emperor, was assembled at Constantinople, 869
when Adrian Bishop of Rome had sent his deputies or Leuetenants thither, and
commanded that the Church of Rome should be the head of other Churches, and
that the common people should be debard from all choice of their ministers:
there grew an inward grudge between the Latin and Greek Churches for the
supremacy, which continues even until this day. But in the other five
hundred The third circle of five hundred years,
years that remain, there followed such counsels, wherein we see almost no
good thing, but all wicked and fond things rather, established.

At the council of Ments (for let me, out of each of these 1049
hundreds, pick and cull forth one sinod a piece, for the manifesting of the
matter) whereat both the Pope, and the Emperor were present, with an hundred
and thirty Bishops, there was consultatio^ for the forbidding of priests
marriage.

In the council held at Brixia, which was called by the Emperor Henry,
Gregory the seventh for his villainies 1080
before mentioned, was deposed. In the council of Papia, 1160
when the Emperor Fridericke would have reformed the election of the Popes,
there arose a schism of twenty years continuance, which lasted till the Pope
had troad upon the Emperors neck at Uenice.

In the council of Lions, Innocentius the fourth made 1243
an act against the Emperor Henry the second, and authorized the Cardinals to
were red Caps, and ride on horses. At the counsel of Uienna in France. Clemens
the first did 1311
solemnly publish his Clementine constitutions, which although at his death he
had commanded to be burned, as those wherein he knew there were many snares
and errors, yet John the two and twentieth, his successor, did again
confirm and rati^^e them. Sigismund the Emperor called a general council,
at Constance, wherein John the 1414
three and twentieth was deposed. There were mooreouer burned at it, contrary
to solemn promise, John Hus, and The death of John Hus and Ierom of Prage.
Jerome of Prage, because they held the opinion of John wickliefe the
Englishman, who taught both many other points agreeable to the word of God,
and also that the Lords supper should be ministered whole, without the dream
of consubstantiation.

There was a council assembled at Basil when the same 1431
Sigismund was Emperor, wherein it was decreed, that the Popes ought to be
subject to the councels. Which when it disliked Eugenius, he removed the
council, first to Bononia, and then to Ferraria, and from thence to Florence,
whereas, although John Palaeologus the Emperor of the Grecians, upon hope of
succor against the Turks, and the Russians also, did promise obedience to ye
See of Rome, yet notwithstanding afterward when they were returned whom, and
the rest for good causes would not agree to them, there could be no peace
concluded with the Pope.

At length also Julius the second called a council at Laterane, 1511
and Paul the third at Trent: in the which because they proceeded not
according to the rules prescribed in the 1552
word of God, therefore the Gospellers affirm that they are not bound to
their decrees. By all which it appears what manner of councels have been
kept in these later hundred years. For as for the contrariety of councels. it
Many contrarietes of councels
is the easiest matter of a thousand to show it. For the council of Chalcedon
condemned Eutiches, the council of Ephesus allowed him: the counsel of Nice
condemned Arrius, the council of Sardice, Smirna, and Millan, defended him.

The Council of Africa, whereof Cyprian was moderator, Did. 32. Can. praeter
Ho. Did. 4. de consec. Can. Non lic^t.
decreed, that those which had been baptized by Heretics, should be baptized
anew: the Council of Carthage forbade it. The Council of Ephesus, celebrated
when Celestinus was Pope, allowed men to communicate both kinds in the
Sacrament: the Council of Constance, under John the three and twenty, and of
Laterane, under Innocentius the third, did forbid it. The Council of Chalons
confirms sacrifice for the dead, the Council of Carthage forbids it. The
Council of Anchira, Nice, Grangren, Did. 17. de cons^. Can.
Toledo, and Illiberis, allow the marriage of Ministers, the Council of
Neocesaria, Chalcedon Agatha, and sundry others, forbid it. The Council of
Toledoe permits Concubines, the third Council of Carthage, and the
Council of Basil, under Eugenius the fourth, condemn them. The Council held
by Alexander, forbids Did. 30. ca. (...) quis.
men to hear the mass of a priest, that keeps a concubine, but the Council
kept under Lucius the third, tollerateth it. The Council of Gangrene
condemns those that thrust^ new ordinances upon the people, the sixth
Council of Constantinople allows it. The Council of Toledoe, in Did. 34.
the eleventh Cannon, forbids Images, the sixth Council of Constantinople,
and many others, confirm and approve them.

What needs more words? The Council of Africa disalloweth the Popes
supremacy, the sixth Council of Chalcedon, and diverse more, allow it. The
Council under Gelasius made a decree against Transubstantiation, Did. 3. Can.
venerabiles.
the Council of Florence, under Victor the second, and of Laterane, under
Innocentius the third, establish it.

Behold the authority of Councels, behold their agreement. And these are the
reasons why the Gospellers will not simply admit the Councels for Judges, in
the controversies of Religion; but as sworn witnesses, and that too so far
forth only, as their depositions shall agree with the deed of the will, and
the meaning of the will maker, which is the Lord God. Wherefore Augustine does
very well advise that in controversies of the Church The words of Augustine.
Lib. 2. cont. don. de Bap. cap. 3. lib. 13. cont. Alex. Arri. 14. lib. co^t.
Mist. Eccle. con. Don. cap. Civil. ad Regi nas defide. Hieron. in Ier. cap. 9.
Ambro. in 1. Cor. 4. Gregor. Mag. Decret Did. 15. The fathers ca^ not be
judges of Religion. 1.
we follow not the authority of the Council, either of Nice or of Ariminum,
as a guide, since we are not bound thereunto, but that rather matter may be
compared with matter, cause with cause, and reason with reason by the
authority of the Scriptures. For more credit is to be given to a man of the
common sort, that speaks the truth according to the Scriptures, then to a
general Council, that brings a lie against the Scriptures.

There remains the third kind of Judges, namely, the ancient Fathers. But
the Gospellers say, they can not absolutely admit these neither, for Judges.
For first they say that there are very few that are very ancient, which
notwithstanding have also most plainly declared, that they may err. And
again they allege that the 2.
age after ensuing, was so generally overtaken, and strongly possessed with a
false persuasion and opinion concerning prayer to the dead, building of
Churches, superstitious celebrating the memorial of martyrs, allegorical and
mystical exposition of the Scriptures, single life, moncherie, and a multitude
of ceremonies, that many Bishops partly of ignorance partly of
covetousness, partly of vain glory, and finally partly of mere
wickedness, were so far from stopping and repressing, that they rather
countenaunced and supported all these errors. This might be proved by many
examples, but a few will serve for the clearing of the matter.

The godly embrace Tertullia^ so far forth, as out of the The errors, and
imperfections of the Fathers. Tertullian.
written word of God he confuted Marcion, and Praxeas, who denied both the
Godhead and manhood of Christ. But in that he maintains the errors of the
Millenaries, and condemns second marriages, therein they judge that he /
erreth. Cyprian was of sound judgment in the doctrine Cyprian.
of the holy Trinity, of the Baptism of infants, and use of the Lords
Supper: but he erreth in this, that he decreed, that those which had been
Baptized by heretics, should be Baptized again, and did too ouerlashinglie
extol virgiuitie, and sette-penaunce. Basil judged aright Basille.
of the Trinity, of repentance, and justification but herein he is not
without fault, that he first set up societies of Monckes, which are now
thought to have grown too far out of kind from their first institution.
Gregory Nazianzene Gregory Nazianzene.
writ many things well, but he was ouershotte in this that he seems to
hold prayer to Saints. Chrysostom Chrysostom.
handled many matters exceeding well, but when he stretches his eloquencie
to extol vowed Pilgrimages, and prayer for the dead, he is judged to err.
Ambrose writ not a few things very religiously of the Ambrose.
Trinity, and of the doctrine of justification: but the reformed Church does
reject those counterfeit and forged books, which go abroad under his name.
Jerome did very good service Jerome.
to the Church, when he disputes, that our regenation is not wrought by the
strength of our free will: but not withstanding in the mean while, he erreth
most grossly and shamefully in this, that he so disprayseth marriage, that he
calls her a whore, which marieth the second time. Augustine the Augustine.
most sincere of all the old fathers, deserves very well of the Church, while
he confuteth the Arria^s, Manicheis, Donatists and Pelagia^s by the word of
God: but whereas he staggereth about Purgatory and vows, therein he is thought
not to have taken counsel with ye word of God. Gregory judges Gregory.
rightly when he said, he was Antichrist, that sought to be called Universal
Bishop, but he erreth very fearfully, while he pulls asunder the lawful
marriages of the Ministers of Gods word, when he says, it is unlawful to
renounce a solitary life, and while he is induced by night apparitious and
visions, to allow of doctrines contrary to the word of God.

And now how should the Gospellers absolutely The testimonies of the fathers
make against the Papists. Ambrose lib. 1. de Abraham. cap. 9.
admit the fathers for judges: when as the playntiefes them selves do not
allow and observe all their sayings.

Ambrose says, that when we have performed the duty of common civility
toward the dead, in burying them, we should then let them alone.

Gelasius says, that the substance of bread and wine in the Sacrament does so
remain and not cease, as there remains Gelasius in concilio Romans
in Christ the Lord, the nature of man joined to the divine nature.

Augustine says, that it is rashness, without plain and August. lib. 2.
peccat. merit. cap. vlt.
manifest testimonies of the Scriptures to determine on either side, matters of
Rellgion that are doubtful.

Calixtus delivered the Sacrament to the whole church, Calixtus did. 2. d^
consecrat.
kept back notorious wicked persons from it, and condemned those which being
present, did not communicate.

Cyprian says, that the Christian people were not to be Cyprian lib. 1. de
cap. Epist. 2.
denied the blood of their Lord, for the confessing of whom, they were
commanded to shed their own blood.

Apollo, amongst other herestes, obrayded Montanus Apollo Eccl. hist. (...).
5. cap. 12.
with this, that he was the first, that had prescribed the people, laws of
fasting.

Paphnutius denied that ye Ministers of the church were Paphnutius Trip. hist.
lib. 2. cap. 14.
to be forbidden marriage. And avouched that the mutual performance of marriage
duties between man and wife, was chastity.

Cyprian said that only Christ was to be heard, of whom it was said, hear
him, and that it was not to be reregarded Cyprian lib. 2. Epist. 2.
what others before us have either said or done: but what Christ (who was
before all) has commanded.

Augustine stoutly maintains, that the Church ought Augustine. Contra Cresco:
Gnam. cap. 2.
not to prefer her self before Christ, because he always judges truly, but
the Judges of the Church, as being men, are oftentimes mistaken.

Ambrose said, that holy things needed not gold, neither Ambros. Lib. 2. de
off. cijs. cap. 28.
were those things acceptable by means of gold, which wree not bought with
gold.

Acatius said, that our God did neither eat nor drink, and Acatius. Tripart
Hist. Lib 2. cap. 28. Spiridion. Tripart Hist. Lib. 1. cap. 10.
that therefore he needed not cups or bowls.

Spiridion said, that he did therefore freelye eat flesh, on that day wherein
others did abstain, because he was a Christian.

Augustine said, that it was not lawful for Monks to Augustine. De oper.
Monachorum. cdp 17.
live at other men's cost, although they were daily occupied in meditations,
prayers, and studies.

Epiphanius said, that it was a horrible abomination, to Epiphanius. In his
Epistle translated by Ierom.
see the Image either of Christ, or any other, painted in the Churches of
Christians.

These and other such bounds of the ancient Fathers, since the Sea of Rome her
self has ouer^strided: by what right she may enjoin others to keep that,
which she her self neglects to do, all men may easily judge.

Since therefore, neither the Popes, neither the councels, nor the Fathers can
end this dissension, is there any at last I pray you, unto whose judgment we
must stand. Are they That traditions cannot be Judges of religion. Eusebius. lib.
3. Hist cap. 4. lib. 5. cap. 8 Irenius. Lib 3. ca. 14. lib. 1. cap. 2 3. 12.
lib. 3. cap. 4. Tertul. in praescrip. Heret.
Traditions that must strike the stroke? Why, by the name of Traditions they
must either understand ceremonies, or doctrines: and as for ceremonies,
although they be ancient, yet if they be either hurtful or needless, and
superfluous, or repugnant to the word of God, or have been abrogated at a
certain time, they are not to be suffered. For the Lord gives express
commandment that men woorship him not with doctrines devised by men's brains:
and as for the traditions that are doctrinall, they must either contain in
them, the written word of God it self, Creedes, and expositions, 2. Cor. 3 12.
1. Cor. 4.
gathered by necessary collection out of the foundations of the scriptures,
against Heretics, or else those things which either directly or indirectly,
are either put to, or taken from the word of God. If you mean the former, who
will not receive such traditions?

If the later, who may not without any breach of Godliness, reject them? And how
much Traditions do avail to appease and cease the contentions of the Church,
old Stories do plainly show.

For when as in the most ancient times, there arose a stir in the Church
concerning the feast of Easter, with so great a do, that the whole world was
shaken therewith, Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 22. August. ad Casulam. Epist. 86.
both sides had recourse to the traditions of the Apostles, which are not
expressed in any certain Book. But when each side alleged that they kept
the feast of Easter on that time which was appointed by tradition of the
Apostles: the matter grew to this pass in the end, that there was a flat
freedom for the Church, in all such manner of Iren. epist. ad Victorem Episc.
Romans
matters, until tyranny prevailed.

Lo what force traditions have to determine the controversies of Religion.

Will miracles then make manifest which is the better cause, or the Catholic
church? Why, the use of miracles is now ceased. For there is not now any new
Eospell or Aug. lib. de vera religione.
new doctrine broached, but that which Christ and the Apostles have already
confirmed with miracles and wonders.

Again we do not read that all those that restored, and as it were reformed
Religion, were famous for their miracles: In the which number John Baptist,
Asaph, Ethan, Iedithun, Heman, Core, and other Prophets, are to be reckonned.
Moreover, except the gift of miracles be left to the wise disposition of God,
they cannot confirm any doctrine. For it is manifest that the miracles of
Christ which otherwise were full of power, did either nothing at all or Deuteronomy.
13. 2. These. 2. Aug. quaesi. 82. li. de orth^fid. cap. 47. Aug. lib. de ciuit.
Dai. 22. cap. 8. Chrysostom. 33. in Matthew.
very little, further the obstinate Jews to faith, and Godly. nesse.

Finally how could miracles be necessary signs of true Religion, of
themselves, when as it is manifest that Antichrist and false Prophets shall
excel with many miracles? wherefore those miracle-mongers ought themselves to
be taken for miracles and wounders, who when the date, and use of miracles is
past, do yet require miracles: although the true doctrine is not even at this
day altogether destitude of great miracles.

What then can the perpetual and continual succession That the succession of
Popes cannot be judge of religion.
of the Bishops of Rome serve to discern between true, and false Religion?
Surely no man will deny that there is one succession of true doctrine, and
another of persons, wherefore if the succession of Persons be joined with the
succession of the Prophets, and Apostles doctrine, it is manifest doublesse,
that the weight thereof is not small.

For in this sense the Fathers did allege succession against In orat. Maxim.
Cynicum.
the Heretics. For he that professes the same doctrine (says Nezianzen) is
partaker of the same chair also: but he that holds a contrary doctrine,
ought not to be counted a Successor: and truly this later has the name in
deed, but that former has the truth of succession. Except perhaps a man call
it succession in that sense, that we In orat. de Hthanas.
say sickness succeeds health: light darkness: a storm fair weather,
madness reason: dregs wine: and in a word, Nero Augustus: or Cambyses,
Cyrus. Since therefore the succession of the Prophets and Apostles doctrine was
broken off long ago in the popish Church: surely the ordinary Thus far reach
the words of Natianzens.
continuance of Pope after Pope is of no force to show which is the true
religion. But it may be, they will demand of the Gospellers, the time and
person, wherein the succession of doctrine was altered.

Unto this the Gospellers answer, that the Popes of When the succession of
doctrine was altered in the popish Church. The first row of Popes.
Rome are to be distinguished into three especial ranks or companies. For
they deny not that from Linus to Milchiades, there were one and thirty true
Pastors of them in number, who labored in the Lords harvest even unto
martyrdom, and therefore may well be called Stars in the right hand of
Christ. But from Sluester the first, unto Sabinianus Apoc. 1. The second order
of popes
Thuscus, there were three and thirty mytired Bishops, who although they were
not the woorst, yet by traditions and constitutions, they prepared a seat for
the great Antichrist. All the rest, even unto this present Pope, The third rank
of Popes. The fourth company. Apoc. 13. The fifth company. Apoc. 27. The sixth
company. Apoc. 20.
they call Antichrists: yet so, that nine and thirty of them, from Boniface
the third and fourth, unto Leo the fourth, are reckoned to be in the Kingdom
of the great beast: one and thirty of them, from John the eight to John the
eighteenth, are numbered in the Kingdom of the great whore: nine and thirty of
them, until the time of Celestine the fourth, belong to the Kingdom of the
Dragon: And from Innocentius the fourth, until the present Pope that now is,
about threescore and four of them, are counted in the Kingdom of Locusts,
according to the order of the Prophecy which God would have to be expressly
set down, concerning the Apoc. 9.
Kingdom of Antichrist. Lo what force and authority succession has.

Will agreement then in public doctrine and outward That bare unity is not a
mark of the true church.
woorship, show which is indeed the catholic Church? why if mere agreement
did prove the true Church: doubtless neither the Jews, nor the Turks, nor
Heretics, or Heathen of any other such litter, would be kept out from the
title of the true Church, since we see that even they also do marueloustie
agree amongst themselves.

And we see that oftentimes great men in the church have The falling out of
great men in the Church.
fallen into hot contentions amongst themselves. Between Barnabas and Paul
there arose such strife, that they brake of company one from another. So Peter
of Alexandria, Zozom. lib. 1. cap. 16. Socrat lib. a Origin. Contra Ceisum.
and Meletius: so Epiphanius and Chrysostom: so Jerome, Augustine and
Ruffinus: So finally, Cyrill, John of Antioch, and Theodoret, were at open
variance and iarres one with another. And in deed, Clemens Alexandrinus
writes, that the Jews did vpbraid the Christians with Lib. 17. Stromatum.
their dissentions amongst themselves.

By all which it is moore clear than the noone days, that as a bare agreement
and unity cannot prove the truth of Religion, so neither do all dissentions
prove a Religion to be false, so that the foundation be not broken by the
discord. That old custom is no sure mark of the true Church. Esa. 8. 12.
Genesis 7. Heb. 11.


Can the common Custom then of many ages, direct us where to seek the true
church? Nay, but God has forbidden the faithful to suffer his everlasting
truth, to be over ruled by any compass of years, any custom, or at a word by
any conspiracy of the whole world. So Noye with his small family, when he saw
that the whole world had conspired and agreed to the same wickedness, confirmed
by the custom of many ages before past, yet chose rather to join with a few
in the true doctrine of God, than to take part with the whole world in
wickedness. How the Church may be judge. That the word of God only ought to be
judge of Religion. ang. Tract. cap. 11. in 10. ad. Hierom. Luke 16. Joh. 4.
Joh. 6. Ioh. 15. Act. 20. Pro. 30. 2. Tim. 3. Esa. 8. Chrisost. Homil. 41. cap.
22. in Matt.


Shall the Church then decide these controversies of the Church? yea, but we
must first severe the true Church from the Synagogue of the Malignant, which
can be done by no other means, but by the word of God.

Shall then the holy scriptures be Judge in this controversy of heirs at
variance? So in deed the Gospellers would have it.

For they affirm with Austine, Chrysostom, and other of the Fathers, that all
things are contained in the written word of God, that might suffice for the
salvation of them that believe.

For, as Augustine says in another place: To the books of the holy Scriptures
only, which are now called canonical, Lib. de-natura and great. cap. 61.
Contra Fau. li. 11. cap 5. Ad Oros. cap 11. Ad paulin. Ad Fortunat. lib. 2.
coat. Crcsc. Gram. cap. 32. Ad Vinc. Dou. 48.
do we owe this reverence and honor, that we assuredly believe that none of
the writers thereof could err at all in writing them: but as for others, we so
read them, that how excellent soever they be, either for holiness or learning,
we do not therefore think it true, because they thought so, but because they
have been able to assure us thereof, either by the said Canonical Scriptures,
or by probable reason, notdisagreeing from the truth.

Therefore (says he in an other place) to the holy Scriptures alone do we
consent without gainsaying: from other writings we may dissent, but to the
canonical Scriptures every man must yield, every man must subscribe, whether
Hitherto reach the words of Austin.
he be Layman, or teacher, or King, or Emperor, let him give place to the holy
Scriptures, then the which there is nothing in this world set forth more
divine, and more necessary.

What can be more religious? what more clear then these testimonies of
Augustine? And if the Gospellers can obtain In what sort the Fathers, councels
and such like are received.
thus much once, that God may be judge of the controversies of religion by his
word, comprehended in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles: why then they
do not stick to admit either councels, or Fathers, or miracles, or other such
like, for sworn witnesses: so that first the true Church be distinguished from
the Sinagogue of Satan: Fathers of sound credit, from fond fellows and
heretics: lawful councels, from tirannicall couenticles: right Books, from
counterfeits: true miracles from coined and forged ones: the succession of
Doctrine, from the disguised succession of persons: true agreement, from
obstinate conspiracy: and finally, the traditions of the Apostles, from the
inventions of men.

Yea, but says the Sea of Rome, how can this be done by How may the
Scriptures be Judges, since heretics do wrest them?
the written word of God, since there is no heretic that does not allege the
Scriptures for himself?

The Gospellers answer, that heretics wresting the the Scriptures, cannot
be better confuted then by the written word of God, which only is able to
decyde all controversies. For Augustine said very well, that we in Ad crescon.
lib. 2 cap. 31. The words of Augustine. Matt. 4. and 21.
no case presume to judge the books of the Prophets and Apostles, but y^ by
them we judge all other writtings both of Christians and Paganes. So Christ by
the Scriptures confuted the Phariseis, Sadduces, yea and the devil him self
(...)isalledging the Scriptures: So Stephen, and Apollos Act. 6. and. 8. and 18.
confounded the Jews, and Philippe convinced the Eunuke of Queen Candace by
the Scriptures. So Act. 2.
the Apostles confirmed the Gospel by the writings of the Prophets: The
Jews of Berea examined Paul's Act. 11. See August. de Concord. Sanct. Epist.
163. lib. 3. confess. cap. 16. Zozom. lib. 2. cap. 3.
doctrine by the doctrine and writing of the Prophets: So finally the
Council of Nice cut down Arrius, the Council of Constantinople Macedonius,
the Council of Chalcedone Eutiches, the Council of Ephesus Nestorius,
Augustine Pelagius, Tertullian Praxeas, and all the Catholic authors
fanstaticall fellows, with the sword of the word of God.

Wherefore (as Augustine says) let no man in controversies The very words of
Augustine Lib. 2. cap. 32. cont. crescon.
too proudly object the writings, either of Fathers or of Councels, because we
take them not as Canonical, but rather examine them by the Canonical
writings, and that which in the^ agrees with the authority of the holy
Scriptures, we receive with their commendation: that which agrees not, we
reject with their leave.

But (say they) the Scripture is heard, dark and doubtful. That the holy
Scripture is neither hard nor doubtful.
Augustine answers, that me^ walk far more safely by the Scriptures, then
by traditions, which being ouershadowed and darkened with figurative speechs,
when we go about to search out, either let that be collected thence which is
out of question, or if it be in question, let it be defined by testimonies
gotten and gathered from all places that may be, out of the same Scriptures.
For so (says he further) has the holy Ghost tempered the Scriptures, that
that which is spoken in one place somewhat darkly, is in another place more
cleerelie set down: which things since they thus stand, it follows, that this
is the only means that is left to conclude a peace, if the matter be
determined by the pure word of God alone, and that religion only be judged
true, and that church Catholic, and of the right belief, which in all points
agreeeth tothe word of God rightly understood.

The Sea of Rome leaving all these reasons of the reformed Church, protests
that although she see that the Gospellers religion does not much differ from
the written The exception of the Church of Rome.
word of God, nay, that it agreeeth there unto in all things, yet she cannot
allow it, since it sprung from heretics, from such as were not sent of God,
and last of all from innouatours, The replye of the Gospellers. That the
reformed Church is not heretical. Le 1. cap. de Haer. 2. Manich. Joan. Auent.
lib. 3. Annalium. Glo. Did. 10. c. nulli. did. 21. Eusebius, lib. 5. cap. 26.
and such as bring in new orders.

The Gospellers on the other side entreat the Church of Rome, that she would
not accuse the^ of so grievous crimes, namely, of herosie, unlawful calling
and innovation, but that rather if she see that their religion does agree with
the truth of God, contained in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles, she
would not be unwilling to receive and embrace it her self also.

For whereas first of all their doctrine is charged with hereste, therein they
complain that they have great wrong done them.

For they say that those are not heretics, which have been Lib. Confon. fol.
274. col. 4.
either convinced upon small ground to swerve from the judgment of the Church
of Rome, or they which say that three are Antipodes, or men dwelling under ye
ground, as Pope Zachary would have it, or they which will not obey all the
constitutions of the Pope, as the Canonists have decreede, or those which do
not agree for the keeping of Easter, as Pope Victor would have at: or finally
those which do not give credit to all those things which are delivered for
truth in the Church of Rome (for otherwise all those should be heretics which
would not believe that Saint Dominick wrought more miracles then Christ and all
the Anton. Flor. hist. part. 3. cap. 1,. 3
Apostles, that the said Domicick is greater the^ John Baptist, and finally
that all the trim tales of Saint Frauncis the Son os Barnardo and others,
are to be credited Can. in fin. extrauag. de Maiur. and obedi. Who may truly
be called the heretics. August. lib. d^ ciuit. Dei. 18. cap. 15. Tertul. lib.
de prescript. haer. 2. Per. 2. 1. Tim. 3. 2. Tim. 3. Matt. 18. Novel. 115..
si. quis.
under pain of being condemned for heresy) or last of all, those that do not
believe that all Emperors, Kings, princes, and every human creature is
subject to the Popes temporal Sword.

But the Gospellers say that they are the right Heretics, first, that bring
into the Church a doctrine contrar y to the rule of faith, or belief of the
Christians: secondlye, that make a departure from the Catholic church, that
holds the pure doctrine of God: last of all, those who being solemnelye
admonished, do obstinatelye continue in their errors, that have been made
manifest unto them.

But as for them, they protest that they have swarued neither from the rule of
faith, and ordinarye creed of the Christians, nor from those four most
ancient councels, I mean the Council of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, and
Chalcedon, nor from the Creed of Athanasius, nor finallye from any part of
the word of God, nor have been cited by due course of Law, or excommunicated
by competent or meet Judges, or proved to be out of the way, but that they have
always either lawfully given an account of their doctrine, or conveniently
referred themselves, and solemnelye appealed to a general and free council of
all Christendom. That the council of Trent was not a fre and lawful council.
For that the council of Trent was not a free council, they prove by stories,
by which it is manifest how that Ceruinus, Polus, and other Cardinals expelled
thence, Iacobus Nachiantes Bishop of Clodia Fossa, Dominicus Wilhelmus of
Uenice, Paulus Vergerius Bishop of Iustinople, and many other, upon mere
suspicion that they favored the Gospel, and for certain speeches repugnant
to their popish errors.

And as for the calling of their Ministers, which first That the Ministers of
the reformed church were both extraordinarily, and ordinarily called.
began to assault the papacy: they answer, that they were called, partly
extraordinarily, (the Lord stirring up their hearts, and inflaming them more
and more with the zeal of the glory of his son) and partly ordinarily, by
Magistrates and Princes, many people of sundry Nations yielding their consent
thereunto, and rendering God thanks for so great a blessing. Which not only
that Princes may do, but also that they are bound to do, whenever Churches
are anewe, in regard of their outward and visible form, either to be
established, or to be reformed and cleansed from those errors, which through
the fault of them that should maintain and preserve Religion, were crept in:
they prove by the flat commandment of God, and by the examples of Eezechias,
Iosaphat, Josias, and other religious That the Protestants doctrine is not new.
Princes. For whereas last of all they accuse the Religion of the Gospellers,
of novelty, therein they complain, that Gods truth is greatly iniuried. For
the Gospellers protest, that they hold no other doctrine, then that whereby
Adam, Seth, Noe, Abraham, and the rest of the Patriarks, were saved, and which,
Christ, the Apostles, the six first Councels, and the more ancient and
sounder sort of the fathers, did preach: until at length, the devil (while
the husbandmen slept) had pestered the Lords field with such store The Church
like the moon.
of tares, that the pure wheat could not at all be seen, for cockle and
daruell. For although God will have his church preserved, yet he has not
appointed that it should always stand in her full strength and flourishing
estate, but suffers Genesis 17. 1. Kings 7.
it, like the Moon, sometime to wear, and sometime to wax: So in the days
of Noe, only eight were preserved in the Arcke against the flood. So in the
time of Eliah, Mat. 2. How true doctrine was corrupted.
there are said to have been five thousand, that embraced the true doctrine.
So finally, in the time of Christ's appearing, the Church was so darckned,
that there was thought scarce one or two to be left. And after the gracious
birth of our Savior Christ, as it were within three circles of a thousand and
five hundred years: the Church in like manner, seems to have by little and
little, decayed.

For in the first five hundred years, true religion began to wrestle with
error: and in the next five hundred, to yield to it, until at length in the
other five hundred years it was so overwhelmed, that it gave no light on any
side.

Neither for all that does it follow hereupon, that either the Church was at
any time clean extinguished, or That the church was never quite destroyed.
that we now are at variance with the church: for ye church of Christ has
always been, and shall be always, as long as the Lord Christ shall reign,
with whose help it is so supported, that yet notwithstanding, the form thereof
is not always visible.

Against this church, the Protestants say, that they have now no quarrel,
because together with her, they do with one consent, worship one God, and
the Lord Christ, according as he has always been worshipped of all the
godly. But they say, that they have departed from that Sinagogue, which has
not kept the true faith, in preferring Reasons why the protestants have
departed from the church of Rome.
men's inventions before the word of God, which would lay intolerable burdens
upon them, which would bear rule over their brethren, which would forbid the
sincere preaching of the word, and right administration of the Sacraments,
which uses every year to curse and banne her, together with the churches of
Africa, Egypt, Syria, the East churches, the churches of Asia, and Greece,
which persecuteth the godly, and will admit no reformation, which has
corrupted those things which were necessary in the church, enjoined those
things to be kept of necessity, which were free, and retained those things
which were naught and hurtful, which has tied the Catholic church to Rome,
which has wilfully polluted her self with all kind of abominations.

And therefore they protest that they have done this of necessity, namely,
that they might obey the commandment of the Lord, and that their consciences
might not be defiled with their Adversaries corrupt doctrine: and that they
might not become subject to those punishments which hang over them. Where the
Church ha^h been hidd^n so many years.


But where then, will they say, has the Church layen hidden so long? Or if the
Church of Rome were not the true and Catholic Church, must then al men be
damned?

The Gospellers answer, first that their were always some, both in the East
Churches, and also in Popery it self, which misliked these corruptions of the
Romish Synagogue, and both by lively voice, and also by writings inueighed
against them.

For that they may say nothing of the Ancient fathers, and the whole Primitive
Church, which the Gospellers affirm to agree with them in all points in the
Articles of faith: they prove that even in these later ages ther^ were many
that subscribed to this reformation of religion. Gregorius magnus in regist.
lib. 4. cap. 8^. Joan. Episc. Constant. epist. 35 ad Maurit. Imperat. Io.
Auent. lib. 7. fol 685. and in the year. 1240. Eberhard of Sal^^b. Ioachim of
Calabria. Frauncis Petrarch. Seven hundred fourscore and five years ago.
Lib. consid, 2. 3. 4.


For Gregory the great, although he bolstered up many foul errors: yet in
this he judged rightly, that he was antichrist, which would suffer himself to
be called the Chief Priest, and Universal Bishop.

Eberhardus Bishop of Salisburgh, proved by a most pithie Oration in a council
at Reinburgh, that the Popes were Antichrists, the foundation of whose Kingdom
Hildebrand had laid.

Ioachim of Calabria also at the very same time, did in like manner call the
Popes Heretics. Frauncis Petrarch both in other places of his writings, and
especially in his twentieth Epistle, does with great earnestnes cry out
against the Popes. Arnulph Bishop of Orleance, in a council held at Rhemes,
did openly pr^nounce the Popes to be Antichrists.

Barnard in the year of our Lord 1550. inueighed against Barnard. Michael
Centenas.
the Popes as the very Antichrists. In ye same age Michael Centenas likewise
openly charged the Pope to be Antichrist. Jerome Souaronola of Ferraria,
preched throughout all Italy, both that the Pope was Antichrist and that his
doctrine was wicked, for the which cause he was burned at Florence by Alexander
the sixth. Thomas Rhedon Thomas Rhedon
did directly condemn y^ papacy, and was for the sameburnd by Eugenius the 4.
Laurentius Valla almost an hundredth Laurentius Val. lo.
years ago, by calling Rome Babylon, the Pope Antichrist, and the donation of
Constantine a forgerie of the Popes: did courageously set himself against
them, and being banished for the same, was very honorably entertained by the
King of Naples. John Wickliefe did mightilye John Wickliefe.
impeache and assault the papacy in England. After him followed not long
after, John Hus and Jerome of Prage, John Hus. Jerome of Prage.
condemned to death at ye council of Constance, contrary to the Emperor
Sigismundes public warrant: and there burned for the true religion: until at
length Martin Luther following them, as it were which the fatal field and last
battle, began more openly and directlye both to unfold the truth of
religion, and also to impugn the papacy. The world would have stopped his
course by many means. For Maximilian the Emperor at Ausburge in the year The
trial of Martin Luther.
1518. and Charles the fifth, with Ferdinando and many other Kings and Princes,
first in the year 1521, at Woormes, then in the year 1523. at Norimberge,
afterward in the year 1524. at Ratisbone, and in the year 1529, at Spire,
moreover in the year 1530. at Ausburgh, again in the year 1532. at
Ratisbone, and in the year 1540. at Hagano, partly themselves heard the
defense of Luther with his own mouth, and partlye caused his doctrine to be
examined by their assigns. But when they perceived that they nothing prevailed
by banishment, imprisonment, burning, and all kind of torments, at length they
were forced to hearken to the advice of Gamaliel, who The counsel of Gamaliel,
and of the priests.
counseled the Jews to let the Apostles alone. For i^ this enterprice or
business were of men, it would come to pass, that it should shortly be brought
to naught: but if it were of God, it could not be that it should be overthrown.

Let all men therefore think the same of the religion of the Reformed church.
And in the mean while, O ye kings A speech by the way to kings and princes to
find out the truth.
and princes, and inhabitants of the whole world, which are desirous of
everlasting life, rouse up your selves, deals wisely, serve the Lord in fear,
and rejoice in trembling, kiss the son least he be angry, and ye perish in
the way, when his wrath shall be but a little kindled, blessed are all those that
trust in him.

The Conclusion.
THese were the things (good Readers, that love your salvation,) which I
thought good to write at this present, concerning the appointing of a Judge for
the controversies of religion, and the finding out of the truth of the right
religion, and Catholic Church. Wherein, because I take it, that I have said
nothing which I cannot make good by manifest proofs, either of the holy
Scriptures, or Catholic Fathers, or else even of those authors themselves,
whose testimonies I have truly alleged: Surely it is meet and right, that
all those that love the truth, should be stirred up to seek out the way of
eternal life: and without partial judgment, to know the truth of religion,
and of the church: without the which, salvation is not to be had. And now, that
which remains, let us with all our hearts beseech our only master, the Lord
Jesus Christ, that we may be taught many things more which we know not, by
him, from whom we have received these things which we do know: let us pray
him, that of his mercy preventing us, and furthering us, he would teach us
those things which being to be known for our comfort, we are not ignorant
of, keep us in those things which we know to be true, strengthen us in those
things wherein we stagger, being true, and deliver us from those things which
are false: that so in our thoughts and words he may find that, which he does
profitably give us: and may cause those things to proceed from us, which may be
acceptable to God, and profitable to men.

Amen.
FINIS.
A Catologue of the authors whose Testimonies, besides the Canonical
scriptures, are alleged and quoted in the margent of this book.
A.
AVgustinus. Ambrosius. Acatius. A^hanasius. Andradius. Antoninus Florentinus.
Aeneas Syluius. Alberr. Krantzius. Abbas Vrspergensis. Augustinus Steuchus.
Arnobius Feron. Actius Zan. Agrippa. Apollo. Arnulphus Aurelian. Episc. Ac
Martyrum.
B.
Barnardus Abb. Clara. Basilius. Bonifacius. Baldus. Benon Cardinalis. Beda.
Barnus. Bernardinus Mendoza.
C.
Chrisostomus. Cyrillus. Clemens Alexandrinus. Cyprianus. Calixtus. C^ementis
clementinae. Coletu. Conformitatum liber. Concilium Tride^inum. Comentarij
magist. Parisiensium. Cuspinianus.
D.
Ducherius.
E.
Eccius. Euagrius. Eutropius. Extrauagan^. Eusebius. Eberhardus Salisburgens.
Archiepisc. Epiphanius. Erasm^s.
F.
Felinus. Franciscus Petrarcha. Flouius Blond. Funccius.
G.
Gregorius Nazianzenus. Gelasius. Guilebnus Budaeus. Gerson. Gregorius Magnus.
Gratianus. Gabriel Biel. Grebelius. Georgius Lilius. Gallici annals.
H.
Hieronymus. Huldricus Huttenus. Hosius. Helmodius. Hieronym. Sauanor.
Hieronymus Marius.
I.
Ireneus. Jus Civil. Ius Canonicum. Jason. Ianus Panonius Episcop.
Quinquecclesiensis. Ioannes de turre cremata. Ioannes Monlucius. Joan. Petrus
Ferrariens. Joan. Auentinus. Joan. Iouianus Pontan. Joan Riuius. Joan.
Kanisius. Joan. Nouiomagus. Ioachimus Calaber. Joan. Dela casa Arch. Ben.
L.
Lindanus. Lombardus. Laurentius Valla. Luitprandus Ticinencis. Legendae
Sanctorum.
M.
Marcilius Ficinus. Mantuan. Baptista. Massaeus. Marullus. Mattheus Parisius.
Michael centena^.
N.
Nicholaus Cusanus. Nauclerus.
O.
Orosius. Origenes.
P.
Paph^^tius. Panormitanus. Paul. Verger. Episc. Petrus a Soto. Platina. Petrus
Praemonstraters. Pighius. Philippus Decius. Pantaleon.
R.
Raphael Volaterran. Ruan. Tap. Rufinus.
S.
Stella Venetus. Sabellicus. Socrates. Sigib^^tus. Spiridion.
T.
Tertullianus. Thom. Aquinas. Theodor. Tetzelius. Thomas Rhedon.
V.
Vincentius. Valor. Anse^mus. Vicelius.
Z.
Zozimus.
Faults escaped in the printing.
Leaf 3. a. line 23. there lack these words: and man. Leaf 7. b. line 1.
put out used. Leaf 10. a. line 22. for of, read to. Lease 12. a. line 7. both
in the text and in the margent, read fifth, for first. Leaf 15. b. in the
latter of the two first verses in meeter, the last word of the verse, read the
same. Leaf 27. b. line 29. read there are, for three are and line 33. for at,
read it.

NON SOLO PANE VIVET HOMO: Luk^ 4.
printer's or publisher's device

Imprinted at London by John Windet, for R. Dexter, and are to be sold in
Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Brazen Serpent.


