THE FIERY TRIAL OF GODS SAINTS; (These Suffered for the witness of Jesus, and
for the word of God, (under Queen Mary,) who did not worship the Beast, nor
his Image, nor had taken his mark upon their foreheads, or on their hands, or
on their Garments, and these live and reign with Christ: Revel: 20. 4.) As a
Counter-poyze to I. W. Priest his English Martyrologe. AND THE DETESTABLE ENDS
OF POPISH TRAITORS: (These are of Satan's Synagogue, calling themselves Jews
(or Catholics) but lie and are not: These worshipped the Beast saying, who is
like unto the Beast? who is able to war with him. Revel. 13. 4. and these
shall drink of the wine of Gods wrath, and shall be tormented with fire and
brimstone before the holy Angels, and before the Saints, because they
worshipped the Beast and his Image. Re. 14. 10. and 11). Set down in a
comparatiue Collection of both their sufferings. Herewith also the Concurrance
and agreement of the reigns of the Kings of England and Scotland, since the
first year of Q. Mary, till this present, the like before not extant.

AT LONDON, Printed by T: P: for Arthur Johnson. 1612.

TO THE PRINCE.
ENglands fair Hope, (borne, Down to quell
the rage of Rome; That proud Babell;
Which in its swelling-madde Desires,
to Worlds sole Empire still Aspires;)
Deigne (Sir) to read this little Book,
at least with mild aspect to look
Upon It. The pledge of Loyalty,
and Subjects love to Royalty, it is.
Vouchsafe your Princely Grace
to me, that humbly place,
my Faith and Duty;
First to God, then my King
(Who Unity did bring)
then to my Country.
The faithful Subject of my Lord the
King, and your Highness,
TO THE PATRONAGE AND protection of the high and mighty Prince, Henry, eldest
Son of our Sovereign Lord the King, Prince of Wales etc.
AS that in one place was well said by Heathen Tullie; Non nobis solum nati
sumus, sed parte^ patria, partem parents, partem liberi, partem amici, partem
propinqui and familiares, peculiariter sibi vendicant: So elsewhere was it
spoken no less Christian-like. Non quid quis fecerit, sed quo animo and studio
fecerit, ponderandum est. Of these sayings, the first seemed unto me, to
Challenge at my hands A special Duty to my Prince and Country, which I knew
not how to perform, but in this kind: The second I assumed as an Apology for
my weak and slender performance of that Duty. If my desire (noble Prince) to
pay that debt for which by obligation Divine, Natural and National I stand
obliged, has transported me beyond that whereunto I am able, of your Princely
Clemency, I humbly beseech you, wink at that amiss, and of your Heroical and
Magnanimous Spirit, Shield me from the Darts of the mighty and maleuolent.
Your Kingly Father out of the goodness of his nature, (for to judge the worst,
as dissonant to a good Disposition) has been observed to conceive of things
ill meant, (or which at least might be doubtfully taken) well: you certainly
being the true Heir as of his Kingdoms so also of his virtues, cannot adiudge
of that which is well meant, ill. The cause which I handle is not mine own, but
my Prince and Countries, wherein what I have done, I the rather undertook to
publish at this time and in this Kind by reason of these encouraging Words of
the reverend, then Bishop of Chichester, now of Ely, in his Book, Cuititulus
est, Tortura Torti, in Epistola dedicatoria ad Regiam Maiestatem, his words
are these, I am, vbi in Discrimen adducta causa communitatis, Spectator nemo
sit, Actor quisque etc. My Intentions herein are right, wherein I desire,
prodesse principi and patriae, non obesse: If I fail in my purpose, that is
not want of will, but of power: If I have performed ought herein that good is,
that same also is, Multo plus votis, quam factis. Therefore for that sometimes
noble Q. Elizabeth's sake, (for she deserved to be loved, etiam post mortem)
whose fame shall never die, (nam virtus post funera viuit:) For the King your
Fathers sake, who according to his names signification is, a Maintainer (of our
peace): for the Common wealths sake, which is the Crown of your Glory: For
your own sake who are our Hope, yeald me, as the reading hereof, so also your
favorable and Princely protection; then shall I not care for the faces of mine
enemies.

The Faithful Subject of my Lord the King, and your Highness.

TO THE WELL affected, and loyal hearted Reader.
AS to the spirit and soul of man nothing internally then a good conscience
can be more comfortable; so externally, then a good report from others nothing
can be more precious. And as for the first, every one that will enjoye it, must
himself alone by the uprightness of his own actions, assure it unto himself
in the sincerity of his own heart; so, for the second, as it depends not upon
ones self alone, but upon the tongues and reports of others, every Christian
by the rules of his profession is chargeable to his power to seek the
preservation thereof toward others, whom he knows to be wronged. This
being granted (as it cannot be denied) if every private man's good name so
nearly touch him, as that for the preservation thereof we are all of us to
others reciprocally bound, and by law divine obliged. How much more strictly
then are all faithful subjects tied, as much as in them lies, to maintain the
good name, honor, and reputation of their lawful Soneraignes, by traitors,
rebels, And antichristians, so unjustly, jmpiously, and jmpudently taxed both
in words and writings. For as his Majesty is our King, by God appointed to
rule over his British and Irish Israel, both in Church and common wealth: and
as in dignity he is nulli secundus, nay more (for that may seem to admit an
equal) Primus inter omnes, without a mate, highest: even so the blemish of
good name, honor, and reputation in his Majesty, is of all others most
dishonorable, most scandalous; as his Majesty is of all others most eminent,
most conspicuous; and therefore by every good subject as occasion offers it
self (pro viribus) to be maintained. If a natural father have a bad name,
though vndesernedly, yet is that in the worlds eye (that cannot judge thereof,
but by report) a scandal unto the children. Our King is more, for he is not
only Pater familiae, a father of a private family, but he is, Pater Patriae, a
father of our Country; nay more, he is, Pater multorum gentium and regnorum, a
father of many Kingdoms England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, and which is
most, he is a good Christian, and Christianae fidei Defensor, the chief
Champion for defense of Christian faith, through whose sides the enemy seeks
to wound the whole Church of Christ, and to lay aspersions of blood and tyrany
upon all such as with him profess the gospel of Christ.

The consideration whereof (as also a fervent desire to do my Country some
public service, in helping (as much as in me lies) to stop the mouths of our
common adversaries the Papists, whose lavish tongs have spit out abundance of
venom, and their pens stung like Scorpions, not only our late most gracious
and worthy Queen Elizabeth (of euer-blessed memory, for the many
unspeakable blessings that God with and through her bestowed upon this and
other Kingdoms) But also our present Sovereign Lord and King, with both their
state Ministers, by charging them as falsely, so maliciously with cruelty,
breach of promise, blood, and bloody persecution for conscience) has moved
me to jmploye the best talent of my small ability to convince them of jmpudent
and lying malicious slanders and reproachful untruths. First in a few
following lines directed unto all Romish favorites, clearing my present
gracious Sovereign of breach of promise with Recusants, for toleration of
Popery, wherein also I have touched the ground of that slander, with the
occasion and Authors thereof, with some other matters of special moment.
Secondly, in a tabular computation; by a comparatiue collection of all such
Martyrs as were burned in Queen Mary's days, with all such Priests, Jesuits,
and popish Recusants, as their Pseudomartyrologist I. W. Priest pretends (and
but pretends) to have been executed in England (Religionis ergo) since the
beginning of Q. Elizabeth's reign until this present year 1608. I have cleared
the second accusation of cruelty, blood, and bloody presecution for conscience,
evidently proouing by their own account, unto the understanding of the most
simple, that is not wilfully blind, that many more of the first sort suffered
death, and were in fire consumed only for their conscience, within the less
then six years reign of Queen Marie, then of the second, third and fourth
sort (to wit, Priests, Jesuits, and Recusants) in 52. years since, and that
not for Religion, but Vide Torturam Torti. paginis. 131. 132.
Treason. Whereby it appears how unjustly our late worthy Queen, our
present gracious King and their Stateministers, have been and are most
jmpudently and falsely of blood and cruelty accused and taxed.

Nor have I ought herein written to give satisfaction to any such (for let them
sincke in their own sins) as being over deeply bewitched with Romes
jdolatry, do hold that all Treasons, all Rebellions, all Attempts, vi, aut
fraud, against the persons and states of our late Queen Elizabeth, and our
now present King, both were and are not only lawful, but meritorious: But to
inform such of them as being of a milder temper, (and yet looking that way)
willingly confess and acknowledge, that all such as have been or are guilty
of such crimes, have deservedly been punished; but yet do, or at least seem
to conceive that their Priests and Jesuits have suffered only for their
Consciences, and therefore their persecution (they being many in number) is (in
their judgment) great and lamentable. Which were it granted, or could (as it
never can) be proved that they all dyed for their conscience only, (which
yet is a conscience mis-enformed) yet does the number of our true Martyrs in
less then 6. years of Queen Mary's reign, (although it should be permitted
unto them to take also into their number those fifty and two lay persons, (for
so many I think there are) registered with the Priests and Jesuits in their
own Martyrologe) not only equallize, but exceed the number of theirs in full
fifty years since, by the number of almost 100. persons. Insomuch, that if the
numbers of persons suffering, and the number of years of both sorts wherein
they suffered be compared, and the cause of all their sufferings admitted to
be alike just or unjust (of which there is no comparison) yet did the cruelty
of Queen Marie and her popish Clergy, outstrip Queen Elizabeth and king
James conjoined, more then ten for one; and therefore learn, you that have
any spark of grace remaining in you, to be good subjects to your King, and
cease now at last to tax your sovereign any more of persecution, whose heart
bleeds that he is forced to draw blood from others for their jntollerable
demerits.

As for the truth of these collections whereat perhaps (and not unlike) some
popish spirits will take Three conversions of Eng: part 3. in many places.
exception; understand that Mr. Fox that sometime reverend Father of our
Church, is my Author, whom for the number of such professors of the Gospel as
were burned in Queen Mary's days, I have soly followed, who albeit happily
(for it is almost jmpossible to be otherwise) in some things in so large a
volume, he might commit some small error in some particular cicumstances,
because no Historian can possibly be present every where with his own eyes and
ears, but must of necessity give credit unto the relations of others in many
points; Yet the granity of his person, his excellent learning, his great
reading, his worthy and sober carriage, his sound judgment, and therein his
wise choice of Authors, and the general report of his honest and religious
mind, by an uniform consent of all such as knew him, freeth him from taxation
of any wilful and gross error, or willing mistaking, and from any malicious
aslertion against the Papists without a probable ground, throughout his worthy
work, in whose behalf I think it needless to bestow much pains, because
the honester and greater sort are honestly already of him persuaded, and for
the rest as they are for number fewer, and their honesty little worth, so ate
they many of them wilfully obstinate and will not be persuaded.

As for the other sort, to wit, popish Priests, Jesuits, and Recusants, such
as have been executed since the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign (as I.
W. pretends for religion) until the year 1608. they are coppyed word for
word out of a book called The English Martyrologe by J. VV. Priest Anno. 1608.
English Martyrologe, by the authority of the popish supervisors (as it should
seem) allowed, unless the nameles author thereof I. W. Priest do belie them.
Wherein I have dealt as truly with them to a letter as I could, save only that
I have left out one person, and in steed thereof added two, to wit, William
Watson and William Clarke, both Priests executed at Watson, and Clarke,
executed at Winchester in An. 1603. November. 29.
Winchester November. 29. 1603. I know not how by the Pseudomartyrologist
omitted, for he might as well have enrolled them as those which he has done,
being all alike, traitors to their Prince and Country. Noram I disposed to
cavil for that I find diverse of their Priests noted in that his Martyrologe by
one name which yet I find set down in our Chronicles by an other name, as for
example, in An. 1585. January 21. Edward Transam, Stowe.
and Nicho. Wodfine, so by this our Martyrologist noted, are by others named
Edmund Barbar and Nicholas Deuorax, which I note chiefly for this end, that
none might be deceived in thinking that more have been executed, then in deed
have been, because one and the same persons are in their and our writings noted
by different names, for they have so many false names, that amongst them all I
find not one good and true. He that at Henry Garnet had 6. names, to wit,
Ganet, VValley, Darcy, Roberts, Farmer, and Phillips. Likewise Edward Hall
alias Oldecorne. Likewise Oswa^d ^esmund alias Greenway. Likewise Thomas Garnet
alias Rookwood, alias Sayer, with many others.
London is called Richard, at Rome is called John, he that at Rhesmes and Doway
is called Peter, in England is called Saul; he that in the Jesuits cells is
Sainted for his resolution, is at Tyburne hanged for his treason. I have I
confess transposed some of both sorts, both of our Martyrs and their traitors,
but only for this end that I might reduce them to our account, which begins
the year on the 25. of March, according to the tabular Register following,
whereas both Mr. Fox and the Pseudomartyrologist began the year the first of
January; As for example, Mr. Fox has noted John Rogers the first Martyr in
Queen Marie her days, to have suffered February 4. 1555. which yet according
to our account was in the year 1554. Likewise the Pseudomartyrologist has in
his Martyrologe noted William Richardson to have been executed Feb. 27. 1603.
which might seem to be in the first year of King James, which yet was in the
latter end of Queen Elizabeth, and in the year of our Lord 1602. according as
in that year in the table following you may see.

Now having compared their numbers together, I could not but admire their
jmpudency in that void of shame, modesty, religion, christianity, they dare so
publicly and unjustly without blushing, revile and slander so gracious a
Princess as was noble Q. Elizabeth, and so merciful a King as is our
Sovereign Lord K. James, considering that so many more suffered in the less
then six years reign of Queen Marie only for religion, then have sithence
by their own account been executed in fifty years of two succeeding Princes
(and those not for religion but for their treasons) the number of the true
Martyrs noted in print, being in all by this account almost 300. and the number
of their Seminary Priests, Jesuits, and Recusants, by their own account not
fully 200. which (number and time considered) is more then ten for one. Nor
is there a greater disproportion in the number, then in the causes of their
sufferings, the former suffering only for their conscience, the latter for
their treasons.

I am not ignorant that our adversaries do tax Mr. Fox of many Three
conversions of England in page 426. and many pages thereof besides
untruths and many strange matters, whose errors, if any such were, I will not
maintain, but somewhat excuse by way of recrimination, by cyting out of this
my popish Author some such stories of his Saints Miracles, as I find in his
said Martyrologe expressed (which he has divided according to the months of
the year) leaving the truth and likely-hoode to thy censure.

Popish Miracles.
ANd first in the month of January; January 7. Page 7.
I find this story, that when Saint Chad Bishop of Litchfield dyed, his
brother Ceds soul (who was before Bishop of London) was seen to descend from
heaven with a troop of Angels, to accompany the same to heaven.

Another.
ST. Egwine Bishop of Worcester, January. 11. Page 10.
made a pair of Iron shackles, locked them close about his legs, then cast
the keys thereof into the River of Seuerne, and so went to Rome with Offa King
of Mercia: desiring of God, that the said shackles might not be loosed from his
legs, until he had made satisfaction for all the sins of his youthful
years: and in his return back, as he came over the sea, upon a soden a fish
leaped into the Ship wherein he sailed, which being taken and killed, the
foresaid keys of the shackles that he had thrown into the River, were found
in the fishes belly, which he applying to his shackles, forthwith unlocked
them.

Another.
IN North Wales the commemoration of S. Beno Priest, January 14. Page 12.
who leading an Eremiticall life in the west parts of England, was by an Angel
admonished to go into Wales to a Noble man called Trebuith, S. Wenefrides
Father, who gave him a part of his lands and possessions to build a Monastery,
as also his Daughter Wenefride to be instructed and brought up in a religious
manner: whose head being soon after cut off by Cradocus son to Alane King of
the same Country, for not yiedling to his unlawful lust, he miraculously set
on again, she living fifteen years after.

Another.
ST. Elsted virgin, January 20. Page 18.
and afterward Abbess; it happened unto her that before she was chosen
Abbess, she being in the Church at Mattins before day, with the rest of her
sisters, going into the midst according to the custom, to read a lesson,
the candle wherewith she saw to read chanced to be put out, and therevppon
wanting light, there came from the fingers of her right hand such an exceeding
brightness upon the sudden, that not only her self, but all the rest of
the Quire might see to read by it also. And having another time given much to
relieve the poor, whereby her chests were emptyed, being therefore for her
lauishnes checked by the Procurator of the house, she made moan to the Lord,
and her Chests were again myraculously filled as before.

Another.
ST. Wereburge; February 3. Page 32.
she upon her death bed commanded her body to be buried at Hamburge, but
contrary to her will it was carried to the monastery of Trickingham, where (the
gates fast locked) the same was kept and watched very carefully. But see a
wonder, they that kept it fell into a sleep, so as the people of Hamburge
coming in the night to fetch the body away, the gates of the Church and
Monastery were opened without hands, of themselves, and so they carried the
body and buried it at Hamburge, as before she requested.

Another.
ST. Patrick: March 17. Page 17.
he obtained by his Prayers, that no venomous creature should live or breed in
Ireland.

Another.
ST. Richard Bishop of Chichester: April 3. Page 86.
he dyed at Dover in Kent, his body being brought to Chichester, so shined with
Miracles that (besides others) he raised up three dead men again to life.

Another.
ST. Frithstan; April 9. Page 92.
one evening as he was saying Mass, as he walked in the Churchyard, when he
came to the words, Requiescant in pace, the voices in the graves round about,
made answer aloud and said, Amen.

Another.
ST. Pyran: May 2. Page 116.
he sustained ten Armies of men for eight days with the flesh of three Kine,
and also raised diverse dead men to life.

Another.
ST. Sewell: May 18.
he for his integrity and innocence of life was such, and so acceptable to
God, that it pleased his divine Majesty in sign thereof, to work miracles by
him both alive and dead; and among others, it is recorded, that lying on his
deathbed he turned water into wine, by only blessing it.

Another.
KIng Henry the sixth: May 22. Page 134.
his velvet Hat which he used to wear, being put on men's heads that were
troubled with the headache, they were presently cured.

Another.
ONe of the soldiers that led S. Alban to his death, June 22. Page 167.
repented when he saw the constancy of the Martyr, and asked him forgiveness,
which the persecutors beholding, they grievously tormented him for the same,
but he following S. Alban to his death when S. Albans head was cut off, he
took it up and embraced it in his arms, and thereby was immediately cured of
all his wounds.

Another.
ST. Swithine: July 2. Page 178.
he, when by a mischance a woman had broken all her eggs, made the sign of
the cross over the same eggs, and immediately they all became whole again.

Another.
THe heads of Wiaman, July 25. Page 202.
Vnaman, and Sunaman, being cut off and cast into a poole by the enemies of
Christ, S. Sigfride on a time walking by the poole and deploring their deaths,
on a sudden there appeared three miraculous lights upon the water, which
encompassed the vessel wherein their said heads were; which he seeing,
presently leaped into the poole, and embracing them wept and said, Vindicet
Deus. Whereto one answered, Vindicatu^erit; another replied, in quem? the third
added, in filios filiorum.

Another.
A Monk of a certain Monastery whereof S. Alexander was, August 6. Page 216.
coming to the said Alexanders tomb to pray, and having an ulcer in his
breast which was now grown to a fistula; Alexander appeared unto him brighter
then the Sun, with two Crowns, one on his head, and another in his hand. The
Monk demanded what that double Crown meant? he answered: The Crown in his
hand is for the temporal Crown which he forsook for Christ's love (for he should
have bin king of Scotland, being next heir thereto, as the story reports)
the other on my head, is that which I have received common with other Saints.
And that you may be assured of the verity of this vision, you shall be
presently cured of your infirmity; and having thus spoken and the other
jmmediatly healed, he vanished away.

Another.
ST. Decuman first passed over the River of Seuerne miraculously with a faggot
in steed of a boat, August 27. Page 233.
and afterward was slain by a Pagan and his head cut off, which he took up
from the ground and carried it to a fountain where he was wont to wash it.

Another.
ST. Dunstan: September 7. Page 244.
he on a time, when the devil appeared unto him in the likeness of a young
woman tempting him to uncleanness, took a pair of pincers which lay by him,
and caught the devil by the upper lip, and so holding him fast, and leading
him up and down his chamber, after diverse jnterrogatories drove him away.

Another.
ST. Osith: she after that the Danes had cut off her head, October 7. Page 372.
took it up in her hands and carried it three furlongs to a Church of S.
Peter, and S. Paul, whither when she came all jmbrued in her own innocent
blood, she fell down, and so ended the course of her Martyrdom.

Another.
ST. Keyna: October 8. Page 374.
she by her prayers turned a wood full of Serpents into stones, still retayning
the likenesses of Serpents: Also she being ready to depart out of this world,
an Angel came down from heaven, and put upon her a white garment wrought with
Gould, bidding her to be in readiness to enter into the kingdom of her
celestial Spouse.

Another.
ST. Edmund: Noue^ber 20. Page 320.
he having his head cut off by the Danes, and cast into a wood near by
amongst briars and bushes, the Christians afterward seeking for the same, lost
themselves in the same wood, and calling one to another, where art? where art?
the head answered, Here, Here, Here, by which they found out the same.

Another.
ST. Inthware: Dece^ber 23. Page 350.
she having her head cut off by her own brother Bana upon a day as she came
from Church, because she was accused by her stepmother to be an harlot, her
jnnocency was presently testified by this, for that she presently took it up
in her own hands and carried it to the Church from whence she came. Add
hereto also their late coined (Death deserving for the fact) wonder of Garnets
face in a wheat straw. Vide librum cuius titulipars est, Vera historia de
admirabili spica. Rightly englished, A fabulous story of a fained straw, first
divulged by a foolish Iack-daw.

Many more such gross and palpable lying woonders are therein expressed, which
I am weary to recount, and I almost wonder that they themselves are not ashamed
to record for truths; but as herein, so also in their false accusations of
Queen Elizabeth and King James, by unjustly and maliciously taxing them with
blood, breach of promise, and bloody persecution for conscience, they are most
jmpudent and shameless, yea past shame and past grace; for as a Reverend D.
Barlow in his answer to M. Broughton.
Father of our Church elsewhere upon another occasion (though more rightly
applyable to this generation) said, Qui semel modestiae limits transilijt,
knauiter fit impudens. But the Priests and Jesuits in this point of jmpudency
surpass, and one maine reason hereof, as I take it, is because they hold the
lay Papists, of whom they have their maintenance, in such a thraldom of
jgnorant obedience, as that they dare not for fear of damnation read any book
whereby to inform them in the truth, but only such as their traitorous and
seditious vn-ghostly leaders shall permit: And so if they can hold the good
opinions of their maintainers, they will never blush at whatsoever themselves
say, or whatsoever be said of them by others.

If any friend shall think that this my labor might well have been spared,
because the lives of the Martyrs, the proceedings against them, and the times
and causes of their sufferings are already by Mr. Fox in his large Book
thereof more fully expressed; or otherwise should think that I do the Papists
too great a grace, by placing them in the same Book with the true Martyrs of
Christ; to him in friendly manner I thus replye, and first to the first. That
though his allegation be indeed true (for I willingly confess that he has
deserved much for his extraordinary pains that ways, and has compassed so
much and such variety of matter therein, as that I cannot say whether were
greater, 1610.
his labor or the Readers profit) yet cannot every man's purse reach so great
price as is that The book at large (worthy to be written in letters of gould)
is this year newly and well printed by the Company of Stationets in London.
Book at large; and besides I have not meddled with any matter of History
contained therein, but only have borrowed out of him the names of such as were
in Queen Mary's days burned, as I have likewise out of their Martyrologist
the names of their Priests, Jesuits, and Recusants, for unless I should set
down their names, I could make no good comparison of their numbers in
opposition one to the other; which is the especial end whereat I aim.

Secondly, although that twenty or thirty years, since many hundreds of
Thousands of persons were living that could viva voce bear record how cruelly
and unmercifully the Professors of Christ's truth were dealt withal in Queen
Mary's days, and could also (if any seducing Priest or Jesuit had accused
their Sovereign of cruelty) have thus replied, Away vild harlots, belie her
not, fox Queen Elizabeth was a merciful Queen, but mine eyes have seen the
abundance of blood shed in Queen Mary's reign only for conscience, wherewith
ye were never glutted, but now these Viue-speakers in Christ's cause being by
time consumed, it is more needful to preserve by these neuer-dying memorials,
the remembrance of their sufferings, especially seeing the adversary is so
busy by all means that the Pope, the Devil, or hell it self can possibly
devise to exalt their faction, and to bring a scandal both upon our
Sovereigns, us, and them.

And to the second point; That it is a Grace unto the Papists and Romanists to
have their Priests and Jesuits ranked with the true Professors, I answer
thus: It is not the punishment, nor the place, but only the cause that makes
a man famous for virtue, or for vice jnfamous, loved of God for his own free
graces, or hated of God and good men for their villainies.

If the Iron bars whereon Catesbies and Percies heads are fixed and nailed on
the Parliament house, be a grace unto them or any of their favorites, because
they possess the highest places of that Honorable house; such grace have all
the kings enemies. If Garnets scaffold because it was raised aloft for more
public view, were an honor unto him or any of his Iesuited society, such
honor have all that are, were, or hereafter shall be his partakers. If London
bridge or Newgate grace that faction, because their friends dismembered limbs
are so highly thereon advanced; let Crows and Ravens likewise devour all them
that deserve the like grace for the like jnfidelity. Lastly, if Judas their
fellow-traitor can any whit at all grace them because he is noted in the book
of God, (but with this foul addition, Traitor) let them likewise take him and
make him a brother of their Company, or rather jncorporate themselves into his
Society, but let all that bear ill will to the Church of England, and the
Kings Majesty as a principal member thereof; let I say, their ends (oh God)
be like unto their master Judas, and let their bowels break in sunder that
would eat out the bowels of thy Church of England; and let this black word of
Traitor be the jndelible spot, never to be washed away, wherewith I brand
all English Italionated Priests and Jesuits, and their Abbettors. Add to
these also the Iacobine Friar and Rauilack, the two murderers of two French
kings Henry 3. and Henry 4. (for these are also Sons of one Father the Pope,
the Devil their Grandfather, and those before, their brethren in iniquity,
never to be spoken of but to their shame with posterity,) the felicity of whose
Reign (namely Henry the 4.) and peaceable government, free from danger of any
desperate attempt of stabbing or poisoning, or other attempt of peril to his
person by any of Romes favorites, our english Popish Recusants (scienter
loquor) before that inhumane and hellish fact committed pleaded and strongly
argued to proceed from that lenity of his, in permitting a freedom of
conscience to his subjects in matter of Religion; whereby they would infer,
that if our Kings Majesty would desire to live securely from any such
attempts, not needing to fear peril either by stabbing, poisoning, powder, or
otherwise, then let a toleration begraunted; but how sound their conclusion is,
France has felt, England may fear, and all the world is amazed thereat.

For if the King of France being a Papist, and at most but suspected to affect
the Protestant Religion, could not yet be secure in his person, how much less
can our King expect any assurance of saftie by a toleration, his Majesty being
himself a professed Protestant, and directly opposite in Faith and Religion.
Nay it might rather be much feared, that it would be a means to pull Gods
just judgments upon him and us, for permission of such false worship of the
true God; for so we may read in diverse places of the Old Testament, that when
the Rulers of the people fell away from God, God sent upon them many plagues,
miseries, and oppressions by their enemies. And thus much in answer to the
second point, which my friend may object.

Thine in all Christian love, monogram incorporating the letters FRANCIS BTO
(?and U)

TO THE WHOLE rabble of English-borne, Romish malcontents, and disturbers of
this State.
NOT HOPING hereby to reclaim you (that are already by Satan's witchcrafts
seduced) from your many dangerous and pernicious errors, which cleave more fast
unto you then the skin unto the flesh, or the flesh unto the bones, for that
were Extra spem sperare, a hope without any ground: Nor yet in bitterness of
spirit (only) purposing to rail upon you as many of you most jmpudently have
done against your own Mother, for that were want of charity: nor any ways
intending to give satisfaction unto your vnsatisfiable obstinacy and
wilfull-willing blindness, by reasoning scholastically, or propounding and
framing logical (or as you use sophistical) arguments to convince your
follies, for that would be in me presumption; For what am I that after so many
rare wits, and vnrefutable judgments in matters Divine, as have already
labored your conversion, I should hope of better success therein then they
before have had?

I rather conclude with Abraham, who told the rich man that desired a messenger
to be sent from the dead to the living to warn them that they might avoid the
like danger of coming there, That if they will not believe the Prophets,
neither would they believe though one came from the dead: so if you will not be
persuaded by the scriptures, and the strong and vn-answerable arguments of such
excellent Divines as have already labored your convesion, neither will you be
persuaded though Christ himself should descend from heaven in person to
confute you.

But my scope and drift herein is, (pro viribus) First to prevent the fall of
those who yet stand but are ready to fall. Secondly, to free my late Sovereign
Queen Elizabeth, that sometimes peerless Prince, and my now dread Sovereign
the Kings Majesty, and their State-ministers from many false and Serpentine
jmputations, laid upon them by men of your rank, of bad spirits, whose
throats are open Sepulchers, wherein to bury true Honor, Faith keeping,
Grace, Mercy, Pity, Piety, Protection, Truth and Religion in eternal
oblivion; breathing out from thence (as from the fournace of Hell) instead
thereof nothing but Dishonor, Breach of promise, Disgrace, Cruelty, Blood,
Want of devotion, Oppression, Heresy, and Irreligion.

These are the motives that enforced my pen* these the reasons of my
non-silence, who otherwise could have been contented quietly and securely to
have reposed my self in the joyful contemplation of Gods manifold blessings
and mercies of an extraordinary nature toward this Nation, by continuance of
the Gospel amongst us, Which, that it is the Truth, and that he himself with
his own right hand has planted it, and defended it by the power of his own
arm, the many strange Miracles (for such say you must needs approve the
Truth) which himself from time to time since before the beginning of Q.
Elizabeth's reign until this present has wrought, do evidently confirm and
prove.

For is it possible that our late famous Queen of euer-blessed memory, The
Miracles that god has wrought for confirmation of his gospel.
and our now Sovereign the Kings Majesty, should have escaped the many pitts
that have been dug for them, and not have fallen therein? Is it possible
that Queen Elizabeth, full of years but fuller of Renown, should have lived
unto a gray headed age, and quietly dying in her bed, to be maugre all her
enemies, brought in peace unto her grave? Is it possible that this present
State wherein we live should now have a Being, seeing that Hell, the Pope, [Vt
obiter note^. The word Recusant, (now so common) until the Eleauenth year of
Queen Elizabeth's Ragine, was altogether unknown, (as may appear by all
Statutes and Acts of Parliament before that time made, wherein there is not a
word thereof at all) until which time all Papists, some very few excepted,
(notwithstanding, that the Religion then professed in the Church of England,
was the very same that it was in the former years of her Reign) came
ordinarily to our Churches, nor was disparitie of religion any cause of
Recusancy, until such times that the roaring Bull of Pope Pius 5. (for then the
land began to swarm with Recusants) was published, and Queen Elizabeth by him
Anathematized: Then the case was suddenly altered, those who before frequented
our Churches, now withdraw themselves from our Society; Those who before
yielded obedience to his Majesty, now would not acknowledge her for their
lawful Queen; hereupon followed jmmediatly the rebellion in the North, and
other dangerous conspiracies by your faction. And to prove that Religion was
not the cause of their Recusancy (besides that which has been abouesayd)
Scotland will testify, wherein albeit there have been and are many known
Papists both men and women, yet in all the time of King James his Reign there,
nor yet since he reigned here, have any of the^ absented themselves or refused
to come to our Churches in Scotland, and yet I make no question but you will
say that the Romish religion is one and the same there that it is here: you
must needs then grant, that not religion but the Popes pleasure (unto whose
girdle you are tied) is the cause of Recusancy, and it behooves his Majesty
to have special regard unto you that are Recusants, and by all good means
that he can to assure his own estate, in another regard then only that you
will not, interesse sacris, with us, for Recusancy and Treason are so linked
one in the other, and compacted, that hardly can he be a Recusant that is not
a Traitor likewise. See more hereof if you please in the 130 and 131. pages of
Tortura Torti.] Seminary Priests and Jesuits, Traitors and seditious persons
have conspired against it, had not the Lord himself miraculously defended it,
and maintained his Truth?

I need not instance particular deliverances, for who is he amongst us that
remembers not many? But yet I cannot without ingratitude to God, Two miracles
of miracles.
our most gracious preserver, ouer-slip in silence those two miracles of
miracles, The 1.
to wit, Our deliverance from Spaines (so falsely by them termed, but blessed
be God therefore) invincible Armado, An. 1588. and from the mines of fire and
Gunpowder prepared by ympes of Hell, The 2.
for Englands Funeral An. 1605. which latter but that mine own eyes have seen
their preparations, I should (with Thomas) scarcely have believed: The Jesuits
reported in Spain that there was no such matter as the gunpowder Treason.
Related by the L. Cook at the Earl of Northumberl. conviction, in the
Star-cha^ber. June 27. 1606.
And no marvel though in Spain the report thereof can with many hardly be
credited, for some at our own home that have not with their own eyes seen it,
or with their ears heard the Delinquents, Viva voce, confess it, can hardly,
yet conceive half the malice thereof, it seems to those that have any sparks
of humanity, so passing cruel and incredible. These if the Gospel must needs
be confirmed by miracles, are true miracles.

These are no counterfeit juggling tricks, or Popish impostures to delude the
simple, Childish and strawish Miracles.
such as were the Sicknesse-healing Child, or the Picture of the Traitor
Garnets face in a wheat straw, found perhaps amongst a Popish Tailors wives
shreds, or brought in in the belly of a Griffin or Gryfo^, inte^ding thereby
the ruin of Troynovant, as were the armed men of Yore in the belly of Synons
wooden horse, for Troy the old its Destruction: such as these we leave to you
to insert into your Legenda Aurea, or Legend of lies.

As for persecution for conscience, In your supplication to the kings Majesty,
Anno. 1603. and An. 1604 in many places thereof: as also in diuerss other
treasonable books since by you set forth and dispersed.
against which in diverse of your pamphlets you so loudly cry, the comparison of
times for continuance wherein, of persons for numbers in those times, how many,
whose blood on both sides have been shed, and the causes (partly) wherefore, in
the following Table will appear. But the grounds of religion, contained in the
holy Scriptures of the old and new Testament, penned by the Prophets and
Apostles, on which we build our faith, and the refutation of errors and false
doctrine maintained by Romish Recusants, Priests, and Jesuits which in former
times and in these times also have and do cause so great disturbances and
persecutions of the Church of Christ, I leave to be defended by those grave
and strong pillars of our Church, and learned Fathers of our Clergy, whose
foundnesse in doctrine all the Papists in the world are unable to evince.

Concerning that dishonor wherewith very freque^tly but falsely (as is well
Tortura Torti. Page 83.
approved by the then Bishop of Chichester) you tax your Sovereign Lord the
Kings Majesty for breach of promise with Recusants, concerning a toleration of
Popish religion, that (quantum in me est) I may confute such unjust
exclamations against his Majesty's Person and his Honor, I will briesly touch
that point, by declaring not only unto you, but unto all the world that shall
take notice hereof, what mine own ears heard in an open Court (of mercy I may
say rather then of justice in this case) debated and censured. The
Star Chamber.


The case stood between the Kings Majesty and a great Peer of this Land,
amongst whose many gross slippes and juglorious acts, this point was as the
rest (all which his Majesty was pleased, nay (as said the Lord Cook then the
Kings Attorney) commanded that they should not otherwise be handled then as
matters of Contempt) ripped up and scanned. His name I could particularly
insta^ce, but because it pleased my Sovereign to deal with him not in rigor
of law and justice but merely in Grace, I hold it not my part (othewise then
what for clearing of the truth I needsly must) him by name to disgrace.

Wherefore that I may help to wash away those aspertions of dishonor, unjustly
thrown upon his sacred Majesty by men of bad spirits, and that like spots and
stains never to be done away* they may seat themselves within the muddy Circle
of the duskie Moon, their true Center, and not eclipse the bright honor of
our splendant Sun and glorious North-star, I will here relate from whence by
much probability, this error at first sprange.

This noble fore-remembred Personage, Omne animi vitium tanto conspectius i^ se
crime^ habet, quanto mayor qui peccat habetur.
whose greatness adds a greatness to his fault, (if I may link Nobility with
such jgnoble actions) ambitiously (as it should seem) affecting a singular
greatness, not at all regarding Religion (as some have thought) further then
as it might serve him as a ladder to promotion, was in show outwardly a seeming
Protestant, but underhand and covertly, willing to be held a Papist, jnsomuch
that by his close carriage he was very honorably thought of by his Majesty,
and chosen by his Majesty to be very near unto him, and yet nevertheless
highly accounted of and respected amongst the Romanists for a sure friend of
theirs, upon whom they might hold a Dependence; Testified hereby, that with his
own hands he delivered and presented their Popish Supplication unto his
Majesty at Theobalds, for a toleration in Anno. 1603.

And that I may not seem maliciously of my self without a ground to tax him
herein of ambition, The now (...) Cook.
observe with me, that at his trial (by one for his learning judicious, for
his knowledge experienced in matters of State) it was by evident arguments
proved that his proceedings argued a manifest Discontentme^t, and withal that
all discontentments proceeded from either want, disgrace, or ambition; but not
from want, for his possessions and yearly revenues were exceeding great; not
from disgrace, for his Majesty had many ways graced and highly honored him;
(which graces as he then did, so I now could particularly jnstance, but that
thereby I must needsly discover his person) and therefore of necessity from
Ambition.

Likewise as then by one was observed his ambition in his jntentions and
thoughts, so by another of higher rank and dignity was noted his
dissimulation in his actions, The Lord Archbishop of Cant.
for said he, there are in all his proceedings, Vestigia manifesta, and
vestigia occulta, giving withal an jnsta^ce herein, That this great personage
had admitted T. P. that Archtraitor to be a Pentioner, The word the^ used was,
To hold an Axe over the Kings head.
but yet without having any oath administered him, either for his allegiance, or
yet for his particular discharge of that place whereunto he was admitted, and
yet underhand giving out that he was sworn, whereupon he jnferred thus, That
wheresoever things were palliated which were, or feigned to be which are not,
there always is some deceit. At which time he was by a third honorable
personage taxed expreslie for his Hippocrisie, as being Jack on both sides,
whereby he had made himself odious to both Protestants (so termed) and
Papists: The L. Zouch.
nor yet (though these are jnough) are these all. But to return to our purpose
and matter in hand.

Before he ascended unto that height of honor (which then by the Kings special
favor he was advanced unto) I mean in Queen Elizabeth's time, when his
predecessors carriage had give^ just occasion of the successors further
disgrace, then [at this very time was the same person employed unto his
majesty with letters from Garnet the Jesuits Provincial, who had about that
time received the Popes Breues to this purpose, Quandocunque contigerit miseram
illam faeminam (meaning Q. Elizabeth) ex hac vita exire, etc. that whenever
that wretched woman should die, the papists should not admit of any other to
inherit, how near so ever in blood, unless he were a (Romish) Catholic,
and not so only, unless he would also swear to uphold to his power the
popish Religion. But the Kings happy acceptance with his good Subjects,
caused those to be converted into ashes, and then come other Breues enioyning
their obedience to his Majesty, but Coacta virtus non est virtus, Gramercy
horse when you cannot choose, then obey. This is that Obedientia, ex
necessitate, nempe ferrea jlla and coacta, which Bellarmine notes
Recognitionum, page 16. And how long this? until they be able to cast him out
who^ they were forced to receive. And your Watson soon attempted that which
he knew his unholy Father the Pope heartily wished. He was a low man in
person, but he aspyred high when he thought to be Lord Chancellor of England:
but missing that, he was advanced to the Gallows for preferment, but I think
being purblind, he missed the way that he meant] I say did this
double-hearted Lord jmploy T. P. the Traitor unto the Kings Majesty then King
only of Scotland, with certain letters of advise, but much in the behalf of
the English Romish Catholics, aduising him that he should at such time as it
should please the Lord to call him to the possession of this his kingdom
(which as now he does, so long Lord grant he may quietly enjoye) give fair
promises and hopes of tolleration unto the Papists, thereby (as he therein
pretended) to prepare a more easy entrance for his Majesty when time should
serve.

The Kings Majesty (not as then suspecting the depth of this his Counselors
drifts, but understanding him simply) returned him an answer, with thanks for
his advise, but withal jnferring a clause directly (as since it appears)
contrary to his Counselors expectation. His Majesty's words in answer to the
letter, were in effect as follows.

Whenever it shall please GOD in his due time to call me to the possession
of my right in England, I purpose not to make any jnnovation in the State, or
to alter the Laws and Ordinances thereof, etc. Whereupon a wise man would (as
the L L. did) have thus jnferred: No alteration in the State, no changing of
Laws and Ordinances therein established; why then no toleratio^ of Popery, no
allowance of Recusancy; and not because it pleased the kings Majesty out of
the meekness of his Spirit (void of guile and double dealing) to return him
thanks for his advise (although he did not so much as make show that he liked
thereof) therefore to conclude that a toleration should be granted.

But he in his ambition besotted with his own folly, not expounding his
Majesty's words as he meant, but as he himself conceited them, because he so
(as it should evidently appear) wished that it might be, did so far exceed
the limits of his commission, and was so far vainly transported, Vide
Tortura^ Torti Page 83. Prom^ssa nescioquae comme^ti sunt quae tamen nulla
suerunt and quod factu^ nunqua^ est, id fuisse tamen factium in vulgus
spargebant.
as that at T. P. his return from the Kings Majesty, it was amongst the
Papists divulged (though falsely) that the King had also by the said T. P.
given directions to the afore-remembred great Personage, by word of mouth to
wind himself into their favors, (for that was the word) and to give hopes of
toleration in his Majesty's name unto Recusants, and herehence chiefly arose
that scandal of the kings Honor, that he had broken promise with Recusants.
For the better confirmation whereof, and that his Majesty never intended any
such matter of toleration, vide the Earl of Northamp. printed speech at
Garnets arraignment in page 1. of A aa
Confer herewith Watson the Priest his confession unto the Honorable Lord
the Lord of Northampton at Winchester; who being by the Earl (by his Majesty
thereunto appointed) examined upon the point of promise of toleration, freely
confessed that albeit he were by some falsely accused to be the Author of that
report, yet it was most true that he could never at any time draw any comfort
from his Majesty in the point of conscience.

All which notwithstanding (besides the just cause that the Powder Treason, and
other dangerous conspiracies against his Majesty's life and kingdoms, hateful
to God and all good men, gave, of an hard hand over the Papists) yet let any of
you (that I may use the words of an Honorable Counselor) even the most
jmpudent and brazen faced amongst you, The Earl of Salisburie in his answer
to certain scandalous papers.
show any the least prints (if you can) of bloody steps in his Majesty's
Course: Nay rather I may much more truly say, he is a man composed all of
mercy, and not of any earthly element, subject to passions and disturbance, but
in a far more divine manner then ordinary men, resembling his Maker, for good
Kings and merciful are the most lively representative jmages of the Deity,
which causes as the wicked without warrant, upon Gods mercies, so Traitors and
miscreant without reason upon his Majesty's Clemency jmpudently to presume, to
their more just condemnation.

And here let me tell you (yet void of any desire of blood or bloody courses,
as God can bear record unto my soul, but only admiring the mercies of our
King) That I greatly doubt whether any Prince in the world (King James
excepted) if the like treason as was the Powdertreason, had been plotted
against him by persons of another religion or sect whatsoever, would have
suffered either man, woman, or child of so dangerous and damnable a profession,
to have breathed within his Dominions, especially if the grounds of their
religion (as does that of yours by evident proofs elswere convinced) do allow
of any such doctrine and enterprises. D. Reynolds in his preface before his
conference with Heart. D. Morton, M. Stock, with many more.


This Powder-plot-treason was in it self, in the eyes of some of the actors
therein, so horride and detestable, as that one of your own Jesuits from an
apprehension of the jmmane cruelty thereof, (not moved with any commiseration
of their miseries, who were by their designs destinated to the rage thereof,
but proceeding from a trembling fear least it should be discovered) could say
to his fellow in profession and action, Greenewell, and Garnet.
That if it were discovered it would be the utter ruin and dissolution of
their Society.

Remember also Robert Winters dream and the horror thereof, Reported at his
arraignme^t in VVestminst. Hall Ianu 27. 1605 mentioned in the Earl of
Northampto^s speech in the first page of L.
how it terrified his very soul with the ghastly appearance of some of his
consorts. And forget not the fearful vengeance of God in suffering their
faces to be so ugly disfigured with Gunpowder in Littletons house, who had
prepared a Destruction for this whole kingdom with the same matter and
Substance; and then conclude that God is just, and therefore in his justice did
punish their wickedness with the inventions of their own brains.

Was it not time to lop those ambitious aspyring thoughts of Watson the Priest
and his confederates, Confessed under his own hand in an examination openly
read in the Star-cha^ber at the co^viction, of the Earl of Northumberl. Iun.
27. 1606.
as also to clippe the wings of the Powder Treason contriuers and their
favorites, the first affecting in his own person the high Chancelorship of
England; and the latter building their hopes above the Moon, Confessed in
diverse examinations under their hands openly read the time and place aforesaid.
amongst themselves concluding to set up a Protector of their own choosing out
of the number of those Popish Lords, that by them were intended should be
preserved from that general destruction of their sulphurious fire, all of them
directly aiming at the utter ruin and destruction of this noble and renowned
Island, and to make desolate the most glorious Kingdom that is covered by the
Heavens.

But as the most fruitful trees bear their tops lowest, Simile.
and the most barren and unfruitful shoot up highest, even so is it amongst
men. Those that are most empty of virtue and laudable qualities, aspire in
their ambition to places of highest honor uncalled, whereas the more worthy
and virtuous would in their humility refuse them being jmposed, were it not
only for this, that they may thereby be the better jnabled to do good.

Admit that the Kings Majesty had in a religious policy promised a
toleration, before he were fully seated in his kingdom, or come into this
Kingdom, nay that he had so also meant indeed, as some of you have falsely
and jmpudently given out; yet had he not, for your extreme ill carriage and
disloyal demeanor, just cause to have revoked it? For before that liberty
could be established for you, there must needs have been a repeal made of
those Laws and Statutes formerly made against Recusancy, which as they were by
act of Parliament confirmed, so must they have been by the like authority
disanulled. These forward spirits (as they would be thought) for the Kings
Succession would yet have bereft us of his head before the Crown had adorned
it.
But your Watson and Clarke thought to make a shorter cut then so, by
preventing the King in the performance of that which Watson himself knew full
well the King never purpose nor promised, albeit it should seem by Watsons
own confession, that he had much labored and jmportuned his Majesty therein.
Since which time also, if his Majesty had promised the like (as some of your
faction have falsely given out) was not that matchless Powder Treason plotted,
Tortura Torti. Page 84.
contrived, See the Catholic supplication to the kings Majesty in Ann. 1604
near beginning thereof.
furthered, and assisted by beasts (for men I cannot call them, but rather
devils) of your religion, both Priests, Jesuits, and (as you style your
selves) lay Catholics, a sufficient warrantise without prejudice to his
honor, to recall such a grant as might give protection to Caterpillars,
Degenerate persons, Miscreants, Vipers, Monsters, and not men, and whatsoever
name more odious, that also; yea unworthy to be called by the name of any of
Gods creatures, for they persist in their created natures, but the other do not
but are degenerated from men to Devils.

That their damnable practice does rightly moralize the tale of the Husbandman,
wherein he is fabled to have found a Snake stiff and almost dead with cold,
and to have brought him home in his bosom and warmed him by the fire, which
after recovering began to hiss at the good man of the house for his pains,
and would with his venomous tongue have stung him to death, who had before
saved his life; which plainly bids King James beware that he nourish not
vipers in his own Kingdom, I pray God not in his Court.

You seem in some places of your writings to tax Queen Elizabeth, and in her
all true profes^ors of religion for a backward and frozen zeal toward the
Kings Majesty's rightful succession in these his kingdoms, See your
supplication to his Majesty, Anno. 1604. chap. 5.
and to blazo^ your own forwardness in his Majesty's behalf: but know, you
false-hearted and degenerate men, that king James knows how to judge of
spirits, Also in the first part of Engl. three Conversions, near the beginning
thereof.
and to hold you but hollow-hearted unto him now, because whiles you were yet
Queen Elizabeth's subjects, you were then so unto her, and to esteem of our
late Queen Honorably, and of us as faithful Subjects then unto her, so now
no less unto him. And albeit that for some reasons of State unto her self
best known, and which no doubt but his Majesty now very well understands,
it pleased her to conceal the kings right from the multitude, yet I verily
persuade my self that his Majesty did never so much as conceive a thought that
Queen Elizabeth did ever purpose or intend to debar him in his right of
lawful succession. And in this point your fellow Catholics thought to cast a
Bone between his Majesty and his good subjects, but you are made to swallow it
your selves, and some whose throats were to little it choked. Nor may I here
let pass untouched that Prophetical speech of that worthy Matriarke
(Honorable amongst women) Q. Elizabeth, who when in the first year of her
reign she was motioned to dispose her self to Marriage; that her subjects
might enjoy an happy issue of her own body, like as Abraham when his Son
Isaac said Behold the fire and the wood, but where is the Lamb for the burnt
offering? Genesis 22. 7. replied, Deus providebit mi fili; So she (Abraham's
daughter by faith) likewise, Fideles mei subditi, my loving and faithful
Subjects, although you may justly fear what may be the event of my disposednes
to a Virgin life, yet be not depressed with care that way, nor dejected with
sorrow, but trust in God, for Deus providebit, he even God, even that God who
made Sarahs barren womb fruitful, and he who, although I should marry, can
cause my womb to be barren, He, who had another meat to eat that his Disciples
knew not of, Ioh. 4. 32. Even he I say will provide you a king of his own
choosing, whom you do not so much as dream of, My Fathers Will must be done,
Ioh. 4. 34. I the Lord will be their God, and my servant David shall be the
Prince amongst them. I the Lord have spoken it, Ezech. 34. 24. Which that your
eyes have, after 44. years after that, seen accomplished, do ye and your
vn-holy father the Pope fret out your heart strings, (for so God bless, curse
ye and spare not) but let all good and faithful subjects say always, The
Lords name be praised. Her own words (worthy to be written in letters of gold)
are recorded by Io. Stow in his Annalls of Eng. in the beginning of her reign.

And to draw to an end with you, because you harp so much upon two strings,
to wit, breach of promise and bloudshedding; Mentioned in M. Fox his book of
Martyrs in the very beginning of Q. Mary's Reign.
remember the vows that Queen Marie made to the Suffolk men (by whose aid
she was settled in her Kingdom) and her violation thereof, although not forced
thereto by any Conspiracy of the Gospellers then, or any attempt (by persons
different to her in religion) against her person after her right once
proclaimed; and withal forget not how much blood her breach of promise cost,
and having waighed both in an equal balance of an jmpartiall and not
prejudicate judgment, If then you justly can, urge both and spare not, but in
the mean space view in the Table following with the eyes of pity the
Catalogue of them, whose blood was by her and her bloody Ministers so cruelly,
only for religion, shed and exhausted. And so wishing that you would be, but
little hoping that you will be, good Subjects unto his Majesty; as I found you
so I leave you, void of Religion, empty of honesty.



By him that affoords you as good means to know me, as your Martyrologist has
done me to know him. monogram incorporating the letters FRANCIS BTO (?and U)
This knot does show
(If thou would know)
The Authors name;
Then it untie
(And him descrye)
Or your Priest blame.
For had he set his name to his
Then had I mine also to this.


A Brief Collection of such Martyrs as within the (less than six years)
Bloody Reign of Queen Mary were burned in England for the profession of the
Gospel of Christ Jesus.
Opposed to the following English-Romish Martyrologe of I. W. Priest.

Drawn jnto such an order as that at one view you may behold the year of our
L: God, the years of the Princes Reigns both of England and Scotland, the
Names of those that suffered, the day and month wherein they suffered, and the
places of their suffering.

A Table very necessary for all Lawyers, Scriueners, Clerks, or whosoever else
desire upon any occasion to know how the double account of the years of the
Reigns of the Princes of England and Scotland, since the first year of Queen
Marie, until this present year of our Lord 1611. do agree and concur. The
like before not extant.

But more especially published to prove, unto the understanding of the most
simple, that Popery is a false Bloody, Antichristian and Merciless Religion,
whose professors delight in shedding the Blood of Gods Saints; and on the
contrary, that the Gospel which we now in England profess is the Truth, and
has for truth been confirmed with the blood of many more Martyrs (in less
then six years space) then this Popish Priest in his Martyloge with any show
of truth can (though falsely) pretend to have suffered in England for Religion
in 50. years since.

THE FIERY TRIAL OF GODS SAINTS:
These are they who were killed for the word of God, and for the Testimony
which they maintained, Revel. 6. 9.
Who cry with a loud Voice.


How long Lord which art holy and true! do thou not judge and avenge our
blood on them that dwell on the Earth. Revel. 6. 10.
And these live and Reign with Christ, and are Blessed because they Dyed in
the Lord. Revel. 14. 13.
The year of our L. God beginning by this account Mar. 25 Q. Mary her Rai. of
Engl. beginning July 6. 1553. Q. Mary her Raig. of Scotland beginning Dece^. 18
1542. The Names of such Martyrs as were burned in Eng. in Q. Mary's Reign, for
the profession of the Gospel. The day of the mo^neth wherein they suffered. The
places where they suffered. 1553. July 6. Mariae Angli. 1 Dece^. 18 Mariae
Scot. 12. 1554. July 6. Mariae Angli. 2 Dece^. 18. Mariae Scot. 13 John Rogers,
burned. Feb. 4. in Smithfield. Lawrence Sanders, burned. 8. at Coventry. Io:
Hooper Bish: of Worcest: and Gloucest: bur. 9. at Gloucester D. Tailor, burned.
eodem. die. at Hadley. Tho: Tomkins, burned. Mar. 16. in Smithfield. 1555. July
6. Mariae Angli. 3 Dece^. 18 Mariae Scot. 14. William Hunter, bur. Mar. 26. at
Burntwod. Tho: Higbed, bur. eodem die. at Horndon Thomas Cawston, bur. eodem
die. at Rayly. William Piggot, burned. 28 at Braintree. Stephen Knight, bur.
eodem die. at Mauldon. John Lawrence, bur. 29 at Colchester. D. Farrar Bish: of
S. David's, bu. 30 at Carmarthe^ Rawlins White, bur. eod. fe. te^p. at Cardiffe
George Marsh, bur. April. 24 at Westchest. William Flower, bur. eodem die. at
Westminst. Io. Cardmaker, and Io. warn, b. May 30. in Smithfield. Io. Simson,
bur. June 10. at Rochford, Io. Ardley, bur. June 10. at Rayly. Tho Hawks, bur.
June 10. at Coxhall. Tho. Wats, bu. June 10. at Chelmsford John Tooly dug
out of his grave, and bur. eod fe. te^p. Nicholas Chamberlain, bur. June 14.
at Colchester. Thomas Osmund, bur. 15. at Ma^niugtre. William Bamford, bur. 15.
at Harwicke. Io. Bradford, and Io Leaf, bur. 15. in Smithfield. Ioh. Bland,
Io. Frankesh. Nicholas Sheterden, and Hum Middleton, bur. July. 12. at
Canterbury. Margerie Pullie; Nicho. Hall, and at Tunbridge Christo Waide, bur.
19. at Rochester. Dirrick Caruer, bur. 22. at Lewis in S Tho. Iueson, bur. eod.
se. te^p. at Chichester James Abbes, bur. August. 2. at Bury. Ioh. Denly, bur.
8. at Vxbridge. George Tankervile, bur. 26. at S. Albons. Patrick Packhingham,
bur. 28. at Saffronwalden. John Newman, bur. 31. Rich: Hook, bur. eode^ me^se.
at Chichester. Rich: Colliar, Will: Cooker, Will: Hooper, Henry Lawrence, Rich:
Wright, and Will: Store, bur. eode^ me^se. at Canterbury Ely: Warn, bur. at
Stratf: Bow Robert Smith, bur: at Vxbridge. Steph: Harward, bur. eode^ me^se.
at Stratf: Bow Thomas Fust, bur: at Ware. Will: Hail, bur: at Barnet. Will:
Allen, bur: at Walsigham Roger Coo bur: at Yexford. Thomas Cobbe, bur: me^se
S^pt. at Thet^ord. Rob: Streater, George Catmer, Anth: Burward, Geo: Bradbrige,
and James Tutty, bur: eode^ mese. at Canterbury Io: Goreway, and Tho: Hayward,
bur: eode^ me^se. at Lichfield. Rob: Glouer, and Correlius Bongey, bur:
Septe^b. 20 at Coventry. Bishop Ridley, and Bish: Latimer, bur: October. 16. at
Oxford. Will: Wolsey, and Robert Piggot, bur: eodem die. at Ely. John webb,
George Roper, and Gre: Park, bur: Noue^. 30. at Canterbury. Io: Philpot
Archdeacon, bur: Dece^. 18. in Smithfield. Thomas Whittle, Barthelet Green,
John Tudson, Io. Went, Thomas Brown, Isabell Foster, and Ioane Warren, bur:
Janu. 27 in Smithfield. John Lomas. Anne Abbright, Ioane Catmer, Ioane Soke,
and Agnes Snoth, bur: 31. at Canterbury. Thomas Cranmer Archbish. of Canter.
bur: March. 21 at Oxford. John Spicer, Will: Cobberley, and Io: Maundrell, bur:
24. at Salisbury. Ioane Trunchfield, and Agnes Potten, bur: eode^ me^se. at
Ipswich. 1556. Mariae. Ang. 4. Mariae Scot. 15. John Harpoole, and Ioane Beech,
bur: April. 1. at Rochester. John Hulliar, bur: 2. at Cambridge Rob: Drakes,
Will: Tymmes, Rich: Spurge, Tho: Spurge, Io: Cauell, and George Ambrose, bur:
24. in Smithfield. Christopher Lyser, Io: Mace, John Spencer, Simo^ Join,
Rich: Nichols, and John Hamund, bur: 28. at Colchester Thomas Drury, and Thomas
Crooker, bur: May 5. at Gloucester Hughe Lauerhoke, and Ioh. ap Rice, bur: 15.
at Stratford-Bowe. Katherine Hull, Ioane Horns, Eliz: Thackvell, and Margery.
Else, bur: 16. in Smithfield. Tho: Spicer, Ioh: Denny, and Edmund Poole, bur:
21. at Beckleys in Suffolk. Tho: Harland, ^oh: Oswald. Tho: Auington, and Tho:
Read, bur: June. 6. at Lewis in Suffolk. Tho: Whood, and Thomas Mylles, bur:
20. at Lewis in Suffolk. Thomas Moore, bur: June. 26. at Leicester. Henry
Adlington, Lawrence Pernham, Henry Wye, Will: Halliwell, Tho: Bowyer, George
Searle, Edm Hurst, Lion Cawch, Ralph Iackson, John Derrifall, John Rowth, Elyz:
Pepper, and Agnes George, bur: 27. at Stratford Bow. Roger Bernard, Rob:
Lawson and Adam Foster, bur: 30. at Bury. Julius Palmer, Io: Gwyn, and Thomas
Askine, bur: July 16. at Newbery. Katherine Cawches, Guilian Gilbert, Perotine
Massey, and the said Masseys Infant breaking violently out of the Mothers womb
into the fire, was taken out once and presently thrown again into the fire,
and bur. 18. in the Isle of Garnsey. Tho* Dungale, John Forema^, and Anne Try,
bur. eodem die. at Greensted. Ioane Wast, bur: August. 1. at Darby. Edw:
Sharp, bur* Septem. 8. at Bristow. John Heart, Tho: Rauensdale; as also a
Shoemaker and a Currier, bur: 24. at Mayfield. A Carpenter, bur: 25. at
Bristow. John Horn, and a woman, bur: 27. at Wooton-vnderhedge. Will: Waterer,
Steph: Kempe, Will: Hay, Tho: Hudson, Will: Lowicke, and William Prouting, bur:
Janua. 15 at Canterbury. Ni: Final and Mat: Brabridge, b: 16. at Ashford. Io:
Philpot, and Thomas Stephens, bur: in Janu. at wye. Martine Bucer, and Paulus
Phagius bones dug up and with their books bur: also Peter Martyrs wives
bones removed and buried in a dunghill. Febru. 16. at Ca^bridge. 1557. Mariae
Ang. 5. Mariae Scot. 16 Tho: Loseby, Henry Ramsey, Tho: Thirtle, Marg: Hyde,
and Agnes Stanly bur: April 12. in Smithfield. Rich: Sharp, and Tho: Hale,
bu: May 7. at Bristow. Steph: Gratwicke, Will: Mona^t, and one King, bur:
eode^me^se. in S. Georges field. Ione Brabridge, Wall, Aplebly, and Petronell
his wife, Edm: Allen, and Kath: his wife Ioa: Manings, and a blind maid, bu:
June 18. at Maidstone. Ioane Fishcoke, Nich: White, Nich: Pardue, Barbara
Final, Brabridge his widow, wilsons wife, and Alice Benden, bur: 19 at
Canterbury. Rich: Woodma^, George Stephe^s, Will: Mainard, Alex: Hosma^,
Thomasine Wood, Mar: Morris, James Morris, Denis Burgis, Ashdo^s wife and
Groves wife, bu: 22. at Lewys in Sussex. Simo^ Myller, and Elyzab: Cooper, bu:
July 13. at Norwich. Will: Bongor, Will: Purcas, Th: Benold, Agnes Siluerside,
alias Smith, Helene Euring, Elyzab: Folks, Will: Mount, Alice his wife; Rose
Allyn, and Ioh: Johnson, bur: August. 2. at Colchester. Rich: Crashfield bur:
5. at Norwich A woman, and one named Friar, bur: 20. at Rochester. Tho: Benyon,
bur: 27. at Bristow. Ralfe Allerton, James Austoo, Marge: Austoo, and Rich:
Rooth, bur: Septem. 17 at Islington. Agnes Bongor, and Margaret Thurston, bur:
eodem die. at Colchester Joyce Lewis, bur: eode^ me^se. at Litchfield. John*
Kurd, bur: 20. at Northamp. John Noyes, bur: eode^ me^se. at Layfield Cycely
Ormes, bur: 23. at Norwich. John Halingdale, Will: Sparrow, and Rih: Gibson,
bur: Nouem. 18 at Colchester. John Rough, and Margery Mearing, bur: December. 22
in Smithfield. John Warner, Tho: Athoth, Io: Mylles, Nich: Holden, John Ashdon,
and Tho: Spurdance, bur. eodem An. in Chichester Diocese. 1558. Mariae Ang. 6.
Mariae Scot. 17. Hugh Fox, John deuenish, and Cuthbert Simson, bur: March. 28
in Smithfield. Will: Nicholne, bur: April. 9. at Hereford. Will: Seaman, Thomas
Carman, and Tho: Hudson, bur: May. 19 at Norwich. Will: Harris, Richard Day, and
Christian George, bur: 26. at Colchester Henry Pond, Raynold Eastland, Robert
Southam, Mat: Richardby, and Roger Holland, bur: June 27. in Smithfield.
Richard Yeoman, bur: July 10 at Norwich. Robert Mylles, Steph: Cotto^, Robert
Dynes, Ste: Wight, John Slade, and Will: Pikes, bur: July. 14. at Brainford.
John Cook, Robert Miles, Alex: Lane, and James Ashley, bur: eode^ me^se. at
Bury. Thomas Bembridge, bur: eode^ me^se. in Winchester Diocese. Alex: Gowch,
and Alice Driuer, bur: Noue^. 4. at Ipswich. Phil: Humfrey, John David, Hen:
David, and a woman named Priest, bur: eode^ me^se. at Exceter. This year the
17. of Nouem: dyed Q. Marie. John Corneford, Christopher Brown, Io: Herst,
Alice, Snoth, and Kathe: Knight, (alias Tynley) being (as says M. Fox) the
last that suffered in Queen Mary's Reign, were burned. 10. at Canterbury The
whole number of Martyrs burned in 5. years of Qu. Mary's Reign, by this
account is about 260.

A Beadroll of all such traitorous Priests, Jesuits, and Popish Recusants, as
by I. W. Priest in his English Martyrologe are by him recorded for Martyrs in
this Kingdom, since the first year of Queen Elizabeth until the latter end
of the sixth year of King James our now Sovereign Lord his Reign.
Drawn jnto such an order as that at one view you may behold the year of our
L: God, the years of the Princes Reigns both of England and Scotland, the
Names of those that suffered, the day and month wherein they suffered, and the
places of their suffering.

A Table very necessary for all Lawyers, Scriueners, Clerks, or whosoever else
desire upon any occasion to know how the double account of the years of the
Reigns of the Princes of England and Scotland, since the first year of Queen
Marie, until this present year of our Lord 1611. do agree and concur. The
like before not extant.

But more especially published to prove, unto the understanding of the most
simple, that Popery is a false Bloody, Antichristian and Merciless Religion,
whose professors delight in shedding the Blood of Gods Saints; and on the
contrary, that the Gospel which we now in England profess is the Truth, and
has for truth been confirmed with the blood of many more Martyrs (in less
then six years space) then this Popish Priest in his Martyloge with any show
of truth can (though falsely) pretend to have suffered in England for Religion
in 50. years since.

THE DETESTABLE ENDS OF POPISH TRAITORS:
These are those unclean Spirits, who like Frogs came out of the mouth of
that Dragon, and out of the mouth of that Beast, and out of the mouth of that
false Prophet. Revel. 13. 16.
Whose Damnation is just. Romans 3. 8.

For they are the Spirits of Devils, working Miracles, to go unto the Kings of
the Earth, and of the whole world, togather them to the Battle of that great
Day of God Almighty. Revel. 16. 14.
And these worshipped the beast. Revel. 13. 4*
The year of our L. God beginning by this account Mar. 25. Qu Elizab. her Raig.
of Eng: beginning No. 17. 1558. Q. Mary her Raig. of Scotland beginning Dece^.
18. 1542. The Names of Traitors as were executed in England in Queen
Elizabeth's Reign. The days of the month wherein they were executed. The
places where they were executed. Noue^b. 17. Eliz. Angl. 1. 1559. Elizab. Angl.
2. Mariae Scot. 18. 1560. Elizab. Angl. 3. Mariae Scot. 19 1561. Elizab: Ang.
4. Mariae Scot. 20 1562. Elizab. Ang. 5. Mariae Scot. 21 1563. Elizab. Ang. 6.
Mariae Scot. 22. 1564. Elizab. Ang. 7. Mariae Scot. 23 1565. Elizab. Ang. 8
Mariae Scot. 24. This year July 28. H. L. Darly was proclaimed Ki. and on the
morrow after he married the Qu. 1566. Elizab. Angl. 9. Mariae S^ot. 25. In
this year of our L. God June 19 was our (now) Kings Majesty Borne, and
Christenned the 18. day of December. following. The 10 of Febr. following the K.
was murdered by traitors 1567. Elyzab. Ang. 10 This year in the month of
July Q. Mary being prisoner in Lochleui^e willingly resigned her Crown unto The
year of our L God beginning by this account Mar. 25 Qu Elizab. her Raig. of
Eng: beginning No. 17. 1558. K. James his Raig. of Scot: beginning July 29.
1567. The Names of such Traitors as were executed in England in Q. Elizabeth's
Reign. The days of the month in which they were executed. The places where
they were executed. James the yo^g Prince, our now Sovereign Lord and King, he
was the^ but two years old. K. James his Rai. of Scot. being the 6. King of
that name. July 29 Iacobi. Sexti Scoto. 1. 1568. Elyzab. Ang. 11 Jacob. Scoto.
2. 1569. Elyzab. Ang. 12 Jacob. Scoto. 3. 1570. Elizab. Ang. 13 Jacob. Scoto.
4. John Felton. August. 8. in Paul's Church yard. 1571. Elyzab. Ang 14 Jacob.
Scoto. 5. John Story. June 1. at Tyburne. 1572. Elyzab. Ang. 15 Jacob. Scoto.
6. 1573. Elyz: 16 Jacob: 7. Thomas Woodhouse. June 19. at Tyburne. 1574. Elyz:
17 Jacob. 8. 1575. Eliz: 18 Jacob: 9. 1576. Elyz: 19 Iaco: 10 1577. Elizab:
Ang: 20 Jacob: Scot: 11 Cuthbert Main. Nouem: 29 at Launston. John Nelson.
Feb. 3. at Tyburne. 1578. Elyzab: Ang: 21 Jacob: Scot: 12 Thomas Sherwood,
Febru. 7. 1579. Elyzab: Ang: 22 Jacob: Scot, 13 Anno. 1577. in the month of
January, was published a Proclamation against Seminary Priests and Jesuits, and
for calling home the Queens subieands from foreign Seminaries, where they
remained under color of study. 1580. Elyzab: Ang: 23 Jacob: Scot: 14 1581.
Elyzab: Ang: 24 Jacob: Scot: 15 Euerard Hanse. July 31. at Tyburne. Edmund
Campion. Alexander Bryant. Ralphe Sherwyn. December. 1 at Tyburne. 1582. Elyzab:
Ang: 25 Jacob: Scot: 16 John Pain. April 2. at Chelmsford Thomas Ford. John
Shert. Robert Johnson. May. 28. at Tyburne. Thomas Cottam. William Filby. Luke
Kirby. Lawrence Johnson. May 30 at Tyburne. William Lacy. Richard Kirkman.
August. 22 at York. James Tompson. in Nouem: at York. 1583. Elyzab: Ang: 26
Jacob: Scot: 17 Richard Thirkhill. May. 29 at York. William Heart. at York.
James Laburne. at Lancaster. William Carter. Janu: 11. at Tyburne. George
Haddocke, Io: Mundine, James Fen, Thomas Emerford, and John Nutter. Feb. 12. at
Tyburne. 1584. Elyzab: Ang: 27 Jacob. Scot. 18 James Bele. John Finch. April
20. at Lancaster Richard White. Octo. 18. at Wrixam. This year also were 21.
Jesuits and Seminary Priests banished the Realm, Ianu: 21. 1585. Elyzab: Ang.
28 Jacob. Scot. 19 Thomas Aufield. Thomas Webley. July 6. at Tyburne. Hugh
Tailor. Marmaduke Bows: at York. Margaret Clitherow. in March. at York. N.
Hamelton. Rob: Bicardine. at York. Edward Transam. Nich: Woodfine. Janu. 21 at
Tyburne. This year also were 32. Priests and Jesuits banished the Realm, Sep.
19. 1586. Elyzab: Ang: 29 Jacob. Scot: 20. Richard Sergeant. William Tompson.
April 20. at Tyburne. John Adams. John Low. Rob: Debdale Rob: Anderton. Octo.
8. at Tyburne. William Marsden. at Tyburne. Francis Ingleby. at York. Stephen
Rowsam. at Gloucester John Finglow. 1587. Elyzab: Ang: 30 Jacob. Scot: 21.
Thomas Pilchard. in March. at Dorcester. John Sands. at Gloucester John Hamly.
at Chard. Alexander Crow. at York. Robert Sutton. at Stafford. Edmund Sykes.
Gabriell Thimbleby. George Douglas. 1588. Elyzab: Ang: 31 Jacob. Scot: 22
William Deane. Henry Webley. August. 28. at Myle-endgreene. William Gunter.
eodem die. at the Theat: Robert Morton. Hugh More. eodem die. at Lincolns-Inne
Fields. Tho: Acton, alias Holford. eodem die. at Clarke^wel Richard Clarkson.
Thomas Felton. eodem die. at Hownslow Rich: Leigh, Edward Shelley, Hugh Morgan,
Rich: Flower, Robert Martyn, John Rock, and Margaret Wade. Aug. 30. at
Tyburne. Edward James. Ralph Crochet. October. 1. at Chichester. Robert
Wilcockes. Edward Campion. Christo: Buxton. Rob: Widmerpoole. eodem die. at
Canterbury. William Wigges. eodem die. at Kingston. John Robinson. eodem die.
at Ispwich. John Weldon. October 5. at Mile^dgreen William Hartley. Rich:
Williams. eodem die. at Halliwell. Robert Sutton. eodem die. at Clarke^wel.
William Spencer. Edward Burden. John Hewyt. Rob: Ludham. Richard Simpson.
Nicholas Garlic. at Darby. William Lampley. at Gloucester 1589. Elyzab: Ang:
32 Jacob. Scot. 23 George Nicols, Rich: Yaxley, Tho: Belson, Hu^: vp-Richard.
July 5. at Oxford. John Annas. Robert Dalby. Christopher Bales. March. 4. in
Fleetstreet. Alexander Blake. eodem d^e. in Gr^^n-lane Nicholas Horner. eodem
d^e. in Smithfield. 1590. Elyzab: Ang. 33 Jacob. Scot. 24. Miles Gerrard.
Francis Dickinson. April. 30. at Rochester. Anthony Myddleton. May. 6. at
Clarke^wel Edward Jones. May 6. in Fleetstreet. 1591. Elyzab. Ang. 34 Jacob.
Scot. 25 Edmund Gennings. December. 10 in Grays Inn Fields. Swithin Wells.
Eustach White. December. 10 at Tyburne. Polydor Plasden. Bryan Lacy. John Mason.
Sidney Hodgson. Momfort Scot. July. 2. in Fleetstreet. George Bisley. William
Dickinson. July. 7. at Winchester Ralph Milner. Edmund Ducke. at Durham. Rich:
Holiday. Ioh: Hagge. Rich: Hill. William Pykes. at Dorcester. William Partison.
Iann. 22. at Tyburne. Tho: Portmore. Feb. 21. in Paul's Church yard. This year
also in the month of October: was published a Proclamation against Priests and
Jesuits. 1592. Elyz. 35 Iaco. 26. Roger Ashton. June. 23. at Tyburne. 1593.
Elyzab. Ang 36 Jacob. Scot. 27. James Burden. March 25 at Winchester. Anthony
Page. April 30 at York. Joseph Lampton. Jane. 23. at Newcastle. William
Dauis. in Sep^em. at Beumaris. Edward Waterson. William Harrington. Feb. 18. at
Tyburne. 1594. Elyzab: Ang: 37 Jacob. Scot. 28 John Cornelius Mohum. July 4. at
Dorcester. Tho: Bosgraue Patricke Samon. John Carey. John Ingram. Thomas Boast.
at Newcastle. James Oldbaston. Robert Southwell. March 3. at Tyburne. 1595.
Elzyab. Ang. 38 Jacob.Scot. 29 Henry Walpole. Alexander Rawiins. April ^7. at
York. George Errington. at York. William Knight. William Gibson. Henry
Abbots. William Freeman. 1596. Elizab Ang. 3^. Jacob.S^ot. 30 N: Auleby. N:
Thorpe. 1597. Elyz: 40 Iaco. 31 John Buckley, alias Jones. July. 12. at S. Th:
Wa: 1598. Elizab. Ang. ^1 Jacob. Scot. 32 Thomas Snow. at York. Christoph:
Robinson Rich. Horner. N: Grimston N: Britton. 1599. Elyz: 42 Iaco: 33. Math.
Hayes. at York. 1600. Elizab. Ang. ^3 Jacob Scot. 34. Christopher Wharton,
with a namelesse Woman. May. 18. at York. John Rigby. July 21 at S: Th Wa:
Robert Nutter. in June. at Lancaster Edward Thwinge. Thomas Sprot in July. at
Lincoln. Thomas Hunt. Thomas Palaser. eode me^se. at Durham. John Norton. N:
Talbot. John Pibush. Febr. 11. at Tyburne. Roger Filcocke Feb. ^7. at Tyburne.
Mark Barkworth. Anne Live. 1601. Elyzab: Ang: 44 Jacob. Scot: 35 Robert
Middleton. at Lancaster. Thurstan Hunt. 1602. Elyzab: Ang: 45 Jacob. Scot. 36
Francis Page. April 29 at Tyburne. Thomas Tichborne. Robert Watkinson James
Ducket. N: Harrison. in April. at York. N: Bates William Richardson. Feb. 27.
at Tyburne. Mar: 24 being the last day of the year 1602 by the account of Eng:
dyed Queen Elizab. The whole number of such Priests, Jesuits, and Recusants,
as were executed in all the time of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, being 44. years
and 4. months, according to the Martyrologists own account, (as he falsely
pretends for religion) amounts but to 180. The year of our L. God beginning by
this account. Mar. 25 K. James his Rai: of Engl: beginning Mar: 24 16^2. K.
James his Rai. of Scot. beginning July. 29. 15^7. The Names of such Traitors as
were executed in England in K. James his Reign. The day of the month in which
^hey were exe^uted. The places where they were executed. 1602. Mar: 24 Jacob:
Ang: 1. KING JAMES HIS Reign of England. 1603. Jacob: Ang: 2. Jacob: Scot. 37
Stowe. William Watson. Nouem: 29 at Winchester William Clarke. This year also
was published a Proclamation against Priests and Iesui^s, that they should
depart the Land. 1604. Jacob. Ang. 3. Jacob: Scot: 38 Lawrence Bailey. in March.
at Lancaster. John Shuker. in August. at Warwick. Robert Griffold. 1605.
Jacob: 4. Iaco: 39. Thomas Wilborne. at York. 1606. Jacob: Ang 5 Jacob: Scot:
40 Edward Oldcorne. April 7. at Worcester. in Paul's Ralph Ashley. Henry
Garnet. May 3. Churchyard. Robert Drury. Febru. 26. at Tyburne. This year also
was published a Proclamation that all Jesuits and Seminary Priests, should
depart the Land. 1607. Jacob: 6. Iaco. 41 Matthew Flathers. March 21 at York.
1608. Iacobi. Ang. 7. Jacob: Scot: 42 George Germs. April 11 at Tyburne.
Thomas Garnet. June 23. at Tyburne. 1609. Iaco: 8. Ia^o: 43 And thus ends J:
VV: Priest the Pseudo-Martyrologist, by whole account there have suffered since
the first year of King James, of these Popish Traitors (as he falsely pretends
for Religion) to the number of 13. 1610. Iaco. 9: Iaco: 44. 1611. Iaco: 45
1612. 1613. 1614. 1615.

The Popes charge to his Bratts.
Estote proditores. Go kill your Prince.



A POSTSCRIPT TO THE WELL AFFECTED READER.
IT may be that some of Antichrists brood will here cry out with open
mouths and say, ^ut, there are many of our Catholic Martyrs, who have
suffered persecution for their consciences that are not here mentioned. Here is
a Collectio^ indeed, to set down some, and leave out the rest: where are those
Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland with their followers? where the
Bristow in his motives 15. Chap. 73 calls these Martyrs. Above 1000 of these
says lay Catholics in their Suplicatio^ to the Kings Majesty 1604.
abandoned their liui^gs rather then they would change their religion. Also the
three co^uersions of England, part the first, page 264.
Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, Canons, and other Ecclesiastical persons? where
Doctor Lopez, Party? where many of the Gentry, as Abington, Babington,
Tichborne, Sauadge and their fellows? and of late where the Lords Cobham and
Gray? where Digbie, Percy, Catesbie, Tresham, Rookewood, the Winters, Litletons
and their followers, With diverse others both of the Nobility and Gentry, who
for their consciences in seeking to advance the (By them so falsely called)
Catholic religion, have suffered Martyrdom, some by death, some by
imprisonment, some by banishment, some by loss of livings, some one way, some
another? So condemning these collections with the author thereof to the fire,
as sometimes their forefathers did the Gospells confessors before registered.

Three conuersions page 265. Of Priests above 100. have Sealed the confession
of their faith with blood within 40. years.
Priests Jesuits and Recusants, as I find recorded by their martyrologist I. W.
Priests whom many simple Papists being seduced by their false teachers give out
to have suffered only for Religion and their consciences, although that in all
of these Priests and Jesuits, men of judgment may easily discern the
contrary, and as for many of them, the most simple cannot be ignorant that
knows any thing, nor the most shameless deny, that is not past all shame,
that they were executed for plotting and contriuing, for knowledge of, and
concealing most barbarous and the like before unheard of treasons, whereas true
martyrdom indeed consists ferendo and patiendo, A small number in
comparison of 278. martyrs in less then six years.
non in agendo, in bearing patiently, and suffering afflictions for CHRIST'S
cause, but not in plotting and attempting the lives and overthrows of Kings
and Countries, their lawful and Liege Sovereigns and native (though of them
hated) habitations and byrth-place: witness for proof hereof, 1. Ballard, 2.
Watson, 3. Clarke, 4. Garnet the Jesuits Provincial, 5. Hall with others, the
first of these was a chief actor and plotter* in Abingtons and Babingtons
Conspiracy. Anno 1586. the second and third in Cobhams and Grayes, but more
properly (for they are the first mouers always) in Watsons and Clerks their
own conspiracy, Anno, 1603. The fourth and fifth in the Gunpouder treason,
which only to name is instar omnium the most damnable bloody plot that ever
was contrived (and I hope in time will prove as their own Greenwell
prophesied, the very breakneck of all Papists that will not be recalled) Anno,
1605. although I greatly fear that there are many in this Kingdom, who, now
GOD in his mercy has defeated them, seem to condemn the plotte, but yet
would with all their hearts have wished that it had taken effect, Talia etenim
nunquam probata antequam acta, for such attempts as these (to wit the Gunpouder
and others treasons,) are never liked of, unless they be acted, but if
performed, then applauded with Vide Pope Sixtus the 5. his oration upon the
death and murder of Henry the 3. French King, by a Friar.
Panegyricke Orations.

Well, that Papists have found so much mercy at the Kings hands
(notwithstanding this their more then heathenish cruelty) as they have, let
them bless God and thank his Majesty, and I pray God they may make a good
use thereof, but let us that are his faithful subjects, rejoice in God for his
and our own deliverance from so eminent danger, ascribing all glory and
thankfulness to God therefore, and unspeakable mildnes and forbearance in our
King, whom no barbarous attempted cruelties, (for then the Gunpouder treason
never was any more horrid, more hellish) can provoke unto rigor, he is so
loath to be of his very enemies accounted cruel. Ne misericordia in inimicos
fit crudelitas in se suosque
But Lord grant thou Ne incidat in Scillam cupiens vitare Carybdim, that his
mercy toward his foes prove not cruelty to himself, his Friends and good
subjects. For this I may justly say, that for a merciful King in forgiving his
enemies, whom yet he has power to destroy, England may boast her self above
all the nations of the world.

Jesuits and Recusants by their Pseudomartyrologist noted, all other traitors
and rebels to be likewise enrolled, let them name as many as they can, and
register them themselves, and take them into their number, for well I know
that (unto honest men) the more they name, the more infamous will they be,
because their horrible and damnable treasons are unto all good men (to whom
only I intend this Postscript) so odious, and unto the world so apparent and
palpable, that their names cannot but with disgrace be recorded, whereas none,
who were in Queen, Mary her reign burned, did suffer for any other cause (as
the Papists themselves cannot deny, but that they falsely call us heretics)
but only for matter of religion; nor can they be justly accused of any to
have attempted against the life of their then Sovereign Lady Queen Mary, or
to have denied her for their lawful Queen, but so (Non obstante religionis
disparitate, although they differed in religion) to have acknowledged her, so
to have prayed for her, in all humility submitting their necks, as good
subjects, to the yoke of temporal obedience to her Majesty, and like true
Christian martyrs, their bodies to the fire, for the only profession of the
Gospel of Christ Jesus, whom in their bodies, goods and spirits they served.

Printed in Anno 1608. as he says, Permissu superiorum.
Martyrologe, and for us by that worthy man Master John Fox in his book of
Martyrs recorded: So I am most certainly assured, that if I should nominate
all those persons who in less then six years reign of Queen Mary were Vide
Fox his book of Martyrs in Queen Mary's reign.
famished for want of meat, imprisoned, dyed in prison, forced to fly,
whipped, tortured and tormented only for matter of religion, and some of these
by the very hands of bloody Bishop Bonner himself, they would far
exceed the number of all such Priests and Jesuits, as the Papists can
produce to have endured in England any kind of torture or corporal punishment
whatsoever for religion, (as they falsely pretend) or otherwise for these
fifty and odd years since.

Vide the Lord Burleigh late Lord Treasurer his book entitled, Execution of
Justice for treason and not for Religion.
condemned simply for being Priests, but if being borne his Majesty's subjects,
they shall take that order upon them by authority derived from the Sea of
Rome, and afterward shall return into his Majesty's Kingdoms Earl of
Northampton in his pri^ted speech at Garnets arraigneme^t in the fourth page of
the letter GG.
to withdraw and alienate the hearts of his subjects, (for so they all do)
from their due allegiance.) And for this law there is great reason. For as
Queen Elizabeth was formerly (nominatim) by the Pope Excommunicated, and
thereupon by the seducing of Priests and Jesuits, (the firebrands of
Christendom) exposed both in her person and state to all dangers and
treasonable practices that could by villains be devised, and her Kingdoms as
the Papists hold, Their refusal of the Oath of allegiance proves what they
hold in this point, and the Popes gift of Ireland to the King of Spain,
mentioned by Azorius the Jesuit in his institut. moral. confirms it.
subject to the Popes disposing, so likewise the Kings Majesty although he
be not for ought I know, by the Pope, by name excommunicated as yet, as
Queen Elizabeth was, Yet by the general excommunication whereby all
Heretics (for such a one they hold his Majesty to be directly) are
anathematized, he stands at this instant excommunicated.

And therefore Papists holding opinions, as they do, that it is Vide Faux his
confession with others mentioned in the before quoted page by the Earl of
Northa^pton. Confer al, therewith Cat^sbies answer to Garnet in the last page
of R. and also in the last page of T. of the former book. his words are; If it
were lawful not to admit of the Kings Majesty at first warranted by the
Popes Breeues then was it also lawful to cast him out.
lawful for subjects to kill their Sovereigns, and take arms against them,
so by the Pope excommunicated, holding him no longer to be their King by
lawful right of ruling, then the Pope pleases; which is only thus qualified,
Rebus sic stantibus; cum deerunt vires, as long as they needs must, and that
they dare do no otherwise for fear of their necks. Is it not then great
reason (to you that in CHRIST have learned to obey I speak) that his majesty
should as near as he can, prevent such dangers to himself and his State?
But here it may be the Priests will reply and say: We are bound by oath, and
therefore in conscience, to go whether soever those of whom we receive our
Priestly Orders, shall enjoin us.

But first answer me; who enforced you thereto, either to leave your country
or to take that order? Did Queen Elizabeth? does King James? do you not that
of your own voluntary wills contrary to your own known country laws.

Secondly, whether that single (sinful I may say) Oath be of sufficient
authority to dissolve that treble bond of allegiance, in which by being his
Majesty's borne subjects, you are bound by law This trebble bond themselves
whiles they labored to seem good subjects, acknowledged in their supplication
to the Kings Majesty, chap. 5. near the end thereof. Agreeable hereto is the
Earl of Northamptons sound maxim in the last page of FF. in his speech to
Garnet.
divine, natural and national.

Thirdly, if you before knowing the danger thereof will yet voluntarily take
such oaths; where then is the fault? in the Prince that upon good and
warrantable grounds shall in a religious policy, to prevent the hazard of his
own, and his subjects states and lives, cause such a law to be enacted, or
in the Priests that shall Scienti and volenti, non sit iniuria.
wilfully and in a resolute determination of working their countries overthrow
take such an oath? And here for a shutting up of all, give me leave, (because
the Papists hold so much of the Popes authority against Princes by him
excommunicated,) to insert Besides this Priests confession against themselves,
see also for thy better confirmation in this point, the judgment of two great
Counselors of state in their several writings published by the Earl of
Salisbury in his answer to certain scandelous papers in the third page of C.
and the Earl of Northampton in his speech at Garnets Arraignement, in the
letter HH. in diverse pages thereof.
two questions with their answers, propounded by the right reverend father in
God the late Lord Bishop of London, unto Thomas Garnet, Alias Roockwood,
Alias Sayer a Seminary Priest, at the time of the said Garnets arraignement
at the Sessions House without Newgate in London upon Thursday the 16. of June
1608.

The first question was this. Whether the said Garnet had ever read any
authors whatsoever, until some hundreds of years after Christ's time, that did
hold that the end of Excommunication tended to a deprivation of life.

The second question was this. Whether if the said Garnet himself held
lands, which by lawful and lineall inheritance had descended from his
ancestors unto him, it were lawful for the Pope, Garnet being by him
excommunicated, to give the lands unto whom he pleased? Garnets answer unto
the first was uncertain, for said he, I remember not well what I have read
concerning this point*

But unto the second question he answered directly, Noe. Why then, mildely
replied the Bishop, what reason have you Master Garnet, to hold that the
Pope has more authority over the Kings Majesty, being your Sovereign, then
over you being but a private person, and his Subject.

This Thomas Garnet is the last that our Pseudomartyrologist. I. W. Priest has
noted in his Beadroll to have suffered in King James his reign.
Garnet reioynder was silence, having first by a concession in his own case
granted, that the Popes authorities was of no force herein. Thus much for
satisfaction in this point unto all men out of the mouth of Thomas Garnet
Seminary Priest. To this purpose see also John Heart Seminary Priest, his
words in his Preface before his D. Reignolds conference with Hearts, in Hearts
own Preface thereto.
conference with Doctor Reignolds. Nor may I here neglect that offer which Pope
Paulus the fourth made unto Queen Elizabeth in the beginning of her Reign,
who when he perceived that his usurped authority and Primateship grew in
England contemptible, condicionally that he might hold that power here that
unjustly he had before done when this land was drowned in Popery, would have
been contented, and caused the Queens Majesty to understand that he would
be pleased, that all matters for religion should be administered in the same
manner that then they were, (being the very same then per omnia, that now it
is) only his Supremacy must be acknowledged, for that indeed, not Religion,
not godliness, not any thing but pride and ambition to be in the eyes of the
world above all, both was and is the cause of his raging madness.

But that noble spirited Queen, whose religion was founded upon a rock, Christ
Jesus being the chief corner stone, by whom all her building was joined
together, scorned to be beholding to that Italian Priest for the exercise of
that religion, which were it lawful by his dispensation, she would and could
by the power of God and her own authority, maintain against him, and all the
power of darkness and hell it self, without being beholding to him.

Let those Princes whose either Pusillanimitie, or weakness of their estates, or
small assurance of their subjects loves, or want of courage to withstand his
yoke of intrusion, or whose unlawful Relation of the state of religion in the
west part of the world, near the beginning thereof.
marriages and thereby illicite issue and succession, must be legitimated by a
more illegitimate dispensation from his unholiness, that the power and sword
of the one, may uphold the authority of the other, that his authority may
reciprocally help to keep that Crown upon the head of him and his
successors, who otherwise were thereof by their own and Gods laws incapable,
verifying thereby that old Proverb, Clawe me and I will claw thee: Let they
usurped authority maintain my illicite marriage, and my power and purse shall
maintain thy usurped authority. Let such as expect Azorius in his
institutions, part. 2. book 11. chapt. 5.
Donations of other Princes Kingdoms from their grand tra^slator of Empyres
the Pope, the devils substitute, as Philip the second of that name King of
Spain did, upon whom Pius Quintus, (or rather Impius intus) the devils
vicegerent then at Rome, conferred the Kingdom of England (but all the craft
was in the catching) instanced and approved as an act lawful, by Azorius the
Jesuit in his moral institutions, part second, book eleventh, chapter the
fist, circa medium capitis.

Let such Princes I say adhere to the Pope, and subiugate their necks to his
trampling, but let those, whose cause is good, succession lawful, spirits more
magnanimous, and of a better metal, their subjects hearts generally, firmly
assured, the word of God which is truth it self on their side, power and
ability to withstand (and offend) him and all his unholy confederates, free
Princes next under God in their own Dominions. Let these I say all learn of
that renowned Queen Elizabeth this resolute saying, rare amongst men, but not
to be paralleld by any woman, If my religion be allowable? (if my marriage
lawful, if my succession rightful,) by the Popes Dispensation, then is it so
also without it, and God willing, I will maintain it without him, who of his
power can make it no more lawful or unlawful then of it self it is without
him? for against the word of God there lies no Dispensation. And let great,
Great Britains King make it known for an honor to him and his posterity
that great,

Elizaes spirit lodges in his Breast,
Though happy she, in peace with God does rest.
Thus holding Popery to be an hotch-poch of new religion coined in the mints
of the Babylonish whore, who contendeth to advance her Kingdom A strange thing
that the Pope claiming to be but Christ's Vicar, should yet challenge a larger
power the^ ever Christ himself did, for Christ confessed, that his Kingdom
was not of this world, and yet the Pope will be a disposer and ^etter up and
puller down of Kings and Kingdoms at his pleasure.
above the Kingdom of Christ, by all means that themselves, or hell it self
can invent, by cruelty, by blood, by deceit, by abusing the word of God, by
equivocation, by what not? yea she has so taught her brats, the Priests and
Jesuits, and infinite others by them seduced, to swear and forswear, to
promise and protest, by whatsoever can be named, (although they have no
purpose to make good any of their vows: in this kind) as that they have almost
left no means whereby a man may be assured of another intentions, although he
vow it never so seeming seriously.

Call to mind the great and serious protestations that In his book of
Quodlibets.
Watson the Priest made in his Quodlibeticall questions, Here was, Mel in ore,
fell cord: a smooth tongue, but a treacherous heart.
That albeit he differed in religion from that which was professed in the
Church of England, yet if either Pope or Spaniard should seek by hostile
means to invade his country, he would willingly spend his substance, nay his
dearest blood against any such as should attempt it, and yet he himself was
the first afterward as I remember that came to the gallows for violating it.
If I could find any thing that good is in either Priests or Jesuits, I would
commend them for it, but because I cannot, holding them all to be traitors in
heart unto his Majesty, and their favorers to be scarcely good subjects, I
will end for their co^mendations with the words of a late, but witty Conclaue
Ignati, in Apologia pro Iesuitis, ad finem libri adiecta.
Satyrist; F^uet illis, quisquis de illis tacet.

FINIS.

