ships and smiling fish scene

A TRVE AND MOST Exact Relation of the taking of the goodly Ship called the
Saint Esprit, belonging unto the French King, which was built in Holland, and
furnished with 54. Pieces of great Ordnance was surprised on the 28. day of
September, by Sir Sackeuill Treuer Knight, and since brought over by him unto
Harwich in ESSEX.

Likewise, The Proceedings of the Duke of Buckingham his Grace, in the Isle of
Ree.

The killing of the Base Brother of the French King, at the new Fort before
Rochell with a Shot from one of our Ships.

And also, The appointed place of Randeuous of the great Fleet Threatened from
Foreign parts to raise the Siedge at the Isle of Ree.

With many other particulars.

Published by Authority.

LONDON: Printed by A. M. for Thomas Walkley, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the Sign of the Eagle and Child in Britains Burse, 1627.

A true and most exact relation of the taking of the goodly Ship called the
Saint Esprit, belonging unto the French King, by Sir SACVILE TREVER Knight, the
28. of September 1627.
THe French resolving to build some Ships for the strengthening of their Navy,
and wanting materials, and Shippe-wrights in the Kingdom, they determined to
build them in Holland, at Amsterdame and Enchusen, a thing which the States of
the United Provinces could not deny them, (it being at their proper cost) in
respect of those obligements which bind them to that Nation.

The notice whereof, together with their supposed time of Launching, being
advertised into England, His Majesty to crush this Crocodile in the Shell, and
to prevent the storm of the danger before it fell, sent out Sir Sacville
Treuer, after his return from the River of Elve, where he made the Haumburgers
come to reason, and searched their Ships in despite of all opposition.

He had with him in this last expedition a Fleet of eight Sail, whereof four
were of the Kings Navy Royal, the rest were Merchants.

His Commission enjoined him to ply up and down upon the Coast of Holland, and
to take all French Ships which he could meet withal.

He observing carefully these Orders, used al possible speed, and on Friday
the eight and twentieth of September, he arrived at the Texell (a great Road
in North-Holland) about 8. of the Clock at night, with all his Fleet in
safety.

The names of his Ships were these.

The Kings good Ship called the Assurance, carrying 38. Pieces of Brass
Ordnance, wherein Sir Sackuille himself went as Admiral.

The Kings good Ship called the Adventure, carrying 26. Brass Pieces, wherein
Captain George Allen commanded as Vize Admiral.

The good Ship called the Ambrose, carrying 18. Pieces of Iron Ordnance,
wherein Captain John Pette the Rear Admiral of the Fleet commanded.

The Kings good Ship called the St. Marie of Roane, carrying sixteen great
Pieces, besides murderers, the Captain whereof was Captain Thomas Bardesey.

Captain Cheineyes Ship called the May flower of London.

Captain Hooks Ship called the Lion of Ipswich.

Captain Morgans Ship called the Jacob.

Captain Neadham a Pinnace belonging to the King, called the Maria, carrying
six Pieces of Brass Ordnance.

These four latter Ships were of no great burden, but were well manned, and
of quick Steerage, and carried in all, besides the Murderers which they had
upon their upper decks, twenty pieces of Brass and Iron Ordnance.

Sir Sackuille Treuer got a Dutch Pilot upon the Coast, who being demanded
concerning the Ships that lay in the Texell, told him, that besides sixteen
Hollandish men of War and diverse other Vessels of good burden, their lay
one goodly French Shipp called the Saint Esprit, which was of the burden of
800 Tons, the upper works whereof are richly guilt with double Angel Gold
in the inside and outside of her, in those places which were fittest to
express pomp and stateliness, as also the very Port-holes were curiously
carved with Lions heads gaping that were richly double guilt.

The Pilot after he had been fully questioned by Sir Sackuile Treuer
concerning al particulars which might tend to the Service, told him, that if
he would give him him Gold, he would bring him to the side of her: whereupon
Sir Sackuile gave him a double Portugue in gold, valuing four pounds sterling.

We coming near unto their French Ship presently she sent out her long Boat
being manned with French and Dutch to hale us, and to see what we were: But our
Admiral commanding the men to come aboard us, we surprised the Long-boate,
and pinioned the men and put them in the Hold.

Afterward the Esprit discovering us to be Enemies, began to fight, and
discharged (but without any effects of hurt) three great Shot and one hundred
small shot. Then sir Sackuille Treuer being willing to take occasion by the
foretop, and to slack no time for fear of loosing advantage, came up close to
her, and gave her a whole broad side: so likewise did our Vize Admiral and
Rere Admiral, and the St. Marie, where Captain Thomas Bardesey commanded:
which Shot was discharged with that quick motion, and working advantage,
that their maine Maste and Bowe-sprit being pierced thorough, they cried out
for Quarter, which for good considerations was granted them: so that by ten of
the clock at night, which was two hours after our coming into the Texel, we
became Masters of this great and warlike Ship.

Before we came up close to her, but after they had discovered us to be
Enemies, those of the St. Esprit, made a train in a Chest filled with
Gunpowder and other combustible materials, to blow up the Ship and our men
that should enter it. But this resolution was again altered, because their long
Boat being taken by our Admiral, they saw no other means of escape, but
only by submitting themselves unto our mercy.

That night we disposed of her men severally in our Ships, being one hundred
French and fifty Dutch. We gave all fair quarter to the Dutch, but the French
were kept Prisoners until the day before we came out of the Texel, and then
they were all set on land in North Holland.

After we had taken this Ship, there came unto us Captain Dupper in the true
Love of Ipswich, and Captain Wall in the Susan of Alborough, on the Sunday
following, whom we welcomed after the manner of the sea.

There was another goodly French Ship, which was newly come over Wearing
Flatts distant eight miles from the Texel, who receiving intelligence of our
strength, and of what we had done, got Hoyes, Lighters, and other small Vessels
of transportation; in which having lighted her self of her Ordnance, she got
over the Flats to Enchusen, before our men could come up to her.

We came up with eight sail of Ships to take her, but loosing our labor,
by means that she was safely harbored in Enchuisen, we returned back again
unto our Admiral, who expected our coming in the Texel road.

Some of the States of the neighbor towns, came aboard us, and demanded
peremptorily, by virtue of what commission we came to fetch that Ship out of
their Rode. Our Admiral told them, that he had commission to take all French
Ships, which he could meet withal, and he was assured that this was a
French Ship, and therefore he adventured to take her without any further
commission.

Cap. George Allen our Vize Admiral and some others of this Fleet, stays upon
the coast of Holland, for the intercepting of this and other French Ships: the
rest under the conduct of Sir Sackuill Treuer brought home the surprised Ship
to Harwich.

This goodly Ship taken on the 28. of September, as is aforesaid, had 42.
Pieces of Ordnance mounted, twelve Pieces vnmounted in her hold, 2006. Armours,
one hundred and fifty Muskets, and 60. barrels of Gunpowder.

The specification of her Ordnance (...)

ITem, upon her lower Tier 20. whole Culnerings of Brass of full size, being
in height five inches and a quarter. 20 In her stearage two demie Culuerings of
Brass, in height four inches, one quarter, and better. 2 Item, two Drakes
upon the half decko, being brass of Sacker bore. 2 24. Brass. Item, upon her
upper Tyer 12. Dema-Culuerings of Iron in height, four inches and a quarter:
12 Item, four Sackers of Iron upon the half deck. 2 18. Iron.


Sum total mounted is 42.

ITem, it is reported there is in hold twelve Pieces of Iron, all whole
Culuerings, we took the height of two, being five inches, the rest we could
not come to. 12 The length of the Ship by the keele, is 105. foot: 105 The
breadth by her beam is 35. foot. 35 From the Kilchin to the Deck in depth
twelve foot. 12 Item, 2006. Armours. Item, 150. Muskets: Item, 60: Barrels of
Gunpowder:


COncerning the proceedings of our Army and Navy in the Island of Ree
(commonly called Saint Martins) there has happened no memorable accident, as
far as we can understand, since the Wednesday sennight after Sir John
Burrowes was slain, upon the night of which day our men surprised diverse Boats
as they were passing to the Fort with Victuals: the particulars of which
exploite were related in our last Iournall: but concerning the occurrences
happening in the Maine, we have received their aduertisements by Letters out of
France on Wednesday last being the third of October.

That the French King being fully bent to follow his Designs against Rochell,
and to pluck out that thorn, which (as the Cardinal intimated unto him) had
so long stuck in the sides of his Sovereignty, continues the building of his
new Fort, of purpose to debar the Townes-men from all ingresse and egresse by
water. He follows this work with great charge and greater labor, as well
knowing how important the finishing thereof will be for his farther ends and
intentions. He has caused twelve whole Cannons to be mounted before the
breast of this Fort, with which his Canoniers make diverse random shot into the
Town, but with more terror then danger. Some Ships of our Fleet riding not
far from the Fort, have bestowed diverse shot upon the French, though without
point blanke distance. One of which fell so fortunately for us, and so
unfortunately for them, that it killed a base son of that great Henry the
fourth, which he had by a sister of the Duke of Orleance. The same shot did
likewise kill another Duke, of whose name we are not as yet certain. And the
wind of that bullet struck down the Monsieur (the legitimate Brother of the
French King) as he was conferring with the other two.

It is further confirmed that two principal men of the French Nobility were
slain by the late Ambush of the Rochellers. Which two Noblemen with diverse
other brave Cheualiers, were drawn within danger by a stale made by twenty
common Soldiers in the habit of Gentlemen, who sallyed forth of the Town of
Rochell.

The Rochellers are very careful to furnish our Fleet and Army, with all
necessary Provisions, which their store or procuration can afford: and these
they transport in twenty long Boats, which in token of the service that they
owe unto the King of England, carry red crosses for the device of their
colors. Diverse English who have been either sick or wounded are in the
Town, amongst whom is that honorable Knight Sir Charles Rich, who is cured of
his wound, but has not as yet recovered the perfect use of his arm. His
presence is much desired of my Lord Duke, and is expected in the Army every
day.

His Excellency to avoid the extortion of Victuallers, who like the milt in
man's body grow fat by the leanenesse of others, has out of his Noble
disposition published a Proclamation for the price of Bread, Wine, and other
necessaries, according to the rates of which Proclamation, the Ilanders and
others from the Continent do bring in Victuals.

There is a confident report in all those parts of France, that there are
appointed sorty Ships of War to come from Spain, and twenty from Dunkerke,
who are to join with the French Fleet for the succors of the Island, and the
beating off of the English. The Randeuowe of all these Ships was appointed at
Blawet, a famous Port Town in Brittanie, on the tenth of this present month.

FINIS.

