THE WHOLE BOOK of Psalms, collected into Englysh meter by T. Starnhold I.
Hopkins and others: conferred with the Ebrue, with apt Notes to sing the^ with all, Faithfully perused and allowed according to thordre appointed in the Queen's
majesty's Injunctions

Very mete to be used of all sorts of people privately for their solace and
comfort: laying apart all ungodly Songs and Ballades, which tend only to the
norishing of vice, and corrupting of youth.

JAMES. V. If any be afflicted let him pray, and if any be merry let him sing
Psalms. COLLOSS. III. Let the word of God dwell plentuouslye in all wisdom
teachinge and exhorting one another in psalms, Hymns and spiritual songs,
and sing unto the Lord in your herts. Imprinted at London by John Day, dwelling
over Aldersgate, Cumgratia and priuilegio Regie Maiestatis, perscpteunium. An.
1562.



A short Introduction into the Science of Music, made for such as are
desirous to have the knowledge thereof, for the singing of these Psalms.
FOr that the rude and ignorant in Song, may with more delight desire, and good
will: be moved and drawn to the godly exercise of singing of Psalms, as well in
common place of prayer, where altogether with one voice render thanks and
praises to God, as privately by themselves, or at home in their houses: I have
set here in the beginning of this book of psalms, an easy and most plain
way and rule, of the order of the Notes and Kayes of singing, which commonly
is called the scale of Music, or the Gamma vt. Whereby (any diligence given
thereunto) every man may in a few days: yea, in a few hours, easily without
all pain, and that also without aid or help of any other teacher, attain to
a sufficient, knowledge, to singe any Psalm contained in this Book, or any
such other plain and easy Songs as these are.

Behold this table
gamut

In this table, or ga^ma vt, is contained all, what is necessari to the
knoweledge of singing Wherefore it must be diligent lie waid and must also be
perfectly committed to memory, so that ye can redely and distinctly say it
without book, both forward and backward: that is, upward and downward And this
is the greatest pain that ye need to take in this travail.

Ye must also note that the letters ascending on the left hand of the Table,
are called Kaies, or Cleuis: of which the first is a Greek letter, signifying
g, and is called gamma, (of whom the whole table or scale is called, the Gamma
vt.) All the other ar lattin letters vii. in number. a, b, c, d, e, f, g, then
repeting the same again, beginning at a, and the third time repeting the same,
till ye com to ee, la. which is the last, but all these Kayes are not signed or
set in these Psalms: but only ii. or three most commonly c, or e, or b. C,
has this form or sign, * E, is signed after this manner * B, has thus, * or
thus sharp.

The kayes of this Scale or Table, are divided and set forth by three diverse
orders of letters. From gamma vt, to G, sol, re, vt,, ar signed with capital
letters, and are called grave base, or capital kayes: From G, sol, re, vt: to
G, sol, re, vt, they are written with small letters: and are called mean or
small kayes: And from g, sol, re, vt, to ee, la, they are written with double
letters, and are called double kaies, and treble kaies.

When it chances ii. kaies to be of one letter, as G sol, re, vt: and g, sol,
re, vt, A, la, mi, re and, a, la, mi, re, E, fa, vt: and f, fa, vt: E, la, mi,
and e, la, mi, ye may (to put difference and distinction between them) call the
one, capital G, or G, sol, re, vt, the lower: and the other small g, or g, sol,
re, vt: the higher, and so of others.

They are called kayes, because they open, as it were the door, and make away
into song: for by the sight and place of the kaye, ye shall know easelye the
whole song, the nature of every Note, in what kaie or place it stands, and
how ye shall name it. ye see also in the table, that some of the kayes be set
in lines or rules, and other are set in spaces between the lines: as gamma, vt,
is set in rule: a, re, in space:: b, mi, in rule. c, fa vt: in space d, sol,
re, in rule, and so ascending to the end: so also in the songs of your Book,
ye se rules and spaces: so that every rule and space in your book, answers to
some one rule or space of your table or scale: and takes the name of the same,
which ye may easily find out, either by ascending or descending from the
kaye set and marked in your song.

Moreover it is to be noted, that there are vi. voices, or Notes, signified and
expressed by these vi. sillables: vt: re mi, fa, sol, la, by which through
repetition of them, may be so^g al songs of what compass so ever they be,
which vi. notes, ye must learn to tune aptely of some one that can already
sing, or by some Instrument of music, as the Uirginals, or some other such
like, Which thing well learned, ye shall need none other teaching of any

And for a plainer learning thereof, I have set before your eyes, those vi.
notes asce^ding and descending: and again with a little variety from their
natural order, to the end ye may attain to the just tunes of them, how so
ever they be placed. For these two examples well had, and tuned a right, all
other songs and Psalms, with little use and a small labor will sone be
attained unto ^

First ye must diligently search out, in what kaie every note of your song
sto^deth: Which ye may easily do, in beholding your signed kaie (commonly
called the cleave) which is set in the beginning of every song: and that line
or, space wherein the signed kaie is set, bears the name of the same kaie: and
all Notes standinge in ye line or space, are said to stand in that kaie: and
so ascending or desce^ding from that kaie, ye shall straight way see wherein, or
in what kaie every Note of your song stands. As in this present example. if
ye will know wherein your first Note stands, consider your kaie, signed and
marked with this letter C. in the second rule (and because it stands in rule,
ye find, by your Table that it is C, sol, fa, vt: For the other two c, c,
which are, c, fa, vt: and, cc, sol fa: stand in space) wherefore that second
line throughout, is called, c, sol, fa, vt, and all the notes placed in that
line, are counted to stand in c, sol, fa, vt: Then descend from that kaie to
the next space, which (as your table tells you) is b, fa,, mi. from thence to
the next rule, which is a, la, mi, re, and from thence to the next space
wherein your first Note stands, which is G, sol, re vt: so find ye by
descending in order beginning at your signed kaye, after this sort: c, sol,
fa, vt,: b, fa,, mi: a, la, mi, re: G, sol, re, vt: ye find that your first
note stands in G, sol, re, vt: wherefore ye may sing it by any of these iii.
Notes sol, re, or vt: But because this note vt, in this place is most aptest to
ascend withal: ye shall call it vt: by the same trial ye shall find that your
second Note stands in a, la, mi, re, ye shall express in singing by this
voice re, rather then by la, or mi, because re, is in order next above vt, so
shall ye find the third Note to stand in b, fa,, mi, which ye shall express
by mi, The fourth stands in the signed kaie or cleave, wherefore it stands
in c, sol, fa, vt, which ye must express by fa. The fifth in d, la, sol, re:
and is to be expressed by sol. The sixth and highest Note, ye shall by ascending
from your keie, find to stand in e, la, mi: and is to be expressed in voice
by la, so have youth whole compass of your so^g* and as in order of notes,
and sound of voice, ye ascendid, so contrary wise; ye must defce^d till ye
come to the last Note of your song.

Here note that when b, fa,, mi, is formed and sighed in this manner, with this
letter b, which is called b, flat, it must be expressed with this voice or
note, fa, but if it be formed and signed with this form, which is called b,
sharp: or if it have no sign at all, then must ye expres it in singing with
this voice or Note. mi.

Like wise may ye practice; placing your first Note vt, in any other kaye,
wherein ye find vt, which are. vii. Ga^ma, vt, C, fa, vt: E; fa vt, grave: G,
sol, re, vt, grave: c, sol, fa, vt: E, fa, vt, sharp: g, sol, re, vt, sharp,
ascending up to la, and descending as in your former example. These vii.
several ascensions and descensyons upon diverse grounds or cleues, are
co^monlye called of writers vii. deductions, which ye may plainly and
distinctlye behold in your table, or Scale.

One example more have I set, wherein ye sing fa, in b, fa,, mi. Whose
deductions begins in vt: placed in, E, fa, vt, grave or capital as ye see. ^

Ye have also in your songs diverse fourmes and figures of Notes. Of which
all, it behooves you to know both the names and value.

Diverse forms of Notes. ^

The first of these is cassed a Large: the second a Long. The third a Brief
the fourth a Semibrief: the fifth a Minime: the sixth a Crochet: The seventh and
last a Quauer. The first is worth in value two of the second, that is, two
Longes: and one Long is worth ii. Breues: and one Breue, is two Semibrefes.
and one Semibrefe: two Minimest and hathet wise the time in pronouncing in
singing that the Minime has One Minime is worth two crochets: and one
Crochet, is two quauers, as appears in this Table following.



If there chance any prick to be set by any of these Notes, the prick is
worth in value the Note next following it. As apricke set by a Semibriefe, as
thus, *^ is worth this none, * which is a Minime: and a prick by a Minime,
as here, *^ is worth a *. There are also oftentimes * in singing, * Pauses or
Restes, setin songs, some time for ease of the singer, and comely stay of the
songs: sometime where diverse parts are, for swetnes of the armonye, and apt
repetityons and reports: Which are signified by lift strikes or lines, or
half lines between the rules: as thus. ^

The first which is drawn from the first line to the iii. is called a long
Rest: and signifies that ye must pause while that a long is song, which is
worth iiii. plain song Notes, or four Semibreues. The second which is from
one line to a another, is called a Breue rest, and requires the pauling of a
breue or of ii. semibreues. The iii. which is from a line to the half space
underneath: is called a semibreue rest, and requires the pause or space while a
semibreue is in singing. The fourth which is ascending from the line, to the
half space above, is called a Minime rest, and is but the drawing of a breath,
while a minime may be song The fifte and last, which is like unto the Minime
rest, but crooked at the top, requires the pause of a crochet.

To set out a full and absolute knowledge of the nature of the scale, the
differences between notes and half notes, and half notes between themselves,
of interualles, proportions: and which notes concord and agree together, and
which disagree. What modes there are: and how many. What is perfection, what
imperfection: How notes ought to be bound together, and what their value is
so bound, tayled upward or downewarde? pertains to a just Introduction to
the art of Music. These things before taught, seem at this time, for the
poor unlearned and rude, sufficient and inoughe to the atteyning of such
knowledge in singing as shall be requisite to the singing of Psalms contained
in this book, for which cause only they are set out.

A Treatise made by Athanasius the great, wherein is setforth, how, and in what
manner ye may use the Psalms, according to theffect of the mind: of gladness
or sorrow: accordingly. which Psalms ye shall use for prayer, which for
thankesgeuing, which for rehearsal of Gods wonderful acts, to the praise of his
name. Also ye may se in them how God has helped his chosen people from time,
to time, and never forsook them.
THe whole scripture universally is as it were a divine Maystres. teaching both
virtue and true faith: but the book of the Psalms has over and besides
that, in a manner an expres image of the state and condition of souls: For as
he which goes to a king, composeth first his behavior, and sets in order
his words, least he should be counted rusticall and rude: so this divine
book, first by choice of all motions, wherewith the soul is affected, warns,
then frames and instructs by diverse forms of speaking all such as covet
virtue, and defyre to know the life of the Savior. It is easy therefore for
every man to find out in the Psalms, the motion and state of his own soul,
and by that means, his own figure and proper erudition. Moreover with what
words he may please God, and with what words he may correct himself, and
give God thanks, Lest if he speak that thing which is not leefull, he fall
into impiety. For not alone of deeds but also of every word must we give
accounte before the judge. wherefore if thou will pronounce any man happy and
blessed: thou have how and wherefore, and whom thou may call happy, in the
Psalms, as you may se in the first psalm. 32. psalm. 41. psa. 112. psalm.
119. psalm, and the, 128. psalm.

If thou wylt complain of the laying awayt of the Jews against the Savior,
say the second Psalm.

If thine acquaintance persecute thee, and many rise against thee, thou have
the third Psalm.

If thou being troubled on this sort, have called upon the Lord, and because
he has hard the thou would give him thanks: sing the. 4. psa. and the. 115
Psalm.

If thou perceyuest wait to be laid for the of evil willers and desyrest that
thy prayer should be hard, sing the. 5. psalm.

If thou feel the threatninges of God, and thereby perceyuest thy self to
be dismayed. thou may say the. 6. psalm and the. 37.

If any consult or conspire against the as Achitophel against David, and some
man tell it the, sing the, 7. Psalm.

when thou considerest the grace of our Savior euerywhere spread abroad, and
man kind restored unto health, the^ if thou will talk to the Lord, sing the 8.
Psalm.

If again thou will sing of the wondrous works of God gyuing God thanks,
thou have the 8. Psalm and the 81. Psalm.

If thou will have thine enemy stopped and driven back and nevertheless the
creature to be saved, not trusting in thy self but in Gods son, say the 9.
Psalm.

If any man will make thee afraid, thou with trust in the Lord shall sing the.
10. Psalm.

If thou see the pride and malice of many to abound, so that nothing which
is good and godly is regarded amongst men, fly thou unto Lord and say the.
11. Psalm.

If the lyinges in wait of enemies continue still, do not forget thy self, as
though the Lord set naught by thee, but call upon the Lord: synging the. 26.
Psalm.

If thou hear any man blaspheming and speaking ill against the providence: be
not thou partaker of their wickedness, but flying unto God say the. 14. Psalm.
and 53. Psalm

If thou will know after what sort the life of a citizen of the kingdom of
heaven is, sing the 15. Psalm.

If thou have need of prayer for them which withstand the and compass thy soul
about singe the 17. Psalm and 86. 89. and 142. Psalm.

If thou will know how Moses prayed thou have the 90. Psalm.

If thou art escaped from enemies, and delivered from the^ which persecute the,
sing the 18. Psalm.

If thou maruelest at thorder of things created, and the grace of the divine
providence sing 19. 26. 27. Psalm.

If thou see any man troubled, comfort them, and praying for them, say the
words of the Psalm 20.

If thou see thy self kept of the Lord and that thou prosperest, rejoice and
sing the 23. Psalm:

If thine enemies rush upon thee, lift up thy soul to God and say the 25.
Psalm, and thou shall see them work wickedness in vain.

If thine enemies persevere and continue, as with bloody hands seek to seduce
thee or kill thee, give not judgment unto manne for all human things are
suspect. But requiring God to be judge, who is thonly Judge, say 26. psalm.
and 35. 43. Psalm.

If thine enemies cruelly curse the, and multiply, as it were an host with
dispite: fear not, no more the^ though thou were nothing in danger at all, and
sing 46. Psalm.

If again they be impudent, which lie in wait, set thou nothin by them but
sing unto the Lord that which is in the 47. Psalm.

If thou will know how thou ought to go unto the Lord when thou will give him
thanks: plainly thou shall understand and sing 48. Psalm.

Furthermore when thou renuest thy house and soul, which receives the Lord,
and the sensible house in which thou bodily dwell: give thanks and say. 49.
and 127. Psalm.

If thou see thy kinsmen and friends hate the for the truth leave not of thy
love, nether fear such adversaries, but think what is to come, and sing the
31. psalm.

If thou see them that be christened, delivered from the corruptible birthe
maruelling at the divine bounteousnes sing the. 31. Psalm.

If thou will sing with the just men, and remembering the^ which live a right,
sing the. 33. psalm.

If thou haste fallen amongst enemies, and wisely escaped them, and fled from
their snares, and therefore wilt give thanks, call together the meke and sing
with them the 34. Psalm.

If thou see the wicked strive to do mischief, think not that sin is
naturally in them, as certain heretics held an opinion: but say 36. Psalm.

If thou se the evil work unrighteousness and bear them selves lofty against
the lower sort, and desire to warn some thereof, say the 37. Psalm.

If thou have determined to take heed unto thy self, and see the adversary,
lying in wait, who is most earnest against such and would arm thy self
against him: sing the 39. psalm,

If thou see many pore men and beggars, and would pity them: thou may
both try them which are now pitied al ready and exhort other to do the same,
saing 41. Psalm.

If thou have a desire toward God, and hear the enemies vpbraiding, let it
not dismay thee, but understanding thimmor tall fruit, which springs of this
desire, comfort the soul with hope toward God, and with this releue, and
mitigate the griefs of life, saying 42 psalm.

If thou will often call to remembrance the benefits of God, which he showed
to the fathers both in the going out of Egypt, and in the wilderness, and how
God was good to them, but they were unthankful: thou have the 44. Psalm. the
79. 80. 102. 106. 107. 114. Psalms.

If fleing unto God thou have escaped such things as were spoken against thee,
and would give thanks unto God, and declare his liberality and goodness
toward the thou have. 46.

If thou haste sinned and being turned, fallest to repentance, and would
obtain mercy, thou have the words of confession in the. 51. Psalm.

If thou have suffered a false accusation before an evil king and see thenemy
to bost: go aside and say the. 52. Psalm.

If any persecute thee and quarrel willing to betray the, like as the Phariseis
did Christ, and strangers David, abashe not thy self, but with trust in the
Lord, sing the 54. Psalm. and the. 56.

If persecution chance, and the persecutour unawares enenter into the cave
where thou art hyd, fear not, for thou have in this strayte profitable
words, both for comfort and for remembrance of the things, in the. 57. psalm
and 142.

If he that lies in wait of thee, have commanded to watch and beset thy
house, and thou have escaped, give thanks unto God and in the tables of thy
soul, grave the thing, and say the 59. Psalm.

If thenemies which troble thee, up brayde thee, and with many words backbyte
thee, which sem to be friends, and in thexercise of this thy trosse thou art
somewhat weak: thou mast call upon the same also saying the. 4. Psalm.

Against hipocrites and such as brag to a man's face, say to convert them
withal, the 58. Psalm.

If they sharply rush upon thee: and would catch thy soul set against them thy
subjection to God ward, and be of good comfort, for the fearser they are
themore shall they be subject unto God, say thou the 62. Psalm.

If to anoyde persecution, thou flee into the deserte, fearenot as though thou
werte there alone and desolate: but having God, and in the dawning of the day
rising to him, sing the. 63. Psalm.

If the enemies make thee afraid and cease not to sow deceytes, and search
always against thee: although they be never so many, cease not for all that,
for their nets shall be like shaftes of little children, if thou sing the. 64.
68. 70. 71. Psalms.

if thou will sing of God, and his praise, thou haste the 65. Psalm.

if thou will enstruct any man in the misterye of the resurrection, thou have
the 80. Psalm.

if thou ask mercy of God, sing the 67. Psalm.

if thou see the wicked prosper in peace, be not so offended that thou be
moved, but say the 73. psalm.

if God be angry with his people, thou haste words wherewith thou may
comfort the same, in the. 74. Psalm.

if thou think expedient to confess thee, sing the 71. 75. 92. 105. 106. 108,
111. 118. 136. and. 138. Psalms.

if thou will rebuke a Gentile and an heretic. namelye such a one as knows
not God thou may with intelligence sing and say that which is in the. 86.
Psalm.

if thenemies have taken thy refuges and thou art in great distres, although
thou art troubled, yet despair not, but pray, and if when thou criest thou
art heard, give thanks unto God saying that which is in the. 77. Psalm.

If the enemies hold on and continue breaking in. and defilyng the house of
God, and killing the saints and casting their bodies to the souls of thayre,
fear not their cruelty but suffering with them that suffer affliction say the
79. psa.

If thou will sing to the Lord in solemnity call together the servants of
God and sing the 81. and the 95. Psalm.

If thenemies be gathered together every where. and threaten the house of the
Lord, conspiring against godliness, let not the multitude and power of them
dismaie thee, thou have as it were an authoure of hope, the words which are
in the. 83. Psalm.

if thou see the house of God and his everlasting tabernacles and have a mind
or affection toward them as had the Apostle: say the 84. Psalm.

if rancor be stinted and captivity released: thou haste to give God thanks
withal the 85. Psalm. and a 116.

if thou will know discord of the catholic church against divisions and
would convert them, thou may say that which is in the 87, Psalm.

If thou will move thy self and other to true religion and persuade that the
hope in God makes not the soul ashamed but rather put away all fear, praise
God, saying the 91. Psalm.

If thou will sing upon the Sabbath, thou haste the. 92, Psalm.

If thou will give thanks upon the Sunday, thou haste in the 13. Psalm.

If thou wylt give thanks in the second Sabbath, sing the. 95. Psalm.

If thou wylt sing vpoon the day of preparation, thou have a form of praise in
the. 93. Psalm: and therefore a song of rejoicing ought to be song unto God
himself.

If there have been imprisonmente, and the house wasted, and bulded again,
singe that which is in the. 96. Psalm.

If the land have been vexed of thenemies, and whiles the Lord rules and
rayneth, it be at quiet, thou have to singe the 97. Psalm.

If thou will sing upon the fourth Sabbath, thou have the 94. Psalm, for
then he being betrayed, began to revenge death, and to triumph over the same.

Therefore when thou redest the Gospel, and see the Jews consulting against
the Lord, and the Lord himself standing boldlye on our side against the
devil: sing that which is in the. 94. Psalm, as is next before said.

If thou markest the providence of the Lord in all things, and the Lord of the
same, and would enstruct any with the faith and obedience thereof, when thou
have persuaded the^ syrft to acknowledge, sing the 100. Psalm.

If thou know power in him to judge, and that God judges mingling
judgment with mercy, and have a desire to attain unto it, thou have for this
purpose, words in the 101. Psalm.

If because of thim becillitie of our nature, thou art, after the manner of a
physician, irke and weary of the manifold mischefes of life, and would
comfort thy self: thou have the. 102. Psalm.

For as much as it is mete and convenient always and in all things to give
God thanks, when thou will praise him thou have wherewith to exhort thy soul
the 103. Psalm.

If thou will praise God, and know how to praise him for any thing, and what
words he that prayseth ought to use, thou have 113. 127. 146. 133. 147. 148.
149. 150. Psalms.

If thou have says, as the Lord has said, and beleuest in those things
which thou speak when thou prayest say the 96. Psalm.

If thou be captiuated with strange cogitations, and have perceived thy self
to be led out of the way, and are sorry therefore, cease from henceforth, and
staying there where thou perceyuedst thy self to sin, sit and mourn also,
as the people did, saying the 137. Psalm.

If thou suppose temptations to be for thy trial, give thanks after the
temptation unto God, saying 139. Psalm.

If thou art again caught of thine enemies, and would be delivered, say the
140. Psalm.

If thou will make thy prayers, say the 5. Psalm, and the 141. 142. 143. 144.
Psalm.

If an enemy and tyrante be risen up against the people, fear thou no more
then David did Goliath, but with David believe and sing the 144. Psalm.

If thou call to remembrance the goodness of God toward thee and all men, and
would praise God, say the 85. Psalm.

If thou will sing unto the Lord, thou have to say in the 96. and in the 98.
Psalms.

If thou being but a mean man peradventure art set before thy brethren in some
thing, puff not up thy self in pride against them, but give the praise to God,
and sing the 52. or the 151. Psalm.

If thou wyltsing obedience, thou have the 105. and the. 106 107. 111. 112.
113. 114. 115. 116. 117. 118. 119. 134. 145. 147. 148. 149. 150. Psalms.

If thou will sing particularly of the savior, thou haste of him in every
psalm: but specially in the 25. and the 110. Psalm.

Such Psalms as show his lawful generation of the father, and his presence,
are the 11. Psalm.

Such as preach of the divine cross, and how much lying in wait he
received for us, and how great things he suffered, are the 2. Psalm, and the
119.

Such as signify the lyinges in wait of the Jews, and the malice, and Judas
Iscariothes betrainges, are the 21. Psalm, and the 50. 72. Psalms.

Such as declare his kingdom, and power to judge, and his presence in the
flesh, is the 16. Psalm.

For declaration of his glorious resurrection in the flesh read the 24. and
the. 47. Psalm.

For his ascencion into heaven, the 93. Psalm 96. and the 98. the 99. Psalms.

Which it thou read, thou may espy what benefytes the Lord bestowed upon
us by his passion.

To him be glory forever.

The use of the rest of the Psalms not comprehended in the former Lable of
Athanasius.
IF thou would praise God, because he has given us a good Prince which
will and does punish the enemies of Christ's relygion, use the 21. Psalm.

If thou be persecuted without a cause, if thou would have no affinity,
with vice, nor with the virious, use the 26. Psalm.

If thou would not be wicked, if not accounted as a malefactor: but would
have them punished, and thyselfe and such other godly men defended from the
tiranie, use the. 28 Psalm.

If thou see the nobility, the counsel, the magistrates, and Princes not
given to religion, nor to the praising of God, use the 29. Psalm.

If thou desire to be just and virtuous, use the 33. psalm.

If thou be afflicted with any sickness, and would feign live and see good
days, and Christ's glory to be increased, use the. 29. Psalm.

If thou be banished for religion, and art almost in despair of retorning to
thy country, use the 42 psalm:

If thou perceive thy self forsaken of God, and therefore persecuted for
religion and virtue sake, use the. 44. Psalm:

If thou would complain of a Doeg, of a wicked man, and would have him to
be voted out, and thy self to have prosperitye, use the. 52 psalm.

If thou would be delivered from thine enemies which persecute thee unto
death use the 54. Psalm:

If thou would have the help of God against such as persecute thee
without a cause, use the 59. Psalm.

If thou would prepare thy self to fight against the Idumeane, or such like
enemies of Christ: use the 60. Psalm.

If thou would have Christ to come conquer and beat down the Siria^s:
Idumes, Amonites, Papists: Antichristians. Nullifidians Neutralles, and
ungracious Pelagyans use the 68. Psalm.

If thou best persuaded that Christ will come and pounysh offenders aid the
true worshippers, and pour our the dregs of wine and vengeance of his
cup, on the ungodly, use the 75. Psalm.

If thou neither would have Idolatry, neither any lycencious lusts rain in
Christ's commonwealth thou must give God thanks if thou be persuaded, he both
will and can take them away, using the 81: Psalm.

If thou would gladly know Christ's Church, and how that Sion signifies
it, and how that the true religion shall be delated and spread through the hole
world, use the. 87. Psalm.

If thou go to fight against the Idumeans, or any of Christ's enemies,
whether they offend in manners, or in doctrine, and would desire God to
give the victory, use the 108. Psalm.

If thou would live a godly life, if thou would replenysh thy mind with
gooly precepts, and thereby obtain imortalitie, and eternal felicity: Study
diligently the. 119. Psalm.

If thou be thrust into a College, or in a parish, town or country, whose in
habitours, are wicked, crafty, and malicious pick quarrels, to be delivered
from them. use the. 120. Psalm.

If thou would have the congregation of Christ to prosper, use the 122.
Psalm.

If thou would be delivered from contempt, infamye and the derision of the
wicked, use 123. Psalm.

when thou art delivered out of prison captivity, or any distres in giving
thanks to God use the 124. Psalm.

To understand, the saftie that those are in, which ar under the tuicion of
the Lord. Ioua, and how that the wicked shall be punyshed, consider the 125.
Psalm:

If thou desire to know the felicity that he has which reuerenceth God,
and lives godly, the tranquillity and peace of conscience which he enjoys
in this life, and the vnspeak able joy in the life to come, meditate
diligently the 128. Ps.

To understand how the good and godly are defended by the aid of the Lord,
and the wicked perish, consider the 129. Psalm.

If thou would not be arrogaunte and proud, use the 131. Psalm.

If thou would praise unity and concord among brethren, use the. 133.
Psalm.

To sing praises to god for his mercies, use the 134. Psalm.

FINIS.
Venicreator.
^ COme holy Ghost eternal God, proceeding ^ from above: Both from the Father
and the ^ son, the God of peace and love, Uisit our minds ^ and into us thy
heavenly grace inspire, that in all ^ truth and godliness, we may have true
desire.

Thou art the very comforter, in all woe and distres:
The heavenly gift of God most high, which no tonguee an expres.
The fountain and the lively spring, of joy Celestial;
The fire so bright, the love so clear, and unction spiritual.
Thou in thy gifts art manifold, whereby Christ's church does stand:
In faithful hearts writing thy law, the finger of Gods hand.
According to thy promise made, thou geuest speech of grace:
That through thy help the praise of God, may stand in every place.
O holy Ghost into our wits, send down thy heavenly light:
Kindle our hearts with fervent love, to serve God day and night.
Strength and stablish all our weakness, sofeable and so frail:
That neither flesh, the world, nor devil. against us do prevail.
Put back our enemies far from us, and grant us to obtain:
Peace in our hearts with God and man. without grudge or disdain.
And grant (O Lord) that thou being, our leader and our guide:
We may eschew the snares of sin and from thee never slide.
To us such plenty of thy grace, good Lord grant we thee pray:
That thou may be our comforter, at the last dreadful day.
Of all strief and discention, O Lord dissolve the hands:
And make the knots of peace and love, throughout all christen lands.
Grant us (O Lord) through thee to know the father most of might:
That of his dear beloved son, we may atteyne the sight.
And that with perfect faith also we may acknowledge thee:
The spirit of them both always, one God in persons three.
Laud and praise be to the father and to the Son equal:
And to the holy spirit also, one God coeternall.
And pray we that the only son, vouchesafe his Sprit to send:
To all that do profess his name, unto the worlds end.
Amen. Look for the lxxxxv Psalm. iii Fol. 237.

The song of S. Ambrose, called Te Deum.
^ WE praise thee god, we knowledge the ^ the only Lord to be, And as eternal
father, all the ^ earth does worship the. To the al angels cry, the ^ heavens
and all the powers therein: To the Cherub. ^ and Seraphin, To cry they do not
linne.

O Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord, Of Saboth Lord the God:
Through heaven and earth, thy praise is spread, And glory all abroad.
Thapostles glorious company yield praises unto thee:
The Prophets goodly selowship. praise thee continually.
The noble and victorious host Of martirs sound thy praise:
The holy church throughout the world does knowledge thee always.
Father of endless majesty, they do acknowledge thee:
Thy Christ, thine honorable, true and only son to be:
The holy Ghost the comforter, of glory thou art king
O Christ, and of the father art the son everlasting.
When sinful man's decay inhand thou tokest to restore:
To be enclosde in virgins womb Thou did not abhor.
When thou had overcome, of death The sharp and cruel might,
Thou heavens kingdom did set open to each believing wight.
In glory of the father, thou do sit on Gods right hand:
We trust that thou shall come our Judge, our cause to understand.
Lord help thy servant whom thou have Bought with thy precious blood
And in eternal glory set Them with thy saints so good.
O Lord do thou thy people save, Bless thine inheritance.
Lord govern them, and Lord do thou for ever them advance.
we magnify thee day by day, and world withoute^ end
Addore thy holy name (O Lord) vouchesafe us to defend.
From sin this day have mercy Lord, have mercy on us all:
And on us, as we trust in thee, Lord let thy mercy fall.
O Lord I have reposed all, My confidence in thee:
Put to confounding shame therefore Lord let me never be.
The song of the three Children praising God, provoking all creatures to do
the same.
^ O all ye works of god the lord bles ye ^ the Lord praise him and magnifye
him for ever.

O ye the Angels of the Lord, bles ye the Lord praise him and magnifye him
for ever.
O ye the sterry heavens hie, bless ye the Lord praise him and magnifye him
for ever.
O ye waters above the sky, bless ye the Lord praise him and magnifye him for
ever.
O all ye powers of the Lord, bless ye the Lord praise him and magnifye him
for ever.
O ye the shining Son and Moan, bless ye the Lord, praise him and magnifye
him for ever.
O ye the glistring stars of heaven, bless ye the Lord, praise him and
magnifye him for ever.
O the showers and dropping dew, bless ye the Lord praise him and magnifye him
for ever.
O ye the blowing wyndes of God, bles ye the Lord praise him and magnifye him
for ever.
O ye the fire and warming heat, bless ye the Lord praise him and magnifye
him for ever.
Ye winter and the summer tide, bless ye the Lord praise him and magnifye him
for ever.
O ye the dewes and binding frostes, bles ye the lord praise him and magnifye
him for ever.
O ye the frost and chilling cold, bless ye the lord praise him and magnifye
him for ever.
O ye congeled ise and snow, bless ye the lord praise him and magnifye him
for ever.
O ye the nights and light somdayes, bless ye the lord praise him and
magnifye him for ever.
O the darkness and the light, bless ye the lord praise him and magnifye him
for ever.
O ye the lightnings and the clouds bless ye the lord praise him and
magnifye him for ever.
O let the earth eke bless the lord, yea bles the lord praise him and magnify
him for ever.
O ye the mountains and the hills bless ye the Lord praise him and magnify
him for ever.
O all ye grene things on the earth bless ye the Lord praise him and magnifye
him for ever.
O ye the ever springing wells, bles ye the Lord praise him and magnifye him
for ever.
O ye the seas and ye the floodes bles ye the Lord praise him and magnifye him
for ever.
whales and all that in waters move bles ye the Lord praise him and magnifye
him for ever.
O all ye flying fowls of thayre, bles ye the Lord praise him and magnifye
him for ever.
O all the beasts and cattayll eke bles ye the Lord praise him and magnifye
him for ever.
O ye the children of mankind bles ye the Lord praise him and magnifye him for
ever.
Let Israel eke bles the Lord, yea bles the Lord praise him and magnifye him
for ever.
O ye the priests of God the Lord bles ye the Lord praise him and magnifye
him for ever.
O ye the servants of the Lord, bless ye the lord praise him and magnifye
him for ever.
ye sprites and souls of righteous men, bless ye the lord praise him and
magnifye him for ever.
ye holy and ye meke of heart bless ye the lord praise him and magnifye him
for ever.
O Ananias bless the lord bless thou the lord, praise him and magnifye him
for ever,
O Azarias bles the lord, bles thou the lord praise him and magnify him for
ever.
And Misaell bles thou the lord, bless thou the lord praise him and magnifye
him for ever.
The song of Zacharias, called Benedictus.
^ THe only lord of Israel, be praised ^ ever more: For through his visitation
and mercy ^ kept in store, his people now he has redemde, ^ that long has
been in thrall, and spread abrod ^ his saving health upon his servants all.

In David's house, his servant true, According to his mind:
And also his anointed king, As we in Scripture find.
As by his holy Prophets all, O ft times he did declare:
The which were since the world began, His way for to prepare.
That we might be delivered, From those that make debate:
Our enemies, and from the hands, Of all that do us hate.
The mercy which he promised, Our fathers to fulfill:
And think upon his covenant made, According to his will.
And also to perform the oath, Which he before had sworn:
To Abraham our father dear, For us that were forlorn.
That he would give him self for us, And us from bondage bring:
Out of the hands of all our foes, To serve our heavenly king.
And that without all manner fear, and eke in righteousness?
and also for to lead our life, In steadfast holiness.
And thou (o child) which now art borne and of the Lord elect:
Shall be the Prophet of the hiest, His ways for to direct.
For thou shall goo before his face, For to prepare his ways:
and also for to teach his will, and pleasure all the days.
To give the^ knowledge, how that their Salvation is nere:
and that remission of their sins, Is through his mercy mere.
whereby the day spring, from an hie, Is come, us for to visit:
and those for to illuminate, which do in darkness sit.
To lighten those that shadowed be, with death and eke oppressed:
and also for to guide their fete, The way to peace and rest.
The song of Blessed Mary, called Magnificat.
^ MY soul does magnifye the Lord, My ^ sprit eke evermore, reioyseth in the
Lord my ^ God which is my Savior, and why? because he ^ did regard, and gave
respect, unto, so base estate ^ of his handmaid, and let the mighty go.

For now behold all nations, And generations all:
From this time forth for evermore, Shall me right blessed call.
Because he has me magnifyed, Which is the lord of might:
whose name be ever sanctified, And praised day and night.
For with his mercy and his grace, All men he does inflame:
Thoro wout all generations, To such as fear his name.
He showed strength with his greatarme And made the proud to start:
With all imaginations, That they bare in their heart.
He has put down the mighty ones. From their supernall seat:
And did exalte the meke in heart, As he has thought it mete.
The hungry he replenished, With all things that were good:
And through his power he made the rich, Often times to want their fode.
And, calling to remembraunee, His mercy every dele:
Has helped up assistantly, His servant Israel.
According to his promise made, To Abraham before:
And to his sede successively, To stand for evermore.
The song of Simeon, called Nunc dimittis. S.
^ O Lord because my hearts desire has ^wished long to see, my only Lord and
savior thy ^ son before I die, the joy and health of all mankind, ^ desired
long before, which now is come in ^ to the world of mercy bringing store.

Thou suffer thyseruaunt now, In peace for to depart:
According to thy holy word, which lighteneth my heart.
Because mine eyes, which thou have made, To give my body light:
Have now beheld thy saving health, which is the Lord of might.
Whom thou mercifully have set, Of thine abundant grace:
In open sight and visible, Before all people face.
The Gentiles to illuminate. And Satan over quell:
And eke to be the glory of Thy people Israel.
The Creed of Athanasius. N
^ WHat man soever he be that, salvation ^will attain, the catholic belefe he
must ^ before all things retain, which faith unless ^ he holy keep, and
vndefiledly, without al doubt ^ eternally, he shall be sure to dye.

The Catholic belefe is this. that God we worship one.
In Trinity and Trinity in unity alone.
So as we neither do confound, the persons of the three,
Nor yet the substance whole of one In sunder parted be.
One person of the father is, an other of the Son,
An other person propre of the holy Ghost alone.
Of Father, Son, and holy Ghost but one the Godhed is,
Like glory, coeternall eke the majesty likewise.
Such as the father is, such is the Son in each degree,
And such also we do believe the holy Ghost to be.
Nncreat is the Father, and vncreat is the Son,
The holy Ghost, uncreate: so vncreat is each one.
In comprehensible Father is, Incomprehensible Son,
And comprehensible also is The holy Ghost of none.
The Father is eternal, and the Son eternal so,
And in like sort eternal is, the holy Ghost also.
And yet though we believe that each of these eternal be:
Yet there but one eternal is, and not eternals three.
As ne incomprensible we, ne yet vncreat three,
But one incomprensible, one vncreat hold to be.
Almighty so the father is, the son almightye so,
And in like sort almightye is the holy Ghost also,
And albeit that every one of these almighty be:
Yet there but one almighty is, and not almighties three.
The Father God is, God the Son, God holy Ghost also:
Yet are there not three Gods in all, but one God and n^mo.
So likewise Lord the Father is, and Lord also the Son,
And Lord the holy Ghost: yet are there not three Lords, but one.
For as we are compeld to grant by Christian verity,
Each of the persons by himself both God and Lord to be.
So Catholic religion for bids us always
That either Gods be three, or that there Lords be three to say.
Of none the father is, ne made ne creat, nor begot:
The Son is of the Father, not creat ne made but got.
The holy Ghost is of them both, the father and the Son,
Ne made, ne creat, nor begot, but does proceed alone.
So we one Father hold, not three: one Son also not three:
One holy Ghost alone, and not three holy Ghostes to be.
None in this Trinity before, nor after other is:
Ne greater any then the rest, ne lesser be likewise.
But every one among them selves, of all the persons three:
Together coeternall all, and all coequall be.
So unity in Trinity, as said it is before:
And Trinity in unity in all things we adore.
Therefore what man so ever that salvation will attain:
This faith touching the Trinity: of force he must reteyne.
And needful to eternal life it is that every wight
Of the incarnating of Christ our Lord believe a right.
For this the right faith is, that we believe and eke beknow,
That Christ our Lord the son of God, is God and man also,
God of his fathers substance, got before the world began:
And of his mothers substance, borne in world a very man.
Both perfect God and perfect man in one one Jesus Christ
That does of reasonable soul, an humane flesh subsist,
Touching his Godhed egall with his father God is he.
Touching his manhed lower then his father in degree.
Who though he be both very God and very man also:
yet is he but one Christ alone and is not persons two.
One not by turning of Godhed into the flesh of man:
But by taking manhod to God this being one began,
All one, not byconfounding of the substance into one:
But only by the unity that is of one person.
For as the reasonable soul and flesh but one man is:
So in one person God and man is but one Christ likewise.
Who suffered for to save us all to hell he did descend:
The third day rose again from dead, to heaven he did ascend.
He sittes at the right hand of God thalmightie father there:
From thence to judge the quick and dead again he shall retire.
At whose return all men shall rise with bodies new restorde:
And of their own works they shall give account unto the Lord.
And they into eternal life shall go that have done well,
Who have done ill shall go into eternal fire to dwell.
This is the catholic belefe, who does not faithfully
Believe the same, without all dout, he saved can not be.
To Father, Son, and holy Ghost, all glory be therefore,
As in beginning was, is now, and shall be evermore.
The Lamentation of a Sinner. M
^ O Lord turn not away thy face, from him ^ that lies prostrate: Lamenting
sore his sinful ^ life, before thy mercy gate: Which gate thou openest ^ wide
to those that do lament their sin, ^ shut not yt gate against me lord, but
let me enter in

And call me not to mine accounts How I have lived here:
For then I know right well (O Lord) How vile I shall appear.
I need not to confess my life, I am sure thou can tell:
what I have been, and what I am I know thou know it well.
O lord thou know what things be past And eke the things that be:
Thou know also what is to come, Nothing is hid from thee,
Before the heavens and earth were made: Thou know what things were then:
As all things else that has been since, Among the sons of men.
And can the things that I have done, Be hidden from thee then:
Nay, nay, thou know them all (O Lord) where they were done and when,
wherefore with tears I come to thee, To beg and to entreat:
Even as the child thht has done evil, And fears to be beat.
So come I to thy mercy gate, where mercy does abound:
Requiring mercy for my sin, Toheale my deadly wound,
O Lord I need not to repete, what I do beg or crave:
Thou know (O Lord) before I ask, The thing that I would have.
Mercy good Lord mercy I ask, This is the total sum:
For mercy Lord is all my suit, Lord let thy mercy come.
The humble suit of the Sinner. M.
^ O Lord of whom I do depend be ^ hold my careful heart, and when thy will
and pleasure ^ is relese me of my smart, thou see my sorrow ^ what they are,
my gref is known to thee and there ^ is none yt can remove, or take the same
from me.

But only thou whose aid I crave, whose mercy still is pressed
To ease all those that come to thee for souccour and for rest.
And since thou see my restles eyes. my teres and grievous groan,
Attend unto my suit, O Lord, Mark well my plaint and moan,
For sin has so enclosed me, and compast me about:
That I am now remediles if mercy help not out.
For mortal man, cannot release, or mitigate this pain:
But even thy Christ, my Lord and God, which for my sins was slain.
Whose blody wounds are yet to see, though not with mortal eye:
yet does thy saints behold them all, And so I trust shall I.
Though sin does hinder me a while, When thou shall see it good:
I shall enjoy the sight of him and see his wounds and blood
And as thine angels and thy saynctes, do now behold the same:
So trust I to possess that place, With them to praise thy name.
But whiles I live here in this vale, where sinners do frequent:
Assist me ever with thy grace My sins still to lament.
Lest that I tread in sinners trace, and give them my consent:
To dwell with them in wickedness whereto nature is bent
Only thy grace must be my stay lest that I fall down flat.
And being down, then of my self cannot recover that.
Wherefore this is yet once again, my suit and my request
To grant me pardon for my sin that I in thee may rest.
Then shall my heart, my tongue and voice, be instruments of praise
And in thy Church and house of saints, Sing psalms to thee always.
The Lords Prayer, or Pater noster.
^ OUr father which in heaven art, lord halowd ^ be thy name, Thy kingdom come,
thy will ^ be don in earth, even as the same in heaven is. ^ Gene us (O Lord)
our daily bread this day: As ^ we forgive our detters so, forgive our dettes

^ we pray. Into temptation lead us not, From evil ^ make us free, for
kingdom, power and glory ^ thine, both now and ever be.

The, x. Commandments. Audi Israel. Exodus xx. N
^ HArk Israel, and what I say, give head ^ to understand. I am the lord thy
God, yt brought ^ thee out of Egypt land, even from the house wherein ^ thou
did in thraldo^ live a slave. Non other gods

^ at all before my presence shall thou have.

No manner graven image shall thou make at all to thee.
Nor any figure like by thee shall counterfayted be,
Of any thing in heaven above, nor in the earth below,
Nor in waters beneth the earth, to them thou shall not bow.
Nor shall them serve. The Lord thy God, a ielous God am I,
That punish parents faults unto the third and fourth degree,
Upon their children that me hate: and mercy do display
To thousands of such as me love and my precepts obey.
The name thou of the Lord thy God, in vain shall never use.
For him that takes his name in vain, the Lord shall not excuse.
Remember that thou holy keep, the sacred Sabbat day:
Six days thou labor shall, and do thy needful works always.
The seventh is set by the Lord, thy God to rest upon.
No work shall thou do in it, ne thou, nor yet thy son,
Thy daughter, servant, nor handmayd, thine ox, nor yet thine ass
Nor stranger that within thy gates has his abiding place.
For in six days God heaven, and earth, and all therein did make,
And after those his rest he did Upon the seventh take,
Wherefore he blessed the day that he for resting did ordain,
And sacred to him self alone appointed to remain.
Yield honor to thy parents, that prolonged thy days may be,
Upon the land, the which the Lord thy God has given thee.
Thou shall not murder. Thou shall not commit adulterye.
Thou shall not steal, nor witness false against thy neighbor be.
Thou shall not covet house that to thy neyghbor does belong,
Ne covet shall in having of his wife to do him wrong:
Nor his man servant, nor his maid, nor ox, nor asseof his:
Nor any other thing that to thy neighbor proper is.
FINIS.
PSALMS OF DAVID.
Beatus vir. Psalm. i. T. S.
Whether it was Esdras, or any other that gathered the Psalms into a book: it
seems he did set this Psalm first in manner of a Preface, to exhort all
godly men to study and meditate the heavenly wisdom, for theffecte hereof is,
that they be blessed that give them selves wholly all their life to Gods law:
And that the wicked contemners of God, though they seem for a while fortunate,
yet at length shall come to miserable destruction.

^ 1THe man is blessed that ^ has not bent, to wicked ^ read his ear: nor led
his life as sinners do nor sat ^ in scorners chair. 2. But in the law of god ye
^ lord, both set his whole delight, and in that law does

^ exercise, him self both day and night.

He shall be like the tree that grows, fast by the river side:
Which brings forth most pleasant fruit. in her due time and tide.
Whose leaf shall never fade nor fall, But flourish still and stand:
Even so all things shall prosper well, that this man takes inhand.
So shall not the ungodly men, Although the wicked seem to bear the swing in
this world yet the lord scatters them likechaffe with a blaste of his
mouth.
they shall be nothing so:
But as the dust which from the earth, the winds drive to and fro.
Therefore shall not the wicked men, in judgment stand vpryght:
Nor yet the sinners, with the just, shall come in place, or sight.
For why? the way of Godly men, unto the Lord is known:
And eke the way of wicked men, shall quyte be overthrown.
Quare fremuerunt gentes. Psalm. ii. T. S.
David reioyseth, that notwithstanding his enemies rage, and worldely power,
yet God will continue his kingdom for ever, and aduau^ce it even to the foremost
end of the world. And therefore be exhorts kings and rulers, that setting
vain glory apart, they would humbly submit themselves under Gods yoke. Herein
is signified Christ and his kingdom.

WHy did the Gentiles tumultesraise, Sing this psalm with the first tune
what rage was in their brain?
Why did the Jewish people muse, seeing all is but vain?
The kings and rulers of the earth, conspire and are all bent:
Against the lord and Christ his son, which he among us sent.
Shall we be bound to them say they? let all their bonds be broke: Inheb,
great ropes or cables

And of their doctrine and their law, let us reject the yoke.
But he that in the heaven dwells, their doings will deride:
And make them all as mocking stocks, throughout the world so wide.
For in his wrath the Lord will say, to them upon a day:
And in his fury trouble them, and then the Lord will say.
I have anointed him my king, upon my holy hill:
I will therefore Lord preach thy laws. and eke declare thy will.
For in this wise the Lord him self, did say to me I wotte,
Thou art my dear and only son, to day I thee begotte.
All people I will give to thee, as heirs at thy request:
The ends and coasts of all the earth, by thee shall be possessed.
Thou shall them bruise even with a mace, as men under foot trod:
And as the potters sheardes shall break, them with an iron rod.
Nowye, O kings and rulers all, bewise therefore and learnde:
By whom the matters of the world, be judged and discernde.
Se that ye serve the Lord above, in trembling and in fear:
Se that with reverence ye rejoice, to him in like manner.
Se that ye kiss and eke embrace, his blessed son I say:
Lest in his wrath ye suddenly, perish in the midde way.
If once his wrath never so small, shall kindle in his breast:
Oh then all they that trust in Christ, shall happy be and blessed.
Domine quid multiplicati. su^t. Psalm. iii. T. S.
David being persecuted, and briuen out of his kingdom by his own son
Absalon: was greatly tormented in mind for his sin against God: and therefore
calls upon God and wareth bold through his promises, against the great
terrors of his enemies: yea, and against death it self, which he saw
present before his eyes. Finally he reioyseth for the good success and
victory, that God gave him (...) the Church over his enemies.

^ O Lord how are my foes increast, ^ which vex me more and more, They kill my
heart ^ when as they say, God ca^ him not restore. but ^ thou, O Lord, art my
defense, when I am ^ hard bestead: my worship and my honor both, ^ and thou
holdst up my head.

Then with my voice upon the Lord, I did both call and cry:
And he out of his holy hill, did hear me by and by.
5 I laid me down, and quyetly, Gods strength must not be measured by manes
weakness, and therefore we ought to fear no dangers.
I slept and rose again:
For why? I know assuredly, The Lord will me sustayn,
If ten thousand had hemde me in, I could not be afraid:
For thou art still my Lord my God, my savior and mine aid.
Rise up therefore, save me my God, He retorneth to his prayer
for now to thee I call:
For thou have broke the cheeks and teeth, of these wicked men all.
Salvation only does belong, to thee, O Lord above:
Thou do bestow upon thy folk, thy blessing and thy love.
Cum inuocarem exaudiuit. Psalm. iiii. T. S.
When Saul persecutid David. be called upon God, trusting most assuredly in
his promise, and therefore boldli reproves his enemies, who by wilful malice
resisted his dominion. And finally prefers the fououre of God before all
worldly treasures. Let us likewise learn to trust in Gods promises, when we
are afflicted with any kind of Cross and so we shall neither fear our
enemies, nor yet be over commen with tentations.

O God that art my righteousness, Lord hear me when I call: Sing this as the
first Psalm.

Thou have set me at liberty when I was bond and thrall:
Have mercy Lord therefore on me, and grant me this request: God will deliver
his church from all dangers, because he favors it. Selah.

For unto thee incessantly, to cry I will not rest.
O mortal men, how long will ye my glory thus despise?
Why wander ye in vanity, and follow after lies?
Know ye that good and godly men, the Lord does take and choose:
And when to him I make my plaint, he does me not refuse.
Sin not, but stand in awe therefore, examine well your heart:
And in your chamber quyetly, see you your selves convert,
Offer to God the sacrifice, of righteousness I say:
And look that in the living Lord, you put your trustalway.
The greater sort crave worldly goods, and riches do embrace:
But Lord grant us thy countenance, thy favor and thy grace.
For thou thereby shall make my heart, more joyful and more glad:
Then they that of their corn and wine, full great increase have had.
In peace therefore lie down will I, taking my rest and sleep:
For thou only wilt me, O Lord, alone in safety keep.
Verba mea auribus percipe. Psalm. v. Th. Stern.
David having suffered great calamity, as well by Doeg and Achitophell Saul's
flaterers, as by other infinite enemies, calls to God for succor, showing how
requisite it is, That god should punish the malicious envy of his adversaries.
After being assured of prosperous success, he conceiueth comfort: concluding,
that when God shall deliver him, other also shall be partakers of the same
mercyes.

INclyne thine ears unto my words, Sing this as the third Psalm.
O Lord my playnt consider.
And hear my voice my king my God, to thee I make my prayer.
Hear me betime, Lord, tarry not, for I will have respect,
My prayer early in the morn, to thee for to direct.
And I will trust through patience, in thee my God alone:
That art not pleased with wickedness, and ill with thee dwells none.
And in thy sight shall never stand. The wicked can not escape Gods
punishment, who will judge all the world.
these furious fools, O Lord:
Uaine workers of iniquity, Thou have always abhorde,
The liers and the flatterers, thou shall destroy them then:
And God will hate the blood thirstye, and the deceitful man.
Therefore will I come to thy house, In the depest of his temptations he puts
his full confydence in God.
trusting upon thy grace:
And reverently will worship thee, toward thine holy place.
Lord lead me in thy righteousness, for to confound my foes:
And eke the way that I shall walk, before my face disclose,
9 For in their mouths there is no truth, their heart is foul and vain:
Their throat an open sepulcher, their tongues do gloss and feign,
Destroy their false conspiracies, that they may come to naught:
Subvert them in their heaps of sin, which have rebellion wrought.
But those that put their trust in thee, let them be glad always:
And render thanks for thy defense, and give thy name the praise.
For thou with favor wilt increase, the iustand righteous still:
And with thy grace as with a shilde, defend him from all ill. Heb that will
crown him.

1. Domine in furore tuo arguas me. Psalm. vi. T. S
When David by his sins has provoked Gods wrath, and now felt not only
hyshand against him, but also conceived the horrors of death everlasting: he
desires forgeuenes, be wayling that if God took him away in his indignation.
he should lack occasion to praise him as he was wont to do whilst he was
amongst men. Then so deinly felyng Gods mercy, he sharply rebukes his
enemies, which reioyseth in his afliction. ^ LOrd in thy wrath reprove me not ^
though I deserve thine ire: Ne yet correct.

^ me in thy rage, O Lord I thee desire. ^ For I am weak therefore O Lord ^
of mercy me forbear, and heal me ^ Lord: for why thou know my bones do ^
quake for fear.

My soul is troubled very sore, and vexed vehemently
But Lord how long will thou delay to cure my misery?
4 Lord, turn thee to thy wonted grace, my sely soul up take:
Oh save me, not for my deserts, but for thy mercies sake.
For why? no man among the dead, He feared not so much the death of the body
but trembled as it werfor fear of gods judgment, and so waxed dimand cold not
praise God.
remembers thee one whit:
Or who shall worship thee (O Lord) in the infernal pit?
So grievous is my plaint and moan, that I wax wondrous faint:
All the night long I wash my bed, with tears of my complaint.
My sight is dymme and waxetholde, with anguishe of mine heart Heb. mine eye is
eaten as, with worms.

For fear of those that be my foes, and would my soulesubuert.
But now a way from me all ye, God sends comfort and boldenes in affliction.
that work iniquity
For why? the Lord has heard the woyce, of my complaint and cry.
He heard not only the request, and prayer of my heart.
But it received at my hand, and took it in good part.
And now my foes, that vexed me, the Lord will sone defame.
And suddenly confunde them all, to their rebuke and shame.
Domine deus meus in te speraui. Psalm. vii. T. S.
David being falsely accused by Thus, one of Saul's kinsmen, he calls to God
to be his defender. to whom he commends his innocence. First showing, that
his conscience did not accuse him of any evil toward Saul. Next that it
touched gods glory to awarde sentence against the wicked. And so entering in to
the consideration of Gods mercies and promises hewaxeth bold, and derideth the
vain enterprises of his enemies, threatening that it shall fall on their own
necks. that which they have purposed for others.

O Lord my God, I put my trust, Sing this as the third psalm.
and confidence in thee:
Save me from them that me pursue. and eke deliver me:
Lest like a Lion he me tear. and rent in pieces small:
While there is none to succor me, and rid me out of thrall.
O Lord my God If I have done, Where with Thus charge me. He reioyseth that
God only has aproued his cause.
the thyug that is not right:
Or else if I be found in faut, or guilty in thy sight.
Or to my friend rewarded evil, or left him in distres.
Which, me pursued most cruelly, and hated me causeles.
Then let my foes pursue my soul, A sign of a pure conscience.
and eke my life down thrust,
Unto the earth, and also lay, mine honor in the dust.
Stert up, O Lord, now in thy wrath, Selah.
and put my foes to pain.
Perform thy kingdom promised, to me which wrong sustain.
Then shall great nations come to thee and know thee by this thing:
If thou declare for love of them, thy self as Lord and king. As touching my
behauor toward Saul and mine enemies.

And thou that art of all men judge, O Lord now judge thou me,
According to my rightousnes. and mine integrity.
The second part.
Lord cease the heart of wicked men, and be the just man's guide.
By whom the secrets of all hearts, are searched and descride.
I take my help, to come of God, in all my grief and smarte:
That does preserve all those that be, of pure and perfect heart.
The just man, and the wicked both, God judges by his pour:
So that he feleth his mighty hand, even every day and hour. He derideth Saul's
enterprises, being surely persuaded to be preseruedby Gods favor.

Except he change his mind, I die, for even as he should smite,
He whet his sword his bow he bendth, aiming where he may hit.
And does prepare his mortal darts, his arrows kene and sharp:
For them that do me persecute, The wicked some to labor of child ^^ll they
have confessed the^^ (...)*
whilst he does mischief warpe,
But we, though he in travel be, of his deuilish fore cast.
And of his mischief once conceived, yet brings forth naught at last.
He digth a ditche, and delueth it deep. The wicked man is beat with his own
rod.
In hope to hurt his brother:
But he shall fall into the pit, that he digde up for other.
Thus wrong retorneth to the hurt, of him in whom it bread:
And all the mischief that he wrought, shall fall upon his head.
I will give thanks to God therefore, that judges rightuously:
And with my song praise will the name, of him that is most hye.
Domine Deus noster. Psalm. viii. Tho. Ster.
The Prophet considering thexcellent liberality, and fatherly providence of
God toward man. whom he made as it were a God ouerall his works, does not
only give great thanks, but is astonished with thadmiration of the same: as one
nothing hable to compass such great mercies, and so ends.

O God our Lord how wonderful, Sing this as the third psalm.
are thy works every where:
Whose fame surmounte in dignity, above the heavens clear.
Even by the mouths of sucking babes, thou will confound thy foes:
For in these babes thy might is seen, thy graces they disclose.
And when I see the heavens high, the works of thine own hand:
The Sun, the Moon, and all the Stars, in order as they stand.
What thing is man (Lord) think I then, that thou do him remember:
Or what is man's posterity, that thou do it considre.
For thou have made him little les, Herein appears the great love of god
toward man. Hebr. 2.
then Angels in degree:
And thou have crowned him also, with glory and dygnitie.
Thou have preferred him to be Lord, of all thy works of wonder,
And at his fete have set all things, that he should keep them under.
As sheep and neat all beasts else, that in the fields do feed:
Fowls of the air, fish in the sea, and all that therein bread.
Therefore must I say once again, O God, that art our Lord:
How famous and how wonderful, are thy works through the world.
Confitebor tibi domine in toto. Psalm. ix. T. S.
After he had given thanks to God, for the sundry victoryes that he had sent
him against his enemies, and also proved by manifold experience how ready God
was at hand in all his troubles: he being now likewise in danger of new
enemies, desires God to help him according to his wont, and distroye the
malicious arrogancy of his adversaries.

WIth heart and mouth, unto the Lord, will I sing laud and praise: Sing this
as the. iii. ps.

And speak of all thy wondrous works, and them declare always.
I will be glad and much rejoice, in thee (O God) most hie:
And make my songs extol thy name, above the sterry sky.
For that my foes are driven back, and turned unto flight:
They fall down flat and are destroyed by thy great force and might.
Thou have revenged all my wrong. God only defe^deth the just cause.
my grief and all my grudge,
Thou do with justice hear my cause, most like a righteous judge.
Thou do rebuke the Heathen folk, and wicked so confound,
That afterward, the memory, of them cannot be found.
My foe, thou have made good dispatche and all our towns destroyed:
Thou have their fame with the^ defaced through all the world so wide.
Know thou that he which is above, for evermore shall raygne:
And in the seat of equity, true judgment will mainteyne.
With justice he will keep and guide, the world and every weight:
And so will yield with equity. to every man his right.
He is protector of the poor, what time they be oppressed:
He is in all adversity, their refuge and their rest.
All they that know thy holy name, therefore shall trust in thee:
For thou forsakest not their suit, in their necessity.
Sing Psalms therefore unto the Lord, We seek God. there by prayer or by
upright and godly life.
that dwells in Sion hill:
Publishe among all nations, his noble arts and will.
For he is mindful of the blood, of those that be oppressed:
For getting not the afflicted heart, that seeks to him for rest.
The second part.
Have mercy Lord on me poor wretch, whose enemies still remain:
Which from the gates of death are wont, to raise me up again.
In Sion that I might set forth, thy praise with heart and voice:
And that in thy salvation (Lord) my soul might still rejoice.
The heathen stick fast in the pit, that they them selves preparde:
And in the net that they did set, their own fete fast are snarde.
God shows his judgment which were good The hebr. wills men to meditate
dilygently on this thing.
for every man to mark:
When as ye see the wicked man, lie trapt in his own warke.
The wicked and the sinful men, go down to hell for ever:
And all the people of the world, that will not god remember.
18 But sure the Lord will not forget, the poor man's grief and pain:
The pacient folk never look, for help of God in dayne.
O Lord arise lest men prevail, that be of worldly might:
And let the Heathen folk receive, their judgment in thy sight.
Lord stryke such terror fear and dread into the hearts of them:
That they may know assuredly, they be but mortal men.
Vt quid domine. Psalm. x. T. S.
He complains of the fraud, rapine, tyranny, and of all kinds of wrong,
which worldly men use, assigninge the cause thereof, which was that wicked men
being as it were dronken with worldly prosperity, and therefore setting aparte
all fear and reverence toward God, think they may do all things without
controwlinge Therefore he calls upon God to send some remeady against these
desperate enyls. And at length comfort him self with hope of deliverance.

WHat is the cause that thou (O Lord) art now so sarre from thine? Sing this
as the third Psalm.

And kepest close thy countenance, from us this troublous time?
The poor does pearysh by the proud, and wicked men's desire:
Let them be taken in the craft, that they themselves conspire.
For in the lust of his own heart, the ungodly does delight:
So does the wicked praise him self, and does the Lord despite.
4 He is so proud that right and wrong, he sets all apart:
Nay, nay, there is no God (says he) for thus he thinks in heart.
Because his ways do prosper still, he does thy laws neglect:
And with a blast does puff against, such as would him correct.
Tush, tush (says he) I have no dread, lest mine estate should change:
And why? for all adversity, to him is very strange.
His mouth is full of cursednes. He means that wickedness is so far ouergrowe^
that God must needs now help or never.
of fraud, deceyt, and guyle:
Under his: tongue does mischiefsyt, and travel all the while,
He lies hid in ways and holes, to slay the innocent.
Against the poor that pass him by, his cruel eyes are bent.
And like a Lion privily, lies lurking in his den:
If he may snare them in his net, to spoil poor simple men.
And for the nonce full craftily, he croucheth down I say:
So are great heaps of poor men made, by his strong power, his pray.
Tush God forgets this (says he) therefore may I be bold:
His countenance is cast aside, he does it not behold,
Arise (O Lord) G God in women, the poor man's hope does rest:
Lift up thy hand, forget not Lord, the poor that be oppressed,
What blasphemy is this to thee? Lord do thou not abhor it?
To hear the wicked in their hearts, say, tushe thou carest not for it?
But thou see all this wickedness, and well do understand:
That frendles and poor fatherles, are left into thy hand.
Of wicked and malicions men, By the Heathen he means the Hypocrites which
gloryed as if they had been of the church.
then break the power for ever:
That they with their iniquytie, may pearish altogether.
The Lord shall rain for evermore, as king and God alone:
And he will chase the Heathen folk, out of his land each one.
Thou hear (O Lord) the poor man's plaint, until their prayers and request:
Their hearts thou will confirm, thine ears to hear be pressed.
To judge the poor and fatherles, and help them to their right:
That they may be no more oppressed, with men of worldly might.
In Domino confido. Psalm. xi. T. S.
This Psalm conteyneth two parts. In the first David showed how hard
assaults of temtations he sustained, and in how great anguish of mind he was,
when Saul did persecute him. Then next he reioyseth. that God sent him succor
in his necessity declaryng his justice, as well in gouernyng the good and the
wicked men as the whole world,

I Trust in God, how dare ye then, say thus my soul until: Sing this as the
third Psalm.

Flee hence as fast as any foul, and hide you in your hill.
Behold the wicked bend their bows, and make their arrows pressed:
To shote in secret and to hurt, the sound and harmeles breast.
Of worldly hope and stays were shrunk and clearly brought to naught:
Alas the just and rightuous man, what evil has he wrought.
But he that in his temple is, most holy and most hye:
And in the heavens has his seat, of royal majesty.
The poor and simple man's estate, All things are governed by gods providence.
considers in his mind:
And searches out full narowly, the manners of mankind.
And with a cherefull countenance, the rightuous man will use:
But in his heart he does abhor, all such as mischiefmuse.
And on the sinners casts snares, as thick as any rain*
Fire and brimstone, and whirle winds thick As in the destruction of Sodom
and Gomo
appointed for their pain.
Ye see then how a righteous God, does righteousness embrace:
And to the just and vpryght man, shows forth his pleasant face.
Saluum mefac Deus. Psalm. xii. T. S.
The Prophet learning the miserable estate of the people. and the decay of all
good order, desires God spedely to send succor to his children: Then
comfortyng himself and others with thassuraunce of gods help: he commends
the constant beritye that God observes in keeping his promises, concluding that
when all orders are most corrupted, then will God deliver his.

Help Lord, for good and godly men, Sing this as the third psalm.
do perysh and decay:
And faith and truth from worldly men, is parted clean away.
Who so does with his neighbor talk, his talk is all but vain:
For every man bethinketh how, to flatter, lie and feign.
But flatteryng and deceitful lips, and tounges that be so stout:
To speak proud words, and make great bragges the Lord soon cut them out,
For they say still, we will prevail, our tongues shall vsextoll
Our tongues are ours, we ought to speak, what Lord shall us control?
But for the great complaint and cry, The lord does deliver from all dangers.
of poor and men oppressed:
Arise will I now (says the Lord,) and them restore to rest.
6 Gods word is like to silver pure, that from the earth is tried:
And has no les then seven times, in fire been puryfyed.
Now since thy promise is to help, God can not deceue them that put their
trust in him.
Lord keep thy promise then:
And save us now and evermore, from this ill kind of men.
For now the wicked world is full, of mischief manifold:
When vanity with mortal men, so highly is extolde.
Vsquequo domine. Psalm. xiii. T. S.
David (as it were) ouercomen with sundry and new afflictions, flees to God as
his only refuge, and so at the length being encouraged through Gods promises
he conceyueth most sure confidence against the extreme horrors of death.

How long will thou forget me (Lord) shall I never be remembered? Sing this
Psalm with the iii. tune*

How long will thou thy visage hide, as though thou were offended.
In heart and mind how long shall I. with care tormented be?
How long eke shall my deadly foe, thus tryumphe over me?
Behold me now (my Lord) my God, and hear me sore oppressed:
Lighten mine eyes lest that I sleep, as one by death possessed.
Lest this mine enemy sai to me, behold I do prevail:
Lest they also that hate my soul, rejoice to see me quayle.
But for thy mercyes and goodness, The mercy of God is the cause of our
salvation.
my hope shall never start:
In thy relife and saving health, right glad shall be my heart.
I will give thanks unto the Lord, and praises to him sing:
Because he has hard my request, and granted my wishyng.
Dixit insipiens. Psalm. xiiii. T. S.
He described the perverse nature of men, which were so grown to
licenciousnes, that God was brought to utter cotempt for the which thing
although he was greatly grieved: yet being persuaded that god would send some
present remedy, he comfort him self and others.

^ THere is no God, as folish me^ affirm ^ in their mad mode: their drifts ar
al corrupt ^ and vain, not one of the^ does good. The lord beheld ^ from heaven
hie ye whole race of mankind and

^ saw not one yt sought in deed ye living god to find.

They went all wide and were corrupt, and truly there was none:
That in the world did any good, I say, there was not one.
Is all their indgement so far lost, that all work mischief still:
Eating my people even as bread, not one to seek Gods will,
When they thus rage, then suddenly, great fear on them shall fall:
For God does love the rightuous men, and will maintain them all.
He mock the doings of the poor, to their reproach and shame?
Because they put their trust in God, and call upon his name.
But who shall give thy people health, and when will thou fulfill: Where wicked
men rain, all felicity is but very slavery, like to Egipte or Babylon.

The promise made to Israel. from out of Sion hill.
Even when thou shall restore again, such as were captives lad:
Then Jacob shall therein rejoice, and Israel shall be glad.
Domine quis habitabit. Psalm. xv. T. S
This Psalm teaches on what condition Goddid choose the Jews for his peculiar
people, and wherefore he placed his Temple among them, which was to thentent,
that they by living uprightly and godly, might witness that they were his
special and holy people.

O Lord with in thy tabernacle, Sing thisas thr. iiii. Psa.
who shall inhabit still?
Or whom will thou receive to dwell. in thy most holy hill?
The man whose life is vncorrupt, whose works are just and streit:
Whose heart does think the very truth, whose tongue speaks no deceyt.
Nor to his neighbor does none ill, in body goods, or name:
Nor willingly does move salse tales, which might empere the same.
That in his heart regards not, malicious wicked men:
But those that love and fear the Lord, he makes much of them.
His oath and all his promises, that keeps faithfully:
Although he make his covenant so, that he does lose thereby,
That put teth not to usury, his money and his coin: Them the which do not
this shall be cast out of the church with Ismaelli and the hipocrites.

Ne for to hurt the innocent, does brybe or else purloyne.
Who so does all things as you see, that here is to be done:
Shall never perish in this world, nor in the world to come.
Conserua me domine. psalm. xvi. T. S.
David prays to God for succor, not for his works, but for his faithes sake,
protestyng that he hates all Idolatry, taking God only for his comfort and
felicytie: who suffers his to lack nothing.

Lord keep me for I trust in thee, and do confess in deed: Sing thisas the,
xiiii. psalm

Thou art my God, and of my good, O Lord, thou have no need.
I give my goodness to the saints, that in the world do dwell:
And namely to the faithful flock, in virtue that excel.
They shall heap sorrows on their heds which run as they were mad:
To offer to the Idols gods, alas it is to bad.
As for their bloody sacrifyce, He would neither by outeward profession nor in
heart consent with Ido latryes.
and offringes of that sort:
I will not touch, nor yet thereof, my lips shall make report.
For why? the Lord the portion is, of mine in heritaunce:
And thou art he that do mainteyne, my rent my lot, my chance,
The place wherein my lot did fall, in beauty did excel:
Mine heritage assigned to me, does please me wondrous well.
I thank the Lord that caused me, The faithfular sure to persevere to the end.
to understand the right:
For by hismeanes my secreat thoughts, do teach me every night.
I set the Lord still in my sight, and trust in him over all:
For he does stand on my right hand, therefore I shall not fall.
Wherefore my heart and tongue also, does both rejoice together:
My flesh and body rest in hope, when I this thing consider.
Thou will not leave my soul in grave, for Lord, thou love me, That is to
say, his life.

Nor yet will give thine holy one, corruption for to see.
But wilt teach me the way to life, Where god favors there is perfect
felicity.
for all treasures and store:
Of perfect joy are in thy face, and power for evermore.
Exaudi domine iustitiam meam. Psalm. xvii. T. S
Here he complayneth to god of thecruel pride and arrogancye of Saul, and the
rest of his enemies, who thus raged without any cause given on his part:
therefore he desires God to revenge his innocence and deliver him. This Psalm
ought diligently to be noted of sucheas receive evil, for well doing.

O Lord give ear to my just cause, Sing this as the. xiiii. psalm.
attend when I complain:
And hear the prayer that I put forth with lips that do not feign.
And let the judgment of my cause, proceed always from thee:
And let thine eyes behold, and clear this my simplicity,
Thouhast well tried me in the night, and yet could nothing find:
That I have spoken with my tongue, that was not in my mind.
As from the works of wicked men, and paths perverse and ill:
For love of thy most holy word, I have refrayned still.
Then in thy paths that be most pure, stay me (Lord) and preserve:
That from the way wherein I walk, my steps may never swerue.
For I dou call to thee (O Lord) surely thou wylt me aid:
Then hear my prayer and way right well the words that I have said.
O thou the savior of all them, that put their trust in thee:
Declare thy strength on the^ that spurn, against thy majesty.
O keep me (Lord) as thou would keep the apple of thine eye:
And under covert of thy wings, defend me secretly.
The second part.
From wicked men that trouble me, and daily me anoy:
Ind from my foes that go about, my soul for to destroy.
10 Which wallow in their worldly wealth, so full and eke so fat:
That in their pride they do not spare, to speak they care not what.
They lie in wait where we should pass Meaning himself and his co^panyons.
with craft me to confound:
And musing mischief in their minds, to cast me to the ground.
Much like a Lion gredely, that would his pray embrace:
Or lurking like a Lions whelpe, within some secret place.
Up Lord with have prevent my foe, and cast him at thy feet:
Save thou my soul from the evil man, and with thy sword him smite.
Deliver me Lord by thy power, out of these tyrants hands:
Which now so long time reigned have. and keep us in their bands.
I mean from worldly men, to whom all worldly goods are rise:
That have no hope nor part of joy, but in this present life.
Thou of thy store, their bellies filst, with pleasures to their mind:
Their children have enough, and leave, to theirs the rest behind.
But I shall with pure conscience, behold thy gracious face:
So when I wake I shall be full, with thine image and grace.
Diligam te domine. psalm. xviii. T. S.
This Psalm is the first beginning of David's salvation and thancks giving in
the entering into his kingdom, wherein he extolleth, and praises most highly,
the marvelous mercies and grace of God, who has both preserved and defended
him: he sets forth the Image of Christ's kingdom, painted in his kindom:
that the faithful may be assured, that Christ shall always conquer and
overcome by the unspeakable power of his father, though all the whole world
should say there against.

^ O God my strength and fortitude, ^ of force I must love the: Thou art my
castle and ^ defense in mine necessity. My god my ^ rock in who^ I trust ye
worker of my wealth, my ^ refuge, buckler and my shield, ye horn of al mi health

When I sing laud unto the Lord, most worthy to be strued:
Then fro my foes I am right sure, that I shall be preserved.
The panges of death did compass me, and bound me every where:
The flowing waves of wickedness. did put me in great fear.
The sly and suttell snares of hell, were round about me set:
And for my death there was preparde, a deadly trapping net.
I thus beset with pain and gryef, did pray to God for grace:
And he forthwith did hear my playnt, out of his holy place.
Such is his power that in his wrath, he made the earth to quake:
Yea the foundation of the mount, of Basan for to shake.
And from his nostrels came a smoke, When kindled was his ire:
And from his mouth came kindled coals, of hot consuming fire,
The Lord descended from above, and bowde the heavens hie:
And underneath his fete he cast, the darkness of the sky.
On Cherubs, and on Cherubins, full royally he rode:
and on the wings of all the winds, came fliyng all abroad.
The second part.
And like a den most dark he made, his den and secret place:
With waters black and ayrie clouds, environed he was.
But when the presence of his face, in brightness shall appear:
Then clouds consume and in their stead, come hayles and coals of fire.
These fiery darts and thunder boltes, disperse them here and there:
And with his often lightninges, he puttes them in great fear.
Lord at thy wrath and threatenings, and at thy chyding cheer.
The springes and the foundations, of all the world appear.
And from above the Lord sent down, to fetch me from below:
And plucked me out of waters great, that would me ouerflowe.
And me delivered from my foes, that would have made me thrall:
Yea from such foes as were to strong, for me to deal with all.
They did prevent me to oppres, in time of my great gryef:
But yet the Lord was my defense, my succor and relief.
18 He brought me forth in open place, where as I might be free:
And kept me safe because he had, a favor unto me.
And as I was an innocent, so did he me regard:
And to the cleanes of my hands. he gave me my reward.
For that I walked in his ways, and in his paths have trod:
And have not wauered wickedly, against my Lord my God.
The third part.
But evermore I have respect, to his law and decree:
His statutes and commandments, I cast not out fro me.
But pure and clean and vncorrupt, appearde before his face:
And did refrain from wickedness, and sin in any case.
The Lord therefore will me reward, as I have done aright:
And to the cleannes of my hands, appearing in his sight.
For Lord with him that holy is, will thou be holy to:
And with the good and virtuous men, right virtuously wilt do.
And to the loving and elect, thy love thou will reserve,
And thou will use the wicked men, as wicked men deserve.
For thou do save the simple folk, In trouble when they lie:
And do bring down the countenance of them that look full hie.
The Lord will light my candell so, that it shall shine full bright:
The Lord my God will make also, my darkness to be light.
For by thy help an host of men, disconfite (Lord) I shall:
By thee I scale and ouerleape, the strength of any wall.
Unspotted are the ways of God, his word is purely tried:
He is a sure defense to such, as in his faith abide,
For who is God? except the Lord, for other there is none:
Or else who is omnipotent, saving our God alone?
The forth part.
The God that girded me with strength, is he that I do mean:
That all the ways wherein I walk, did evermore keep clean.
That made my feet like to the hearts, in swiftnes of my pace:
And for my suertie brought me forth, into an open place
He did in order put my hands, to bataile and to fight:
To break in sunder bars of bras, he gave my arms the might.
Thou reachest me my saving health, thy right hand is my tower:
Thy love and familiarity, does still increase my power.
And under me thou make plain, the way where I should walk:
So that my feet shall never stippe. nor stumble at a balke.
And fiercely I pursue and take, my foes that me annoyed:
And from the field do not reforne, till they be all destroyde.
So I suppress and wound my foes, that they can rise no more:
For at my seat they fall down flat, I strike them all so sore.
For thou do gird me with thy strength to war in such a wise:
That they be all scatred abroad, that up against me rise,
Lord thou have put into my hands my mortal enemies yoke:
And all my foes thou do divide, in sonder with thy stroke.
They called for help but none gave ear, to help them with relief:
Yea to the Lord they callde for help, yet heard he not their grief.
The fifth part.
And still like dust before the wind, I drive them under feate:
And swepe them out like filthy claye, that stinketh in the streat.
Thou kepest me from sedicious folk, that still in strife be led:
And thou do of the heathen folk, apoint me to be head.
A people strange to me unknown, and yet they shall me serve:
And at the first obey my word, whereas mine own will swerve.
I shall be ircksom to mine own, they will not see my light:
But wander wide out of their ways, and hide them out of sight.
But blessed be the living Lord. most worthy of all praise:
That is my rock and saving health, praised be he always.
For God it is that gave me power, revenged for to be:
And with his only word subdued, the people unto me.
And fro my foe me delivered, and set me hier then those:
That cruel and ungodly were, and up against me rose.
48 And for this cause, O Lord my God, to thee give thanks I shall?
And sing out praises to thy name, among the Gentiles all.
That gave great prosperity, unto the king I say:
To David thy anointed king, and to his seed for aye.
Coeli enarrant gloriam dei. Psalm. xix. T. S.
To the intent he might move the faithful to a deper consideration of Gods
glory, he sets before their eyes the most exquisite workema^ship of the
Heavens, with their proportion and ornaments. And afterward calls them to
the law wherein God has reveled himself more familiarly to his chosen people.
The which peculiar grace by commending the law, he sets forth more at
large, and at the end, he concludes with a Prayer.

THe heavens and the firmament, do wonderously declare: Sing this as the.
xiiii. psalm.

The glory of God omnipotent, his works and what they are.
The wondrous works of God apere by every days success:
The nights, which likewise their race run the self same things express.
There is no language, tongue, or speech, where their sound is not heard: Roma.
x. d. acts. xiiii, c.

In all the earth and coasts thereof their knowledge is conferd.
In them the Lord made for the sun, a place of great renome:
Who like a bridegroom ready trimde, does from his chamber come.
And as a valiant champion, He notes three excellent qualytses in the su^n^
his beauty, sweftnes and heat.
who for to get a price:
With joy does have to take in hand, some noble enterprise.
And all the sky from end to end, he compasses about:
Nothing can hide it from his heat, but he will find it out.
How perfect is the law of God, how is his covenant sure?
Converting souls and making wise, the simple and obscure. Man's inventions are
crooked, without comfort, filthy and blind

Just are the Lords commaundime^ts, and glad both heart and mind:
His precept pure and gives light, to eyes that be full blind.
The fear of God is excellent, and does endure for ever: What soever man's
fantasye does invent, is but lies, and vanitit.

The judgments of the Lord are true, and righteous altogether.
And more to be embraste always, then fined gold, I say:
The honey and the honey comb, are not so sweet as they.
By them thy servant is forewarnde, to have God in regard:
And in performance of the same, there shall be greatrewarde.
But lord what earthly man does know the errors of his life?
Then cleanse my soul from secreat sins, which are in me most ryfe.
And keep me that presumptuous sins, prenayle not over me:
And then shall I be innocent, and great offenses flee.
Accept my mouth and eke my heart, my words and thoughts echone:
For my redemer and my strength, O Lord thou art alone.
Exaudiat te dominus. Psalm. xx. T. S.
A prayer of the people unto God: that it would please him to hear their
king: and receive his sacrifice, which he offered before he went to battle
against the ammonites, declaryng how that the Heathen put their trust in
horses and chariotes, but they trust only in the name of the Lord their God.
Wherefore the other shall fall, but the Lord will save the king and his people.

IN trouble and adversity, Sing this as the. xiiii. psalm
the Lord God hear thee still:
The majesty of Jacobs God, defend thee from all ill.
And send thee from his holy place, his help at every need:
And so in Sion stablish thee, and make thee strong in deed.
Remembering well the sacrifice, that now to him is done:
And so receive right thankfully, thy burnt offringes echeone.
According to thy hearts desire, the Lord grant unto thee:
And all thy counsel and deuyse, full well perform may he.
We shall rejoice when thou us sauest, and our banners displaye:
Unto the Lord which thy requests, fulfilled has always.
The Lord will his anointed save, I know well by his grace:
And send him health by his right hand out of his holy place:
In charets some put confidence, and some in horses trust:
But we remember God our Lord, that keeps promise just.
They fall down flat, but we do rise, and stand up steadfastly:
Now save and help us, Lord and king, on thee when we do cry.
Domine in virture. Psalm. xxi. T. S.
David in the parson of the people prayseth God for the victory which he gave
them against the Siria^s and Ammonites. i. Sam. x. xi. wherein he had the rich
crown of the king of Ammon set upon his head. ii, Sam. xii. and was endued
with the manifold blessings of God, and contrariwise his enemies destroyed.

^ O Lord how joyful is the king, ^ in thy strength, and thy power: how
vemently does ^ he rejoice in thee his savior. For thou haste ^ given unto him
his godly hearts desire: to him ^ nothing have thou denide of that he did
require.

Thou did prevent him with thy gifts, and blessings manifold: David did not
only obtayne^ life, but also assurance that his posterity should raigue for
ever.

And thou have set upon his head. a crown of perfect gold.
And when he asked life of thee, thereof thou madst him sure:
To have long life, yea such a life, as ever should endure.
Great is his glory by thy help, thy benefyte and aid:
Great worship and great honor both, thou have upon him laid,
Thou will give him felycytie, that never shall decay:
And with thy cheerful countenance, wylt comfort him always.
For why the king does strongly trust, in God for to prevail: Hereof he
describes the strength of christ's kingdom against thenemies thereof.

Therefore his goodness and his grace, will not that he shall quayle.
But let thine enemies feel thy force, and those that thee withstand:
Find out chy foes, and let them feel, the power of thy right hand.
And like an oven burn them Lord, in fiery flame and fume:
Thine anger shall destroy them all, and fire shall them consume.
And thou will root out of the earth, their fruit that should increase,
And from the number of thy folk, their seed shall end and cease.
For why? much mischief did they muse, against thine holy name:
Yet did they fail and had no power, for to perform the same.
But as a mark thou shall them set, in a most open place:
And charge thy bowstringes readily, against thine enemies face.
Be thou exalted Lord therefore. in thy strength every hour:
So shall we sing right solempnely, praisyng thy might and power.
Deus deus meus respice. Psalm. xxii. T. S
David complayneth himself to be brought into such extremities, that he is,
like a man desperate and past al hope, after declares whereof, he recouereth
himself from the botomles pit of temptations. And under his own parson he
sets forth the figure of Christ, who^ he did forsee in the spirit of
prophecye. So this Psalm after two sorts does declare that prophecye of Esaias:
he was taken forth of yrison and judgment.

O God my God, wherefore do thou, forsake me utterly: Sing this as the. xxi.
psalm.

And helpest not when I do make, my great complaynte and cry.
To thee my God even all day long, I do both cry and call?
I cease not all the night and yet, thou hear not at all.
Even thou that in thy sanctuary, and holy place do dwell:
Thou art the comfort and the joy, and glory of Israel,
And he in whom our fathers old, had all their hope for ever:
And when they put their trust in thee, So did thou them deliver.
They were delivered for ever, when they called on thy name:
And for the faith they had in thee, they were not put to shame.
But I am now become a worm, more like then any man:
And outcast whom the people scorn, with all the spite they can.
And me despise as they behold, me walking on the way:
They gren, they mow, they nod their heads, and in this wise they faye.
8 This man did glory in the Lord, his fauore and his love:
Let him redeem and help him now, his power if he will prove.
But Lord out of my mothers womb I came by thy request:
Thou did preserve me still in hope, while I did suck her breast.
I was committed from my birth, with thee to have abod:
Since I was in my mothers womb thou have ben ever my God.
The second part.
Then Lord depart not now from me in this my present gryef:
Since I have none to be my help, my succor and relyef.
So many bulls do compass me, that be full strong of head:
Yea hulles so fat as though they had, in Basan field be fed.
They gape upon me gredely. as though they would me slay:
Much like a Lion roaring out, and ramping for his pray.
But I drop down like water shed, my joints in sunder break:
My heart does in my body melt, like wax against the heat.
And like a potshard drithe my strength my tongue it cleaves fast:
Unto my jaws, and I am brought, to dust of death at last.
And many dogs do compass me, and wicked counsel eke:
Conspire against me cursedlie, they pearse my hands and fete.
I was tormented so that I, might all my bones have fold:
yet still upon me they do look, and still they me behold:
My garments they divided eke, in parts among them all:
And for my coat they did cast lottes, to whom it might be fall.
Therefore I pray thee be not far, fro me at my great nead:
But rather since thou art my strength, to help me (Lord) make speade.
And from the sword (Lord) save my soul by thy might and thy power:
And keep my soul thy darlyng dear, from dogs that would devour.
And from the Lions mouth that would me all in sunder shiuer:
And from the horns of Unicornes, Lord safely me deliver.
And I shall to my brethren all, thy majesty record:
And in thy church shall praise the name of thee the living Lord.
The third part.
All ye that fear him praise the Lord: Thou sede of Jacob honor him:
And with all reverence possible: thou sede of Israel worship him.
For he despises not the poor, he tourneth not awrye:
His countenance, when they do call, but grants to their cry.
Among thy flock that fear the Lord, I will therefore proclayme:
Thy praise and keep my promise made, for setting forth thy name.
The poor shall eat and be suffised, and those that do their deuer:
To know the Lord shall praise his name, their hearts shall live forever.
All costs of earth shall praise the Lord, and turn to him for grace:
The Heathen folk shall worship him, before his blessed face.
The kingdom of the Heathen folk, the Lord shall have therefore:
And he shall be their governor, and king for evermore.
The rich men of his godly gifts, shall feed, and fast also:
And in his presence worship him, and bow their knees full low.
30 And all that shall go down to dust, of life by him must taste
My seed shall serve and praise his name while any world shall last.
31 My seed shall plainly show to them, that shall be borne hereafter:
His justice and his righteousness, and all his works of wonder.
Dominus regit me. Psalm. xxiii TS.
Because the prophet had proved the great mercies of God at diverse times, and
in sundry manners: he gathers a certain assurance, fully perswadyng him
self that God will continue the very same goodness toward him for ever.

My shepehard is the living Lord, Nothing therefore I nead: Sing this as the.
xxi. psalm.

In pastors fair, with waters calm he set me for to fead.
He did convert and glad my soul, and brought my mind in frame:
To walk in paths of righteousness, for his most holy name.
yea though I walk in vale of death, yet will I fear non ill:
Thy rod, thy staff, does comfort me, and thou art with me still.
And in the presence of my foes, my table thou shall spread:
Thou shall (O Lord) fill full my cup, and eke annoint my head.
Through all my life thy favor is, So frankly shewde to me:
That in thy house for evermore, my dwelling place shall be.
Domini est terra. Psalm. xxiiii. I. H.
Because the grace of God was then to be uttered in the temple, more glorious
then before it had been in the tabernacle, David gives it a more glorious
title, and with exclamation sets forth the honor thereof, styring us to the
consideration of the eternal mansions prepared for us in the heavens: whereof
this was a shadow and figure.

THe earth is all the Lords, with all, Sing this as the. xxi. psalm*
her store and furniture:
Yea his is all the world, and all, that therein do endure.
For he has fastly founded it. above the sea to stand:
And laid allow the liquid floods, to flow beneathe the land.
For who is he (O Lord) that shall, ascend into thy hill.
Or pass into thy holy place, there to continue still.
Whose hands are harmles, and whose heart no spot there does defyle:
His soul not set on vanity, who has not sworn no guyle.
Him that is such a one the Lord, shall place in blisfull plight:
And God his God, and savior, shall yield to him his right.
This is the brood of trauelers, in sekyng of his grace:
As Jacob did the Israelite, in that time of his race.
Ye princes open your gates stand open, the everlasting gate:
For there shall enter in thereby, the king of glorious state.
What is the king of glorious. the strong and mighty Lord:
The mighty Lord in battles stout, and trial of the sword.
Ye princes open your gates stand open, the everlasting gate:
For there shall enter in thereby, the king of Glorious state.
What is this king of glorious, the Lord of hosts it is:
The kingdom and the royalty, of glorious state is his.
Ad te domine leuaui. Psalm. xxv. T. S
The Prophet touched with the consideration of his sins, and also grieved with
the cruel malice of his enemies, prays to god most fervently to have his
sins forgeuen, especially such as he had committed in his youth. He
begins every verse according to the Ebrue letters two or three except.

^ I Lift mine heart to the my god and ^ guide most just. Now suffer me to take
no shame, ^ for in thee do I trust. Let not my foes rejoice, ^ nor make a
scorn of me, And let them not ^ be overthrown that put their trust in thee.

But shame shall them befall, which harm them wrongfully:
Therefore thy paths and thy rightwaies, unto me Lord descry.
Direct me in thy truth, and teach me I thee pray:
Thou art my God and savior, on thee I wait always.
Thy mercyes manifold, I pray thee Lord remember:
And eke thy pitye plentiful, for they have been for ever.
Remember not the fautes, and frailty of my youth:
Remember not how ignorant, I have been of thy troth:
Nor after my deserts, let me thy mercy find:
But of thine own beningnitie, Lord have me in thy mind.
His mercy is full sweet, his truth a perfect guide:
Therefore the Lord will sinners teach and such as go aside.
The humble he will teach, his precepts for to keep:
He will direct in all his ways, the lowly and the meke,
For all the ways of God, are truth and mercy both:
To them that keep his testament, the witness of his troth.
The second part.
Now for thy holy name, O Lord I thee entreat:
To grant me pardon for my sin, for it is wondrous great,
Who so does fear the Lord, True felicitye stands in the fear of God.
the Lord does him direct:
To lead his life in such away, as he does best accept.
His soul shall evermore, in goodness dwell and stand:
His seed and his posterity, inherit shall the land,
All those that fear the Lord, know his secret intent:
And unto them he does declare, his will and testament.
Mine eyes and eke my heart, to him I will advance:
That plucked my fete out of the snare, of sin and ignorance.
With mercy me behold, to thee I make my moan:
For I am poor and desolate, and comfortles alone.
The troubles of mine heart, are multiplied in deed:
Bring me out of this misery, necessitiy and need.
Behold my poverty, mine anguish and my pain:
Remit my sin and mine offense, and make me clean again:
O Lord behold myfoes, how they do still increase:
Pursuing me with deadly hate, that feign would live in peace.
Preserve and keep my soul, and eke deliver me:
And let me not be overthrown, because I trust in thee.
Let my simple pureness, me from mine enemies shend:
Because I look, as one of thine, that thou should me defend.
21 Deliver Lord thy folk, and send them some relief:
I mean thy chosen Israel, from all their pain and grief.
Iudica me domine. Psalm. xxvi. I. H
David oppressed with many iniuryes, finding no help in the world, called for
aid from God: and assured of his integrity toward Saul, desires God to be
his judge and to defend his innocence, causeles afflicted. Finally he makes
mention of his sacrifice which he will offer for his deliverance, and
desires to be in the company of the faithful in the congregation of God,
whence he was banished by Saul, promisyng integrity of life and open praises
and thanks geuingr

Lord be my judge, and thou shall see, Sing this as the. xviii. psalm.
My paths be right and plain:
I trust in God, and hope that he, will strength me to remain.
Prove me my God I thee desire, my ways to search and try:
As men do prove their gold with fire, my reins and heart epsy.
Thy goodness laid before my face, I durst be bold always:
For of thy truth I tread the trace, and will do all my days.
I do not lust to haunt or use, with men whose deeds ar vain:
To come in house I do refuse, with the deceiptfull train.
I much abhorte the wicked sort, their deeds I do despise:
I do not once to them resort, that hurtful things deuyse*
6 My hands I wash and do proceed, in works that walk vpryght:
Then to the altar I make speed, to offer there in sight.
That I may speak and preach the praise that does belong to thee:
And so declare how wondrous ways thou have ben good to me.
O Lord thy house I love most dear, to me it does excel:
I have delight and would be near, where as thy grace does dwell.
Oh shut not up my soul with them, in sin that take their fill,
Nor yet my life amongst those men, that seek much blood to spill.
whose hands ar heapt with craft and guile their life thereof is full:
And their right hand with wre^ch and wile, for bribes does pluck and pull.
But I in righteousness entend, my time and days to serve*
Have mercy Lord and me defend, so that I do not swerve.
My foot is stayed for all assayes, it stands well and right:
Wherefore to God will I give praise, in all the peoples sight.
Dominus illum inatio. Psalm. xxvii. I. H.
David makes this Psalm, being deliuerth from great pearsts as appears by
the praises and thankesgeuyng annexed: wherein we may see the constant faith of
David against the assaults of all enemies, and also the end wherefore he desires
to live and to bedeliuered, only to worship God in his congregation. Herby he
promises himself assurance, though father and mother forsake him, he teaches
this to be the only way, to to see the good things in the land of the living,
and after his example he exhorts to faith and to attend upon the Lord.

THe Lord is both my health and light Sing this as the. xviii. psalm.
shall man make me dismayde?
Since God does give me strength and why should I be afraid?
While that my foes with all their strength might begin with me to brawle:
And think to eat me up at length, themselves have caught the fall.
Though they in camp against me lie, my heart is not afraid:
In battle pight if they will try, I trust in God for aid.
One thing of God I do require, that he will not deny:
For which I pray and will desire, till he to me apply.
That I within his holy place, my life throughout may dwell:
To see the beauty of his face, and view his temple well.
In time of dread he shall me hide, within his place most pure:
And keep me secret by his side, as on a rock most sure.
At length I know the Lords good grace, shall make me strong and stout:
My foes to foil and clean deface, that compass me about.
Therefore within his house will I. Give sacrifice of praise:
With Psalms and songs I will apply, to laud the Lord always.
Lord hear the voice of my request, for which to thee I call:
Have mercy (Lord) on me oppressed, and send me help withal.
My heart does knowledge unto thee, I sue to have thy grace:
Then seek my face sayste thou to me, Lord I will seek thy face.
In wrath turn not thy self a way, Nor suffer me to slide:
Thou art my help still to this day, be still my God and guide.
My parents both their son forsook, and cast me of at large:
And then the Lord himself yet took, of me the cure and charge.
Teach me, O God, the way to thee, and lead me on forth right:
For fear of such as watch for me, to trap me if they might.
Do not betake me to the will, of them that be my foes:
For they surmyse against me still, false witness to depose,
My heart would faint but that in me, this hope he fixed fast:
The Lord Gods good grace shall it see, in life that aye shall last.
Trust still in God, whose whole thou art, His will abide thou must:
And he shall ease and strength thy heart, if thou in him do trust.
Ad te domine clamabo. Psalm. xxviii. I. H
Being in great fear and pensiuenes to see God dishonored by the wicked men,
he desires to be rid of them, and cries for vengeance against them, and at
length assures him self, that God has hard his prayer, unto whose tuition he
commends all the faithefull.

THou art (O Lord) my strength and stay, Sing this as the. xxi. psalm
the succor which I crave:
Neglect me not, lest I be like, to them that go to grave.
The voice of thy suppliant hear, that unto thee does cry:
When I lift up, my hands unto, thy holy arc most hye.
Repute not me among the sort, of wicked and pervert:
That speak right fair unto their friends, and think full ill in heart.
According to their handy work, as they deserve in deed:
And after their inuencions, let them receive their mede.
For they regard nothing Gods works, his law ne yet his lore:
Therefore will he them and their seed, destroy for evermore.
To render thanks unto the Lord, how great a cause have I:
My voice, my prayer and my complaynt, that heard so willingly.
He is my shield and fortitude, my buckeler in destresse.
My hope, my help, my hearts relyef, my song shall him confess.
He is our strength and our defense, our enmies to resist:
The health and the salvation, of his elect by Christ.
Thy people and thine heritage, Lord bless, guide, and preserve:
Increase them Lord, and rule their hearts that they may never swerue.
Afferte domino. Psalm. xxix. T. S.
An excellent Psalm. wherein the Prophet exhorts the very Princes and rulers
of the world (which otherwise for the most part think there is no God) at
the least to fear him for the thunders and tempests, for fear whereat all
creatures tremble. And though thereby God threatens sinners, yet is he always
merciful to his, and moves them thereby to praise his name.

Give to the Lord, ye potentates, ye rulers of the world: Sing this as the.
xxi. Psa.

Give ye all praise, honor and strength, unto the living Lord.
2 Give honor to his holy name, and honor him alone:
Worship him in his majesty, within his holy throne.
His voice does rule the waters all, even as him self does please:
He does prepare the thunder clappes, and governs all the sease.
He means the thunderinges and tempests.
The voice of God, is of great force, and wondrous excellent:
It is most mighty in effect, and much magnificent.
The voice of God, does rent and break the Cedre trees so long:
The Cedre tres of Libanus, which are most hie and strong.
And makth them leap, like as a call, or else the Unicorne:
Not only trees, but mountains great, whereon the tres are borne.
His voice deuideth flames of fire, and shakth the wilderness:
It makth the desert quake for fear, that called is Cades.
It makth the Hindes, for fear to calue and makth the couerte plain:
Then in his temple every man, his glory does proclaim.
The Lord was set above the floudes, ruling the raging sea:
So shall he raygne, as Lord and king for ever and for aye.
The Lord will give his people power, in virtue to increase:
The Lord will bless his chosen folk. with everlasting peace.
Exaltabo te domine. Psalm. xxx. I. Hop.
When David should have dedicated his house to the Lord, he fell so extreme
sick, that he was without all hope of life, and therefore after his recovery, he
renders thanks to God, exhortyng others to the like, and learn by his
example, that God is rather merciful then severe, and rigorous toward his
children, and also that the fall from prosperity is sodeine. This done, he
retourneth to prayer, promisyng to praise God for ever.

^ ALl laud and praise, with heart and voice, ^ O Lord I give to thee: which
did not ^ make my foes rejoice, but have exalted me. ^ O lord my god to thee
I cryde, in all my ^ pain and grief: thou gave an ear, and did ^ provide
to ease me with relief,

Of thy good will thou have calde back, My soul from hell to save:
Thou did reuine when strength did lack, and kept me from the grave.
Sing praise ye saints that prove and see, the goodness of the Lord:
In memory of his majesty, Rejoice with one accord.
For why his anger but a space, does last and slake again:
But in his favor and his grace, always does life remain.
Though gripes of grief, and panges full sore, shall lodge with us all night:
The Lord to joy shall us restore, before the day be light.
When I enioyde the world at will, thus would I boast and say:
Tushe, I am sure to feel none ill, this wealth shall not decay.
For thou (O Lord of thy good grace, had sent me strength and aid.
But when thou turned away thy face, my mind was sore dismaide.
Wherefore again yet did I cry, to thee, O Lord of might:
My God with plaintes I did apply, and prayde both day and night.
What gain is in my blood said I, if death destroy my days:
Does dust declare thy majesty, or yet thy truth does praise?
Wherefore my God some pity take, O Lord I thee desire:
Do not this simple soul forsake, of help I thee require.
Then did thou turn my grief and woe, unto a cheerful voice:
The mournyng weed thou tokste me fro, and madst me to rejoice.
Wherefore my soul vncessauntly, shall sing unto thy praise:
My Lord, my God, to thee will I, Give laud and thanks always.
Inte domine speraui. Psalm. xxxi. Io. Hop.
David delivered from some great danger, in the desert of Ma^^ or else where,
first reherseth what meditation he had by the power of says when death was
before his eyes, his enemy being ready to take him: then he adioyneth the favor
of God always to be ready to those that fear him. Finally he exhorts all the
faithful to trust in God and to love him, because he preserves and
strengthens, them, as they may se by his example.

O Lord I put my trust in thee, Let nothing work me shame: Sing this as the.
xviii. psalm.

As thou art just deliver me, and set me quyte from blame.
Give me (O Lord) and that anon. to help me make good spead,
Be thou my rock, and house of stone, my fence in time of need.
For why as stones thy strength is tried thou art my fort and tower:
For thy names sake be thou my guide, and lead me in thy power.
Pluck forth my feet, and break the snare which they for me have laid:
Thou art my strength, and all my care is for thy might and aid.
In to thy hands Lord I commit, my spirit which is thy dew:
For why thou have redeemed it, O Lord thou God most true.
I hate such folk as will not part, from things to be abhorde:
When they on trifles set their heart, my trust is in the Lord.
For I will in thy mercy joy, I see it does excel:
Thou see when ought would me annoy, and know my soul full well.
Thou have not left me in their hand, that would me ouercharge.
But thou have set me out of band, to walk abroad at large.
The second part.
Great grief (O Lord) does me assail some pitye on me take:
Mine eyes wax dim, my might does my womb for woe does ache.
My life is worn with grief and pain fail my years in woe are past:
My strength is gone and through disdain my bones corrupt and wast.
Among my foes I am a scorn, my friends are all dismaide:
My neighbors and my kinsmen borne to see me are afraid.
As men once dead are out of mind, so am I now forgot:
As small effect in me they find, as in a broken pot.
I heard the bragges of all the route, their threats my mind did fraye:
How they conspirde and went about, to take my life away.
But (Lord) I trust in thee for aid, not to be over trod:
For I confess and still have said, thou art my Lord and God.
The length of all my life and age, O Lord, is in thy hand:
Defend me from the wrathes and rage, of them that me withstand.
16 To me thy servant (Lord) express, and show thy ioifull face:
And save me Lord for thy goodness, thy mercy and thy grace.
The third part.
Lord let me not be put to blame, for that on thee I call:
But let the wicked bear their shame, and in the grave to fall.
Oh how great good have thou in store, laid up full safe for them:
That fear and trust in thee therefore, before the sons of men.
Thy presence shall the^ fence and guide, from al proud bragges and wrongs
Within thy place thou shall them hyde from all the strife of tongues.
Thanks to the lord that has declard on me his grace so far:
Me to defend with watch and ward, as in a town of war.
Thus did I say both day and night, when I was sore oppressed:
Lo, I was clean cast out of sight, yet heardst thou my request,
Ye saints, love ye the Lord, I say, the faithful he does guide:
And to the proud he will repay, according to their pride.
Be strong and God shall stay your heart be bold and have a lust:
For sure the Lord will take your part, since ye on him do trust.
Beati quorum remissi sunt. Psalm. xxxii. T. S.
David punished with grievous sickness for his sins, counts them happy to
whom God does not impute their transgressions. And after that he had confessed
his sins and obtained pardon, he exhorts the wicked men to live godly, and
the good to rejoice.

THe man is blessed, whose wickedness. the Lord has clean remitted: Sing this
as the. xxx. psalm

And he whose sin and wretchedness, is hid and also covered.
And blessed is he to whom the Lord, imputes not his sin:
Which in his heart has hid no guile, nor fraud is found therein.
For whilst that I kept close my sin, in silence and constraynt:
My bones did wear and wast away, with daily moan and playnt.
For night and day thy hand on me so grievous was and smert:
That all my blood and humors moist, to drines did convert.
I did therefore confess my fault, and all my sins discover:
Then thou (O Lord) did me forgive, and all my sins pass over.
The humble man shall pray therefore, and seek thee in due time:
So that the floudes of waters great, shall have no power on him.
When trouble and adversity, do compass me about:
Thou art my refuge and my joy, and thou do rid me out.
Come hither and I shall thee teach, how thou shall walk a right:
And will thee guide as I my self, have learnd by proof and sight.
Be not so rude and ignorant, as is the horse and mule:
Whose mouth without a rain or bit, from harm thou can not rule:
The wicked man shall manifold, sorrows and grief sustain:
But unto him that trusts in God, his goodness shall remain.
Be merry therefore in the Lord, ye just lift up your voice:
And ye of pure and perfect heart, be glad and eke rejoice.
Exultate iusti in domino. Psalm. xxxiii. I. H.
He exhorts good men to praise God, for that he has not only created all
things and by his providence governs the same: but also is faithful in his
promises. He understands man's heart, and soattereth the counsel of the
wicked. So that no man can be preserved by any creature or man's strength: but
they that put their confidence in his mercy, shall be preserved from all
adversity.

YE rightuous in the Lord rejoice, it is a semely sight: Sing this as the.
xxx. psalm.

That upright men with thankful voice, should praise the God of might.
Praise ye the Lord with harp and song, in Psalms and pleasant things:
With lute and instrument among, that sounds with ten stringes.
Sing to the Lord a song most new, with courage give him prays:
For why? his word is ever true, his works and all his ways,
To judgment equity and right, he has a great good will:
And with his gifts he does delight, the earth through out to fill.
For by the word of God alone, the heavens all were wrought:
Their hosts and powers every chone his breath to pass has brought.
The waters great gathered has he, on heaps within the shore:
And hid them in the depth to be, as in an house of store.
All men on earth both least and most, fear God and keep his law:
Be that inhabit in each cost, dread him and stand in awe.
what he commanded wrought it was, at once with present speed:
what he does will, is brought to pass. with full effect in deed.
The counsels of the nations rude, the Lord does drine to naught: No counsel
ca^ prevail against God, but shall have ill succes.

He does defeat the multitude, of their devise and thought.
11 But his decres continue still, they never slake or swage:
The motions of his mind and will, take place in every age.
The second part.
And blessed are they to whom the Lord as God and guide is known:
Whom he does chose of mere accord: to take them as his own.
The Lord from heaven cast his sight, on men mortal by birth:
Considering from his seat of might, the dwellers of the earth.
Te lord I say, whose hand has wrought man's heart, and does it frame:
For he alone does know the thought, and working of the same.
A king that trusts in his host, God only delivers and preserves his people
shall naught prevail at length.
The man that of his might does boast, shall fall for all his strength.
The troops of horsemen eke shall fail their sturdie stedes shall sterue:
The strength of horse shall not prevail the rider to preserve.
But lo, the eyes of God intend, and watch to aid the just:
With such as fear him to offend, and on his goodness trust.
That he of death and all distres, may set their soul from dread:
And if that death the land oppress, in houger them to fead.
Wherefore our soul does still depend, on God our strength and stay:
He is the shield us to defend, and drive all darts away.
Our soul in God, has joy and game. rejoicing in his might:
For why? in his most holy name, we hope and much delight:
Therefore let thy goodness (O Lord) still present with us be:
As we always with one accord, do only trust in thee.
Benedicam domino. Psalm. xxxiiii. T. Stern.
After David had escaped Achis, according as is written in the 1. Sa. xxi whom
in this title he calls Abimelech (which was a general name to all the kings
of the Philistenes) he prayseth God for his deliverance provoking all others,
by his example to trust in God, to fear and serve him, who defends the godly
with his angels, and utterly destroieth the wicked in their sins.

I Will give laud and honor both, Unto the Lord always: Sing this as the.
xxx. psalm

And eke my mouth for evermore, shall speak unto his prays.
I do delight to laud the Lord, in soul and eke in voice:
That humble men and mortified, may hear and so rejoice.
Therefore see that ye magnifye, with me the living Lord:
And let us now exalt his name, together with one accord.
For I my self besought the Lord, he answered me again:
And me delivered incontinent, from all my fear and pain.
who so they be that him behold, shall see his light most clear:
Their countenance shall not be dashed they need it not to fear.
This sely wretch for some relyef, unto the Lord did call:
who did him hear without delay, and rid him out of thrall. Gen, 19. 31. 32.
4. Reg. 6. Heb. 1

The angel of the Lord does pitche, his tents in every place:
To save all such as fear the Lord, that nothing them deface,
Taste and consider well therefore, that God is good and just.
O happy man that makes him, his only stay and trust.
Fear ye the Lord his holy ones, above all earthly thing:
For they that fear the living Lord, are sure to lack nothing.
The Lions shall be hongerbit, and pinde with famine much:
But as for them that fear the Lord, no lack shall be to such.
The second part.
Come near therefore my children dear and to my words give ear:
I shall you teach the perfect way, how you the Lord should fear.
who is that man that would live long, 1. Pete. 5. b.
and lead a blessed life?
Se thou refrain thy tongue and lips, from all disceipt and strife.
Turn back thy face from doing ill, Heb. iiii. c. Eccle. xv. d.
and do the godly deed:
Inquire for peace and quyetnes, and follow it with speed.
For why the eyes of God above, upon the just are bent:
His ears likewise do hear the plaint of the pore innocent.
But he does frown and bend his brows upon the wicked train:
And cut away the memory, that should of them remain.
But when the just do call and cry, the Lord do hear them so:
That out of pain and misery, for the with he letth them go.
The Lord is kind and straight at hand to such as be contrite:
He sauthe also the sorrowful, the meke and poor in spirit.
Full many be the miseries, that righteous men do suffer:
But out of all adversities, the Lord does them deliver,
The Lord does so preserve and keep. his very bones always:
That not so much as one of them, does pearish or decay,
The sin shall slay the wicked man, which he him self has wrought:
And such as hate the righteous man. shall soon be brought to naught.
But they that serve the living Lord, the Lord does save them sound:
And who that put their trust in him. nothing shall them consounde.
Iudica domine, Psalm. xxxv. I. Hop.
So long as Saull was enemy to David, all that had any authority vnver him,
to flater their king did also most Cruelly persecute David: against whom he
prays God to plead and to aueng his cause, that they may be taken in their
netts and snares, which they laid for him, and his inocencie may be declared.
And that the inocent which takes part with him may rejoice and praise the
name of the lord that thus delivers his servant. And so he promyseth to
speak forth the justice of the lord and to mangnisie his name all the days of
his life.

^ Lord plead my cause against my ^ foes, confound their force and might:
Fight ^ on my part, against all those, that seek with ^ me to fight. Lay hand
upon thy spear and shild, ^ thy self in armor dres: stand up for me and
fight ^ the feld, to help me from distres.

Gird on thy sword, and stop the way, my enemies to withstand:
That thou unto, my soul do say, lo I thy help at hand.
Confound them with rebuke and blame, that seek my soul to spill:
Let them turn back and fly with shame, that think to work me ill.
Let them disperse, and fly abroad, as wind does drive the duste:
And that the angel of our God, their might away may thrust.
Let all their ways, be void of light, and slipprie like to fall:
And send thine angel with thy might to persecute them all.
For why without my fault they have, in secret set their grinne:
And for no cause have digd a cave: to take my soul therein.
when they think least and have no care O Lord destroy them all.
Let them be trapt in their own snare, and in their mischief fall.
And let my soul my heart and voice, in God have joy and welthe:
That in the Lord I may rejoice, and in his saving health.
And then my bones shall speak and say my parts shall all agree:
O lord though they do seem full gaie, what man is like to thee.
The second part.
Thou do defend the weak from the^ that are both stout and strong:
And rid the poor from wicked men that spoil and do them wrong.
My cruel foes against me rise, to witness things untrue:
And to acuse me they devise, of that I never knew.
where I to them did owe good will, they quite me with disdain:
That they should pay my good with ill my soul does sore complain.
14 When they were sick I mornd therefore and clad my self in sack.
With fasting I did faint full sore, to pray I was not slack.
As they had been my brethern dear, I did my self behave:
As one that makes woeful chere, about his mothers grave,
But they at my dissease did joy, and gather on a route:
Yea abject slaves at me did toye, with mockes and checks full stout.
The belly gods and flattering train, that all good things deride:
At me do grin with great disdain, and pluck their mouth a side.
Lord when will thou amend this gear why do thou stay and pause:
Oh rid my soul mine only dear, out of these Lions claws.
And then will I give thanks to thee, before thy church alwayse:
And where as most of people be, there will I show thy praise.
Let not my foes prevail on me, which hate me for no fault:
Nor yet to wink or turn their eye, that causeles me assault.
The third part.
Of peace no word they think or say, their taulke is all untrue:
They still consult and would betraye, all those that peace ensue.
With open mouth they run at me, they gape, they laugh, they flere:
Well well, say they our eye does see, the thing that we desire.
But Lord thou see what ways they take sease not this gear to mende:
Be not far of nor me forsake, as men that fail their friend.
Awake, arise, and stir abroad, defend me in my right:
Revenge my cause my Lord my God, and aid me with thy might.
According to thy righteousness, my Lord God set me free:
And let not them their pride express, nor triumph over me.
Let not their hearts rejoice and cry, there, there, this gear does trime:
Nor give them cause to say on hye, we have our will of him.
Confound them with rebuke and shame, that joy, when I do mourn:
And pay them home with spite and blame that brag at me with scorn.
Let them be glad and eke rejoice, which love mine upright way
And they all times with heart and voice, shall praise the Lord and say.
Great is the Lord and does excel, for why he does delyght:
To see his servant prosper well, that is his pleasant sight.
Wherefore my tongue I will apply, thy righteousness to praise:
Unto the Lord, my God will I, sing lauds with thanks alwayse,
Dixit iuiustus. Psalm. xxxvi. I. H.
David grievously vexed by the wicked, does complain of their maiyce and
wickedness. The^ he turns to consider the unspeakable goodness of God toward
all creatures: But specially toward his children, that by faith thereof he
may be comforted and assured of his deliverance by this ordenary course of
Gods work, who in the end destroys the wicked and saves the ruite.

THe wicked with his works unjust, does thus persuade my heart: Sing this as
the. xxxv. psalm.

That of the Lord he has no trust, his fear is set aparte.
Yet does he joy in his estate, to walk as he began:
So long till he deserve the hate, of God and eke of man:
His words ar wicked, vile and naught, his tongue no truth does tell:
Yet at no hand will he be taught, which way he may do well.
When he should sleep then does he muse, his mischife to fulfill:
No wicked ways does he refuse, nor nothing that is ill.
But Lord thy goodness does ascend, above the heavens high:
So does thy truth it self extend, unto the cloudie sky.
Much more then hills, so high and steep thy justice is expressed:
Thy judgments like to sease most deep thou sauest both man and beast.
Thy mercy is, above all things, O God it does excel:
In trust whereof as in thy wings, the sons of men shall dwell.
Within thy house they shall be fed, with plenty at their will:
Of all delight they shall be sped, and take thereof their fill.
For why the well of life so pure, does over flow from thee:
And in thy light, we are full sure, the lasting light alwayse to see.
From such as thee desire and know, let not thy grace depart:
Thy righteousness declare and show, to men of upright heart.
Let not the proud on me prevail, O Lord of thy good grace?
Nor let the wicked me assail, to throw me out of place.
But they in their device shall fall, that wicked works maintain:
They shall be overthrown with all, and never rise again.
Noli emulari. Psalm. xxxvii. w. w.
Because the godly should not wonder to see wicked men prosper in this world:
the prophet shows that all thing shall be granted according to their hearts
desire, to them that love and fear God: and they that do the contrary,
although they seem to flourish for a tune, shall at length peryshe. Sing this
as the. xxxv. psalm.


GRudge not to see the wicked men, in wealth to flourish still:
Nor yet envy such as to ill, have bent and set their will.
For as grene gras and flourishing herbs, are cut and wither away:
So shall their great prosperity, sone pass, fade, and decay.
Trust thou therefore in God alone, to do well give thy mind:
So shall thou have the land as thine, and there sure food shall find.
In God set all thy hearts delight, and look what thou would have:
Or else can wish in all the world, thou nedest it not to crave.
Cast both thy self and thine affairs, on God with perfect trust:
And thou shall see with patience, theffect both sure and just.
The perfect life and godly name, he will clear as the light:
So that the sun, even at none days, shall not shine half so bright.
Be still therefore, and steadfastly, on God see thou wait then:
Nor shrinking for the prosperous state, of leude and wicked men.
Shake of despite, envy and hate, at least in any wise:
Their wicked steps, avoid and fly, and follow not their guise.
For every wicked man, will God, destroy both more and less:
But such as trust in him are sure, the land for to posses.
Watch but a while, and thou shall see, no more the wicked train:
No not so much, as house or place, where once he did remain.
The second part.
But merciful and humble men, enjoy shall sea and land:
In rest and peace they shall rejoice, for naught shall them withstand.
The lewd men and malicious, against the just conspire:
They gnash their teeth at him, as men, which do his bane desire.
But while that lewd men thus do think the Lord laugh them to scorn:
For why he sees their term approach, When they shall sygh and morn.
The wicked have their sword out drawn their bow eke have they bent:
To overthrow and kill the poor, as they the right way went.
But the same sword shall pearse their hearts which was to kill the just:
Likewise the bow shall break to shiuers wherein they put their trust.
Doubtless the just man's poor estate, is better agreat deal more:
Then all these lewd and worldly men's, rich pomp and heaped store.
For be their power never so strong, God will it overthrow:
Where contrary he does preserve, the humble men and low.
He sees by his great providence, the good men's trade and way:
And will give them inheritance, which never shall decay.
They shall not be discouraged, when some are hard bested:
When other shall be hungre bit, they shall be clad and fed.
For whosoever wicked is, and enemy to the Lord:
Shall quail, yea melt eue^ as la^bs grease or smoke that flies abroad,
The third part.
Behold the wicked boroweth much, and never paith again:
whereas the just by liberal gifts, makth many glad and feign.
For they who^ God does bles. shall have the land for heritage:
And they whom he does curse likewise, shall pearysh in his rage.
The Lord the just ma^s ways does guide and geuth him good success:
To every thing he takes in hand, he sends good address.
Though that he fall, yet is he sure, not utterly to quayle:
Because the Lord stretche out his hand, at need, and does not fail.
I have been young and now am old, yet did I never see:
The just man left, or else his sede, to beg for miserye.
But gives always most liberally, and lendthe whereas is need:
His children and posterity, receive of God their mede.
Flee vice therefore and wickedness, and virtue do embrace:
So God shall grant thee long to have in earth a dwelling place:
For God so loves equity, and she with to his such grace:
That he preserves them evermore, but destroyth the wicked race.
Where as the good and godly men, inherit shall the land:
Having as Lords all thing therein, in their own power and hand.
30 The just man's mouth does ever speak, of matters wise and hye:
His tongue does talk to edify, with truth and equity.
For in his heart the law of God, his Lord does still abide:
So that where he goes or walks, his foot can never slide.
The wicked like a ravening wolf, the just man does beset:
By all means seking him to kill, if he fall in his net.
The forth part.
Though he should fall into his hands, yet God would succor send:
Though men against him sentence give, God would him yet defend.
Wayt thou on God, and keep his way, he shall preserve thee then:
The earth to rule and thou shall see, destroyde these wicked men.
The wicked have I seen most strong, and placed in high degree:
Flourishing in all wealth and store, as does the Laurel tree.
But suddenly he passed away, and lo he was quite gone:
Then I him sought, but could scarce find the place where dwelt such one.
Mark and behold the perfect man, how God does him increase:
for the just man shall have at length, great joy with rest and peace.
As for transgressors, woe to them, destroyde they shall all be:
God will cut of their budding race, and rich posterity.
But the salvation of the just, does come from God above:
Who in their trouble sendth them aid of mercy grace and love.
God does them help, save and deliver, from lewd men and unjust:
And still will save them whilst that they in him do put their trust,
Domine ne in furore. Psalm. 38. I. H.
David lying sick of some grievous disease, acknowlegeth him self to be
chastysed of the Lord for his sins, and therefore prays God to turn away
his wrath, he utters the greatness of his grief by many words and
circumstances, as wounded with the arrows of gods Ire, forsaken of his friends,
evil entreated of his enemies, but in the end with firm confidence he
commends his cause to God, and hops for spedie help at his hand,

PUt me not to rebuke, O Lord, in thy provoked ire: Sing this as the xxxv. psa

Ne in thy heavy wrath, O Lord, Correct me I desire.
Thine arowes do stick fast in me, thy hand does press me sore:
And in my flesh no health at all, appears any more.
And all this is by reason of, thy wrath that I am in:
Nor any rest is in my bones. by reason of my sin.
For, lo my wicked doings, Lord, above my head are gone,
As greater lode then I can bear, they lie me sore upon.
My wounds stinck and are festred so as lothesome is to see.
Which all through mine own folishnes betideth unto me.
And I in careful wise am brought, in trouble and distres:
That I go wayling all the day my dulfull heaviness.
My loins are filled with sore disease, my flesh has no whole part:
I feeble am and broken sore, I rore for grefe of heart.
Thou know, Lord, my desire: my groans are open in thy sight:
My heart does pant, my strength has faild mine eyes have lost their light.
My lovers and my wonted friends. stand lokyng in my woe:
And eke my kinesmen far away, are me departed froe.
They that did seek my life, laid snares, and they that sought the way:
To do me hurt, spoke lies and thought, on treason all the day.
The second part.
But as a deefe man I became, that cannot hear at all:
And as one dumme that opens not, his mouth to speak withal,
For all my confidence, O Lord, is wholly set in thee:
O Lord, thou Lord that art my God, thou shall give ear to me.
This I did crave, that they, my foes, triumph not over me:
For when my foot did slip then they, did joy my fall to see.
And truly I poor wretch am set, in plage a woeful wight:
And eke my grefefull heaviness. is ever in my sight.
For while that In my wickedness, in humble wise confess,
And while I for my sinful deeds, my sorrow do express,
My fooes do still remain alive, and mighty are also:
And they that hate me wrongfully, in number hugely grow.
They stand against me, that my God, with evil do repay,
Because that good and honest things, I do ensue always.
Forsake me not, O Lolde, my God, be thou not far away:
Have me to help, my Lord my God, my safety and my stay.
Dixi custodiam xxxix. John Hop.
David utters with what great gref and bitterness of mind he was driven to
these outrageous complaynts of his infirmities, for he canfesseth that when he
had determined silence, that he brast forth yet in to words that he would not,
through the greatness of his greef. The^ be reherseth certain requests which
taste of infirmity of man, and mixeth with them many prayers but all to show a
mind wonderfully troubled, that it may plainly appear how he did strive
myghtiye against death and desperatyon.

I Said I will look to my ways, For fear I should go wrong: Sing this as
the. xxxv. psalm.

I will take heed all times that I, Offend not in my tongue.
As with a bit I will keep fast, my mouth with force and might:
Not once to whisper all the while, the wicked are in sight.
I held my tongue and spoke no word, but kept me close and still,
Yea from good tallke I did refrain, but sore against my will.
My heart waxt whote within my breast, with musing thought and doubt:
Which did increase, and stire the fire, at last these words brast out.
Lord, number out my life and days which yet I have not past:
So that I may be certifyed, how long my life shall last,
6 Lord, thou have poynted out my life, in length much like a spanne:
Mine age is nothing unto thee, so vain is every man.
Man walks like a shade, and does in vain him self annoye,
In getting goods, and cannot tell, who shall the same enjoy.
Now lord since things this wise do frame what help do I desire:
Of truth my help does hang on thee, I nothing else require.
The second part.
From all the sins that I have done, Lord quyteme out of hand:
And make me not a scorn to fools, that nothing understand.
I was as dumme, and to complain, no trouble might me move:
Because I know it was thy work, my patience for to prove.
Lord take from me thy scourg and plage I can them not withstand:
I faint and pine away for fear, of thy most heavy hand.
when thou for sin do man rebuke, he waxes woe and wanne:
As does a clothe that mothes have fret so vain a thing is man.
Lord hear my suit and give good head regard my tears that fall
Soiourne like a stranger here as did my fathers all.
Oh spare a little give me space, my strength for to restore:
Before I go away from hence, and shall be seen no more.
Expectans expectaui. Psalm. lx. I. H
David delivered from great danger, does magnifye and praise the grace of God
for his deliverance, and commendith his providence toward all mankind. Then
does he promise to give him self wholly to Gods service, and so declares how
God is truly worshipped. Afterward he gives thanckes and prayseth God, and
having complained of his enemies with good courage. he calls for aid and
cuccour.

I waited long and sought the Lord, and patiently did bear:
At length to me he did accord, Sing this as the. xxxv. psalm.
my voice and cry to hear.
He plucked me from the lake so deep, out of the mire and clay:
And on a rock he set my feet, and he did gide my way.
To me he taught a psalm of praise, which I must show abroad:
And sing new songs of thanks alwayse, unto the Lord our God.
When all the folk these things shall see, as people much afraid.
Then they unto the Lord will flee, and trust upon his aid.
O blessed is he whose hope and heart, does in the Lord remain:
That with the proud does take no part, nor such as lie and feign.
For Lord my God thy wondrous deeds, in greatness far do pass:
Thy favor toward us excedes, all things that ever was.
When I entend and do devise, thy works abroad to show:
To such a reckning they do rise, thereof no end I know.
Burnt offringes thou delightste not in, I know thy whole desire:
With sacrifice to purge their sin, thou do no man require.
Meat offering and sacrifice, thou woldst not have at all:
But thou O Lord have open made, mine ears to hear withal.
But then said I behold and look, I come a mean to be:
For in the volume of the book, thus it is said of me.
The second part.
That I, O God, should do thy mind, which thing does like me well:
For in my heart thy law I find, fast placed there to dwell.
Thy Justice and thy righteousness, in great resorts I tell:
Behold, my tongue no time does cease, O Lord thou know full well.
I have not hid within my breast, thy goodness as by stelth,
But I declare and have expressed, thy truth and saving health.
I kept not close thy loving mind, that no man should it know:
The trust that in thy truth I find, to all the church I show.
For I with mischefes many one, am sore beset about:
My sins increase and so com on, I can not spy them out.
For why in number they excede, the hears upon my head:
My heart does faint for very dread, that I almost am dead.
With speed send help and set me free, O Lord I thee require:
Make have with aid to succor me, O Lord at my desire.
Let them sustain rebuke and shame, that seek my soul to spille:
Drive back my foes and them defame, that wish and would me ill.
For their ill feats do them discrie, that would deface my name:
Alwayse at me they rail and cry, fie on him, fie for shame.
Let them in thee have joy and wealth that seek to thee alwayse:
That those that love thy saving health may say, to God be praise.
But as for me I am but poor, oppressed and brought full low:
Yet thou O Lord wilt me restore, to health full well I know.
For why thou art my hope and trust my refuge help and stay,
wherefore my God as thou art just, with me no time delay.
Beatus qui in telligit. Psalm. xli. T. S
David being grievously afflicted, blessed them that pity his case, and
complayneth of the treason of his own friends and familiars, as came to pass
in Judas. Ioh. xv. After he felyng the great mercyes of god gently chastisyng
him, and not suffering his ennemies to triumph against him, gives most hartye
thanks unto God.

^ THe man is blessed ye careful is the nedie ^ to consider. For in the season
perilous, the lord ^ will him deliver: The lord will make him safe ^ and sound
and happy in the land: And he will not ^ deliver him, into his enemies hand.

And in his bed when he lies sick, the Lord will him restore?
And thou (O lord) will tourn to health his sickness and his sore.
Then in my sickness thus say I, have mercy Lord on me:
And heal my soul which is full woe, that I offended thee.
Mine enemies wished me ill in heart, and thus of me did say:
When shall he die, that all his name, may vanish quite away?
And when they come to visit me, they ask if I do well:
But in their hearts mischief they hatche, and to their mates it tell:
They bite their lips and whisper so, as though they would me charm:
And cast their fetches how to trappe me with some mortal harm.
Some grievous sin, has brought him to, this sickness, say they plain:
He is so low that without doubt, rise can he not again.
The man also that I did trust, Acts. l, c Heb. he lift by his hele against
me, or used deceitand therefore Jacob had his name by taking by the heel and
deceyuing. Gene, 15, ^, 17^
with me did use disceite:
who at my table eat my bread, the same for me laid wait.
Have merry Lord on me therefore, and let me be preserude:
That I may render unto them, the things they have deserude
By this I know assuredly, to be beloved of thee:
When that mine enemies have no cause to triumph over me.
But in my right thou have me kept, and maintained always:
And in thy presence place assignde, where I shall dwell for aye.
The Lord the God of Israel, be praised evermore:
Even so be it (Lord) will I say, even so be it therefore.
Quemadmodum desiderat. Psalm. xlii. I. H
The Prophet grievously complaynech that being let by his persecutours he
could not be present in the congregation of Gods people, protesting, that
although he was separate in body from them: yet his heart was thither
affectioned. And last of all he shows that he was not so far ouercomen with
these sorrows and thoughts, but that be continually put his confidence in the
Lord.

LIke as the heart does breath and bray, the well springs to obtain: Sing this
as the. xxxv. psa

So does my soul desire always, with thee Lord to remain.
My soul does thirst and would draw nere the living God of might:
O when shall I come and appear, in presence of his sight?
The tears all times are my repast, which from mine eyes do slide:
When wicked men cry out so fast, where now is God thy guide,
Alas what grief is it to think, what fredome once I had?
Therefore my soul as at pits brinke, is most heavy and sad.
When I did march in good array, furnished with my train:
Unto the temple was our way, with songs and hearts most feign.
My soul why art thou sad always, and freatst thus in my breast?
Trust still in God, for him to praise, I hold it ever best.
By him have I succor at need, against all pain and grief:
He is my God which with all speed, will have to send relyef.
And this my soul within me (Lord) does faint to think upon:
The land of Jordan, and record, the little hill Hermon.
One grief an other in does call, as clouds burst out their voice.
The floudes of evil that do fall, run over me with noyce. God tries his
children by diverse and often afflictions.

Yet I by day felt his goodness, and help at all assayes:
Likewise by night I did not cease, the living God to praise.
I am persuaded thus to say, to him with pure pretense:
O Lord thou art my guide and stay, my rock and my defense.
Why do I then in pensiuenes, hanging the head thus walk:
While that mine enemies me oppres, and vex me with their talk.
For why? they pearse mine inward parts with panges to be abhord:
When they cry out with stubburne hearts, where is thy God, thy Lord?
So sone why do thou faint and quayle my soul with pains oppressed?
with thoughts why do thy self assail, so sore within my breast?
Trust in the Lord thy God always, and thou the time shall see:
To give him thanks with laud and praise for health restorde to thee.
Iudica me deus. Psalm. xliii.. T. S
He prays to be delivered from them which conspire with Absolo^, to thend
that he might joyfully praise God in his holy congregation.

Judge and revenge my cause, O Lord, From them that evil be: Sing this as
the. xxxv. psalm.

From wicked and deceitful men, O Lord deliver me.
For of my strength thou art the God, why put thou me thee fro?
And why walk I so heavily, oppressed with my fo?
Send out thy light, and eke thy truth and lead me with thy grace:
which may conduct me to thy hill, and to thy dwelling place.
Then shall I to the altar go, of God my joy and cheer:
And on my harp give thanks to thee O God, my God most dear.
Why art thou then so sad my soul, and fretst thus in my breast?
Still trust in God, for him to praise, I hold it always best.
By him I have deliverance, against all pains and grief:
He is my God, which does always, at need send me relief.
Deus auribus nostris. Psalm. xliiii. T. S.
A most earnest prayer made in the name of the faithful, when they are
afflicted by their enemies, for sustayning the quarrel of gods word according
to the exposition of S. Paul, Roma. viii.

^ OUr ears have hard our fathers tell, and ^ reverently record: the wondrous
works ye thou ^ have done in alder time (O Lord.) How thou ^ did cast the
Gentiles out, and stroyost them with ^ strong hand, planting our fathers in
their ^ place, and gave to them their land.

They conquered not by sword nor strength, the land of thy behest:
But by thy hand, thy arm and grace, because thou louedst them best.
Thou art my king (O God) that help, Jacob in sundry wise:
Led with thy power, we threw down such, as did against us rise.
I trusted not in bow ne sword, they could not save me sound:
Thou kept us from our enemies rage, thou did our foes confound.
And still we beast of thee our God, and praise thy holy name:
Yet now thou go not with our host, Selah.
but leauest us to shame.
Thou made us flee before our foes, and so were over trod:
Our enemies robde and spoilde our goods when we were sparst abroad.
Thou have us given to our foes, as sheep for to be slain:
Amongst the Heathen every where, scartered we do remain.
Thy people thou have sold like slaves, and as a thing of naught?
For proffit none thou had thereby, no gain at all was sought.
And to our neighbors thou have made, of us a laughing stock:
And those that round about us dwell, at us do grinne and mock.
The second part.
Thus we serve for none other use, but for a common talk:
They mock, they scorn, and nod their heds where ever they go or walk.
I am a shamd continually, to hear these wicked men:
Yea so I blush, that all my face, with red is covered then.
For why? we hear such sclaundrous words such false report and lies:
That death it is to see their wrongs, their threatenings and their cries.
For all this we forgot not thee, nor yet thy covenant brake:
We turn not back our hearts from thee, nor yet thy paths forsake.
Yet thou have trod us down to dust, where dens of dragons be:
And covered us with shade of death: and great adversity.
If we had our Gods name forgot, and help of idols sought:
Would not god then have tried this out for he does know our thought.
Nay, nay, for thy names sake, O Lord always are we slain thus:
Aa sheep unto the shambles sent, right so they deal with us.
Up Lord why slepest thou awake, and leave us not for all:
Why hidest thou thy countenance, and do forget our thrall?
For down to dust, our soul is brought and we now at last cast:
Our belly like as it were glude, unto the ground cleaves fast.
Rise up therefore for our defense, and help us Lord at need:
We thee bese the for thy goodness, to rescue us with speed.
Eructauit. Psalm. xlv. I. H.
The majesty of Solomon, his honor strength beauty, riches, and power are
praised, and also his marriage with the Egiptian being an Heathen woman to
blessed, if that she can renounce her people and the^ love other country and
give her self wholly to her husband, Under the which ^ygu^e the wonderful
majesty* and the increase of the kingdom of Christ and the Church his
spouse now taken of the genuies is described.

MY heart does now, take in hand, Sing this as the. xxv. psa
Some godly song to singe?
Thy praise I shall show therein, perteyneth to the king.
My tongue shall be as quick, his honor to endite:
As is the pen of any scribe, that uses fast to write.
O fairest of all men, thy speech is pleasant pure:
For God has blessed thee with gifts, for ever to endure.
About thee girde thy sword O prince of might elect:
With honor glory and renoume, thy person pure is dect.
Go forth with godly speed, in mekenes, truth and right:
And thy right hand, shall thee instruct, in works of dreadful might.
Thine arrows sharp and kene, their hearts so sore shall stinge,
That folk shall fall and knele to thee, yea all thy foes, O king.
Thy royal seat, O Lord, for ever shall remain:
Because the scepter of thy realm, does righteousness maintain.
Because thou love the right, and do the ill detest:
God even thy God has pointed thee, with joy above the rest:
With mirth and savors sweet, thy clothes ar all be spread:
when thou do from thy palace pas, wherein to make thee glad.
Kings daughters do attend, in fine and rich array:
At thy right hand, the queen does stand, in goulde and garments gaye.
The second part.
O daughter take good heed, enclyne and give good ear:
Thou must forget thy kindred all, and fathers house most dear.
Then shall the king desire, Thy beuty fayer and trim:
For why he is the Lord thy God, and thou must worship him.
The daughters then of Tire, with gifts full rich to see:
And all the welthy of the land, shall make their suit to thee.
The daughter of the king, is glorious to behold:
within his closet she does sit, all dect in beaten goulde.
In robes well wrought with needle, with many a pleasant thing:
With virgins faier on her to waighte, she comes to the king.
16 Thus are they brought with Joy, and mirth on every side:
Into the palace of the king, and there do they abide.
Instead of parents left, O queen the change so stands.
Thou shall have sons who^ thou may set as princes in all lands.
Wherefore thy holy name, all ages shall record.
The people shall give thanks to thee, for ever more, O Lord.
Deus noster refugium. Psalm. xlvi. I. H.
A song of thanks geuyng for the delyueraunce of Jerusalem after Senacherib
with his army was driven away, or some otherlyke so dayne and marvelous
delyueraunce by the mighty hand of God. Whereby the Prophet commendyng this
great benefyte does exhort the faithful to give them selves wholly into the
hand of God, doubtyng nothing but that under his protection they shall be safe
against all the assaults of their enemies.

^ THe Lord is our defense and aid, ^ the strength whereby we stand, when we
with ^ woe are much dismaide, he is our help at hand ^ Though thearth remove
we will not fear, though ^ hills so high and stepe, be thrust and hurled
hear ^ and there, within the sea so deep.

No though the waves, do rage so sore, that all the banks it spilles:
And though it over flow the shore, and beat down mighty hills.
For one fayer flood, does send abroad, his pleasant streams a pace:
To fresh the city of our God. and wash his holy place,
In midst of her the Lord does dwell, she can no whit decay:
All things against her that rebel, the Lord will truly stay.
The heathen flock, the kingdoms fear the people make a noise:
The earth does melte and not appear, when God puttes forth his voice.
The Lord of hosts, does take our part to us he has an eye:
Our hope of health, with all our heart, on Iacobes God does lie.
Come here and see, with mind and thought, the working of our God:
what wonders he him self has wrought through out the earth abrod.
By him all wars are hushed and gone, which countres did conspire:
Their bows he brake and spears echone, their Charets brent with fire.
Leave of therefore (says he) and know, I am a God most stout:
Among the heathen high and low, and all the earth throughoute,
The Lord of hosts does us defend, he is our strength and tower:
On Jacobs God do we depend. and on his mighty power
Omnes gentes. Psalm. xlvii. I. H.
The prophet exorteth all people to the worship of the true and everliving God,
commending the mercyes of God toward the posterity of Jacob: and after
prophecieth of the kingdom of Christ in this tune of the Gospel.

YE people all in one accord, clappe hands and eke rejoice: Sing this as the.
xlvi. Psa

Be glad and sing unto the Lord, with sweet and pleasant voice.
2 For hie the Lord and dreadful is, with wonders manifold:
A mighty king he is truly, in all the earth extolde.
The people shall he make to be, unto our bondage thrall:
And underneath our fete he shall the nations make to fall.
For us the heritage he chose, which we possess alone:
The flouring worship of Jacob, his well-beloved one.
Our God ascended up on hye, with joy and pleasant noyce,
The Lord goes up above the sky, with trompets royal voice.
Sing praise to God, sing praise, sing praises to our king:
For God is king of all the earth, all skillful, praises sing.
God on the heathen reigns and sittes, upon his holy throne.
The princes of the people have, them joined every one.
To Abrams people, for our God, which is exalted hye:
Us with a buckler does defend, the earth continually.
Magnus dominus, Psalm. xlviii. I. H
A notable deliverance of Jerusalem from the hands of many kings is
mentioned, for the which thanks are given to God, and the estate of that city
is praised, that has God so presently at all times redye to defend them,
this Psalm seems to be made in the time of Ahaz, Iosaphat, Asa or Ezechia,
for in their times chiefly, was the city by forayne Princes assaulted.

GReat is the Lord and with great praise, Sing this as the. xlvi. psalm.
to be advanced still:
Within the city of our Lord, upon his holy hill.
Mount Sion is a pleasant place, it gladdeth all the land:
The city of the mighty king, on her northside does stand.
Within the palaces thereof, God is a refuge known:
For lo the kings were gathered and together eke were gone.
But when they did behold it so, they wondered and they wear:
Astonyed much and suddenly, were driven back with fear.
Great terror there on them did fall, for every woe they cry:
As does a woman when she shall, go travail by and by,
As thou with esterne wind the ships upon the sea do break,
So they were stayed and even as, we hard our fathers speak,
So in the city of the Lord, we saw as it was told,
yea in the city which our Lord, for ever will uphold:
O Lord we wait and do attend, on thy good help and grace.
For which we do all times attend, within thy holly place.
O Lord according to thy name for ever is thy praise:
And thy right hand, O Lord, is full, of righteousness always.
Let for thy judgments Sion mount, full filled be with joys:
And eke of Judah grant O Lord, the danger to rejoice.
Go walk about all Syon hill, yea round about her go:
And tell the towers that theruppon, are bilded in a row.
And mark ye well her bulwarks all, behold her towers there:
That ye may tell thereof to them, that after shall be here.
For this God is our God, our God, for evermore is he:
yea and unto the death also, our guider shall he be.
Audite haec omnes. Psalm. xlix. T. S.
The holy Ghost calls all me^ to the consideration of man's lift, showing them
not to be most happy that are most wealthy, and therefore not to be feared:
but contrariwyse he lifts up our minds to consider how al things are ruled
by gods providence, who as he judges these worldly miseryes to everlasting
torments: so does he preserve his, and will reward them in the day of the
resurrection, i. These. i.

ALl people harken and give ear, Sing this as the. xlv. psalm.
To that that I shall tell:
Both high and low, both rich and poor that in the world do dwell.
For why? my mouth shall make discourse, of many things right wise:
In understanding shall my heart, his study exercise.
I will inclyne mine ear to know, the parables so dark.
And open all my doubtful speech, in meter on my harp.
why should I fear afflictions, or any careful toil?
Or else my foes which at my heles, are pressed my life to spoil?
For as for such as riches have, wherein their trust is most:
And they which of their treasures great, them selves do brag and boast:
There is not one of them that can, his brothers death redeem:
Or that can give a price to God, sufficient for him.
It is to great a price to pay, none can thereto attain:
Or that he might his life prolong, or not in grave remain.
They see wise men as well as foles, subject unto deaths hands:
And being dead, strangers possess, their goods, their rentes, their lands
Their care is to build houses fair, and so determine sure:
To make their name right great in earth for ever to endure.
Yet shall no man always enjoy, high honor, wealth and rest:
But shall at length taste of deaths cup, as well as the brute beast.
The second part.
And though they try these folish thoughts to be most lewd and vain:
Their children yet approve their talk, and in like sin remain.
As sheep into the fold are brought, so shall they into grave:
Death shall them eat, and in that day the just shall Lordship have.
Their image, and their royal port, shall fade and quite decay:
When as from house to pit they pass, with woe, and weal away.
But God will surely preserve me, from death and endless pain:
Because he will of his good grace, my soul receive again.
If any man wax wondrous rich, fear not, I say, therefore,
Although the glory of his house, increases more and more,
17 For when he dies, of all these things, nothing shall he receive:
His glory will not follow him, his pomp will take her leave.
Yet in this life he takth him self, the happiest under sun:
And others likewise flatter him, saying, all is well done.
And presuppose he live as long, as did his fathers old:
Yet must he needs at length give place: and be brought to deaths fold.
Thus man to honor God has calde, yet does he not consider:
But like brute beasts so does he live, which turn to dust and powder.
Deus deorum. Psalm L. I. H.
He prophecieth how God will call all nations by the Gospel, and require no
other sacrifices of his people, but confession of his benefits, and thanks
geuyng, and how he detesteth all such as seem zealous of Ceremonies, and not of
the pure word of God only.

^ THe god of Gods, the lord has calde ^ the earth by name, from where the
son does

^ rise unto the setting of the same. From Syon his ^ fair place, his glory
bright and clear, The ^ perfect beutye of his grace, from thence it did ^
appear.

Our God shall come in haste, to speak he shall not doubt:
Before him shall the fire waste, and tempest round about.
The heavens from on hye, the earth below likewise:
He will call forth to judge and try, his folk he does devise.
Bring forth my saints (says he) my faithful flock so dear:
Which are in band and league with me my law to love and fear.
And when these things are tried, the heavens shall record:
That God is just, and all must bide, the judgment of the Lord:
My people O give heed, Israel to thee I cry:
I am thy God, thy healpe at need, thou can it not deny.
I do not say to thee, thy sacrifice is slack:
Thou offrest daily unto me, much more then I do lack.
Think thou that I do need, thy cattle young or old:
Or else so much desire to feed, on goats out of thy foulde.
Nay, all the beasts are mine, in woods that eat their filles:
And thousands more, of nete and kine, that run wild in the hills.
The birds that build on hie, In hills and out of sight:
And the beasts that in the filds do lie are subject to my might.
Then though I houngred sore, what need I ought of thine.
Since that the earth, with her great store and all therein is mine.
To bullockes fleash have I such mind to eat it, do thou think?
Or such a sweetness do I find, the blood of goats to drink.
Give to the Lord his praise, with thanks do him apply:
And see thou pay thy vows always, unto the God most hie.
Then seek and call to me, when ought would work thee blame.
And I will sure deliver thee, that thou may praise my name.
But to the wicked train, which talk of God each day:
And yet their works are foul and vain to them the Lord will say.
With what a face dare thou, my word once speak or name:
why does thy taulke my law allow, thy deeds deny the same.
Where as for to amend, thy life thou art so slack:
My word the which thou do pretend is cast behind thy back.
When thou a thief do see, by theft to live in welthe:
with him thou runnest, and do agree, likewise to thryne by stealthe.
When thou do them behold, that wives and maids, defile:
Thou likest it well, and waxest boulde, to use that life most vile.
Thy lips thou do apply, to slander and defame*
Thy tongue is taught to craft and lie, and still does use the same.
Thon studiest to revile, thy friends, to thee so nere:
With sclaunder thou woldst needs defile thy mothers son most dear.
Hereat while I do wink, as though I did not see:
Thou go on still, and so do think. that I am like to thee.
But sure I will not let, to stryke when I begin:
Thy faults in order I will set. and open all thy sin.
Matke this I you require, that have not God in mind:
Least when I plage you in myneire, your help be far to find.
He that does give to me, the sacrifice of praise:
Does please me well, and he shall see, to walk in Godly wayse.
1. Miserere mei deus Psalm. li. w. w
When David was rebuked by the Prophet Nathan for his great offenses, he did
not only acknowledge the same to God, with protestation of his natural
corruption, and iniquity: but also left a memorial thereof to his posterity.
Therefore first he desires God to forgive his sins, and renew in him, his
holy spirit: with promise that he will not be unmindful, of those great
graces. Finally fearyng lest god would punish the whole church for, his fault:
He requires that he would rather increase his graces toward the same.

^ O Lord consider my distres. And now ^ with speed some pity take? My sins
deface, ^ my fautes redress, good Lord, for thy great ^ mercies sake. Wash me
(O Lord) and make ^ me clean. From this unjust and sinful act: and purify ^
yet once again: my heinous crime and blody fact

Remorse and sorrow do constrayne, Me to acknowledge mine exces:
My sin alas does still remain, Before my face without reles.
4 For thee alone I have offended, committing evil in thy sight:
And if I were therefore condemned, yet were thy judgment just and right.
It is to manifest alas, that first I was conceived in sin:
Yea of my mother so borne was, and yet vile wretch remain therein.
Also behold Lord thou do love, the inward truth of a pure heart:
Therefore thy wisdom from above, thou have reueld me to convert.
If thou with Hissope purge this blot, I shall be cleaner then the glass:
And if thou wash away my spot, the snow in whitenes shall I pass.
Therefore (O Lord) such joy me send, that inwardly I may synd grace:
And that my strength may now amend, which thou have swagd for my trespace
Turn back thy face and frowning ire for I have felt inoughe thy hand:
And purge my sins I thee desire, which do in number pass the sand.
Make new my heart within my breast, and frame it to thy holy will:
Thy constant spirit in me let rest, which may these raging enemies kill.
The second part.
Cast me not (Lord) out from thy face, but spedely my torments end:
Take not from me thy spirit and grace which may from dangers me defend
Restore me to those joys again, which I was wont in thee to find:
And let me thy free spirit retain, which unto thee may stir, my mind
Thus when I shall thy mercyes know I shall instruct others therein:
And men that are likewise brought low by mine ensample shall flee sin,
O God that of my health art Lord, forgive me this my bloody vice:
My heart and tongue shall then accord, to sing thy mercies and justice.
Touch thou my lips, my tongue untie, (O Lord) which art the only kay:
And then my mouth shall testifye, thy wondrous works and praise always.
And as for outward sacrifice, I would have offered many one:
But thou estemest them of no price, and therein pleasure takst thou none.
The heavy heart, the mind oppressed, O Lord, thou never do reject:
And to speak truth it is the best, and of all sacrifice the effect.
Lord unto Sion turn thy face, pour out thy mercyes on thy hill:
And on Jerusalem thy grace, buyld up the walls, and love it still,
Thou shall accept then our offrynges, of peace and righteousness, I say:
Yea calves and many other things, upon thine altar will we lay.
Another of the same by T. N.
Have mercy on me, God, after Sing this as the Lamentation,
thy great abounding grace:
After thy mercies multitude do thou my sins deface.
Yet wash me more from mine offense and cleanse me from my sin:
For I be know my fautes, and still my sin is in mine eyes.
Against thee, thee alone, I have offended in this case:
And evil have I done before the presence of thy face.
That in the things that thou do say, vpryght thou may be tried:
And eke in judging, that the dome may pass upon thy side.
Behold in wickedness my kind and shape I did receive?
And lo my sinful mother eke in sin did me conceive.
But Lo the truth in inward parts, is pleasant unto thee:
And secrets of thy wisdom thou reveled have to me.
With hysope, Lord, be sprincle me, I shall be cleansed so:
Yea wash thou me, and so I shall be whiter than the snow.
Of joy and gladness make thou me to hear the pleasing voice:
That so the broosed bones, which thou have broken, may rejoice.
From the beholding of my sins, Lord turn away thy face:
And all my deeds of wickedness, do utterly deface:
O God creat in me a heart unspotted in thy sight:
And eke within my bowels, Lord, renew a stable sprite.
Ne cast me from thy sight, nor take thy holy sprite away:
The comfort of thy saving help, give me again, I pray:
With thy free sprite establish me. And I will teach therefore,
Sinners thy ways, and wicked shall be turnde unto thy lore.
O God that art God of my health, from blood deliver me:
That praises of thy righteousness my tongue may sing to thee.
My lips that yet fast closed be, do thou, O Lord unloose:
The praises of thy majesty my mouth shall so disclose:
I would have offered sacrifice, if that had pleased thee.
But pleased with burnt offringes: I know thou will not be.
A trobled sprite is sacrifice delytefull in Gods eyes:
A broken and an humbled heart, God, thou will not despise?
In thy good will deal gently Lord to Sion, and with all
Grant that of thy Jerusalem, vpreard may be the wall.
Burnt offerings, gifts and sacrifice, of justice in that day
Thou shall accept, and calves they shall upon thine altar lay.
Quid gloriaris. Psalm. lii. I. H
David describes the arrogante tyranny of his aduersarye Doeg, Saules chief
shepherde, who by false surmyses caused Achimelech with the rest of the
priests to be slain. David prophecieth his destruction, and encourages the
faithful to put their confidence in God. whose judgments are most sharp
against his adversaries. And finally he renders thanks to God for his
deliverance, In this Psalm is lively set forth the kingdom of Antichrist.

^ WHy do thou tyra^t boast abroad, thy ^ wicked works to praise: do thou
not know ^ there is a God whose mercies last always, ^ Why does thy mind yet
still devise, such wicked ^ wiles to warpe? Thy tongue untrue in forging ^ lies,
is like a rasour sharp.

On mischief why set thou thy mind, and wilt not walk vpryght:
Thou have more lust false tales to find, then bring the truth to light.
Thou do delight in fraud and guile, in mischief blud and wrong:
Thy lyppes have learnde the flateryng style, O false deceitful tongue.
Therefore shall God for ever confound, and pluck thee from thy place:
Thy sede rote out from of the ground, and so shall thee deface.
The just when they behold thy fall, with fear will praise the Lord:
And in reproach of thee withal, cry out with one accord.
Behold the man which would not take the Lord for his defense:
But of his goods his God did make, and trust his corrupt sense.
But I an Olive fresh and grene, shall spring and sprede abroad:
For why? my trust all times has been, upon the living Ood.
For this therefore will I give praise, to thee with heart and voice:
I will set forth thy name always, wherein thy saints rejoice.
Dixit in sipiens. Psalm. Liii. T. N
The Prophet describes the crooked nature, the crueltye, and punishment of the
wicked, when they look not for it and desires the deliverance of the godly
that they may rejoice together.

THe foolish man in that which he, within his heart has said: Sing this as
the. xiv. psalm.

That there is any God at all, has utterly denyde.
They are corrupt and they also, a heinous work have wrought:
Among them all there is not one, of good that works ought.
The Lord looked down on sons of men from Heaven all abroad:
To see if any were that would, be wise and seek for God.
They are gone all out of the way, they are corrupted all:
There is not one does any good, there is not one at all.
Do not all wicked workers know, that they do feed upon:
My people as they feed on bread, the Lord they call not on.
Even there they were afraid and stood with trembling all dismayde
Where as there was no cause at all, why they should be afraid.
For God his bones that thee beseged, has scattered all abroad.
Thou have confounded them, for they rejected are of God.
O Lord give thou thy people health, and thou, O Lord, fulfill:
thy promise made to Israel, from out of Syon hill.
When God his people shall restore, that erst was captive lad,
Thou Jacob shall therein rejoice and Israel shall be glad.
Deus in nomine, Psalm. Liiii. I. H
David brought into Great danger by reason of Ziphius, calls upon the name
of God to destroy e his enemies, promysing sacrifice and froe offerings for
their delyueraunce.

GOd save me for thy holy name, and for thy goodness sake: Sing this as the.
xlvi. Psa

Unto the strength Lord of the same I do my cause betake.
Regard (O Lord) and give an ear, to thee when I do pray?
Bow down thy sealfe to me and hear the words that I do say.
For strangers up against me rise, and tirauntes vex me still:
Which have not God before their eyes they seek my soul to spill.
But lo my God does give me aid, the Lord is straight at hand.
with them by whom my soul is stayed the Lord does ever stand:
With plages repay again all those, for me that lie in wait:
And with thy truth destroy my foes, with their own snare and bayte.
An offering of free heart and will, that I to thee shall make:
And praise thy name for therein still, great comfort I do take,
O Lord at length do set me free, from them that craft conspire:
And now mine eye with joy does see, on them my hearts desire.
Exaudi deus. Psalm, Lv. I. H.
David being in great heaviness and distres complayneth of the crueltye of
Saul, and of the falshod of his familyar acquaintance vtteryng most ardent
affections to move the Lord to pity him. After being assured of deliuerau^ce,
he sets forth the grace of god as though he had all ready obtained his
request.

O God give ear and do apply, To hear me when I pray: Sing this as the.
xxxv. psalm.

And when to thee I call and cry, hide not thy self away.
Take heed to me, grant my request, and answer me again:
with playntes I pray, full sore oppressed, great grief does me constrayne.
Because my foes with threats and cries, oppres me through despighte:
And so the wicked sort likewise, to vex me have delighte.
For they in counsel do conspire, to charge me with some ill:
So in their hasty wrath and ire, they do pursue me still.
My heart does faynte for want of breathe, it pants in my breast:
The terroures and the dread of death, do work me much unrest.
(...) fear on me does fall. (...) with do quake:
Such (...) whelmeth me with all, that I (...) can make.
But I (...) will give me, (...)*
Of some, fayer dove that I may flee, and rest me from these things.
Lo then I would go far away, to fly I would not cease,
And I would hide my self and stay, in some great wilderness.
I would be gone in all the have, and not abide behind:
That I wear quite and over past, these blasts of boisteous wind:
Divide them Lord, and from them pull, their diuilish double tongue:
For I have spied their city full, of rapyne, strife, and wrong.
Which things, both night and day throghoute do close her as a wall:
In mids of her, is mischif stout, and sorrow eke with all.
Her privy parts, are wicked plain, her deeds are much to vile?
And in her streets there does remain, all crafty fraud and guile.
If that my foes did seek my shame, I might it well abide:
From open enmies check and blame, some where I could me hide.
But thou, it was my fellow dear, which friendship did pretend:
And did my secret counsel here, as my famillier friend.
With whom I had delight to taulke, in secret and abroad:
And we to gether often did walk, within the house of God.
Let death in have upon them fall, and send them quick to hell,
For mischief rayneth in their hall, and parloure where they dwell.
But I unto my God do cry, to him for healpe I flee:
Ohe Lord does hear me by and by, and he does succor me.
At morning, noone, and evening tide, unto the Lord I pray:
When I so instantly have tried he does not say me nay.
To peace he shall restore me yet, though war be now at hand:
All though the number be full great, that would against me stand.
The Lord, that first, and last, does reign both now and evermore,
will hear when I to him complain, and punish them full sore.
For sure there is no hope that they, to turn will once accord:
For why they will not God obey, nor do not fear the Lord,
Upon their friends they laid their hands which wear in covenant knitte*
Of friendship to neglect the bands, they pass or care no whyt.
while they have war within their heart as butter are their words:
Although his words were smothe as oil they cut as sharp as swords.
Cast thou thy care upon the Lord, and he shall nourish thee:
For in no wise will he accord, the just in thrall to see.
But God shall cast them deep in pit, that thirst for blood always:
He will no guilefull man permit, to live out half his days.
Though such be quite destroyde and gone in the (O Lord) I trust:
I shall depend thy grace upon, with all my heart and lust.
Miserere. Psalm. Lvi. I. H
David being brought to Achis the king of Gath, Saum complayneth of his
enemies, demands succoure, puts his trust in God and his promises, and
promises to perform his vows which he had taken upon him. Whereof this was
the effect to praise God in his Church.

Have mercy Lord on me I pray, for man would me devour: Sing this as the.
li. Psa.

He fyghteth with me day by day, and troubles me each hour.
Mine enmies daily enterprise, to swalowe me outeryghte:
To fight against me many rise, O thou most high of might,
When they would make me most afraid with boast and bragges of pride:
I trust in thee alone for aid, by thee will I abide.
Gods promise I do mind and praise O Lord I stick to thee:
I do not care at all assayes, what flesh can do to me.
What things I either did or spoke, they wrast them at their will:
And all the counsel that they take, is how to work me ill.
They all consent them sealues to hyde, close watch for me to lay:
They spy my paths and snares have tred to take my life away.
Shall they thus escape on mischef set? thou God on them will frown:
For in his wrath he does not let, to throw whole kingdoms down.
Thou see how often they make meflee, and on my tears do look:
Reserve them in a glass by thee. and write them in thy book:
When I do call upon thy name, my foes away do starte.
I well perceive it by that same, that God does take my part.
I glory in the word of God, to praise it I accord:
with Joy will I declare abroad, the promise of the Lore.
I trust in God and yet I say, as I before began:
The Lord he is my healpe and stay, I do not care for man.
I will perform with heart so free, to God my vows always:
And I O Lord all times to thee, will offer thanks and praise.
My soul from death thou do me defend and keep my feet upright:
That I before thee may ascend. with such as live in light.
Miserere. Psalm. lvii.. I. H
David being in the deserte of Ziph where the in habitauntes did betraye him,
and at length in the same Cave with Sauil. Calls most earnestly unto God with
full confidence, that he will perform his promis and take his cause in hand:
Also that he will show his glory in the Heavens and the earth against his
cruel enemies: Therefore does he render laud and praise.

TAke pity for thy promise sake, have mercy Lord on me:
For why my soul does her betake, Sing this as the. ill. psalm.
unto the help of thee.
Within the shadow of thy wings, I set my self full fast:
Till mischief, malice, and like things, be gone and over paste.
I call upon the God most hye, to whom I stick and stand.
I mean the God that will stand by, the cause I have in hand.
From heaven he has sent his aid, to save me from their spighte:
That to devour me have assayed, his mercy truth and might.
I lead my life with Lions fell, all set on wrath and ire:
And with such wicked men I dwell, that freate like flambes offyre.
Their teeth are spears and arrows long as sharp as I have seen:
They wound and cut, with their quick tou^g like swerdes and weapons kene,
Set up and show thy self O God, above the heavens bright:
Exalt thy praise on earth abroad, thy majesty and might.
They lay their net and do prepare, a privy cave and pit:
Wherein they think my soul to snare, but they are fallen in it.
My heart is set to laud the Lord, in him to joy always.
My heart I say does well accord, to sing his laud and praise.
Awake my joy, awake I say, my lute, my harp and string:
For I my sealf before the day, will rise, reioyre and sing
Among the people I will tell, the goodness of my God:
And show his praise that does excel, in Heathen lands abroad.
His mercy does extend as far, as heavens all are hie:
His truth is high as any star, that stands in the sky,
Set fourth and show thy self O God, above the heavens bryghte:
Extol thy prase on earth abroad, thy majesty and might.
Siuere vtique. Psalm. lviii. I. H
He describes the malice of his enemies, the flatterers of Saul, who both
secretiye and openly sought his dystruction, from whom he apealeth to Gods
judgment, showing that the just shall rejoice, when they see the punishment of
the wicked to the glory of God.

YE rulers that are put in trust, to judge of wrong and right: Sing this as
the. lix. Psa.

Be all your judgments true and just not knowing need or might.
Nay, in your hearts ye mark and muse, in mischief to consent:
And where ye should true justice use, your hands to brybes are bent.
This wicked sort from their birth day have erred on this wise:
And from their mothers womb alwaie, have used craft and lies.
In them the poison and the breathe, of serpents do appear:
Yea like the adder that is deaf, and fast does stop his ear.
Because he will not hear the voice, of one that charmeth well:
No though he were the chief of choice, and did therein excel.
O God break thou their teeth at once, within their mouth throughoute:
The tuskes that in their great chawbones like Liones whelps hang out.
Let them consume away and wast, as water renth fourth right:
The shafts that they do shoute in haste, let them be broke in flight.
As snailes do wast within the shell, and unto slime do run:
As one before his time that fell, and never saw the sun.
Before the thorns that now are young to bushes big shall grow:
The storms of anger waxing strong, shall take them ere they know.
The just shall joy, it does them good, that God does vengance take:
And they shall wash their feet in blood, of them that him forsake.
Then shall the world show forth and tell that good men have reward.
And that a God in earth does dwell, that justice does regard.
Eripe me. Psalm. lix. I. H
David being in great danger of Saull, who sent to slaye him in his bed
prays unto God, declares his innocence, and their furye, despryng god to
destroy all those that sin of malityous wickedness. Whom though he keep a
live for a time to exercise his people, yet in the end he will consume them in
his wrath, that he may be known to be the God of Jacob to the worlds end,
for this he sing eth praises to God, assured of his mercyes.

^ Send aid and save me from my foes ^ O Lord I pray to thee, defend and
keep me ^ from all those that rise and strive with me O ^ Lord preserve me
from those men, whose doings ^ are not good, and set me sure and saufe ^ from
them that thursteth after blood.

For lo they wait my soul to take, they rage against me still:
Yea, for no fault that I did make, I never did them ill.
They run and do their selves prepare, When I no whit offend:
Arise and save me from their snare, and see what they entend.
O Lord of hosts of Israel, arise up and strike all lands:
And pity none that does rebel, and in their mischife stands.
At night they stir and seek about, as hounds they houle and grenne:
And all the city clean throughoute, from place to place they run.
They spoke of me with mouth always, but in their lyppes wear swords:
They greed my death, and then would say What? none does hear our words.
But Lord thou have their ways espied and laughed thereat a pace:
The Heathen folk thou shall deride, and mock them to their face.
The strength that does my foes withstand O Lord does come of thee:
My God he is my healpe at hand, a forte of fence to me.
The Lord to me does show his grace, in great abondaunce still:
That I may see my foes in case. such as my heart does will.
Destroy them not at once O God, lest it from mind do fall:
But with thy strength drive them abroad and so consume them all.
For their ill words and trutheles tongue confound them in their pride:
Their wicked oaths with lies and wrong let all the world deryde.
Consume them in thy wrath O Lordd, that naught of them remain:
That men may know throught the world Jacobs God does raygne.
At evening return apace, as dogs they grinne and cry.
Throughoute the streets, in every place they run about and spy.
They seek about for meat I say, but let them not be fed:
Nor find an house wherein they may, be bold to put their head.
But I will show thy strength abroad, thy goodness I will praise:
For thou art my defense and God, at need in all assayes.
Thou art my strength, thou have me staid O Lord I sing to thee:
Thou art my forte, my fence and aid, a loving God to me.
Deus repulsit. Psalm lx. I. H.
David being now king over Judah and having had many victories, shows by
euydent signs, that God elected him king, assuring the people that God will
prosper them, if they approve the same: After he prays unto God to fynish
that that he has begone,

O Lord thou did us clean forsake, and scatteredst us abroad: Sing this
as the. lix psalm.

Such great displeasure thou did take return to us O God.
Thy might did move the land so sore, that it in sonder brake:
The hurt thereof (O Lord, restore, for it doothe bow and quake.
with heavy chance, thou plagest thus, the people that are thine:
And thou have given unto us, a drink of deadly wine.
But yet to such as fear thy name, a token shall ensue:
That they may tryumphe in the same, because thy word is true.
So that thy might may keep and save, thy folk that fouour thee:
That they thy help, at hand may have, O Lord grant this to me.
The Lord did speak from his own place, this was his joyful tale:
I will divide Sichem by pace, and mete out Succothes vale.
Galaad is given to my hand: Manasses mine beside*
Ephraim the strength of all my land, my law does Judah guide:
In Moab I will wash my feet, over Edom throw my shoo:
And thou Palestine oughtst to seek, for favor me unto.
But who will bring me at this tide, unto the city strong:
Or who to Edom will me gide, so that I goo not wrong.
Will thou my God which did forsake thy folk, their land and costs:
Our wars in hand, thou woldst not take. nor walk among our hosts.
Give aid O Lord, and us releue, from them that us disdain:
The healp that hosts of men can give it is but all in vain.
But through our God, we shall have to take great things in hand:
He will tread down and put to flight might all those that us withstand.
Exaudi deus. Psalm. lxi. I. H
whether that he were in danger of the Amonites, or being purfusued of
Absalon, Here he cries to be heard and delivered. And confirmed in his
kingdom, He promises perpetual praises.

^ Regard (O Lord) for I complain, ^ and make my suit to thee, let not my
words return ^ in vain, but give an ear to me, from of ^ the costs and
utmost parts of all the earth abroad, ^ in grief and anguish of my heart I
cry ^ to thee, O God.

Upon the rock of thy great power, my woeful mind repose:
Thou art my hope my forte and tower, my fence against my foes.
within thy tent I lust to dwell, forever to endure:
under thy wings I know right well, I shall be safe and sure:
The Lord dueth my desire regard, and does fulfill the same:
with goodly gifts will he reward, all them that fear his name.
The king shall he inhealth maintain, and so prolong his days:
That he from age to age shall raygne, for ever more alwayse.
That he may have a dwelling place, before the Lord for aye:
O let thy mercy truth and grace, defend him from decay.
Then shall I singe for ever still, with praise unto thy name:
That all my voues I may fulfill, and daily pay the same.
Nonne deo subiecta. Psalm. lxii. I. H.
David declares by his example, and by the nature of God, that he must trust
in God alone: and thereunto exhorts people, seeing that all is vanytie and
without God all goes to naught and we are always taught that God only is of
power to save, and that he rewards man, according to his works.

MY soul to God, shall give good head Sing this as the. lxi. psalm.
and him alone entende:
For why? my health and hope to speed, does whole on him depend.
For he alone is my defense, my rock, my health, my aid:
He is my stay that no pretense, shall make me much dismaide.
O wicked folk how long will ye, use crafts? sure ye must fall:
For as a rotten hedge ye be, and like a tuttering wall.
4 whom God does love ye seek always, to put him to the worse:
Ye love to lie, with mouth ye praise. and yet your heart does curse.
Yet still my soul does whole depend, on God my chief desire:
From all false feats, me to defend, none but him I require.
He is my rock, my strength, my tower, my health is of his grace:
He does support me that no power, can move me out of place.
God is my glory and my health, my souls desire and lust,
My fort, my strength, my stay, my wealth. God is mine only trust.
Oh have your hope in him always, ye folk with one accord:
Pour out your hearts to him, and say, our trust is in the Lord.
The sons of men deceitptfull are, on balaunce but a sleyght:
with things most vain do them compare for they can keep no weight.
Trust not in wrong, robbry, or stealth, let vain delytes be gone:
Though goods well got flow in with wealth set not your hearts thereon.
The Lord long since one thing does tell, which here to mind I call:
He spoke it often, I hard it well, that God alone does all.
And that thou (Lord) art good and kind, thy mercy does excede:
So that all sorts which thee shall find, according to their deed.
Deus deus meus. Psalm. lxiii. T. S
David after he had been in great danger by Saul, in the deserte Ziph, made
this psalm: wherein he gives thanks to God for his wonderful deliverance,
in whose mercyes he trusted, even in the middist of his miseryes: prophesying
the destruction of Gods enemies, and contrarywyse, happynes to all them that
trust in the Lord, i. Sa. iu.

O God, my God, I watch betyme, to come to thee in have: Sing this as the.
xliiii. ps

For why? my soul and body both, does thirst of thee to taste:
And in this baren wilderness, where waters there are none:
My flesh is partched for thought of thee, for thee I wish alone.
That I might see yet once again, thy glory strength and might:
As I was wont it to behold, within thy temple bright.
For why? thy mercyes far surmount, this life and wretched days:
My lyppes therefore shall give to thee, due honor, laud and prays.
And whylst I live, I will not fail, to worship thee always:
And in thy name I shall lift up, my hands when I do pray.
My soul is filled as with marow, which is both fat and sweet:
My mouth therefore shall sing such songs as are for thee most mete.
When as in bed, I think on thee, and eke all the night tide:
For under covert of thy wings, thou art my joyful guide,
My soul does surely stick to thee, thy ryghthande is my power:
And those that seek my soul to stroy, them death shall sone devour.
The sword shall them devour echone their carcases shall feed:
The hungry foxes, which do run, their pray to seek at need.
The king, and all men shall rejoice, that do profes Gods word:
For liers mouths shall then be stopped, which have the truth disturbde.
Exaudi deus vocem meam. Psalm. lxiiii. I. H.
David prays against the false reports and sklaunderers, he declares their
punishment and destruction, to the comfort of the just, and the glory of God.

O Lord unto my voice give ear, with plaint when I do pray: Sing this as the.
xviii. Ps

And rid my life and soul from fear, of foes that threat to slay,
Defend me from that sort of men, which in deceipts do lurk:
And from the frownyng face of them, that all ill feats do work.
Who whet their tongs as we have seen, men whet and sharp their swords:
They shote abroad their arrows kene, I mean most bitter words.
With privy sleyght shote they their shaft the upright man to hit:
The just unware to strike by craft, they care or fear no whit
A wicked work have they decreed, in counsel thus they cry:
To use deceit let us not dread, what? who can it epsy?
What ways to hurt they talk and muse, all times within their heart:
They all consulte what feats to use, each does invent his part.
But yet all this shall not avail, when they think least upon:
God with his dart shall sure assail, and wound them every one.
Their crafts and their ill toungs withal, shall work them selves such blame:
That they which then behold their fall, shall wonder at the same.
Then all that see shall know right well, that God the thing has wrought:
Shall praise his witty works and tell, what he to pas has brought.
Yet shall the just in God rejoice, Still trusting in his might:
So shall they joy with mind and voice, whose heart is pure and right.
Te decet hymnus. Psalm. lxv. I H.
A prapse and thankesgeuing unto God by the faithful, who are signyfied by
Sion, and Jerusalem, for the chosing, preservation and governance of them, and
for the plentyfull blessings powered forth upon all the earth.

THy praise alone, O Lord, does reign, in Sion thine own hill:
Their vows to thee they do maintain Sing this as the. xxx psalm.
and their behestes fulfill.
For that thou do their prayer hear and do therfo agree:
Thy people al both far and near, with trust shall come to thee.
Our wicked life so far excedes, that we should fall therein:
But Lord forgive our great misdeedes, and purge us from out sin.
The man is blessed whom thou do choose, within thy court to dwell:
Thy house and temple be shall use, with pleasures that excel.
Of thy great justice hear us God, our health of thee does rise:
The hope of all the earth abroad, and the sea coasts likewise.
With strength thou art beset about, and compasd with thy power:
Thou makst the mountayns strong and stout, to stand in every shower.
The swelling seas thou do assuage, and make their streams full still:
Thou do restrain the peoples rage, and rule them at thy will.
The folk that dwell full far on earth, shall dread thy signs to see:
Which morn and even in great mirth, do pass with praise to thee.
When that the earth is chopped and dry, and thirsts more and more:
Then with thy dropes thou do apply, and much increase her store.
The flood of God does ouerflow, and so does cause to spring:
The seed and corn which men do sow, for he does guide the thing.
With wete thou do her forowes fill, whereby her cloddes do fall:
Thy drops to her, thou do distill, and bles her fruit withal.
Thou deckst the earth of thy good grace, with fair and pleasant crop:
Thy clouds distill their deaw a pace, great plenty they do drop.
whereby the desert shall begin, full great increase to bring:
The little hills shall joy therein, much fruit in them shall spryng.
In places plain the flock shall feed. and cover all the earth:
The valies with corn shall so excede, that men shall sing for mirth.
Iubilate deo omnis terra. Psalm. lxvl. T. S.
He provoke all men to praise the Lord, and to considre his works,
rehersing two things most wonderful. He sets forth the power of God to
affray the rebels, and shows how God has delivered Israel from great
bondage and afflictions* he promises to give sacryfyce, and provoke all men to
hear what God has done for him and to praise his name,

YE men on earth in God rejoice, Sing this as the. xviii. Ps
with praise set forth his name:
Extol his might with heart and voice give glory to the same.
How wonderful, O Lord, say ye, in all thy works thou art:
Thy foes for fear do seek to thee, full sore against their heart.
All men that dwell the earth throughout do praise the name of God:
The laud thereof the world about, is showed and set abroad.
All folk come forth behold and see, what things the Lord has wrought
Mark well the wo^drous works that he, for man to pass has brought.
He laid the sea like heaps on hye, therein away they had:
On foot to pas both fair and dry, whereof their hearts were glad.
His might does rule the world always, his eyes all things be hold:
All such as would him disobey, by him shall be controld.
ye people give unto our God, due laud and thanks always,
With joyful voice declare abroad, and sing unto his praise.
Which does endue our soul with life, and it preserve with all:
He stays our fete so that no strife, can make us slip or fall.
The Lord does prove our deeds with fire if that they will abide:
As workmen do when they desire, to have their metals tryde.
Although thou suffer us so long, in prison to be cast:
And there with chains and fetters strong to lie in bondage fast.
The second part.
Although I say thou suffer men, on us to ride and raygne:
Though we through fire and water ren of very grief and pain.
yet sure thou do of thy good grace, dispose it to the best:
And bring us out into a place, to live in wealth and rest.
Unto thy house resort will I, to offer and to pray:
And there I will my self apply, my vows to thee to pay.
The vows that with my mouth I spoke in all my grief and smart:
The vows I say which I did make, in dolor of my heart.
Burnt offringe I will give to thee, of Oxen fat and Rams:
No other sacrifice shall be, of bullockes goats and lamkes.
Come forth and harken here full sone, all ye that fear the Lord:
what he for my poor soul has done. to you I will record.
Full often I call upon his grace, this mouth to him does cry:
And thou my tongue make speed apace, to praise him by and by,
But if I feel my heart within, in wicked works rejoice:
Or if I have delight to syn, God will not hear my voice.
But surely God my voice has heard and what I do require:
My prayer he does well regard, and grants my desire.
All praise to him that has not put, nor cast me out of mind:
Nor yet his mercy from me shut, which I do ever find.
Deus misereatur nostri. Psalm. lxvii. I. H.
A sweet prayer for all the faithful to obtain the favor of God, and to be
lyghtened with his countenance, to the end that his way and judgments may be
known throughout the earth. A rejoicing that God is the governor of all
nations.

Have mercy on us, Lord, Sing this as the. xxx psalm.
and grant to ps thy grace:
To show to us do thou accord, the bryghtnes of thy face,
That all the earth may know, thy way to godly wealth:
And all the nations on a row, may see thy saving health.
Let all the world, O God, give praise unto thy name:
O let the people all abroad, Extol and laud the same.
Thoroughout the world so wide let all rejoice with mirth:
For thou with truth and right do guide the nations of the earth.
Let all the world, O God, give praise unto thy name:
Oh let the people all abroad. extol and laud the same.
Then shall the earth increase, Great store of fruit shall fall:
And then our God, the God of peace, Shall bles us eke with all,
God shall us bles, I say, and then both far and near,
The folk throughout the earth always, of him shall stand in fear.
Exurgat deus. Psalm. lxviii, T. S.
In this Psalm David sets forth as in a glass, the wonderful me mercyes of
God toward his people, who by all means, and most strange sorts declares
him self to them. And therefore Gods church by reason of his promises, graces
and victoryes, does excel without comparyson alworldly things: he exhorts
therefore all men to praise God for ever.

^ LEt God arise, and then his foes, will turn ^ them selves to flight: His
enmies then will ^ run abroad, and scatter out of sight, and as the ^ fire
does melt ye wax, and wind blow smoke away: ^ so in the presence of ye lord,
the wicked shall decay

But righteous men before the Lord, shall heartily rejoice:
They shall be glad and merry all, and cheerful in their voice.
Sing praise, sing praise unto the Lord who rides on the sky:
Extol this name of Iah our God, and him do magnify:
That same is he that is above, within his holy place:
That father is of fatherles, and judge of widows case.
Houses he geuth and issue both, unto the comfortles:
He brings bondmen out of thrall, and rebels to distres.
When thou did march before thy folk the Egiptians from among:
And brought the^ through the wilderness, which was both wide and long
Thearth did quake, ye rain powered down heard were great claps of thunder,
The mount Sinai shoke in such sort, as it would cleave a sunder.
Thine heritage with drops of rain, abundantly was washed:
And if so be it baren waxt, by thee it was refresht.
Thy chosen flock does there remain, thou have preparde that place:
And for the pore thou do provide, of thine especial grace.
The second part.
God will give women causes just, to magnifye his name:
When as his people triumphs make, and purchase brut and fame.
For puissant kings for all their power shall flee and take the foil.
And women which remain at home, shall help to part the spoil.
And though you were as black as pots, your hew should pas the dove:
whose wings and feathers seem to have, Or triuets.
silver and gold above.
when in this land God shall triunphe, over kings both hyge and low,
Then shall it be like Salmon hill, as white as any snow.
Though Basan be a fruitful hill, The church of God does excel all worldly
things not in outward pomp but by the grace of God which there remaynth
because of his promise.
and in heyght others pas:
Yet Sion Gods most holy hill, does far excel in grace.
why brag ye thus, ye hills most high, and leap for pride together?
This hill of Sion God does love, and there will dwell for ever.
Gods army is two millions, of warriors good and strong:
The Lord also in Sinai, is present them among.
Thou did (O Lord) ascend on high, and captives led them all:
which in times past thy chosen flock, in prison kept and thrall.
Thou madst them tribute for to pay, God took not taxes to enriche himself,
but to bestow them on his church and therefore in the nu, to the^he. S. Paul
says he gave gifts, following the grek translation Se^^th.
and such as did repine.
Thou did subdue that they might dwell, in thy temple divine.
Now praised be the Lord for that, he powers on us such grace:
From day to day, he is the God, of our health and solace.
The third part.
He is the God from whom alone, salvation comes plain:
He is the God by whom we escape: all dangers death and pain.
Thus god will wound his enemies head and break the heary scalpe:
Of those that in their wickedness, continually do walk.
From Basan will I bring (said he) my people and my sheep: He meanth the
victory which David had of Og. king of Basan.

And all mine own as I have done, from danger of the deep,
And make them dip their fete in blood, of those that hate my name:
And dogs shall have their tongs embrude with licking of the same.
All men may see how thou (O God) thine enemies do deface:
And how thou go as God and king, into thy holy place.
The singers goo befrre with joy, the minstrels follow after:
And in the midst the damsels play, with timbrell and with taber.
Now in thy congregations, (O Israel) praise the Lord:
And Jacobs whole posterity, give thanks with one accord.
27 Their chief was little Benjamin, Because he was the yo^gest of the
Patriarchs Jacobs sons, he callech him little Benjamin.
but Judah made their host:
with Zabulon, and Neptalim, which dweld about their cost,
As God has given power to thee, so Lord make firm and sure:
The thing that thou have wrought in us for ever to endure.
And in thy temple gifts will we, give unto thee (O Lord:
For thine unto Jerusalem, sure promise made by word.
The for the part.
Yea and strange kings to us subdued shall do like in those days:
I mean to thee they shall present, their gifts of laud and prays.
He shall destroy the spear men's rancks these calves and bulls of might:
And cause them tribute pay, and daunt, all such as love to fight.
Then shall the Lords of Egypt come, and presents with them bring:
The mores most black shall stretch their hands unto their lord and king.
Therefore ye kingdoms of the earth, give praise unto the Lord:
Sing Psalms to God with one consent, thereto let all accord.
who though he ride and ever has, above the heavens bright:
Yet by the fearful thunder claps, men may well know his might.
Therefore the strength of Israel, ascribe to God on hie.
whose might and power does far exte^d above the cloudy sky.
O God thy holiness and power, is dread for evermore:
The God of Israel gives us strength, praised be God therefore.
Saluum me fac domine. Psalm. lxix, I. H
The complayntes, prayers, fervent zele, and great anguish of David is set
forth as a figure of Christ, and all his members: the malicious crucitye of
thenemies, and their punishment also where Judas and such traitors are
accursed. Then gathered he courage in his affliction and offers praises unto
God, which are more acceptable then all sacrifyces: whereof all the afflicted
may take comfort. Finallye he does provoke all creatures to praises,
prophesying of the kingdom of Christ, and the buildyng of Judah, where all the
faithful and their sede shall dwell for ever:

^ Save me, O God and that with speed, the ^ waters flow full fast: So nie my
soul do ^ they proceed that I am sore aghast. I stick

^ full deep in filthe and clay, whereas I feel no ^ ground: I fall into such
floods, I say, that I ^ am like be drounde.

With crying often I faint and quayle, my throat is horse and dry:
With loking up my sight does fail, for help to God on hye.
My foes that giltles do oppres, my soul, with hate are led:
In number sure they are no les, then hears are on my head.
Though for no cause they vex me sore they prosper and are glad:
They do compel me to restore, the things I never had.
What I have done for want of wit, thou Lord all times can tell:
And all the same that I commit, to thee is known full well.
O God of hosts defend and stay, al those that trust in thee:
Let no man doubt or shrink away, for ought that chances me,
It is for thee and for thy sake, that I do bear this blame:
In spite of thee they would me make, to hyde my face for shame.
My mothers sons my brethern all, forsake me on a row:
And as a stranger they me call, my face they will not know.
unto thy house such zeal I bear, that it does pine me much:
Their checks and taunts at thee to hear my very heart does grutch.
The second part.
Though I do fast my flesh to chaste, yea if I weep and moan:
Yet in my teath this gear is cast, they pass not thereupon.
If I for grief, and pain of heart, in sackcloth use to walk:
Then they anon will it pervert, thereof they jest and talk.
Both hie and low, and all the throng, that sit within the gate:
They have me ever in their tongue, of me they talk and prate.
The dronkards which in wine delight it is their chief pastime:
To seek which way to work me spite, of me they sing and rhyme,
But thee the while (O Lord) I pray, that when it pleases thee.
For thy great truth thou will always, send down thine aid to me.
Pluck thou my feet out of the mire, from dro wning do me keep:
From such as owe me wrath and ire, and from the waters deep.
Lest with ye waves I should be drowned and depth my soul deuouer:
And that the pit should me confound, and shut me in her power.
O Lord of hosts to me give ear, as thou art good and kind.
And as thy mercy is most dear, Lord have me in thy mind.
And do not from thy servant hyde, nor turn thy face away:
I am oppressed on every side, in have give ear I say.
O Lord unto my soul draw nigh, the same with aid repose:
Because of their great tyranny, acquit me fro my foes.
The third part.
That I abide rebuke and shame, thou know and thou can tell:
For those that seek and work the same, thou see them all full well.
When they with brags do break my heart I seek for help anon.
But find no friends to ease my smarte, to comfort me not one,
But in my meat they gave me gall, to cruel for to think:
And gave me in my thirst withal, strong vinegar to drink.
Lord turn their table to a snare, to take them selves therein.
And when they think full well to fare, then trap them in the gin.
And let their eyes be dark and blind that they may nothing see:
Bow down their back and do the^ bind, in thraldom for to be.
Power out thy wrath as hoate as fire, that it on them may fall:
Let thy displeasure in thine ire: take hold upon them all.
As desert dry their house disgrace, their offering eke expel:
That none thereof posses their place, nor in their tents do dwell:
If thou do strike the man to tame, on him they lay full sore.
And if that thou do wound the same, they seek to hurt him more:
Then let them heap up mischief still. since they are all pervert:
That of thy favor and good will, they never have no part,
And dash them clean out of the book, of life, of hope of trust:
That for their names they never look, in number of the just.
The forth part.
Though I, O Lord, with woe and grief, have been full sore oppressed?
Thy help shall give me such relief, that all shall be redrest.
That I may give thy name the praise, and show it with a song:
I will extol the same always, with hearty thanks among.
Which is more pleasant unto thee, (Such mind thy grace has borne:)
Then either Ox, or Calfe can be, that has both hoof and horn.
When simple folk do this behold, it shall rejoice them sure:
All ye that seek the Lord, behold, your life for aye shall dure.
For why the Lord of hosts does hear, the poor when they complain:
His prisoners are to him full dear, he does them not disdain.
Wherefore the sky and earth below, The sea with flood and stream:
His praise they shall declare and show with all that live in them.
For sure our God will Sion save, and Iudaes cities build:
38 Much folk possession there shall have, her streate shall all be filde.
Her servant sede shall keep the same, all ages out of mind,
And there all they that love his name, adwellyng place shall find.
Deus in adiutorium. Psalm. lxx. I. H.
He prays to be right spedely delivered as in the. ix. Psalm. Then he
desires the shame of his enemies, and the joy full comfort of all those that
seek the Lord.

O God, to me take heed. of help I thee require: Sing this as the. lxxii. ps

O Lord of hosts with have and speed help, help, I thee desire.
With shame confound them all, that seek my soul to spill.
Rebuke them back with blame to fall that think and wish me ill.
Confound them that apply, and seek to work me shame:
And at my harm, do laugh and cry, so, so, there goth the game.
But let them joyful be, in thee with joy and wealth:
Which only trust and seek to thee, and to thy saving health.
That they may say always, in mirth and one accord:
All glory, honor, laud and praise, be given to thee (O Lord.)
But I am weak and poor, come Lord thine aid I lack:
Thou art my stay and help therefore, make speed and be not slack.
In te domine speraui. Psalm. lxxi. I H.
He prays in says establyshed by the word of the promise, and confirmed by
the work of God from his youth he desires now to be delivered from the wicked
and cruel man (meaning) his son Absolo^, and his confederacy, and he
promises to be mindful and thankful for the same.

MY Lord, my God in all distres, my hope is whole in thee: Sing this as the.
lxix. psa

Then let no shame my soul oppres, nor once take hold on me.
As thou art just defend me Lord, and rid me out of dread:
Give ear, and to my suite accord, and send me help at need.
Be thou my rock, to whom I may, for aid all times resort:
Thy promise is to help always, thou art my fence and fort.
Save me my God, from wicked men, and from their strength and power:
From folk unjust, and eke from them, that cruelly devour,
Thou art the stay wherein I trust, thou Lord of hosts art he:
Yea from my youth I had a lust, still to depend on thee.
Thou have me kept even from my birth and I through thee was borne:
wherefore I will thee praise with mirth, both evening and morn.
As to a monster seldom seen, much folk about me thronge:
But thou art now and still have been, my fence and aid so strong.
Wherefore my mouth no time shall lack, thy glory and thy praise:
And eke my tongue shall not be slack, to honor thee alwayse.
Refuse not me, O Lord, I say, when age my limbs does take:
And when my strength does wast away do not my soul forsake.
Among themselves my foes enquire, to take me through deceyt:
And they against me do conspire, that for my soul laid wayt:
The second part.
Lay hand and take him now they said for God from him is gone:
Dispatch him quyte, for to his aid, iwis there comes none.
Do not absent thy self away, O Lord, when need shall be:
But that in time of grief thou may, in have give help to me.
With shame confound and overthrow, all those that seek my life:
Oppres them with rebukes also, that feign would work me strife,
But I wilpatienly abide, thy help in all assayes:
Still more and more ec he time and tide I will set forth thy praise.
My mouth thy justice shall record, that daily help does send:
But of thy benefyts, O Lord, I know no count nor end.
Yet will I goo and seek forth one, with thy Good help (O God)
The saving health of thee alone, to show and set abroad.
For of my youth thou tokest the care, and do instruct me still:
Therefore thy wonders to declare, I have great mind and will.
And as in youth from wanton rage, thou did me keep and stay:
Forsake me not unto mine age, and till my head be gray.
That I thy strength and might may show to them that now be here:
And that our sede thy power may know hereafter many a year.
O Lord thy justice does excede, thy doings all may see:
Thy works are wonderful in deed, oh, who is like to thee?
Thou made me feel afflictions sore, and yet thou did me save:
yea thou did help and me restore, and take me from the grave.
23 And thou mine honor do increase, my dignity maintain:
yea thou do make all grief to cease, and comfort me again:
Therefore thy faithfulness to praise, I will both lute and sing:
My harp shall sound thy laud always O Isreal's holy king.
My mouth will joy with pleasant voice when I shall sing to thee:
And eke my soul will much rejoice, for thou have made me free.
My tongue thy vprightnes shall sound, and speak it daily still:
For grief and shame do them confound, that sought to worck me ill.
Deus iudicium tuum. Psalm. lxxi. I. H.
He prays that the kingdom of God by Christ may come under the parson of
Salomen under whom shall be righteousness, peace and felicity, unto whom all
kings, and all nations shall do homage, whose name and power shall in dure
for ever.

^ LOrd give thy judgments to the king, ^ therein instruct him well: And with
his son

^ that Princely thing. Lord let thy justice ^ dwell. That he may govern up
ryghtly, ^ And rule thy folk a right: and so ^ defend through equity, the
poor that ^ have no might.

And let the mountains that are hye, unto their folk give peace,
And eke let little hills apply, in justice to increase.
That he may help the weak and pore, with aid and make them strong:
And eke destroy for evermore, all those that do them wrong.
And then from age to age shall they, regard and fear thy might:
So long as Sun does shine by day, or else the moon by night.
Lord make the king unto the just, like rain to fields new mowen:
And like to drops that lay the dust, and fresh the land vnsowen.
The just shall flourish in his time, and all shall be at peace:
Until the moon shall leave to prime, wast, change, and to increase,
He shall be Lord of sea and sand, from shore to shore throughout:
And from the floods within the land, through all the earth about.
The people that in desert dwell, shall knele to him full thick:
And all his enemies that rebel, the earth and dust shall lyck.
Their Lords of all the yles thereby, great gifts to him shall bring:
The kings of Sabe and Arabie, give many a costly thing.
The second part.
All kings shall seek with one accord, in his good grace to stand:
And all the people of the world, shall serve him at his hand.
For he the neady sort does save, that unto him do call.
And eke the simple folk that have, no help of man at all,
He takes pity on the poor, that are with need oppressed.
He does preserve them evermore, and bring their souls to rest.
He shall redeem their life from dread, from fraud, fom wrong, from might:
And eke the blood that they shall blead, is precious in his sight.
But he shall live and they shall bring, to him of Sabaes gold?
He shall be honored as a king and daily be extold.
The mighty mountains of his land, of corn shall bear such throng:
That it like Cedre trees shall stand, in Libanus full long,
Their cities eke full well shall speed: the fruits thereof shall pas:
In plenty it shall far excede, and spring as grene as grass.
For ever they shall praise his name, while that the sun is light:
And think them happy through the same all folk shall bles his might.
Praise ye the Lord of hosts and sing, to Isreal's God each one:
For he does every wondrous thing, yea he him self alone.
And blessed be his holy name, all times eternally:
That all the earth may praise the same, Amen, Amen, say I.
Quam bonus deus. Psalm. lxxiii. T. S.
The prophet teaches by his example, that neither the worldly prosperity of
the ungodly, nor yet the affliction of the good, ought to discourage Gods
children: but rather ought to move us to consider our fathers providence, and
to cause us to reverence Gods judgments for as much as the wicked vanysh away
like smoke, and the ungodly enter into life everlasting, in hope whereof he
resigneth himself into Gods hands.

HOw ever it be, yet God is good, Sing this as the. xliiii. psalm.
and kind to Israel:
And to all such as safely keep, their conscience pure and well.
Yet like a fool I almost slypt, my feet began to slide:
And or I wist even at a pinch, my steps a wrye began glyde.
For when I saw such folysh men, I grudge and did disdain:
That wicked men all things should have, without turmoyle or pain.
They never suffer panges nor grief, as if death should them smite:
Their bodies are both stout and strong, and ever in good plyte.
And free from all adversity, when other men be shent:
And with the rest they take no part, of plague or punishment,
Therefore presumption does embrace, their necks as does a chain:
And are even wrapped as in a robe, with rapine and disdain.
They are so fed, that even for fat, their eyes often times out start:
And as for worldly goods they have. more then can wish their heart,
Their life is most licentious, boastyng much of the wrong:
Which they have done to simple men, and ever pride among.
The heavens and the living Lord, they spare not to blaspheme:
And prate they do on worldly things, no wight they do esteem.
The people of God, often times turn back, to see their prosperous state:
And almost drink the self same cup, and follow the same rate.
The second part.
How can it be that God (say they) should know and understand:
These worldly things since wicked men, be Lords of sea and land?
For we may see how wicked men, in riches still increase:
Rewarded well with worldly goods, and live in rest and peace.
Then why do I from wickedness, my fantasy refrain:
And wash my hands with innocents, and cleanse my heart in vain?
And suffer scourges every day, as subject to all blame:
And every morning from my youth, sustain rebuke and shame?
And I had almost said as they, misliking mine estate:
But that I should thy children judge, as folk unfortunate.
Then I bethought me how I might, this matter understand:
But yet the labor was to great, for me to take in hand,
Until the time I went into, thy holy place and then,
I understood right perfectly, the end of all these men.
And namely how thou set them, upon a slippery place:
And at thy pleasure and thy will, thou do them all deface.
Then all men muse at that straung sight to see how suddenly:
They are destroid, dispatche, consumde and dead so horribly.
Much like a dream when one awakth so shall their wealth decay:
Their famous names in all men's sight shall ebb and pas a way.
The third part.
Yet thus my heart was grieved then, my mind was much oppressed:
So fond was I and ignorant, and in this point abeast,
23 Yet nevertheless by my right hand, thou hold me always fast:
And with my counsel do me guide, to glory at the last.
What thing is there that I can wish, but thee in heaven above?
And in the earth there is nothing, like thee that I can love.
My flesh and eke my heart do fail, but God does fail me never:
For of my heart God is the strength, my portion eke for ever.
And lo, all such as thee forsake, thou shall destroy echeone:
And those that trust in any thing, saving in thee alone.
Therefore will I draw nere to God, and ever with him dwell,
In God alone I put my trust, thy wonders will I tell.
Vt quid deus. Psalm. lxxiiii. I. H.
The faithful complain of the destruction of the church and true relygyon,
under the name of Sion and the aultars destroyed: And trustyng in the might and
free mercyes of God, by his covenant they require help and succor for the
glory of Gods holy name, the saluatyon of his pore afflicted servant and the
confusion of his proud enemies

WHy art thou Lord so long from us, in all this danger deep? Sing this as
the. lxxii. ps

why does thine anger kindle thus, at thine own pasture sheep?
Lord call the people to thy thought, which have been thine so long:
The which thou have redemd and brought, from bondage sore and strong.
Have mind and think upon, remember it full well:
Thy pleasant place thy mount Sion, where thou wast wont to dwell.
Lift up thy foot and come in have, and all thy foes deface:
Which now at pleasure rob and wast within thy holy place.
A mid thy congregations all, thine enemies roar (O God:
They set as signs on every wall, their banners splayde abrod.
As men with axes hew the trees, that on the hills do grow:
So shine the bills and swords of these, within thy temples now.
The selings sawde, the carved bordes, the godly graven stones:
with axces, hammers, bills and swords they beat them down at ones.
Thy places they consume with flame, and eke in all this toil:
The house appointed to thy name, they race down to the soil.
And thus they said within their heart, dispatche them out of hand:
Then burnt they up in every part, Gods houses through the land
10 Yet thou no sigue of help do send, our Prophets all are gone:
To tell when this our plage should end among us there is none.
When will thou lord once end this shame and cease thine enemies strong:
Shall they always blaspheme thy name and rail on thee so long?
Why do with draw thy hand a back? and hide it in thy lap:
O pluck it out and be not slack, to give thy foes a rappe.
The second part.
O God thou art my king and Lord, and evermore have ben:
yeathy good grace throughout the world for our good help has seen.
The seas that are so deep and dead, thy might did make them dry:
And then did break the serpents head, that he therein did dye.
yea thou did break the heads so great of whales that are so fell:
And gave them to the folks to eat, that in the deserts dwell.
Thou made a spring with streams to rise from rock both hard and hye:
And eke thy hand has made likewise, deep rivers to be dry.
Both day and eke the night are thine, by thee they were begone,
Thou set to serve us with their shine, the light and eke the sun,
Thou do appoint the ends and costs of all the earth about:
Both summer heates, and winter frosts, thy hand has found them out.
Think on (O Lord (no time forget. thy foes that thee defame:
And how the folish folk are set, to rail upon thy name.
O let no cruel beast devour, thy Turtle that is true:
Forget not always in thy power, the poor that much do rue.
Regard thy covenant and behold, thy foes posses, the land:
All sad and dark, for worn and old, our realine as now does stand.
Let not the simple go away, with disapointed shame:
But let the poor and nedye aye. give praise unto thy name.
Rise Lord, let be by thee maintained, the cause that is thine own:
Remember how that thou blasphemde, art by the folysh one.
The voice forget not of thy foes, for they presumyng hie:
Is more and more encreast of those, that hate thee spitefully.
Confitebimur tibi deus. Psalm. lxxv. N.
The faithful do praise the name of the Lord, which shall come to judge at
the time appointed, when the wicked shall be put to confusion, and drink of the
cup of his wrath, their prayer shall be abated, and the righteous shall be
exaited to honor.

Unto the God we will give thanks, Sing this as the. rliiii. psalm.
we will give thanks to thee:
Since thy name is so nere, declare, thy wondrous works will we.
I will uprightly judge, when get, convenient time I may.
The earth is weak and all therein: but I her pillars stay.
I did to thee mad people say, deal not furiouslye:
And unto the vngodliones, set not your horns so hie.
I said unto them, set not up, your taysed horns on hye,
And see that you do with stiff neck, not speak presumptuously.
For neither from the eastern part, nor from the westernside,
Nor from forsaken wilderness, protection does proceed.
For why the Lord our God, he is, the righteous judge alone:
He puts down the one, and sets another in the throne.
For why? a cup of mighty wine, is in the hand of God:
And all the mighty wine therein, himself does pour abroad.
As for the lees and filthy dregs, that do remain of it.
The wicked of the earth shall drink, and suck them every whyt.
But I will talk of God (I say) of Jacobs God therefore:
And will not cease to celebrate, his praise for evermore.
In sunder break the horns of all, ungodly men will I:
But then the horns of righteous men, shall be exalted hye.
Gloria patri.

To father, son, and holy ghost,
all glory be therefore:
As in beginning was, is now,
and shall be evermore.
In Judea. Psalm. Lxxvi. I. H.
This Psalme^ sets for the the power of God and care for the defense of his
people in Jerusalem, in the destruction of the army Senacherib: And exhorts
the faithful to be thankful for the same.

TO all that now in Jury dwell, Sing this as the, lxix. psa
the Lord is clerly known:
His name is great in Israel, a people of his own.
At Salem he his tents has pighte, to tarry there a space:
In sion eke he has delyghte, to make his dwelling place.
And there he brake both shaft and bow the sword the spear and shilde:
And brake the ray to overthrow, in battle on the field.
Thou art more worthy honor, Lord, more might in thee does lie:
Then in the strongest of the world, that rob on mountayes hye.
But now ye proud are spoiled through the and they are fallen on sleep:
Through men of war no help can be them selves they could not keep.
At thy rebuke (O Jacobs God, when thou do them reprove:
As half in sleep their charets, stood, no horsman once does move.
For thou art fearful Lord in deed, what man the courage has:
To bide thy sight and does not dreede, when thou art in thy wrath.
When thou do make thy judgments hard from heaven through the ground:
Then all the earth, full sore, afearde. in silence shall be found.
And that when thou O God do stand in judgment for to speak:
To save thafflicted of the land, on earth that are full weak,
The fury that in man does raygne, shall turn unto thy praise:
Hereafter Lord do thou restrain, their wrath and threats always,
Make voues and pay them to your God, ye folk that nigh him be:
Bring gifts all ye that dwell abroad, for dreedfull sure is he.
For he does take both life and might, from Princes great of birth:
And full of terroure is his sight, to all the kings on earth.
Voce mea ad dominum. Psalm. lxxvii. IH.
The Prophet in the name of the church, rehearses the greatness of his
affliction, and his grievous temptation, whereby he was driven to this end to
consider his formore conversation, and the continual course of Gods worckes in
the preservation of his servants, and so he confirms his says against
these temptacyons.

^ I With my voice to God do cry, with ^ heart and hearty cheer, my voice to
God I ^ lift on high and he my suit does hear, in ^ time of grief I sought
to God, by night

^ no rest I took: But stretched my hands to him ^ abroad, my soul comfort
forsook.

When I to think one God entend, my troble then is more:
I spoke but could not make an end, my breath was stopped so sore.
Thou houldst mine eyes alwayse from rest, that I always awake:
With fear am I so sore oppressed, my speech does me forsake.
The days of old in mind I cast. and often did think upon:
The times and ages that are past, full many years agon.
By night my songs I call to mind, once made thy praise to show:
And with my heart, much taulke I find, my spirits does search to know.
Will God (said I) at once for all, cast of his people thus?
So that hence for the no time he shall, be friendly unto us.
What, is his goodness clean decayed, for ever and aday?
Or is his promise now delayde, and does his truth decay?
And will the Lord our God forget, his mercyes manifold:
Or shall his wrath increase so whot, his mercy to with hold:
At last I said my weakness is, the cause of this mistrust.
Gods mighty hand, can healpe all this, and change it, when he lust.
I will regard, and think upon, the workyng of the Lord:
Of all his wonders past and gone, I gladly will record.
yea all his works I will declare, and what he did devise:
To tell his factes I will not spare, and eke his counsel wise.
Thy works (O Lord) are all vprghit and holy all abrod:
What one, has strength to match ye might of thee O Lord our God.
Thou art a God, that often do show, thy wonders every hour:
And so do make the people know, thy virtue and thy power.
And thine own folk thou did defend with strength and stretched arm?
The sons of Jacob that descend, and Josephes seed from harm.
16 The waters, Lord perceued thee, the waters saw thee well:
And they for fear a side did flee, the depthes on trembling fell.
The clouds that were, both thick and black did rain full plenteously:
The thonder in the air did crack, thy shaftes a broad did fly.
Thy thunder in the fire was heard, the lightening from above,
With flashes great made men afearde, the earth did quake and move.
Thy ways within the sea do lie, thy pathe in waters deep:
Yet none can there, thy steps espy. nor know thy pathe to keep.
Thou leadest thy folk upon the land, as sheep on every side:
Through Moses and through Aarons hand thou did them safely gide.
Attendite popule. Psalm. lxxviii. T. S.
He shows how God of his mercy chose his church of the posterity of Abraham,
castyng in theyrteth the stubburne rebellion of their fathers that the children
might not only understand, that god of his fremercies made his covenant with
their ancestors, but also seeing the^ so malicious and perverse, might be
ashamed and so turn wholly to god. In this Psalm the holy Ghost has
comprehended, as it were the sum of all Gods benefits, to the intent the
ignorant and gros people might see in few words the effect of the whole
historyes.

^ ATtend my people to my law and to

^ my words inclyne. My mouth shall speak ^ strange parables, and sentences
deuyne. ^ Which we our selves have hard and lernd, even ^ of our fathers old,
and which for our instruction ^ our fathers have us told.

Because we should not keep it close, from them that should come after.
Who should Gods power to their race praise and all his works of wonder.
To Jacob he commaundment gave, how Israel should live:
willing our fathers should the same, unto their children give.
That they and their posterytie, that were not sprung up tho:
Should have the knowledge of the law, and teach their seeede also.
That they may have the better hope, in God that is above:
And not forget to keep his laws, and his precepts in love.
Not being as their fathers were, rebellyng in Gods sight:
And would not frame their wicked hearts to know their God a right.
How went the people of Ephraim, their neighbors for to spoil?
Shoting their darts the day of war, and yet they took the foil.
For why? they did not keep with God, the covenant that was made:
Nor yet would walk or lead their lives, according to his trade.
But put into oblivion, his counsel and his will:
And all his works most magnifique, which he declared still.
The second part.
What wonders to our forefathers, did he him self disclose:
In Egypt land, within the field, that called is Thaneos?
He did deuyde, and cut the sea, that they might pas at once:
And made the water stand as still, as does an heap of stones,
He led them secret in a cloud, by day when it was bright:
And in the night when dark it was, with fire he gave them light.
He brake the rocks in wilderness, and gave the people drynk:
As plentiful as when the depes, do flow up to the brynk.
He drew out rivers out of rocks, that were both dry and hard:
Of such a boundaunce that no floudes, to them might be compard.
Yet for all this, against the Lord, their sin they did increase:
And styred him that is most high, to wrath in wilderness.
They tempted him within their hearts, like people of mistrust:
Requiring such a kind of meat, as served to their lnst.
Saying with murmuration, in their unfaithfulness:
What can this God prepare for us, a feast in wilderness?
Behold, he struck the stony rock, and floudes forthwith did slo:
But can he now give to his folk, both bread and flesh also?
When God hard this, he waxed wroth with Jacob and his sede:
So did his indignation, on Israel proceed.
The third part.
Because they did not faithfully, believe and hope that he:
Could always help and succor them, in their necessity.
Wherefore he did command the clouds forthwith they brake in sundre:
And raind down Manna for the^ to eat a food of mickell wondre.
When earthly men with angels fode, were fed at their request:
He bad the east wind blow away, and brought in the south west.
And raind down flesh as thick as dust and foul as thick as sand:
Which he did cast amids the place. where all the tents did stand.
Then did they eat excedingly, and all men had their fills:
Yet more and more they did desire, to serve their lusts and wills.
But as the meat was in their mouths his wrath upon them fell
And flew the flower of all their youth, and choice of Israel.
Yet fell they to their wonted sin, and still they did him grieve:
For all the wonders that he wrought. they would him not believe.
33 Their days therefore he shortened, and made their honor vain:
Their years did wast and pas away, with terrors and with pain.
But ever when he plaged them, they sought him by and by:
Remembering then, he was their strength, their help and God most hye.
Though in their mouths they did but gloss and flatter with the Lord:
And with their tongs, and in their hearts, dissembled every word.
The for the part.
For why? their hearts were nothing bent, to him nor to his trade:
Nor yet to keep or to perform, the covenant that was made,
yet was he still so merciful, when they deserved to dye:
That he forgave them their misdedes, and would not them destroy,
Yea many atyme he turned his wrath, and did himself auise:
And would not suffer all his whole, displeasure to arise.
Considering they were but flesh, and even as a wind:
That passes away and cannot well, return by his own hynde.
How often times in wilderness, did they their Lord provoke:
How did they move and stir their Lord to plage them with his stroke?
yet did they turn again to sin, and tempted God eftsone:
Prescribing to the holy Lord, what things they would have don,
Not thinking of his hand and power, nor of the day when he:
Delivered them out of the bonds, of the fierce ennemie.
Nor how he wrought his miracles, as they them selves beheld:
In Egypt, and the wonder that he did in Zoan field.
Nor how he turned by his power, their waters into blood
That no man might receive his drink, at river nor at flood.
Nor how he sent them swarms of flies which did them sore annoy
And filled their countries full of frogs, which should their land destroy.
Nor how he did commit their fruits, unto the Caterpiller.
And all the labor of their hands, he gave to the Grasshopper.
with haylestones he destroid their vines so that they were all lost:
And not so much as wild fig trees, but he consumde with frost.
And yet with hailestones once again, the Lord their cattle smote:
And all their flocks and herds like wise with thunderbolts full hot.
He cast upon them in his ire, and in his fury strong:
Displeasure, wrath, and evil spirits, to trouble them among.
Then to his wrath he made a way, and spared not the least:
But gave unto the pestilence, the man and eke the beast.
He struck also the first borne all, that up in Egypt came:
And all the chief of men and beasts, within the tents of Ham.
But as for all his own dearefolk, he did preserve and keep:
And carried them through wilderness, even like a flock of sheep.
Without all fear, both safe and sound, he brought them out of thrall:
Where as their foes with rage of Sea were overwhelmed all.
And brought them out into the costs, of his own holy land:
Even to the mount which he had got, by his strong arm and hand.
And there cast out the Heathen folk, and did their land deuyde:
And in the tents he set their tribes, of Israel to abide.
Yet for all this, their God most high, they stirred and tempted still:
And would not keep his testament, nor yet obey his will.
But as their fathers turned back, even so they went astray:
Much like a bow that would not be^d, but slipped and start away.
The. vi. part.
And grieved him with their hill altars, with offerings, and with fire:
And with their Idols vehemently, provoked him to ire.
Therewith his wrath began again, to kindle in his breast:
The naughtines of Israel, he did so much detest.
Then he forsook the tabernacle, of Silo where he was:
Right conversant with earthly men, even as his dwelling place.
Then suffered he his might and power, in bondage for to stand:
And gave the honor of his Arcke into his enemies hand.
And did commit them to the sword, wroth with his heritage:
The young men were devoured with fire maids had nomariage.
64 And with the sword, the priests also, did pearish euerychone:
And not a widow left alive, their death for to be moan,
And then the Lord began to wake, like one that slept a time:
Or like a valyant man of war, refreshed after wine.
With Emerods in the hinder parts, he struck his enemies all:
And put them then unto a shame, that was perpetual.
Then he the tent and tabernacle, of Joseph did refuse:
As for the tribe of Ephraim, he would in no wise choose.
But chose the tribe of Iehuda, where as they thought to dwell:
Even the noble mount Sion, which he did love so well.
Where as he did his temple build, both sumptuously and sure:
Like as the earth which he has made for ever to endure.
Then chose he David, him to serve, his people for to keep:
Which he took up and brought away, even from the foldes of sheep.
As he did follow the ewes with young, the Lord did him auaunce:
To feed his people of Israel, and his inheritance.
Then David with a faithful heart, his flock and charge did feed:
And prudently with all his power, did govern them in deed.
Deus venerunt gentes. Psalm. lxxix. I. H
The Israelites complain to God for the great calamity, and oppression that
they suffered when Antiochus destroyed their temple, and city Jerusalem,
desiring God aid against his ragyng tyranny, lest Gods name and religion
should be contemned among the Heathen, which should see them thus forsaken
and peary she.

O Lord the Gentiles do invade, Thine heritage to spoil: Sing this as the.
lxxvii. psalm.

Jerusalem an heap is made, thy temple they defoyle.
The bodies of thy saints most dear, abroad to birds they cast:
The flesh of them that do thee fear, the beasts devour and wast.
Their blood throughout Jerusalem, as water spilt they have:
So that there is not one of them, to lay their dead in grave.
Thus are we made a laughing stock, almost the world throughout:
The enemies at us jest and mock, which dwell our coasts about.
Will thou (O Lord) thus in thine ire, against us ever fume?
And show thy wrath as hoate as fire, thy folk for to consume?
Upon those people power the same, which did thee never know:
All realms which call not on thy name consume and overthrow.
For they have got the upper hand, and Jacobs sede destroyed:
His habytacion and his land, they have left wast and void.
Bear not in mind our former faults, with speed some pity show:
And aid us Lord, in all assaults, for we are weak and low.
O God that geuest all health and grace, on us declare the same:
Mey not our works, our sins deface for honor of thy name.
Why shall the wicked still always, to us as people domme:
In thy reproach rejoice and say, where is their God become:
Require (O Lord) as thou see good, before our eyes in sight:
Of all these folk thy servants blood, which they spilt in despite.
Receive into thy sight in have, the clamours grief and wrong:
Of such as are in prison cast, susteyning yrons strong.
Thy force and strength to celebrate, Lord set them out of band:
Which unto death are destinate, and in their enemies hand.
The nations which have been so bold, as to blaspheme thy name:
Into their laps with seven fold, repay again the same.
So we thy folk thy pasture sheep. will praise thee evermore:
And teach all ages for to keep, for thee like praise in store.
Qui regis Israel. Psalm. lxxx. I. H.
A lamentable prayer to God to help the miseryes of the Church, desiring him
to consider their first estate, when his favor shined toward them, to the
intent that he might finish that work that he had begone.

Thou heard that Israel do keep, give ear and take good head:
Which leadest, Joseph like a sheep, Sing this as the, lxvii.
and do him watch and feed.
Thou Lord I say whose seat is set. on cherubins so bright:
show forth thy self and do not let, send down thy beams of light.
Before Ephraim, and Benjamin, Manasses eke likewise:
To show thy power do thou begin, come healpe us Lord arise.
Direct our hearts unto thy grace, convert us Lord to thee.
Show us the brightness of thy face, and then full safe are we.
Lord God of hosts of Israel, Now long will thou I say.
Against thy folk in anger swell, and wilt not hear them pray.
Thou do them feed with sorrows deep their bread with tears they eat:
And drink the tears that they do weep in measure full and great.
Thou have us made, a very strife, to those that dwell about:
And that our foes do love of life, they laugh and jest it out.
O take us Lord unto thy grace; convert our minds to thee:
Show forth to us thy joyful face, and we full safe shall be.
From Egypt where it grew not well, thou broughtest a vine full dear:
The heathen folk thou did expel, and then did plant it here.
Thou did prepare for it a place, and set her roots full fast:
That it did grow and spring a pace, and fill the land at last.
The hills were covered round about with shade that from it came:
And eke the Ceders high, and stout, with branches of the same.
Why then did thou her wall destroy her hedge plucked up thou have:
That all the folk that pas thereby, thy vine may spoil and waste:
The bore out of the wodes so wild, does dig and rote it out:
The furious beasts out of the field, devour it all about,
O Lord, of hosts return again, from heaven look betime:
Behold and with thy healpe sustain, this poor vineyard of thine.
Thy Plant I say, thine Israel, whom thy right hand has set:
The son which thou did love so well, O Lord do not forget.
They loppe and cut it down apace, they burn it eke with fire:
And through the frowning of thy face, we perish in thine ire.
Let thy right hand be with them now, whom thou have kept so long:
And with the son of man whom thou, to thee have made so strong.
And so when thou have set us free, and saved us from shame:
Then will we never fall from thee, but call upon thy name.
Lord of hosts through thy good grace convert us unto thee:
Behold us with a Pleasant face, and then full safe are we.
Exultate deo, Psalm. lxxxi. I. H.
An exhortation to praise God both in heart and voice for his benefytes, and
to worship him only: God condemns the ingratitude, and shows what great
benefits they have lost through their own malice,

^ BE light and glad in God rejoice ^ which is our strength and stay be
joyful and ^ lift up your voice, to Jacobs God I say, prepare ^ your
instruments most mete some joyful ^ psalm to sing, stryke up with harp and
^ ^ute so sweet on every pleasant stryng,

Blow as it were in the new moan, with trumpets of the best:
As it is used to be done, at any solemn feast.
For this is unto Israel, a statute and a trade:
A law that must be kept full well, which Jacobs God has made.
This clause with Joseph was decreed, when he from Egypt came:
That as a witness all his sede, should still observe the same.
When God I say, had so preparde, to bring him from that land:
Where as the speech which he had heard, he did not understand.
I from his shoulders took says he, the burden clean away:
And from the furnace quit him free, from burning brick of claye,
When thou in grief, did cry and call I help thee by and by:
And I did answer the withal, in thunder secretly.
Yea at the waters of discord, I did thee tempt and prove:
Whereas the goodness of the Lord, with muttering thou did move,
Hear O my folk, O Israel, and I assure it thee:
Regard and mark my words full well if thou will cleave to me.
Thou shalt no God in thee reserve, of any land abroad:
Nor in no wise to bow or serve, a strange and fortaine God.
I am the Lord, thy God, and I, from Egypt set thee free:
Then ask of me aboundauntly, and I will give it the.
And yet my people would not hear, my voice when that I spoke:
Nor Israel would not obey, but did me quite forsake.
Then did I leave them to their will, in hardness of their heart
To walk in their own counsels still, themselves they might pervert.
O that my people would have hard, the words that I did say:
And eke that Israel would regard, to walk within my way.
How soon would I confound their foes and bring them down full low:
And turn my hand upon all those, that would them overthrow.
And they that at the Lord do rage, as slaves should seek him till:
But of his folk the time and age, should flourish ever stilll.
18 I would have fed them with the croppe, and finest of the wheat:
And make the rock with honey drop, that they their filles should eat.
Deus stetit in Sinagoga. Psalm. lxxxii. I. H
The Prophet Declaring God to be present amongst the judges and maiestrates,
reproves their parcialitie and unrighteousness, and exhorts them to do
justice but seeing no amendment, he desires God to undertake the matter, and
execute justice him self.

A Mid the prease with men of might, Sing this as the lxxvui. Ps.
The Lord him self did stand:
To plead the cause of truth and right, with judges of the land.
How long (said he) will you proceed, false judgment to awarde?
And have respect for love of mede, the wicked to regard?
Whereas of due ye should defend, the fatherles and weak:
And when the poor man does contend, in judgment justly speak.
If ye be wise defend the cause, of poor men in their right:
And ryd the nedie from the claws, of tyrants force and might.
But nothing will they know or learn, in vain to them I talk:
They will not see or ought discern, but still in darkness walk.
For so, even now the time is come, that all things fall to naught:
And like wise laws both all and some, for gain are sold and bought.
I had decreed it in my sight, as Gods to take you all:
And children to the most of might, for love I did you call.
But not withstanding ye shall dye, as men, and so decay:
O tyrannes I shall you destroy, and pluck you quyte away.
Up Lord and let thy strength be known, and judge the world with might:
For why? all nations are thine own, to take them as thy right.
Deus quis Similis. Psalm. lxxxiii. I. H
The people of Israel pray unto the Lord to deliver them from their enemies
both at home and far of, which imagined nothing but their destruccyon: and
they desire that all such wicked people may, according as God was accostomed,
be stricken with the stormye tempests of Gods wrath, that they may know that
the Lord is most hye upon the earth.

DO not (O God) refrain thy tongue, in silence, do not stay:
Withholde not Lord thy self so long nor make no more delay. Sing this as
the. lxxvii. P

For why, behold thy foes and see. how they do rage and cry,
And those that bear an hate to thee, hold up their heads on hye.
Against thy folk they use disceate, and craftly they enquire:
For thine elect to lie in wait, their council does conspire
4 Come on (said they) let us expel, and pluck these folk away:
So that the name of Israel, may utterly decay.
They all conspire within their heart, how they may thee withstand:
Against the Lord to take a part, they are in league and band.
The tents of all the Edomites, the Ismalites also:
The Hagarenes and Moabites, with diverse other more.
Geball with Ammon, and likewise, does Amalece conspire:
The Phillistines against thee rise, with them that dwell at Cyre.
And Assure eke is well apaide, with them in league to be:
And does become afence and aid, to Lots posterity.
As thou did to the Madianites, so serve them Lord echeone:
As to Cicer and to Iabin, beside the broke kison.
Whom thou in Endor did descry, and wast them through thy might,
That they like doung on earth did lie, and not in open sight.
Make them now and their Lords appear, like Zeb and Oreb then:
As Zebah and Zalmana we are, the kings of Madian.
Which said, let us throughout the land, in all the costs abroad:
Posses and take into our hand, the fayer houses of God.
Tourn them O God with storms as fast as wheels that have no stay:
Or like as chafe, which men do cast, with winds to flee away.
Like as the fire, with rage and fume, the mighty forest spilles:
And as the flame does quyte consume, the mountains and the hills.
So let the tempest of thy wrath, upon their necks be laid:
And of thy stormy wind and shower, Lord make them all afraid.
Lord bring them all I thee desire, to such rebuke and shame
That it may cause them to enquire, and learn to seek thy name.
And let them evermore daily, to shame and sclaunder fall
And in rebuke and oblique, to perish eke with all.
That they may know and feel full well, that thou art called Lord
And that alone thou do excel, and raygne throughout the world.
Quam dilecta tabernacula. Psalm. lxxxiiii. I. H.
David driven forth of his country desires most ardently to come a gain to
the Tabernacle of the Lord, and the assembly of the saints to praise God,
pronouncing them blessed that may so do. Then he prayseth the courage of the
people, that pass through the wilderness to assemble them selves in Sion.
Finally with praise of this matter and confidence of Gods goodness he ends the
Psalm.

How pleasant is the dwelling place Sing this as the. lxvii. psalm.
(O Lord of hosts) to me:
The Tabernacles of thy grace, how pleasant Lord they be.
My soul does long, full sore to go, into thy courts abroad:
My heart does lust, my flesh also, in thee the living God.
The sparrowes find a rome to rest, and save them selves from wrong:
And eke the swalow has a neste, wherein to keep her young.
These birds full nigh, thine altar may) have place to sit and sing:
O Lord of hosts thou art I say, my God and eke my king.
Oh they be blessed that may dwell, within thy house alwayse:
For they all times thy factes do tell, and ever give thee praise.
yea happy sure likewise arthey, whose stay and strength thou art:
Which to thy house do mind the way, and seek it in their heart.
As they go through, the vale of tears, they dig up fountaynes still:
That as a spring it all appeeres, and thou their pittes do fill.
From strength to strength they walk full fast no fayntnes there shall be:
And so the God of Gods at last, in Sion they do see.
O Lord of hosts, to me give heed, and hear when I do pray:
And let it through thine ears proceed, O Iacobes God I say.
O Lord our shilde, of thy good grace, regard and so draw nere:
Regard (I say) behold the face, of thine anointed dear.
For why within thy courts one day, is better to abide:
Then other where to keep or stay, a thousand days beside.
Much rather would I keep a door, within the house of God:
Then in the tents of wickedness, to settle mine abode.
For God the Lord light and defense, will grace and worship give:
And no good thing shall he witholde, from them that purely live.
O Lord of hosts, that man is blessed, and happy sure is he:
That is persuaded in his breast, to trust all times in thee.
Benedixisti domine. Psalm, lxxxv. I. H
Because God with drew not his rods from his church after the return from
Babylon, first they put him in mind of their delyuerau^ce to the intent that he
should not leave the work of his grace imperfect: next they complain of their
long affliction: And thirdlye the rejoice in hope of felicytie promised for
their deliverance, was a figure of Christ's kingdom, under which should be
perfect felycitie,

THou have ben merciful in deed, Sing this as the. lxxxi. Ps.
O Lord unto thy land:
For thou restoredst Jacobs sede, from thraldom out of band.
The wicked ways that they were in, thou did them clean remitte:
And thou did hide thy peoples sin, full close thou coueredst it.
Thine anger eke thou did assuage, that all thy wrath was gone:
And so did turn the from thy rage, with them to be at one.
O God, our health, do now convert, thy people unto thee:
Put all thy wrath from us aparte, and anger cese to be.
Why? shall thine anger never end, but still proceed on us?
And shall thy wrath it self extend, upon all ages thus,
Will thou not rather turn therefore, and quicken us that we:
And all thy folk may evermore, be glad and joy in thee.
O Lord, on us do thou declare, thy goodness, to our wealth:
Show forth to us and do not spare, thine aid, and saving health.
I will hark, what God says, for he, speaks to his people peace,
And to his saints that never they, return to folishnes.
For why, his health is still at hand, to such as him do fear:
Whereby great glory in our land, shall dwell, and flourish there.
For truth, and mercy there shall mete, in one to take their place:
And peace also, justice greet with kis, and there they shall embrace.
As truth from earth shall spring a pace, and flourish pleasauntly:
So righteousness, shall show her face, and look from heaven hye.
Yea-God him self shall take in hand, to give us each good thing:
And through the costs of all our land, the earth her fruits shall bring.
Before his face shall justice go, much like a guide or stay:
He shall direct his steps also, and keep them in the way.
Inclina domine aurem. Psalm. lxxxvi. I. H.
David sore afflicted and forsaken of all. prays fervently for delyueraunce:
Sometimes rehearsing his miseryes, somtymes the mercyes received desiring also
to be enstructed of the Lord that he may fear him also and gloryfye his name.
He complayneth also of his adversaries, and requires to be delivered from them,

Lord bow thine ear to my request Sing this as the. lxxxi. Ps.
and hear me by and by:
With grievous pain and gref oppressed full poor, and weak am I.
Preserve my soul, because my way, and doings holly be:
And save thy servant, O my Lord, that puttes his trust in thee.
Thy mercy Lord on me express, defend me eke with all:
For through the day I do not cease, on thee to cry and call.
Comfort O Lord thy servant soul, that now with pain is pinde:
For unto thee Lord I extol, and lift my soul and mind.
For thou art good and bountiful, thy gifts of grace are free:
And eke thy mercy plentiful, to all that call on thee.
O Lord like wise when I do pray, regard and give an ear:
Mark well the words that I do say. and all my prayers hear.
In time when troble does me move, to thee I do complain:
For why I know and well do prove, thou answerest me again.
Among the Gods (O Lord) is none, with thee to be comparde:
And none can do as thou alone, the like has not ben hard.
The Gentiles and the peoples all, which thou did make and frame.
Before thy face, on knees will fall, and gloryfye thy name.
For why thou art so much of might, all power is thine own:
Thou workest wonders still in sight, for thou art God alone.
O teach me Lord thy way, and I shall in thy truth proceed:
O join my heart to thee so nigh, that it thy name may dread.
To thee my God, will I give praise, with all my heart (O Lord:
And gloryfie thy name alwayse, for ever through the world.
For why thy mercy showed to me, is great and does excel:
Thou set my soul, at liberty, out from the lower hell.
O Lord the proud against me rise, and heaps of men of might,
They seek my soul, and in no wise, will have thee in their sight.
Thou Lord art merciful, and meek, full slack and slow to wrath:
Thy goodness is full great, and eke, thy truth no measure has.
16 O turn me, and mercy grant, thy strength to me apply:
O help and save thine own servant, thy handmaides son am I.
On me some sign of favor show, that all my foes may see:
And be ashamed because (Lord) thou, do help and comfort me.
Fundamenta eius. Psalm. lxxxvii. I. H
The holy Ghost promises that the condition of the Church, which was in
miserye after the captivity of Babylon, should be restored to great
excelency, so that there should be nothing more comfortable the^ to be nombred
among the members thereof.

THat city shall full well endure, Sing this as the. lxxxi. Ps.
her ground work still does stay:
upon the holy hills full sure, it can no time decay.
God loves the gates of Sion best. his grace does there abide:
He loved them more then all the rest, of Jacobs tents beside.
Full glorious things reported be, in Sion and abrod:
Great things I say, are said of thee, thou city of our God.
On Rahab I will cast an eye, and bear in mind the same:
And Babylon shall eke apply, and learn to know my name.
Lo, Palestine and Tire also, with Ethiope likewise:
A people oulde full long ago, were borne and there did rise.
Of Sion they shall say abrod, that diverse men of fame:
Have there sprung up and the hie God, has founded fast the same.
In their records, to them it shall, through Gods devise appear:
Of Sion that the chief of all, had his beginning there.
The trumpetters with such as sing, therein great plenty be:
My fountayns and my pleasant springs are compast all in thee.
Domine deus salutis. Psalm. lxxxviii. I. H
Agrieuous complaynt of the faithful, sore afflicted by sickness persecution
and abuersitie: being as it were left of God without any consolation? yet he
calls on God by faith and strives against desperation, complaining him self
to be forsaken of all yearthly healpe.

^ Lord God of health ye hope and stay thou ^ art alone to me, I call and cry
throughoute the ^ day, and all the night to thee. O let my

^ prayers sone ascend, unto thy sight on high, ^ enclyne thine ear O Lord
entend, and harken ^ to my cry.

For why my soul with woe is filled; and does in trouble dwell:
My life and breath almost does yield, and draws nigh to hell.
I am estemd as one of them, that in the pit do fall:
And made as one, among those men, that have no strength at all.
As one among the dead, and free, from things that hear remain:
It wear more easy for me to be, with them the which are slain.
As those that lie in grave I say, whom thou have clean forgot,
The which thy hand has cut away: and thou regardst them not.
Yea like to one, shut up full sure, within the lower pit:
In places dark, and all obscure, and in the depth of it.
Thine anger, and thy wrath like wise full sore on me does lie:
And all thy storms against me rise, my soul to vex and try.
Thou put my friends, far of from me, and makst them hate me sore.
I am shut up in prison fast, and can come forth no more.
My sight does fail through grefe and woe I call to thee O God:
Throughout the day, my hands also, to thee I stretche abroad.
Do thou unto the dead declare, thy wondrous works of fame?
Shall dead to life again repair, and praise thee for the same?
Or shall thy loving kindness Lord. be preached in the grave:
Or shall with them that are destroyed, thy truth her honor have?
Shall they that lie, in dark full low, of all thy wonders wotte?
Or there shall they thy justice know, where all things are forgot?
But I (O Lord) to thee always, do cry and call apace:
My prayer ear it be day, shall come before thy face.
Why do thou Lord) abhor my soul in grefe that seeks thee?
And now O Lord why do thou hide, thy face away from me?
I am afflicte as dying still, from youth this many a year:
Thy terrors which do vex me ill, with troubled mind I bear.
The furies of thy wrathful rage, full sore upon me fall:
Thy terrors eke, do not assuage, but me oppres with all.
All day they compass me about, as water at the tide:
And all at once with streams full stout beset me on each side.
Thou set far from me my friends, and lovers every one
Yea and mine oulde acquaintance all, out of my sight are gone,
Miserecordias domini. Psalm. lxxxix. IH.
With many words does the prophet praise the goodness of God. for his testament
and covenant that he had made between him and his elect by Jesus Christ the
son of David: Then does he complain of the great ruin and desolation of
the kingdom of David so that to the outward aperaunce. the promis was broken.
Finally he prays to be delivered from his aflictions. making mention of the
shortness of man's life, and confirming him self by Gods promises,

TO sing the mercyes of the Lord, Sing this as the. lxvii.
my tongue shall never spare:
And with my mouth from age to age, thy truth I will declare.
2 For I have said that mercy shall, for evermore remain:
In that thou do the heavens stay thy truth appears plain.
To mine elect (says God) I made, a covenant and be hest:
My servant David to persuade, I swore and did protest.
Thy seed for ever I will stay, and stablish it full fast:
And still vphoulde thy throne always, from age to age, to last.
The heavens show, with joy and mirth, thy wondrous works O Lord:
Thy saints within thy church on earth thy faith and truth record.
Who with the Lord is equal then, in all the clouds abroad?
Among the sons of all the Gods, what one is like our God.
God in assemble of the saints. is greatly to be drad:
And over all that dwell about, in terror to be had,
Lord God of hosts, in all the world, what one is like to thee:
On every side most mighty Lord* thy truth is seen to be.
The raging sea, by thine advice, thou rulest at thy will:
And when the waves thereof arise, thou makst them calm and still.
And Egypt thou Lord have subdued and thou have it destroyed.
Yea thou thy foes with mighty arm, have scattred all abroad.
The heavens thine and still have been, likewise the earth and laud:
The world with all that is therein. thou foundest with thy hand.
Both north and south, with est and west thy self did make and frame:
Both Tabor mount and Hermon rejoice and praise thy name,
Thine arm is strong, and full of power all might therein does lie:
The strength of thy right hand each hour thou liftest up on hie.
In righteousness and equity, thou have thy seat and place:
Mercy, and truth are still with thee, and go before thy face.
That folk is blessed that knows a right thy present power O God:
For in the favor of thy sight, they walk full safe abroad,
For in thy name, throughout the day, they joy and much rejoice*
And through thy rightousnes have they, a pleasant fame and noise.
For why their glory strength and aid in thee alone does lie:
Thy goodness eke that has us stayed, shall lift our horn on hye.
Our strength, that does defend us well, the Lord to us does bring:
The holly one of Israel, he is our gide and king.
Sometime thy will unto thy saints, in visions thou did show:
And thus then did thou say to them, thy mind to make them know.
A man of might have I erect, your king and gyde to be:
And set up him whom I elect, among the folk to me.
My servant david, I appoynte, whom I have searched out:
And with my holy oil anoynte, him king of all the route.
For why my hand is ready still, with him for to remain
And with mine arm also I will, him strengthen and sustain
The ennemies shall not him oppres, they shall him not devour:
Ne yet the sons of wickedness, of him shall have no power.
His foes likewise will I destroy, before his face in sight:
And those that hate him I will plage, and stryke them with my might.
My truth and mercy eke with all, shall still upon him lie:
And in my name his horn eke shall be lifted up on hye.
His kingdom I will set to be, upon the sea and sand:
And eke the running floods shall he, embrace with his right hand.
He shall depend with all his heart, on me and thus shall say:
My father, and (my God thou art) my rock of health and stay.
As one first borne I will him take, of all on earth that sprynges:
His might, and honor, I shall make, above all worldly kings.
My mercy shall be with him still, as I my sealfe have toulde:
My faithful covenant to fulfill, my mercy I will houlde.
And eke his seed will I sustain, for ever strong and sure:
So that his seat shall still remain, while heaven does endure.
If that his sons forsake my law, and so begin to swerue:
And of my judgments have none awe, nor will not them observe.
32 Or if they do not use aryght, my statutes to them made:
And set all my commaundments light, and will not keep my trade.
Then with the rod will I begin, their doings to amend:
And so with scourging for their sin, when that they do offend.
My mercy yet, and my goodness, I will not take him froe:
Nor handle him with craftines, and so my truth forgo.
But sure my couenaunte I will hold, with all that I have spoke:
No word the which my lips have told shall alter or be broke.
Once swore I by mine holiness, and that perform will I:
With David I shall keep promise, to him I will not lie,
His seed for evermore shall rain, and eke his throne of might:
As does the son it shall remain for ever in my sight.
And as the moon within the sky, for ever stands fast:
A faithful witness from on hie, so shall his kingdom last.
But now O Lord thou do reject, and now thou chaungest chere,
Yea thou art wroth with thine elect, thine own anointed dear.
The covenant which thy servant made Lord thou have quite undone:
And down upon the ground also, have cast his royal crown.
Thou pluckst his hedges up with might his walls do thou confound:
Thou beatest eke his bulworkes down and breakst them to the ground.
That he is sore destroyed and forne, of comers by throughoute:
And so is made a mock and scorn, to all that dwell about.
Thou their right hand have lifted up, that him so sore annoy:
And all his foes that him devour, lo thou have made to joy.
His swerds edg thou do take away, that should his foes withstand:
To him in war no victory, thou geuest nor vpperhand.
His glory thou do also waste, his throne, his joy, and mirth:
By thee is overthrown, add cast, full low upon the earth.
Thou have cut of, and made full short, his youth and lusty days:
And raised of him an ill report, with shame and great disprayse.
How long away from me, O Lord, for ever will thou turn:
And shall thine anger still always, as fire consume and bourne.
O call to mind, remember then, my time consumes fast:
Why have thou the sons of men, as things in vain to wast.
What man is he that lives here, and death shall never see?
Or from the hand of hell his soul, shall he deliver free?
Where is (O lord) thine oulde goodness so often declared beforne?
Which by thy truth and vprightnes, to David thou have sworn.
The great rebukes to mind do call, that on thy servants lie:
The railing of the people all, borne in my breast have I.
Wherewith O Lord thine enemies, blasphemed have thy name,
The steps of thine anointed one, they cease not to defame.
All praise to thee, O Lord of hosts, both now and eke for aye:
Through sky, and earth in all the costs Amen, amen, I say.
Domine refugium. Psalm. lxxxx. I. H
Moses in his prayer sets before us the eternal favor of God toward his,
who are nether admonished by the brevity of their life, nor by his plages to
be thanckefull. Therefore Moses prays God to turn their hearts and continue
his mercies toward them and their posterity for ever.

THou Lord have ben our suer defense, Sing this as the. lxxviii. Ps.
Our place of ease and rest:
In all times past, yea so long sense, as cannot be expressed.
Or there was made mountain or hill, the earth or world abrod:
From age to age and alwayse still, for ever thou art God.
Thou grindest man through gref and pain to dust or clay and then:
And then thou say again, return, again ye sons of men.
The lastyng of a thousand year, what is it in thy sight:
As yester day it does appear, or as a watch one night.
So sone as thou do scattre them, then is their life and trade:
All as a sleep and like the grass. whose bewty soon does fade.
Which in the morning, shines full bright, but fades by and by:
And is cut down, ere it be night, all withered dead and dry.
For through thine anger we consume, our might is much decayed:
And of thy seruent wrath and sum, we are full sore afraid.
The wicked works yt we have wrought, thou setst before thine eye:
Our privy faults, yea eke our thought. thy countenance does espy.
For through thy wrath our days do wast thereof does naught remain:
Our years consume as words or blast and are not called again.
Our time is threscore year and ten, that we do live on molde:
If one see fourscore, surely then, we count him wonders oulde.
Yet of this tune the strength and chief, the which we count upon:
Is nothing else but painful grief, and we as blastes are gone.
Who once does know, what strength is there what might thine anger has?
Or in his heart, who does the fear, according to thy wrath?
Instruct us Lord to know and try, how long our days remain:
That then we may our hearts apply, true wisdom to attain.
Retourn O Lord, how long will thou fourth on in wrath proceed:
Show favor to thy servants now, and healp them at their need.
Refresh us with thy mercy soon, and then our joy shall be:
All times so long as life does last, in heart rejoice shall we,
As thou have plaged us before, now also make us glad:
And for the years wherein full sore, affliction we have had.
O let thy work and power appear and on thy servants light:
And show unto their children dear, thy glory and thy might.
Lord let thy grace and glory stand, on us thy servants thus:
Confirm the works we take in hand Lord prosper them to us.
Qui habitat. Psalm. lxxxxi. I. H
Here is described in what assurance he lives that puts his whole trust in
God, and commits him self whollye to his protection in all temptacyons. A
promise of God to those that love him, know him and trust in him to deliver
them, and give them immortal glory.

HE that within the secret place, of God most hie does dwell:
In shadodw of the mightiest grace, at rest shall keep him well.
Thou art my hope, and my strong hold I to the Lord will say:
My God on hye, in him will I, my whole affiance stay.
He shall defend thee from the snare, the which the hunter laid:
And from that deadly plage and care, whereof thou art afraid.
And with his wings shall cover thee, and keep thee safely there:
His faith and truth thy fence shall be, as sure as sheld and spear.
So that thou shall not need I say, to fear, or be afflighte,
Of all the shafts that fly by day, nor terrors of the night.
Nor of the plage that priutlye, does walk in dark so fast:
Nor yet of that which does destroy, and at none days does wast.
Yea at thy side as thou do stand, a thousand dead shall be:
Ten thousand eke, at thy right hand, and yet shall thou be free.
But thou shalt see it for thy part, thine eyse shall well regard:
That even lyk, to their desert, the wicked have reward.
For why (O Lord) I only lust, to stay my hope on thee:
And in the hiest, I put my trust, my sure defense is he.
Thou shall not need, none ill to fear, with thee it shall not mell:
Nor yet the plage, shall once come nere, thy house where thou do dwell.
For why unto his angels all, with charge commands he:
That still in all thy ways they shall, preserve and prosper thee.
And in thy hands, shall the bear up, still waiting thee upon:
So that thy foot shall never chance, to spurn at any stone.
Upon the Lion thou shall go, the adderfell and long:
And tread upon the Liones young, with dragons stout and strong.
For that he trusts unto me, I will dispatch him quite:
And him defend, because that he, does know my name a right.
When he for health on me does cry, an answer I will give:
And from his grefe take him will I in glory for to live.
2With length of years, and days of wealth, I will fulfill his time:
The goodness of my saving health, I will declare to him.
Bonum est confiteri. Psalm. lxxxxii. I. H
This Psalm was made to be soung on the sabbath, to stir up the people to
acknowledge God and to praise him in his works: The Prophet reioyseth therein.
But the wicked is not able to consider, that the ungodly, when he his most
flourishing, shall most spedely peryshe. In the end is discribed the felicity
of the just, planted in the house of god to praise the Lord.

IT is a thing, both good and meet, to praise the highest Lord:
And to thine name O thou most hye, to sing in one accord.
To show the kindness of the Lord, betime ere day be light,
And eke declare his truth abroad, when it does draw to night.
Upon ten strynged instrument, on lute and harp so sweet:
With all the mirth you can invent, of instruments most meet,
For thou have made me to rejoice, in things so wrought by thee:
And I have joy, in heart and voice, thy handy works to see.
O Lord (how glorious and how great are all thy works so stout:
So deeply are thy counsels set, that none can try them out.
The man unwise has not the wit, this gear to pas to bring:
And all such fools are nothing fit, to understand this thing.
When so the wicked at their will, as gras do spring full fast.
They when they flourish in their ill, for ever shall be wast.
But thou art mighty Lord most hye, yea thou do raygne therefore:
In every time eternally, both now and evermore.
For why (O Lord) behold and see, behold thy foes I say:
How all that work iniquity, shall perish and decay.
But thou like as an Unicorne, shall lift my horn on hie:
With fresh and new prepared oil, thine ointed king am I.
And of my foes before mine eyes, shall see the fall and shame:
Of all that up against me rise, mine ear shall hear the same.
The just shall flourish up on hie, as date trees bud and blow?
And as the ceders multiplye, in Lybanus that grow.
For they are planted in the place, and dwelling of our God:
within his courts they spring apace, and flourish all abroad.
And in their age more fruit shall bring both fat and well besene:
And pleasauntly both bud and spryng, with boughs and branches grene.
To show that God is good and just, and upright is his will:
He is my rock, my hope, and trust, in him there is none ill.
Dominus regnauit. Psalm. lxxxxiii. I. H
He prayseth the power of God in the creation of the world and beats down
all people which lift them up against his majesty, and provoke to consider
his promises,

THe Lord as king a loft does raygne, Sing this as the. lxxvii. psalm.
in glory goodly dighte:
And he to show his strength and main, has girt him self with might.
The Lord likewise the earth has made and shaped it so sure:
No might can make it move or sad, at stay it does endure.
Ear that ye world was made or wrought thy seat was set before:
Beyond all time that can be thought, thou have ben evermore.
The floods O Lord the floudes do rise, they rore and make a noise:
The flouddes I say did enterprise, and lyfted up their voice.
Yea though the storms before in sight though seas do rage and swell:
The Lord is strong and more of might, for he on hye does dwell.
And look what promise he does make, his houshoulde to defend:
For just and true they shall it take, all times withouten end.
Deus vltionum. Psalm. lxxxxiiii. I. H.
He prays unto God against the violence and arrogancy of tyrauntes, Then
does he comfort the afflicted by the good issue of their affectyons, as he
felt in him self and did see in others, and by the ruin of the wicked, whom
the Lord will destroy.

O Lord thou do reueng all wrong, Sing this as the. (...). psalm.
that office longes to thee:
Since vengaunce does to thee belong, declare that all may see,
Set forth thy sealfe, for thou of right, the earth do judge and give
Reward the proud and men of might, according to their pride.
How long shall wicked men bear sway with lifting up their voice?
How long shall wicked men I say, thus trihumph and rejoice?
How long shall they with brags brust out and proudly prate their fill?
Shall they rejoice which be so stout, whose works are ever ill?
Thy flock (O Lord) thine heritage, they spoil and vex full sore:
Against thy people they do rage, still daily more and more:
The widows which are comfortles, and strangers they destroy
They slay the children fatherles, and none does put them by.
And when they take these things in hand this talk they have of thee
Can Jacobs God this understand, tush no he can not see.
O folk unwise, a people rude, some knowledge now discearne
ye fools among the multitude, at length begin to learn.
The lord which made the ear of man he needs of right must hear:
He made the eyne, all things must then, before his sight appear.
10 The Lord does all the world correct, and make men understand:
shall he not then your deeds detect, how can ye escape his hand?
The lord does know, the thoughts of man his heart he sets full plain:
The lord I say men's thoughts does frame, and finds them but vain.
But Lord that Man is happy sure, whom thou do keep in awe:
And through correction do procure, to teach him in thy law.
Whereby he shall in quiet rest, in time of trouble sit:
When wicked men shall be suppressed, and fall into the pit.
For sure the Lord will not refuse, his people for to take:
His heritage whom he did choose, he will no time forsake.
Until that judgment be decrede, to justice to convert:
That all may follow her with speed, that are of upright heart.
But who upon my part shall stand, against the cursed train?
Or who shall rid me from their hand, that wicked works maintain.
Except the Lord had been mine aid, mine enmies to repel:
My soul and life had now ben laid, almost as low as hell:
When I did say my foot does slide, and now am like to fall:
Thy goodness Lord did so provide, to stay me up with all.
When with my self I mused much, and could no comfort find:
Then Lord thy goodness did me touch and that did ease my mind.
Will thou enhaunte thy self and draw with wicked men to sit:
Which with pretense instead of law, much mischief do commit.
For they consoult against the life, of righteous men and good.
And in their counsels they are ryfe, to sheade the giltles blood.
But yet the Lord he is to me, a strong defense or lock:
He is my God to him I flee, he is my strength and rock.
And he shall cause their mischefe all, them sealues for to annoye:
And in their malice they shall fall, our God shall them destroy.
Venite exultemus. Psalm lxxxxv. I. H
An earnest exhortacio^ to praise god for the government of the world and the
election of his church. An admonishion not to follow the rebellion of the old
fathers, that tempted God in the wilderness: For the which they might not enter
into the land of promise.

^ O Come let us lift up our voice, ^ and sing unto the Lord, in him our
rock of ^ health rejoice, let us with one accord, yea let ^ us come before his
face, to give him thanks and ^ praise, in singing Psalms unto his grace, let ^
us be glad all ways.

For why the Lord he is no doubt, a great and mighty God:
A king above all Gods throughout, in all the world abroad.
4 The secrets of the earth so deep, and corners of the land:
The tops of hills that are so stepe, he has them in his hand.
The sea and waters all are his, for he the same has wrought:
The earth and all that therein is, his hand has made of naught.
Come let us bow and praise the Lord, before him let us fall:
And knele to him with one acorde, the which has made us all.
For why he is the Lord our God. for us he does provide?
We are his folk he does us feed, his sheep, and he our guide.
Today if ye his voice will hear, then harden not your heart:
As ye with grudging many a year, provoked me in deserte.
Where as your fathers tempted me, my power for to prove:
My wondrous works when they did see, yet still they would me move.
Twice twenty year, they did me grieve and I to them did say:
They err in heart and not believe, they have not known my way.
Wherefore I swear, when that my wrath was kindled in my breast:
That they should never tread the pathe, to enter to my rest.
Cantate domino. Psalm. lxxxxvi. I. H
An exhortacyon both to the Jews and gentiles to praise God for his mercy.
And this specyallye ought to be referred to the kingdom of Christ.

Sing ye with praise unto the Lord, Sing this as the. lxxvii. psalm.
New songs of joy and mirthe
Sing unto him with one accord, all people on the yearthe.
yea sing unto the Lord, I say, praise ye his holy name
Declare and show from day to day, salvation by the same.
Among the Heathen eke declare, his honor round about
To show his wonders do not spare, in all the world throughout.
For why the Lord is much of might, and worthy praise always
And he is to be dred of right, above all Gods I say.
For all the Gods of Heathen folk, are idols that will fade
But yet our God he is the Lord, that has the heavens made.
All praise and honor eke do dwell, for aye before his face:
Both power and might likewise excel, within his holly place.
Ascribe unto the Lord always, ye people of the world:
All might and worship eke I say, ascribe unto the Lord.
Ascribe unto the Lord also, the glory of his name:
And eke into his courts do go, with gifts unto the same.
Fall down and worship ye the lord, with in his temple bright:
Let all the people of the world, be fearful at his sight.
Tell all the world be not agaste, the Lord does reign above:
Yea he has set the yerth so fast, that it did never move.
And that it is the Lord alone, that rules with princely might:
To judge the nations every one, with equity and right.
The heavens shall great joy begin, the earth shall eke rejoice:
The sea with all that is theirin, shall shoute and make a noice.
The field shall joy and every thing, that spryngeth of the earth:
The wod and every tree shall sing, with gladness and with mirth.
Before the presence of the Lord, and coming of his might:
when he shall justly judge the world, and rule his folk with right.
Dominus regnauit. Psalm. lxxxxvii. I. H
The prophet exhorts all to rejoice for the coming of the kingdom of Christ,
dreadful to the rebels and Idolaters, and joyful to the just whom he
exhorts to innocence, to rejoicing and thanks giving,

THe lord does reign, where all ye earth Sing this as the. lxxxxv
may joy with pleasant voice:
And eke the yles with joyful mirth, may triumph and rejoice.
Both clouds and darkness eke do swell and round about him beat:
Yea right and justice ever dwell, and bide about his seat.
Yea fire and heat at once does run, and go before his face:
Which shall his foes and ennemies burn abroad in every place.
His lightness eke, full bright did blase, and to the world appear:
Whereat the yearthe did look and gase, with dread and deadly fear.
The hills like war did melt in sight, and presence of the Lord:
They fled before that rulers might, which gideth all the world.
The heavens eke declare and show, his justice forth abroad:
That all the world may see and know the glory of our god.
Confusion sure shall come to such, as worship Idols vain:
And eke to those that glory much, dome pictures to maintain,
For all the Idouls of the world, which they as Gods do call:
Shall feel the power of the Lord, and down to him shall fall.
With joy shall Sion here this thing, and Judah shall rejoice:
For at thy judgments they shall sing, and make a pleasant noyce.
That thou O Lord art set on hie, in all the earth abroad:
And art exalted wonderously, above each other God.
All ye that love the Lord, do this, hate all things that is ill:
For he does keep the souls of his, from such as would them spill.
And light does spring up to the just, with pleasure for his part:
Great joy, with gladness, mirth and lust to them of upright heart,
Ye rigteous in the Lord rejoice, his hollines proclayme:
Be thankful eke with heart and voice, and mindful of the same.
Cantate domino. Psalm, lxxxxviii, I. H
An Earnest exhortacyo^ to all cratures to praise the Lord for his power,
mercy and fydelitie in his promise by Christ by who^ he has communicated his
salvation to all natio^es.

OSyng ye now unto the Lord, a new and pleasant song: Sing this as the.
lxxxxv

For he has wrought throughout the world His wonders great and strong.
With his rigt hand full worthily, he does his foes devour:
And get him sealf the victory, with his own arm and power.
The Lord does make the people know his saving health and might:
The Lord does eke his justice show, in all the Heathens sight.
His grace and truth to Israel, in mind he does record:
That all the earth, has seen right well the goodness of the Lord,
Be glad in him, with joyful voice, all people of the earth:
Give thanks to God, sing and rejoice to him with joy and mirth.
Upon the harp unto him sing, give thanks to him with psalms:
Rejoice before the Lord our king, with trumpets and with shalmes.
Yea let the sea with all therein, with joy both rore and swell:
The earth likewise let it begin, with all that therein dwell.
And let the flouddes rejoice their filles, and clap their hands apace:
And eke the mountains and the hills before the Lord his face.
For he shall come to judge and try, the world and every wighte:
And rule the people mightily, with justice and with right,
Dominus regnauit. psalm. lxxxxix I. H.
He commends the power, equity, and excellency, of the kingdom of God by
Christ, over the Jew and Gentiles, and provoke them to magnyfye the same and
to serve the Lord, following the example of the ancient fathers, Mosies, Aaron,
Samuel, who calling upon God were hard in their prayers.

THe Lord does raygne, although at it, The people rage full fore: Sing this as
the. lxxxxv. p

yea he on Cherubin does sit, though all the world would rore.
The Lord that does in Sion dwell, is high and wonders great:
Above all folk he does excel, and he aloft is set.
Let all men praise thy mighty name, for it is featfull sure:
And let them magnifye the same, that holy is and pure.
The princely power of our king, does love judgment and right:
Thou rightly rulest every thing, in Jacob through thy might.
To praise the Lord our God devise, all honor to him do:
His footstool worship ye likewise, for he is holy too.
Moses, Aron, and Samuel, as priests on him did call:
When they did pray he herd them well and gave them answer all.
Within the cloud to them he spoke, then did they labor still:
To keep such laws as he did make, and pointed them until.
O Lord, our god thou did them here and aunswerst them again:
Thy mercy did on them appear. their deeds did not maintain.
O laud and praise our God and Lord, within this holy hill:
For why our God throughoute the world is holy ever still.
2 Iubilate deo omnis terra. Psalm. C.
He exhorts all to serve the Lord who has made us, and to enter into his
courts and assemblies to praise his name.

IN God the Lord be glad and light, praise him throughout the yearthe: Sing
this as the. lxvii.

Serve him and come before his sight, with singing and with mirth.
Know that the Lord our God he is, he did us make and keep:
Not we our sealues for we are his, own folk and pasture sheep.
O go into his gates always, give thanks within the same:
within his courts set forth his praise, and laud his holy name.
For why the goodness of the Lord, for evermore does raygne:
From age to age throughout the world his truth does still remain.
Miserecordiam et iudicium. Psalm. Ci. N.
David describes what government he will observe in his house and kingdom. He
will punish and correct by roting out the wicked, and cheryshing the godly
persons.

I Mercy will and judgment sing, O Lord God unto thee: Sing this as the.
lxxxi. Ps.

And wisely do in perfect way, until thou come to me.
And in the midst of my house walk, in pureness of my sprite:
And I no kind of wicked thing, will set before my sight.
I hate their work that fall away, it shall not cleave to me,
From me shall part the froward heart: none evil will I see.
Him will I stroy that sclaundereth, his neighbor privily:
The lofty heart I can not bear, nor him that looks hie.
Mine eyes shall be on them within, the land that faithful be:
In perfect way who works, shall be servant unto me:
I will no guilefull person have, within my house to dwell:
And in my presence he shall not, remain that lies does tell:
Betymes I will destroy even all, the wicked of the land:
That I may from Gods city cut, the wicked workers band.
Domine exaudi orationem. Psalm. C. ii. I. H.
It seems that this prayer was appointed to the faithful to pray in the
captivity of Babylon. A consolation for the buyldyng of the church: whereof
follows the praise of god to be published unto al posterities The conversion
of the Gentels: And the stabilytie of the church.

O Hear my prayer, Lord, and let, my cry come unto thee:
In time of troble do not hide, thy face away from me.
Inclyne thine ears to me, make haste, Sing this as the. lxvii.
to hear me when I call:
For as the smoke does fade, so do my days consume and fall.
And as a herth, my bones are burnt: my heart is smitten dead,
And withers as the grass, that I forget to eat my bread.
By reason of my groaning voice, my bones cleave to my skin:
As pellicane of wilderness, such case now am I in.
And as an oule in desert is, lo I am such a one:
I watch, and as a sparow on the house top am alone.
Lo daily in reprochefull wise, mine enmies do me scorn:
And they that do against me rage, against me they have sworn.
Surely with ashes, as with bread, my hunger I have filld,
And mingled have my drink with tears that fro mine eyes have stild,
Because of thy displeasure, Lord, thy wrath and thy disdain:
For thou have lifted me aloft, and cast me down again.
The days wherein I pas my life, are like the fleting shade:
And I am withered like the gras, that sone away does fade.
But thou, O Lord, for ever do remain in stedy place,
And thy remembrance ever does abide from race to race.
The second part.
Thou will arise, and mercy thou, to Sion wilt extend:
The time of mercy, now the time foreset is come to end.
For even in the stones thereof, thy servants do delighte,
And on the dust thereof they have, compassion in their sprite.
Then shall the Heathen peoples fear, the Lords most holy name:
And all the kings on earth shall dread thy glory and thy fame:
Then when the Lord the mighty God, again shall Syon rere,
And then when he most nobly in, his glory shall appear:
To prayer of the desolate, when he himself shall bend:
when he shall not disdain unto, their prayer to attend.
This shall be written for the age, that after shall succeed:
the people yet uncreated. the Lords renome shall sprede.
For he from his hie sanctuarye, has looked down below,
and out of Heaven has the Lord, beheld the earth also:
That of the mourning captive he, might hear the woeful cry,
And that he might deliver those, that damned are to dye:
That they in Sion may declare, the Lords most holy name,
and in Jerusalem set fourth, the praises of the same:
Then when the people of the land, and kingdoms with accord,
Shall Be assembled for to do: their service to the Lord.
The third part.
My former force of strength he has, abated in the way,
And shorter he did cut my days: thus I therefore did say:
My God, in mids of all my days, now take me not away:
Thy years endure eternally from age to age for ay.
Thou the foundations of the earth, before all time have laid,
And Lord the heavens are the work, which thine own hands have made.
Yea they shall perish and decay, but thou shall tarry still:
And they shall all in time wax old, even as a garment will.
Thou as a garment shall then change, and changed shall they be:
But thou do still abide the same, thy years do never flee.
The children of thy servants shall, continually endure,
And in thy sight their happy sede for ever shall stand sure.
1 Benedic anima mea. Psalm. Ciii. T. S.
This is a Psalm most excellent, wherein the Prophet does provoke men and
angels, and all creatures to praise the Lord for his fatherly mercyes, and
deliverance of his people from all evils for his prouivence over all things
and the preservation of the faithful.

^ My soul give laud unto the lord my ^ sprite shall do the same: and all the
secrets of ^ my heart praise ye his holy name, Give thanks ^ to god for all his
gifts, show not thy self unkind

and suffer not his benefits to slip out of thy mind.

That gave thee pardon for thy faults, and thee restored again:
For all thy weak and frail disease, and healde thee of thy pain.
4 That did redeem thy life from death, from which thou could not flee:
His mercy and compassion both, he did extend to thee.
That filled with goodness thy desire, and did prolong thy youth:
Like as the Egle casts her bill, whereby her age renueth.
The Lord with justice does repaye, all such as be oppressed:
So that their sufferings and their wrongs, are turned to the best.
his ways and his commandments to Moses he did show:
His counsels and his valiant acts, the Israelites did know.
The Lord is kind and merciful, when sinners do him grieve:
The slowest to conceive a wrath, and rediest to forgive.
He chideth not us contiuually, though we be full of strife:
Nor keeps our faults in memory, for all our sinful life.
Nor yet according to our sins, the Lord does us regard,
Nor after our iniquities, he does not us reward.
But as the space is wondrous great, twixt heaven and earth above:
So is his goodness much more large, to them that do him love.
God does remove our sins from us, and our offenses all:
As far as is the sun rising, full distant from his fall.
The second part.
And look what pit parents dear, unto their children bear:
Like pity bears the Lord to such, as worship him in fear.
The lord yt made us knows our shape, our mould and fashion just:
How weak and frail our nature is, and how we be but dust.
And how the time of mortal men, is like the withering hay:
Or like the flower right fair in field, that fadth full sone away.
Whose gloss and beauty stormy winds, do utterly disgrace:
And make that after their assaults, such blossoms have no place.
But yet the goodness of the Lord, with his shall ever stand:
Their childrens children do receive, his righteousness at hand.
I incane which keep his covenant, with all their whole desire.
And not forget to do the thing, that he does them require.
The heavens hie are made the seat, and fotestole of the Lord:
And by his power imperial, he governs all the world.
ye angels which are great in power, praise ye and bles the Lord:
Which to obey and do his will, immediately accord.
Ye noble hosts and ministers, cease not to laud him still:
Which ready are to execute, his pleasure and his will.
ye all his works in every place, praise ye his holy name:
My heart my mind, and eke my soul, praise ye also the same.
Benedic anima mea. Psalm. Ciiii, w. K
An excellent psalm to praise God for the creation of the world, and the
governance of the same by his marvelous providence: where in the Prophet
prays against the wicked, who are occasions that God diminishes his
blessings.

^ My soul praise the lord: speak good ^ of his name. O lord our great god,
how do the^ ^ appear, So passing in glory that great is thy ^ same: honor
and majesty in thee shine most ^ clear. with light as a robe, thou have thee
beclad ^ whereby all the earth thy greatness may see, the ^ heavens in such sort
thou also have spread, that ^it to a curtain compared may be.

His chamber beams lie, in the clouds full sure,
Which as his charet, are made him to bear:
And there with much swiftnes his course dothindure,
Upon the wings riding of wind in the air.
He makes his sprites: as herauldes to go:
And lightnings to serve we see also pressed:
His will to accomplish they run to and fro,
To save, or consume things, as seems him best.
He groundeth the earth, so firmly and fast,
That it once to move none have shall suck power
The deep afaire covering for it made thon have,
Which by his own nature the hills would devour,
But at thy rebuke the waters do flee,
And so give due place, thy word to obaye:
At thy voice of thunder so fearful they be,
That in their great raging, they have sone away.
The mountains full high they then up ascend:
If thou do but speak,
So likewise the valleis most quickly descend,
Where thou them appointest, remain they do still.)
Their bonds have thou set how far they shall run,
So as in their rage not that pas they can:
For God has appointed, they shall not return
The earth to destroy more, which made was for man.
He sends the springs to strong streams or lakes,
Which run do full swyft among the huge hills,
Where both the wild asses, their thirst often times slakes,
And beasts of the mountains thereof drink their filles,
By these pleasant springs or fouutaynes full fair.
The fowls of the air abide shall and dwell:
Who moved by nature to hoppe here and there,
Among the grene branches their songs shall excel,
The mountains to moist, the clouds he does use:
The earth with his works are wholly repleat:
14 So as the brute cattle he does not refuse,
But grass does provide them, and herb for man's meat.
Yea bread, wine and oil, he made for man's sake,
His face to refresh, and heart to make strong,
The ceders of Liban this great Lord did make,
Which trees he does nourish, that grow up so long.
In these may birds build, and make there their nest:
In fur trees the storckes remain and abide:
The hie hills are succors, for wild goats to rest,
And eke the rocks stonye for conyes to hyde.
The moon then is set her seasons to run,
The days from the nights thereby to discearne:
And by thee descending also of the sun,
The cold from heat always thereby we do learn.
When darkness does come by Gods will and power,
Then crepe forth do all the beasts of the wood:
21 The lions range roaring their pray to devour.
But yet it is thou Lord, which give them food.
As Soon as the sun is up they retire.
To touch in their dens then are they full feign,
That man do his work may: as right does require:
Till night come and call him, to take rest again.
The third part.
How sundry, O Lord, are all thy works found.
With wisdom full great, they are in deed wrought:
So that the whole world of thy praise does sound,
And as for thy riches, they pass all men's thought:
So is the great sea, which large is and broad,
Where things that crepe, swarm. and beasts of each sort:
There both mighty ships sail, and some lie at road:
The whale huge and monstrous there also does sport.
All things on thee wait: thou do them relieve,
And thou in due time full well do them feed.
28 Now when it does please thee, the same so to give,
They gather full gladly those things which they need,
Thou openest thine hand, and they find such grace,
That they with good things are filled we see:
But sore are they troubled, if thou turn thy face.
For if thou their breath take, vile dust then they be.
Again when thy sprite from thee does proceed,
All things to appoint, and what shall ensue,
Then are they created, as thou have decreed,
And do by thy goodness the dry earth renew.
The praise of the Lord, for ever shall last,
Who may in his works, by right well rejoice.
His look can the earth make, to tremble full fast,
And likewise the mountains to smoke at his voice.
To this Lord and God sing will I always:
So long as I live, my God praise will I
Then am I most certain my words shall him please:
I will rejoice in him, to him will I cry.
The sinners, O Lord, consume in thine ire,
And eke the perverse them root out with shame:
But as for my soul, now let it still desire.
And say with the faithful, praise ye the Lords Name.
Confitemini domino. Psalm. Cv. N.
He prayseth the singular goodness of God who has of all the people of the
world chosen a peculier people to him self. and having chosen them, never
cease to do them good, even for his promise sake.

Give praises unto God the Lord, and call upon his name:
Among the people eke declare, his works, to spread his fame. Sing this as the.
lxxxxv

Singye unto the Lord, I say, and sing unto him praise,
And talk of all the wondrous works, that he has wrought always.
In honor of his holy name, rejoice with one accord,
And let the heart also rejoice of them that seek the Lord.
Seek ye the Lord, and seek the strength of his eternal might,
And seek his face continually, And presence of his sight.
The wondrous works that he has don, keep still in mindful heart,
Ne let the iugements of his mouth, out of your mind depart,
Ye that of faithful Abraham, his servant are the sede,
ye his elect, the children that of Jacob do proceed:
For he, he only is I say, the mighty Lord our God,
And his most rightful iugements are through all the earth abroad.
His promise and his covenant, which he has made to his
He has remembered evermore, to thousands of degrees.
The. ii. part.
The covenant which he has made, with Abraham long ago,
And faithful oath which he has sworn to Isaac also,
And did confirm the same for law, that Jacob should obey:
And for eternal covenant to Israel foray,
when thus he said, lo I to you, all Canaan land will give,
The lot of your inheritance wherein your sede shall live,
Although their number at that time, did very small appear,
yea very small, and in the land they then but strangers were.
While yet they walked from land to land, without a sure abode,
And while fro sundry kingdoms they did wander all abroad,
And wrong at none oppressers hand, he suffered them to take,
But even the great and mighty kings, reproved for their sake.
And thus he said, touch ye not those, that mine anointed be,
Ne do the prophets any harm, that do pertayne to me.
He called a dearth upon the land, of death he stroyed the store:
But he against their time of need, had sent a man before.
The third part.
Even Joseph which had once ben sold to live a slave in woe:
Whose feet they hurt in stocks, whose soul, the iron pearst also.
Until the time came when his cause, was known apparently,
The mighty word of God the Lord, his faultles truth did try.
The king sent and deliuerd him, from prison where he was:
The ruler of the people then, did freely let him pas:
And over all his house he made, him Lord to bear the swey,
and of his substance made him have, the rule and all the stay,
That he might to his will instruct the princes of his land,
And wisdoms lore his ancient men, might teach to understand.
Then into the Egiptian land, came Israel also:
And Jacob in the land of Ham, did live a stranger thoo.
His people he excedingly, in number made to flow:
And over all their enemies, in strength he made them grow.
whose heart he turned, that they with hate his people did entreat:
And did his servants wrongfully, Abuse with false deceit.
His faithful servant Moses then. and Aaron whom he chose,
He did command to go to them, his message to disclose.
The wondrous message of his signs, among them they did show:
And wonders in the land of Ham, then did they work also.
Darkness he sent, and made it dark, in deed of brighter day,
And unto his commission they did not disobey.
He turned their waters into blood, he did their fishes slay:
Their land brought frogs, eue^ in yt place where their king Pharao lay.
He spoke and at his voice there came, great swarms of noisome flies,
And all the quarters of their land, were filld with crauling lyse.
He gave them cold and stony hayle, instead of milder rain:
And fiery flames within their land, he sent unto their pain.
He smote their vines, and al their trees whereon their figs did grow,
And all the trees within their coasts, down did he overthrow,
He spoke: then caterpillars did, and greshoppers abound,
Which eat the grass in all their land and fruit of all their ground.
The. v. part.
The first begotten in their land, eke deadly did he smite,
yea the beginning and first fruit, of all their strength and might,
With gold and silver he them brought, from Egypt land to pass,
And in the number of their tribes, no feeble one there was.
Egypt was glad and joyful then, when they did thense depart:
For terror and the fear of them, was fallen upon their heart.
To shroude them from the parching heat a cloud he did display:
And fire he sent to give them light, when night had hid the day.
They asked and he caused quayles, to rain at their request,
And fully with the bread of heaven, their hunger be represt.
He opend then the stony rock, and waters gushed out,
And in the dry and parched grounds like rivers ran about.
For of his holy covenant, ay myndefull was he thoe:
Which to his servant Abraham, he plighted long ago.
He brought his people forth with mirth and his elect with joy:
Out of the cruel land where they, had lived in great anoye.
And of the heathen men he gave, to them the fruitful lands,
The labors of the people eke they took into their hands.
That they his holy statutes might, observe for evermore.
And faithfully obey his laws, praise ye the Lord therefore.
Confitemine domino. Psalm. Cvi. N.
The people dispersed under Antiochus do magnify the goodness of God emonge
the just and repentant: Desiring to be brought again into the land by Gods
merciful vysytacion. And after the manifold meruayles of God wrought in their
deliverance forth of Egypt and the great ingratitude of the people rehearsed,
they do pray and dedesier to be gathered from among the Heathen to the intent
they may praise the name of the God of Israel.

Praise ye the Lod, for he is good, Sing this as the. lxxxxv
his mercy dures for ay:
Who can express his noble acts, or all his praise display.
They blessed are that iugment keep, and justly do always:
With favor of thy people, Lord, remember me I pray,
And with thy saving health O Lord, vouchesafe to visit me:
That I the great felicytie, of thine elect may see.
And with thy peoples joy I may, a joyful mind posses:
And may with thine inheritance, a glorying heart expres.
Both we and eke our fathers all, have sinned every one:
We have committed wickedness, and leudly we have done,
The wonders great which thou O lord have done in Egypt land:
Our fathers, though they saw them al, yet did not understand.
Nor they thy mercies multitude, did keep in thankful mind?
But at the sea yea the red sea, rebelled most unkind.
Nevertheless he saved them, for honor of his name,
That he might make his power known and spread abroad with fame.
The red sea he did then rebuke, and forthwith it was dried:
And as in wilderness, so through, the deep he did them guide
He saved them from the cruel hand, of their despitefull so
And from the enmies hand he did, deliver them also.
The second part.
The waters their oppressors whelmd, not one was left alive,
Then they believed his words, and praise in song they did him give.
But by and by unthankfully, his works they clean forgot:
And for his counsel and his will, they did neglect to wait.
But lusted in the wilderness. with fond and gredy lust,
And in the desert tempted God, the stay of all their trust,
And then their wanton minds desire he suffered them to have,
but wasting leannes there withal into their soul he gave,
Then, when they lodged in the tents, at Moses they did grutch,
Aaron the holy of the Lord, so did they envy much.
Therefore the earth did open wide, and Dathan did devour:
And all Abrams company, did cover in that hour.
In their assembly kindled was, the whote consuming fire,
And wasting flame did then burn up, the wicked in his ire.
Upon the hill of Horeb they an idol calf did frame,
And there the molten image they did worship of the same.
Into the likeness of a calfe, that fedeth on the grass:
Thus they their glory turned and all, their honor did deface.
And God their only savior, unkindly they forgot,
Which many great and mighty things in Egip land hadt wrought,
The third part.
And in the land of Ham for them. most wondrous works had done
And by the red sea dreadful things performed long agone.
Therefore for their so showing them, forgetful and unkind,
To bring destruction on them all he purposde in his mind.
Had not his chosen Moses stood, before them in the break:
To turn his wrath, lest he on them, with slaughter should him wreke.
They did despise the pleasant land, that he beheght to give:
Yea and the works that he had spoke, they did no whit believe:
But in their tents with grudging heart, they wickedly repined,
Nor to the voice of God the Lord, they gave a harkning mind,
Therefore against them lifted he, his strong revenging hand,
Them to destroy in wilderness, ere they should see the land.
And to destroy their sede among the nations with his rod,
And through the contrees of the world to scatter them abroad.
To Baal Peor then they did, adioyne themselves also,
And eat the offringes of the dead so they forsook him tho.
Thus with their own inventions, his wrath they did provoke,
And in his so inkindled wrath, the plage upon them broke.
But Phineas stood up with zeal, the sinners vile to stay,
And judgment he did execute, and then the plage did stay,
The. iiii. part.
It was imputed unto him. for righteousness that day,
And from thenceforth so compted is from race to race foraye.
At waters eke of Meribah, they did him angry make,
Yea so far fourth that Moses was then punished for their sake,
Because they vexed his sprite so sore, that in impatient heat
His lips spoke unadvisedly, his feruor was so great,
Nor as the Lord commanded them. they slew the people thoe,
But were among the heathen mixed, and learnde their works also,
And did their idols serve, which were their ruin and decay,
To feends their sons and daughters they did offer up and slay.
yea with unkindly murdring knife, the giltles blood they spilt,
yea their own sons and daughters blood without all cause of gilt,
Whom they to Canaan idols then, offered with wicked hand,
And so with blood of innocents, defiled was the land.
Thus were they stained with the works of their own filthy way,
And with their own inventions, a whoring did they stray.
Therefore against his people was the Lords wrath kind led sore,
And even his own in heritance therefore he did abhor.
Into the hands of heathen men, he gave them for a prey:
And made their foes the lords who^ they were forced to obey.
The, v, part.
Yea and their hateful enemies, oppressed them in the land:
And they were humbly made to stoop as subjects to their hand.
Full oftentimes from thrall had he, deliuerd them before,
But with their counsels they to wrath provoked him evermore.
Therefore they by their wickedness, were brought full low to lie.
yet when he saw them in distres, he harkned to their cry.
He called to mind his covenant, which he to them had swore.
And by his mercies multitude, repented him therefore.
And favor he them made to find, before the sight of those:
That led them captive from their land, when erst they were their foes.
Save us, O Lord that art our God, save us O Lord we pray,
And from among the Heathen folk, Lord, gather us away.
That we may spread the noble praise, of thy most holy name,
That we may glory in thy praise and sounding of thy fame.
The Lord the God of Israel, be blessed for evermore.
Let all the people say Amen. praise ye the Lord therefore.
Confitemini domino. Psalm. Cvii. VV. K.
The Prophet exhorts all those that are redeemed by the Lord and gathered unto
him, to give thanks for this merciful providence of God, governing all
things at his good pleasure, sending good and evil, prosperity and
adversity, to bring men unto him. Therefore as the righteous thereat rejoice,
so shall the wicked have their mouths stopped.

Give thanks unto the Lord our God, Sing this as the. xxix. Psalm.
for gracious is he:
And that his mercy has none end, all mortal men may se.
Suthe as the Lord redeemed has, with thanks should praise his name
And show how they from foes wet fred, and you he wrought the same,
He gathered them forth of the lands, that lay so far about:
From East to west, from north to south his hand did find them out.
They wandered in the wilderness, and strayed from the way,
And found no city where to dwell, that serve might for their stay.
Whose thirst and honger was so great in these deserts so void:
That faintnes did them sore assalt, and eke their souls anoyde.
Then did they cry in their distres, unto the Lord for aid,
Who did remove their troublous state, according as they prayde.
And by that way which was most right be led them like a guide:
That they might to a city go, and there also abide.
Let men therefore before the Lord, confess his goodness then:
And show the wonders, 'that he does, before the sons of men.
For he the empty soul sustaynde, whom thirst had made to faynte:
The hungry soul with goodness fed, and did them eke acquainte:
Such as do dwell in darkness deep where they of death do wait,
Fast bound to taste such troublous storms as iron chains do threate:
The second part.
For that against the lords own words they sought so to rebel.
Esteming light his counsels high, which do so far excel.
But when he humbled them full low, they then fell down with grief,
And none was found, so much to help whereby to get relief.
Then did they cry in their distres, unto the Lord for aid:
Who did remove their troublous state, according as they prayde.
For he from darkness out them brought and from deaths dreadful shade,
Bursting with force the iron bands, which did before them lade.
Let men therefore before the Lord, confess his kindness then:
And show the wonders that he does, before the sons of men.
For he threw down their gates of bras and brake them with strong hand
Theyron bars he smote in two: nothing could him withstand.
The foolish folk great plagues do feel and cannot from them wend:
But hepe on me to those they have, because they do offend.
Their soul so much did loathe all meat that none they could abide:
Whereby death had them almost caught, as they full truly tryde.
Then did they cry in their distres, unto the Lord for aid:
Who did remove their troublous state, according as they prayde.
For he then sent to them his word, which health did sone restore,
And brought them from those dangers deep wherein they were before.
The third part.
Let men therefore before the Lord, confess his kindness then,
And show the wonders that he does, before the sons of men.
And let them offer sacrifice, with thanks and also fear,
And speak of all his wondrous works with glad and joyful cheer.
Such as in ships or brittell barks, into the seas descend,
Their merchandise through fearful flods to compass and to end.
Those men are forced to behold, the Lords works, what they be:
And in the dangerous deep the same, most marvelous they see.
For at his word, the stormy wind, arises in a rage:
And stirs up the surges so, as naught can them assuage.
Then are they lifted by so high. the clouds they seem to gain:
And plunging down the depth until, their souls consume with pain.
And like a drunkard, to and fro, now here now there they reele:
As men with tear of wit bereft, or had of sense no feel.
Then did they cry in their distress, unto the Lord for aid:
Who did remove their troublous state according as they prayde.
For with his word the Lord does make the sturdie storm to cease:
So that the great waves from their rage, are brought to rest and peace.
Then are men glad when rest is come which they so much do crave,
And are by him in haven brought, which they so feign would have.
The forth part.
Let men therefore before the Lord, confess his kindenes then:
And show the wonders that he does before the sounes of men,
32 Let them in presence of the folk, with praise extol his name:
And where the elders do convent, let them there do the same.
For running floods to dry deserts, he does often change and turn:
And dries up, as it were dust, the springing well and burn.
A fruitful land with pleasures decked, full barren does he make.
When on their sins, which dwell therein he does just vengeance take.
Again the wilderness full rude, he makes fruit to bear:
With pleasant springs of water clear though none before were there.
Wherein such hungrye souls are set, as he does freely choose,
That they a city may them build to dwell in for their use.
That they may sow their pleasant la^d and vineyardes also plant:
To yield them fruits of such increase, as none may seem to want.
They multiplye exceadingly: the Lord does bles them so:
Who does also their brut beasts make by numbers great to grow.
But when the faithful are low brought by the oppressors stout:
And minish do through many plagues, that compass them about,
Then does he princes bring to shame, which did them so oppres,
And likewise caused them to err, within the wilderness.
But yet the poor he rayseth up, out of his troubles deep:
And often times does his train augme^t much like a flock of sheep.
The righteous shall behold this sight, and also much rejoice:
whereas the wicked and perverse, with grief shall stop their voice.
But who is wise that now full well, he may these things record?
For certainly such shall perceive, the kindness of the Lord.
Paratum cor meum. Psalm. Cviii. N.
This psalm is composed of two other psalms before, the seven and fyftye and
the sixty. The matter here contained is, That David gives himself with heart
and voice to praise the Lord, and assures him self of the promise of God
concerning his kingdom over Israel, and his power against other nations, who
though he seem for to forsake us for a time, yet he alone in the end will
cast down our enemies.

O God, my heart prepared is, Sing this as the. lxxxxv
and eke my tongue is so.
I will advance my voice in song, and geuyug praise also.
Awake my viole and my harp, sweet melody to make.
And in the morning I my self, right early will awake.
By me among the people, Lord, still praised shall thou be,
And I among the Heathen folk, will sing, O Lord, to thee.
Because thy mercy, Lord is great, above the heavens hie,
And eke thy truth does reche the clouds within the lofty sky.
Above the sterry heavens height exalt thy self, O God,
And Lord display upon the earth, thy glory all abroad.
That thy derely beloved may, be set at liberty.
Help, O my God, with thy right hand, and harken unto me.
God in his holiness has spoke: wherefore my joys abound,
Sychem I shall divide, and mete, the vale of Sucoth ground:
And Gilead shall be mine own, Manasses mine shall be,
My head strength Ephraim, and Law shall Judah give for me:
Moab my washpot, and my shoe, on Edom will I throw,
Upon the land of Palestine, in triumph will I goo,
Who shall into the city strong, be guide to conduict me,
Or who by whom to Edom land, conveyed shall I be?
Is it not thou, O God, which late, had us forsaken quyte:
And thou O Lord which with our host did not go fourth to fight?
Give us, O Lord, thy saving aid, when trouble does assail:
For all the help of man is vain. and can no whit avail.
Through God we shall do valiant acts and worthy of renown:
He shall subdue our enemies, ye he shall tread them down.
Deus laudem meam. Psalm, Cix. N.
David being falslye accused by flatterers unto Sawl, prays God to help him
and to destroy his enemies. And under them he speaks of Judas the traitor
unto Jesus Christ, and of all the like enemies of the children of God: And
desires so to be delivered, that his enemies may know the work of God, Then
does he promise to give praises unto God.

IN specheles silence do not hold, O God thy tongue always, Sing this as the.
lxxxxv

O God, even thou I say that art. the God of all my praise.
The wicked mouth and gilefull mouth, on me disclosed be,
And they with false and lying tongue, have spoken unto me.
Even so do I depart away, as does declynyng shade:
And as the grasshopper, so I am shaken of and fade.
With fasting long from needful fode, enfebled are my knees:
And all her fatnes has my flesh, enforced ben to lose.
And I also a vile reproach, to them was made to be.
And they that did upon me look: did shake their heds at me.
But thou, O Lord that art my God, mine aid and succor be:
According to thy merycy, Lord, save and deliver me.
And they shall know thereby, that this (Lord) is thy mighty hand:
And that thou thou have done it, Lord, so shall they understand.
Although they curse with spite, yet thou shall bles with loving voice:
They shall arise and come to shame, thy servant shall rejoice.
Let them be clothed all with shame, that enmies are to me*
And with confusyon as a cloak, eke couerd let them be.
But greatly I will with mg mouth, give thanks unto the Lord,
And I among the multitude his praises will record.
For he with help at his right hand, will stand the pooreman by,
To save him from the men that would condemn his soul to dye.
Dixit dominus domino. Plalm. Cx. N
David prophecyeth of the power and everlasting kingdom given to Christ and
of his Pristhod which should put an end to the Pristode of Leuy.

Sing this as the. lxviii. Psalm.

THe Lord did say unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand.
Till I have made thy foes a stoule, whereon thy fete shall stand.
The Lord shall out of Syon send, the scepture of thy might:
A midde thy mortal foes be thou, the ruler in their sight.
And in the day on which they reign and power they shall see:
Then hearby frewill offringes shall, thy people offer thee.
Yea with a holy worshipping, then shall they offer all:
Thy birthes dew is the dew that does, from womb of morning fall.
The Lord has sworn and never will, repent what he does say,
By thorder of Melchisedech thou art a priest for ay.
The Lord thy God on thy righthand, that stands for thy stay
Shall wound for thee the stately kings upon his wrathful day.
The Heathen he shall judge and fill, the place with bodies dead,
And over diverse contreyes shall in sonder smite the head.
And he shall drink out of the broke, that runs in the way:
Therefore he shall lift up on hye, his ryall head that day.
Confitebor tibi domine. Psalm. Cxi. N
He gives thanks to the Lord for his merciful works toward his church, and
declares wherein true wisdom and right knowledge consists.

^ WIth heart I do accord To praise and ^ laud the Lord Inpresence of the
just; For

^ great his works are found. To search them ^ such are bound, as do him
love and trust, ^ His works are glorious: Also his rightousnes ^ It does
endure for ever, His wondrous works ^ he would we still remember should, his
mercy ^ fails never.

Such as do love him bear, a portion full fair.
He has up for them laid:
For this they shall well find,
He will them have in mind, and keep them, as he said.
For he did not disdain, his works to show them plain,
By lightnings and by thunders. when he the Heathens land.
Did give into their hand,
Of all his works insueth both judgment, right and truth.
Whereto his statutes tend: they are decreed sure.
For ever to endure, which equity does end:
Redemption he gave, his people for to save,
And has also required, his promise not to fail,
But always to prevail. his holy name be feared.
Whosoever with heart full layne, true wisdom would attain,
The Lord fear and obey. such as his Laws do keep,
Shall knowledge have full deep, his praise shall last for aye.
Beatus vir. Psalm. Cxii. VV. K.
He prayseth the felicity of them that fear God, and condemns the ^^rsed
state of the contemners of God.

^ THe man is blessed that god does fear ^ And that his laws does love in deed:
His sede ^ on earth God will vpreare. And bles such as ^ from him proceed: His
house with good he will ^ fulfill: His rightousnes endure shall still.

Unto the righteous does arise, In trouble joy, in darkness light:
Compassion in his eyes, and mercy always in his sight:
yea, pity moves such to lend: he does by judgment things expend.
And surely such shall never fail: for in remembrance had is he:
7 No tidings ill can make him quayle, who in the Lord sure hope does se.
His heart is firm, his fear is past: for he shall se his foes down cast.
He did well for the poor provide, his rightousnes shall still remain,
And his estate with praise abide, though that the wicked man disdain
yea, gnash his teeth thereat shall he, and so consume his state to see.
Laudate pueri. Psalm Cxiii. VV. K.
An exhortation to praise the Lord for his providence, in that, that contrary
to the course of nature he works in his Church.

^ YE children, which do serve ye lord, ^ praise ye his name with one accord,
yea, blessed ^ be always his name: who from the rising ^ of the sun, til it
return where it begone,

^ is to be praised with great fame. The Lord all ^ peoples does surmount: As
for his glory we may ^ count, above the heavens high to be. With ^ God the
Lord who may compare, whose dwellyngs ^ in the heavens are? of such great
power ^ and force is he.

He does abase him self, we know, things to behold both here below,
And also in heaven above,
7 The nedie out of dust to draw, And eke the poor, which help none saw,
His only mercy did him move: And so him set in high degree,
with princes of great dignity, That rule his people with great fame.
The barren he does make to bear,
And with great joy her fruit to rear: therefore praise ye his holy name.
In exitu Israel. C. xiiii. VV. Whit.
How the Israelites were delivered out of Egypt, and of the wonderful
miracles that God showed at that time, which put us in remembrance of Gods
great mercyes toward his children, and of our unthankfulness for the same.

WHen Israel by Gods addres, from Pharos land was bent: Sing this as the.
ixxviii, psa.

And Jacobs house the strangers left, and in the same train went.
In Judah God his glory shewde, his holiness most bright:
So did the Israelites declare, his kingdom, power and might,
The sea it saw, and suddenly, as all amassed did flee:
The roaring streaimes of Iordans flood, reculed backwardly.
As rams afraid, the mountains skipt, their strength did them forsake:
And as the sely tremblyng lambs, their tops did beat and shake,
What ayled the sea, as all amassed, so suddenly to flee?
Ye rowlyng waves of Iordans flood, why ran ye backwardly?
Why shoke ye hills as Rams afraid, why did your strength so shake:
Why did your tops as trembling lambs for fear quiver and quake.
O earth confess thy soueraygne Lord and dread his mighty hand:
Before the face of Jacobs God, fear ye both sea and land.
I mean the God which from hard rocks does cause many floods appear:
And from the stony flint does make, gush out the fountaynes clear.
Non nobis domine. Psalm. Cxv. N.
A prayer of the faithful, oppressed by idolatrous tirants, against who^ they
desire that God would succor them: for as much as there is no comparyson
between him and their false God, or Idols, trustyng most constantly that God
will preserve them in this their need, seeing that he has adopted. and
received them to his favor: promising finally, that they will not be
unmindful, of so great a benefyte, if it would please God to hear their
prayer, and deliver them by his omnipotent power.

NOt unto us, Lord, not to us, but to thy name give praise,
both for the mercy and the truth, that are in thee always.
Why shall the Heathen scorners say, where is their God become?
Our God in heaven is, and what, he will, that has he done.
Their idols silver are and gold, work of men's hands they be:
They have a mouth and do not speak: and eyes, and do not see.
And they have ears joined to their heds and do not hear at all:
And noses eke they formed have, and do not smell withal.
And hands they have, and handle not* and feet and do not goo:
A throat they have, yet through the same they make no sound to blow.
Those that make them be like to them, and those whose trust they be.
O Israel trust in the Lord, their help and shield is he.
O Aarons house trust in the Lord: their help and shield is he:
Trust ye the Lord that fear the Lord* their help and sheld is he.
The Lord has mindful ben of us, and will us bles also:
On Isreal's and Aarons house, his blissing he will show.
They did beset me round about, with words of hateful spite:
Without all cause of my desert, against me did they fight,
For my good will they were my foes, but then began I to pray:
my good with ill, my frendlynes, with hate they did repay,
The second part.
Set thou the wicked over him, to have the upper hand:
At his right hand eke suffer thou, his hateful foe to stand.
When he is judged, let him then, condemned be therein:
And let the prayer that he makes, be turned into sin.
Few be his days, his charge also, let thou an other take,
His children let be fatherles, his wife a wydow make:
Let his offspring be vagabundes, to beg and seek their bread,
wandering out of the wasted place, where erst they have been fed.
Let covetous extorcionet, catch all his goods and store,
And let the strangers spoil the fruits of all his toil before.
Let there be none to pity him, let there be none at all:
That on his children fatherles, will let their mercy fall.
And so let his posterity, for ever be destroyed:
Their name out blotted in the age, that after shall succed.
Let not his fathers wickedness, from Gods remembrance fall,
And let thou not his mothers sin, be done away at all.
But in the presence of the Lord, let them remain foray,
That from the earth their memory, he may cut clean away.
Since mercy he forgot to show, but did pursue with spite:
The troubled man and sought to slay, the woeful hearted wight.
The third part.
As he did cursing love, it shall, betide unto him so:
And as he did not blessing love, it shall be far him froe.
As he with cursing clad himself, so it like water shall:
Into his bowels, and like oil, into his bones befall.
As garment let it be to him, to cover him for ay,
And as a girdle wherewith he, shall girded be always.
Lo let this same be from the Lord, the guerdon of my foe,
Yea and of those that evil speak, against my soul also.
But thou, O Lord that art my God, deal thou I say with me.
After thy name: deliver me, for good thy mercies be:
Because in depth of great distres, I nedy am and pore,
And eke within my payned breast, my heart is wounded sore.
Them that be fearers of the Lord, the lord will bless them all:
Even he will bless them every one, the great and eke the small.
To you I say the loving Lord, will multiply his grace,
To you and to the children that, shall follow of your race.
Ye are the blessed of the Lord, even of the lord I say,
Which both the heaven and the earth, has made and set in stay.
The heavens, yea the heavens hye, belong unto the Lord:
The earth unto the sons of men, he gave of free accord.
They that be dead do not with praise, setfourth the Lords renoume,
Nor any that into the place, of silence do go down.
But we will praise the Lord our god, from hencefourth and foray
Sound ye the praises of the Lord, praise ye the Lord I say.
Dilexi quoniam. Psalm. Cxvi N,
David being in great danger of Saull in the desert of Mammon, perceiving the
great and inestimable love of God toward him, mangnyfyeth such great mercyes,
and protests that he will be thankful for the same.

I Love the Lord, because my voice, and prayer heard has he: Sing this as
the. lxxxxv

When in my days I called on him, he bowed his ear to me,
Even when the snares of cruel death, about beset me round:
When pains of hell me caught, and when I woe and sorrow found.
upon the name of God my Lord, then did I call, and say:
Deliver thou my soul, O Lord, I do thee humbly pray.
The Lord is very merciful, and just he is also,
And in our God compassion, does plentifully flow.
The Lord in safety does preserve, all those that simple be:
I was in woeful miserye, and he releued me.
And now my soul, since thou art safe, return unto thy rest:
For largely lo the Lord to thee, his bounty has expressed:
Because thou have delivered, my soul from deadly thrall,
My Moisted eien from mournful tears my slidyng fete from fall:
Before the Lord I in the land, of life will walk therefore.
I did believe, therefore I spoke, for I was trobled sore.
I said in my distres and fear. that all men liars be:
What shall I pay the Lord for all, his benefits to me?
The wholesome cup of saving health, I thankefully will take:
And on the Lords name I will call, when I my prayer make.
I to the Lord will pay the vows, that I have him behight,
Yea even at this present time, in all his peoples sight.
Right dear and precious in his sight, the Lord does ay esteem:
The death of all his holy ones, what ever men do deem.
Thy servant Lord, thy servant lo, I do my self confess,
Son of thy handmayd thou have broke the bonds of my distres.
And I will offer up to thee, a sacryfyce of praise:
And I will call upon the name, of God the Lord always.
I to the Lord will pay the voues, that I have him behight,
Yea even at this present time, in all his peoples sight,
yea in the courts of Gods own house and in the mids of thee:
O thou Jerusalem I say. wherefore the Lord praise ye.
Laudate dominum. Psalm. Cxvii. N. He exhorts the Gentels to praise God,
because he has accomplished as well to them as to the Jews, the promys of
life everlasting by Jesus Christ.
O All the natyons of the world, Praise ye the Lord always: Sing this as
the. ixxxxv

And all ye people every where, set fourth his noble praise.
For great his kindness is to us, his truth endures for ay:
Wherefore praise ye the Lord our God, praise ye the Lord I say:
Confitemini domino. Psalm. CXviii. M. David reiectid of Saul and of the
people, at the time appointed obtained the kingdom, for the which he bids
all them that sear the Lord, tobe thankful and under his person, in all this
was Christ lively setforthe, who should be of his people rejected.
O Give ye thanks unto the Lord, Sing this as a 115. Psalm.
for gracious is he:
Because his mercy does endure* for ever toward thee.
Let Israel confess and say, his mercy dures for ay:
Now let the house of Aaron say, his mercy dures for aye.
Let all that fear the Lord our God; even now confess and say:
The mercy of the Lord our God, endures still for aye.
In trouble and in heuines, unto the Lord I cride:
Which lovingly hard me at large, my suit was not denyde.
The Lord him self is on my side, I will not stand in dout:
Nor fear what man can do to me, when God standth me about.
The lord does take my part with them, that help to succor me:
Therefore I shall see my desire, upon mine enemy.
Better it is to trust in God, then in man's mortal sede:
Or to put confidence in kings or princes in our need,
All nations have in closed me, and compassed me round:
But in the name of God shall I, mine enemies confound.
They kept me on every side, they kept me in I say:
But through the lords most mighty name, I shall work their decay.
They came about me all like bees, but yet in the lords name:
I quenched their thorns, that were on fire and will destroy the same.
Thou have with force, thrust fore at me, that I in deed might fall:
But through the lord I found such help that they were vanquist all.
The lord is my defense and strength my joy, my mirth and song:
He is become for me in deed, a savior most strong.
The right hand of the lord our God, does bring to pas great things:
He causes voice of joy and health, in rightous men's dwellynges,
The right hand of the lord does bring most mighty things to pas:
his hand has the preeminens, his force is, as it was,
I will not dye but ever live. to utter and declare:
The lord his might, and wondrous power his works and what they are.
The lord himself has chastened, and has corrected me:
But has not given me over yet, to death as ye may see.
Set open unto me the gates', of truth and righteousness:
That I may enter into them, the lords praise to confess.
This is the gate even of the lord, which shall not so he shut:
But good and righteous men always, shall enter into it.
I will give thanks to thee O Lord, because thou have heard me:
And art become most lovingly, a savior unto me.
The stone which ere this time among the builders was refused:
is now become the corner stone, and chefely to be used.
This was the mighty work of God, this was the Lords own fact,
And it is marvelous to be hold, with eyes that noble act.
This is the joyful day in deed, which God himself has wrought:
Let us be glad and joy therein, in heart, in mind and thought.
Now help me Lord and prosper us, we wish with one accord:
Blessed be he that comes to us, in the name of the Lord.
God is the Lord that shows us light: bind ye therefore with cord:
Your sacrifice to the alter, and give thanks to the Lord.
Thou art my God I will confess, and render thanks to thee:
Thou art my God, and I will praise, thy mercy toward me.
O give ye thanks unto the Lord, for gracious is he:
Because his mercy does endure, for ever toward thee.
Beati immaculati. Psalm Cxix. VV. VV.
In this psalm is contained an exquisit art, and a wonderful vehemencye in
setting forth the praises of gods law: wherein the Prophet cannot satisfye
himself, nor sufficyently expres the affection which he bears thereunto:
adding moreover many notable complaynts and consolatyons, wherefore it is mete
that all the faithful have it always both in heart and mouth, and in the
Ebrue every vii, verses begin with one lerter of the Alphabet.

^ BLessed are they that perfect are, and ^ pure in mind and heart: whose lives
and conversation, ^ from Gods laws never start. 2. Blessed are ^ they that
give them selves his statutes to observe: ^ Sekyng the Lord, with all their
heart, ^ and never from him swerue.

Doubtless such men go not astraye, nor do no wicked thing:
Which steadfastly walk in his paths, without any wandering.
It is thy will and commandment, that with attentive head:
Thy noble and deuyne precepts, we learn and keep in deed.
Oh would to God it might thee please, my ways so to adres:
That I might both in heart and voice, thy laws keep and confess.
So should no shame my life atteyne, whylst I thus set mine eyes:
And bend my mind always to muse. on thy sacred decrees.
Then will I praise with upright heart, and magnifye thy name:
When I shall learn thy judgments just, and likewise prove the same.
And wholly will I give my self, to keep thy laws most right:
For sake me not for ever (Lord) but show thy grace and might.
The. ii. part. MTH

By what means may a young man best. his life learn to amend:
If that he mark and keep thy word, and therein his time spend.
Unfaynedly I have thee sought. and thusse king abide:
Oh never suffer me (O Lord) from thy precepts to slide.
Within my heart and secret thoughts, thy words I have hyd still:
That I might not at any time, offend thy godly will.
We magnifye thy name (O Lord) and praise thee evermore.
Thy statutes of most worthy fame, (O Lord) teach me therefore?
My lips have never ceast to preach and publysh day and night:
The judgments all, which did proceed from thy mouth full of might.
Thy testymonies and thy ways, please me noles in deed.
Then all the treasures of the earth, which worldlings make their mede
Of thy precepts I will still muse, and therefore frame my talk:
As at a mark so will I aim, thy ways how I may walk.
My only joy shall be so fixed, and on thy laws so set:
That nothing can me so far blind, that I thy words for get.
The third part. MMEL

Grant to thy servant now such grace as may my life prolong:
Thy holy word then will I keep, both in my heart and tongue.
18 Mine eyes which were dim and shut up, so open and make bright:
That of thy law and merueilous works I may have the clear sight.
I am a stranger in this earth, wandering now here, now there:
Thy word therefore to me disclose, my fotesteppes for to clear.
My soul is ravished with desire, and never is at rest.
But seeks to know thy judgments hie and what may please thee best,
The proud men and malicious, thou have destroyed echone:
And cursed are such as do not, thy hests attend upon.
Lord turn me from rebuke and shame which wicked men conspire:
For I have kept thy couenaunts, with zele as hot as fire.
The princes great in counsel sat, and did against me speak:
But then thy servant thought how he, thy statutes might not break.
For why thy covenants are my joy, and my great hearts solace:
They serve instead of counselors, my matters for to pas.
The. iiii part. DALETH

I am alas, as brought to grave, and almost turned to dust:
Restore therefore my life again, as thy promise is just.
My ways when I acknowledged, with mercy thou did hear:
Here now eftsoon, and me instruct, thy laws to love and fear.
Teach me once thoroughly for to know thy precepts and thy lore:
Thy works then will Imeditate, and lay them up in store.
My soul I feel so sore oppressed: that it melts for grief:
According to thy word therefore, have Lord to send relyef.
From lying and deceitful lyppes, let thy grace me defend:
And that I may learue thee to love, thy holy law me send.
The way of truth both straight and sure, I have chosen and found:
I set thy judgment me before, which keep me safe and sound.
Since then (O Lord) I forced my self thy covenants to embrase:
Let me therefore have no rebuke, nor check in any case.
Then will I run with joyful cheer where thy word does me call:
When thou have set my heart at large. and rid me out of thrall.
The. v. part. H E

Instruct me (Lord) in the right trade of thy statutes deuyne:
And it to keep even to the end, my heart will I inclyne.
Grant me the knowledge of thy law, and I shall it obey:
With heart and mind, and all my might, I will it keep, I say.
In the right path of thy precepts, guide me Lord, I require:
None other pleasure do I wish, nor greater thing desire.
Inclyne my heart thy laws to keep, and covenants to embrace:
And from all filthy avarice, and shield me with thy grace.
From vain desire and worldly lusts turn back mine eyes and sight:
Give me the sprite of life and power, to walk thy ways a right.
Confirm thy gracious promise, Lord, which thou have made to me:
Which am thy servant, and do love, and fear nothing but thee.
Reproach and shame which I so fear from me (O Lord) expel
For thou do judge with equity, and therein do excel.
Behold my hearts desire is bent, thy laws to keep for aye:
Lord stre^gthen me so with thy grace, that it perform I may.
The. vi. part. VAV

Thy mercyes great and manifold, let me obtain (O Lord)
The saving health let me enjoy: according to thy word.
So shall I stop ye slaundrous mouths, of lewd men and unjust:
For in thy faithful promises, stand the my comfort and trust.
The word of truth with in my mouth, let ever still be pressed:
For in thy judgments wonderful, my hope does stand and rest.
And while that breath within my breast does natural life preserve:
yea till this world shall be dissolved, thy law will I observe.
So walk will I, as set at large, and made free from all dread:
Because I sought how for to keep, thy precepts and thy read.
Thy noble acts I will describe, as things of most great fame:
Even before kings I will them blase, and shrink no whit for shame.
I will rejoice them to obey. thy worthy hests and will:
Which evermore I have loved best, and so will love them still,
48 My hands will I lift to thy laws, which I have dearly sought:
And practice thy commandments, in will in deed and thought.
The. vii. part, ZAIN

Thy promise which thou madst to me thy servant (Lord) remember:
For therein have I put my trust, and confidence for ever.
It is my comfort and my joy, when troubles me assail:
For were my life not by thy word, my life would sone me fail.
The proud, and such as God contemn still made of me a skorne:
yet would I not, thy law forsake, as he that were forlorn:
But called to mind (lord) thy great works shewde to our fathers old:
Whereby I felt the joy surmount, my grief an hundred fold.
But yet, alas, for fear I quoke, seeing how wicked men:
Thy law forsook and did procure, thy judgment: who knows when
And as for me, I framed my songs, thy statutes to exalt:
When I among the strangers dweld, and thoughts began me assalt.
I thought upon thy name, O Lord, by night when others sleep:
As for thy law, also I kept, and ever will it keep.
This grace I did obtain, because, thy covenants sweet and deate:
I did embrace, and also keep, with reverence and with fear.
The. viii, part. HETH

O God, which art my part and lot, My comfort and my stay:
I have decreed, and promised, thy law to keep always.
Mine earnest heart did humbly sue, in presence of thy face:
As thou therefore have promised, Lord grant me of thy grace.
My life I have examined, and tryde my secret heart:
Which to thy statutes caused me, my fete straight to convert.
I did not stay nor linger long, as they that slothful are:
But hastily thy laws to keep, I did my self beware.
The cruel bands of wicked men, have made of me their pray:
Yet would I not thy law forget, nor from thee go astray.
Thy rightous judgment showed toward me so great is and so hie:
That even at midnight will I rise, thy name to magnifye.
Companion am I to all them, which fear thee in their heart:
And neither will for love nor dread* from thy commandments start:
Thy mercies (Lord) most plentuously do all the world fulfill.
Oh teach me how I may obey, thy statutes and thy will.
The, ix, part. TETH

According to thy promise Lord, so have thou with me dealt:
For of thy grace in sundry sorts, have I thy servant felt.
Teach me to judge always a right, and give me knowledge sure,
For certainly believe I do. that thy precepts are pure.
Yer thou did touch me with thy rod, I erred and went astray:
But now I keep thy holy word, and make it all my stay,
Thou art both good and gracious, and geuest most liberally:
Thy ordinances how to keep, therefore (O Lord) teach me.
The proud and wicked me^ have forged, against me many a lie:
yet thy commandments still observe, with all my heart will I.
Their hearts are swollen with worldly wealth as gras so are they fat:
But in thy law do I delight, and nothing seek but that.
Oh happy time may I well say, when thou did me correct:
For as a guide to learn thy laws, thy rods did me direct.
So that to me thy word and law, is dearer manifold:
Then thousands great of silver and gold, or ought that can be told.
The. x. part. IOD

Seeing thy hands have made me Lord to be thy creature:
Grant knowledge like wise how to learn to put thy laws in ure.
So they that fear thee shall rejoice, when ever they me see:
Because I have learned by thy word, to put my trust in thee.
When with thy rods, ye world is plagd I know the cause is just:
So when thou did correct me Lord, the cause just needs be must.
Now of thy goodness I thee pray, some comfort to me send:
As thou to me thy servant hetest, so from all ill me shend.
Thy tender mercies power on me, and I shall surely live:
For joy and consolation bathe, thy laws to me does give.
78 Confound the proud whose false pretense is me for to destroy:
But as for me thy hestes to know, I will myself employ.
Who so with reverence do thee fear, to me let them retire:
And such as do thy covenants know and them alone desire.
My heart without all waueryng, let on thy laws be bent:
That no confusion come to me, whereby I should be shent,
The, xi, part. GAPH

My soul does faint and cease not, thy saving health to crave:
And for thy words sake still I trust, my hearts desire to have.
Mine eyes do fail with loking for, thy word and thus I say:
Oh when will thou me comfort Lord: why do thou thus delay?
As a skin bottell in the smoke, so am I partcht and dried:
yet will I not out of my heart, let thy commandment slide.
Alas how long shall I yet live, before I see the hour.
That on my foes which me torment, thy vengeance thou will power.
Presu^ptuons men have dug pittes, thinking to make me sure:
Thus contrary against thy law, my hurt they do procure.
But thy commandments are al true, and causeles they me grieve:
To thee therefore I do complain, that thou might me relieve.
Almost they had me clean destroide, and brought me quite to ground:
yet by thy statutes I abode. and therein succor found.
Restore me, Lord, again to life, for thy mercyes excel:
And so shall I thy covenants keep, till death my life expel.
The. xii. part, LAMID

In heavens lord where thou do dwell thy word is stablished sure:
And shall for all eternity, fast graven there endure.
From age to age thy truth abides, as does the earth witness:
Whose ground work thou have laid so sure as no tongue can expres.
Even to this day we may well see, how all things persevere:
According to thy ordinance, for all things thee reuere.
Had it not ben that in thy law, my soul had comfort sought:
Long time year now in my distres, I had been brought to naught.
Therefore will I thy precepts aye, in memory keep fast:
By them thou have my life restorde, when I was at last cast,
No wight to me can title make, for I am only thine:
Save me therefore for to thy laws, mine ears and heart inclyne.
The wicked men do seek my bane, and thereto lie in wait:
But I the while considered, thy notable acts and great.
I see nothing in this wide world, at length which has not end:
But thy commandment and thy word beyond all end extend.
The. xiii. part. MEM

What great desire and fervent love, do I bear to thy law:
All the day long my whole deuyse, is only on thy law.
Thy word has taught me far to pas, my foes in polycye:
For still I keep it as a thing, of most excellencye.
My teachers which did me instruct, in knowledge I excel:
Because I do thy couenauntes keep, and them to others tell.
In wisdom I do pas also, the ancient men in deed:
And all because to keep thy laws, I held it aye best read.
My fete I have refrayned eke, from every evil way:
Because that I continually, thy word might keep, I say,
I have not swarued from thy judgments nor yet shronk any dell:
For why? thou have taught me thereby to live godly and well.
Oh Lord how sweet unto my taste, find I thy words always?
Doubtless no honey in my mouth, feel ought so sweet I may.
Thy laws have me such wisdom learnd that utterly I hate:
All wicked and ungodly ways, in every kind or rate.
The. xiiii. part. NVN

Even as a lantern to my fete, so does thy word shine bright:
And to my paths, where ever I go, it is a flaming light.
I have both sworn and will perform, most certainly doubtless:
That I will keep thy judgments just and them in life expres.
Affliction has me sore oppressed, and brought me to deaths door:
O Lord as thou have promised, so me to life restore.
The offerings which with heart and voice most frankly I thee give:
Accept, and teach me how I may, after thy judgments live.
My soul is aye so in my hand, that dangers it assail:
yet do I not thy law forget, nor it to keep will fail,
Although the wicked laid their nets, to catch me at a bray:
yet did I not from thy precepts, once swerue or go astray.
Thy law I have so claymed always, as mine own heritage:
And why? for therein I delight, and set my whole courage.
For evermore I have been bent, thy statutes to fulfill:
Even so like wise unto the end, I will continue still.
The. xv. part. SAMECH

The crafty thoughts and double heart, I do always detest:
But as for thy law and precepts, I loved them ever best.
Thou art my hid and secret place, my shield of strong defense:
Therefore have I thy promises, looked for with patience.
Go to therefore ye wicked men: depart from me anon:
For the commaundments will I keep, of God my Lord alone.
As thou have promisd so perform, that death me not assail.
Nor let my hope abuse me so, that through distrust I quayle.
Uphold me and I shall be safe, for ought they do or say:
And in thy statutes pleasure take, will I both night and day.
Thou have trod such under thy fete, as do thy statutes break:
For naught avails their subtlety, their counsel is but weak.
Like dross thou castes the wicked out, where ever they go ordwell:
Therefore can I as thy statutes, love nothing half so well.
My flesh alas, is taken with fear, as though it were benomde:
For when I see thy iudgmentses strayt I am as one astounde.
The. xvi. part. AIN

I do the thing that lawful is, and give to all men right:
Resign me not to them that would, oppress me with their might.
But for thy servant surty be, in that thing that is good:
That proudmen give me not the foil, which rage as they were wood.
Mine eyes with waiting are now blind thy health so much I crave:
And eke thy righteous promise Lord, whereby thou will me save.
Entreat thy servant lovingly, and favor to him show:
Thy statutes of most excellence, teach me also to know.
Thy humble servant, Lord I am, oh grant me to understand:
How by thy statutes I may know, best what to take in hand.
It is now time (Lord) to begin, for truth is quyte decayed:
Thy law lyk wise they have transgrest and none against them said.
This is the cause wherefore I love, thy laws better then gold:
Or jewels fine which are estemd, most costly to be sold,
I thought thy precepts all most just, and so them laid in store:
All crafty and malicious ways, I do abhor therefore.
The. xvii; part. PE

Thy couenaunts are most wonderful and full of things profound:
My soul therefore does keep them sure when they are tried and found.
when men first enter into thy words, they find alyght most clear:
And very idiots understand, when they it read or hear.
For joy I have both gaped and breathed, to know thy commandment:
That I might guide my life thereby, I sought what thing it meant.
With mercy and compassion Lord, behold me from above:
As thou art wont to behold such, as thy name fear and love.
Direct my footsteps by thy word, that I thy will may know:
And never let iniquity, thy servant overthrow,
From slanderous tongues and deadly harms preserve and keep me sure.
Thy precepts then I will observe, and put them eke in ure,
Thy countenance which does surmou^t the sun in his bright hew.
Let shine on me: and by thy law, teach me what to eschew.
Out of mine eyes great flods gush out, of drery tears and fell:
When I behold how wicked men. thy law keep never a dell.
The. xviii, part. ZADE

In every point (Lord) thou art just, the wicked though they grudge:
And when thou do sentence pronunce, thou art a righteous judge,
To render right and fly from guile, are two chief points most hye.
And such as thou have in thy law, commanded us straightly.
With zele and wrath I am consumde, and even pyned away:
To see my foes thy words forget, for ought that I do may.
So pure and perfect is thy word, as any heart can deem:
And I thy servant nothing more, do love or yet esteem.
And though I be nothing set by, as one of base degree:
Yet do I not thy hestes forget, nor shrink away from thee.
Thy righteousness (Lord) is most just for ever to endure:
Also thy law is truth it self, most constant and most pure.
Trouble and grief have seized on me, and brought me wondrous low:
yet do I still of thy precepts, delyght to hear and know.
The righteous of thy judgments, do last for evermore:
Then teach them me, for even in them, my life lies up in store.
The. xix. part. ^OPH

With fervent heart I callde and crid now answer me (O Lord:
That thy commandment to observe, I may fully accord.
To thee (my God) I make my suit, with most humble request:
Save me therefore, and I will keep, thy precept and thy hest.
To thee I cry, even in the morn, before the day wax light:
Because that I have in thy word, my confidence whole plyght.
Mine eyes prevent the watch by night and year they call, I wake:
That by deuisyng of thy word, I might some comfort take.
Incline thine ears to hear my voice and pity on me take:
As thou wast wont so judge me Lord, lest life me should forsake.
My foes draw nere and do procure, my death maliciously:
Which from thy law are far gone back, and straid from it leudly.
Therefore (O Lord) approach thou nere, for need does so require:
And all thy precepts true they are, then help I thee desire.
By thy commandments I have learnd not now, but long ago:
That they remain for evermore, thou have them grounded so.
The. xx, part. RES

My trouble and affliction, consider and behold:
Deliver me, for of thy law, I ever take fast hold,
Defend my good and righteous cause, with speed me succor send:
From death as thou have promised, Lord keep me and defend.
As for the wicked far they are, from having health and grace:
Whereby they might thy statutes know they enter not the trace.
Great are thy mercyes, Lord I grant what tongue can them atteyne?
And as thou haste me judged yer now, so let me life obtain.
Though many men did trouble me, and persecute most sore:
Yet from thy laws I never shronk, nor went awry therefore.
And truth it is, for grief I dye, when I these traitors see:
Because they keep no whit thy word, nor yet seek to know thee.
Behold, for I do love thy laws, with heart most glad and feign:
As thou art good and gracious Lord, restore my life again.
What thy word does decree, must be, and so it has been ever,
Thy rightuous judgments are also, most true and decay never.
The. xxi. part. SCHIN

Princes have sought by crueltye, causeles to make me crouche:
But all in vain, for of thy word, the fear did my heart touch,
And certainly even of thy word. I was more merry and glad
Then he that of rich spoils and pray, great store and plentye had.
As for all lies and falsitie, I hate most and detect:
For why? thy holy law do I, above all things love best.
Seven times aday I praise the Lord singing with heart and voice:
Thy rightuous acts and wonderful, so cause me to rejoice.
Great peace and rest shall all such have which do thy statutes love:
Nor danger shall their quiet state, impere or once remove.
My only health and comfort Lord, I look for at thy hand:
And therefore have I done those things, which thou did me command.
Thy laws have been my exercise, which my soul most desired:
So much my love to them was bent, that naught else I required.
Thy statutes and commandments, I kept thou know a right:
For all the things that I have done, are present in thy sight.
The. xxii. part. TAV

O Lord let my complaynt and cry, before thy face appear:
And as thou have me promise made, so teach me thee to fear.
Mine humble supplication, toward thee, let find acces:
And grant me Lord deliverance, for so is thy promise.
Then all my lips thy praises speak, after most ample sort:
When thou thy statutes have me taught, wherein stands all comfort:
My tongue shall sing and preach thy word and on this wise say shall:
Gods famous acts and noble laws, are just and perfect all.
Stretch out thy hand I thee beseech, and spedely me save:
For thy commaundments to observe, chosen, O Lord I have.
Of thee alone, Lord I crave health, for other I know none:
And in thy law and nothing else, I do delight alone.
Grant me therefore long days to live, thy name to magnifye:
And of thy judgments merciful, let me thy favor try.
For I was lost and went astraye, much like a waydryng sheep:
Oh seek me, for I have not failed, thy commaundmentes to keep.
Dd dominum cum tribularer. Psalm. cxx. T. S.
The prayer of David being now banished among the barbarious people of Arabia
by the fasle reports of envious flatterers. And therefore he lamenteth his long
abode among those infidels, who were given to all kind of wickedness and
contetion.

^ IN trouble and in thrall, unto the ^ Lord I call: and he does me comfort:
deliver me (I say) ^ from liers lips always, And tongue of false reyort.

What vantage, or what thing,
Getst thou thus for to sting.
Thou false and flattering liar?
Thy tongue does hurt I wene,
No les then arrows kene,
Of whote consuming fire.
Alas to long I slake,
Within these tents so blake,
Which kedars are by name:
By whom the flock elect,
And of Isaackes sect.
Are put to open shame.
With them that peace did hate,
I came a peace to make,
And set a quiet life:
But when my word was told,
Causeles I was controld,
By them that would have strife.
Leuaui oculos meos. Cxxi. VV. VV.
The Prophet showed by his own example that the faithful ought to look for all
their succor of God alone, who will govern and give good success to all their
godly enterpryses.

^ I Lift mine eyes to Sion hill, from ^ whence I do attend, that succor God
me send. ^ The mighty God me succor will, which heaven ^ and earth framed, and
all things therein named.

3 Thy foot from slip he will preserve,
And will thee safely keep:
For he will never sleep.
Lo he that does Israll conserve,
No sleep at all can him catch?
But his eyes shall ever watch,
The Lord is thy warrant always,
The Lord eke does thee cover,
As at thy right hand ever.
The sun shall not thee parche by day,
Nor the moon not half so bright.
Shall with could thee hurt by night.
The Lord will keep thee from distres,
And will thy life sure save:
And thou also shall have.
In all thy business good success,
Where ever thou go in or out,
God will thy things bring about.
Letatus sum. Psalm. Cxxii. VV. K.
David rejoices in the name of the faithful that God has accomplished his
promise, and placed his Arc in Sion, for the which he gives thanks, and
prays for the prosperity of the Church.

^ I did in heart rejoice, to hear ye peples ^ voice, in offering so willingly:
For let us ^ up say they, and in the Lords house pray: thus ^ spoke the folk
full lovingly. Our fete that ^ wandered wide, shall in thy gates abide, O thou ^
Jerusalem full fair, Which art so semely ^ set, much like a City net, the
like whereof ^ is not else where.

The trybes with one accord,
The tribes of God the Lord,
Are thither bent their way to take:
So God before did ^ell
That there his israel.
Their prayers should together make.
For there are thrones erect,
And that for this respect.
To set forth justice orderly.
Which thrones right to maintain,
To david's house perteine,
His folk to judge accordingly.
To pray let us not cease,
For Ierusalems peace,
Thy friends God prosper mightily.
Peace be thy walls about,
And prosper the throughout,
Thy places eke continually.
I wish thy prosperous state,
For my poor brethrens sake,
That comfort have by means of the.
Gods house both me allure,
Thy wealth for to procure
So much always as lies in me.
Adte leuaui oculos Psalm. Cxxiii. Th. Stern.
A prayer of the faithful which are afflicted by the wicked worldelinges and
contemners of God.

O Lord that heaven do possess, Singe this as the. xxiii. psalm.
I lift mine eyes to the,
Even as the servant lifts his, his masters hands to see.
As handmaides watch there maistres hands, some grace for to atchiue,
So we behold the Lord our God, til he do us forgive.
Lord grant us thy compassion, and mercy in thy sight:
For we be filled and over comen, with hatred and despite.
Our minds be stuffed with great rebuke, the rich and worldly wise:
To make af us their mocking stock, the proud do us despice.
Nisi quia dominus, Psalm Cxxiiii. VV.
The people of God. being delivered out of a great danger acknowledge not to
have escaped by their own power. but through the favor of God, and show in
how great peril they were.

^ NO we Israel may say, and that truly, ^ If that the Lord had not our cause
mainteind. ^ If that the lord had not our right susteind. When ^ all the world
against us furiously, made their ^ vprors, and said we should all die.

Now long a go they had devour us all:
And swalowed quick, for ought yt we could deem,
Such was their rage, as we might well esteem.
And as the flouddes, with mighty force do fall,
So had they now, our life even brought to thrall.
The raging stremes, most proud in roaring noice
Had long a go, over whelmde us in the deep,
But loved by God which does us safely keep,
From bloody teeth, and their most cruel voice.
Which as a pray to eat us would rejoice.
Even as the bird out of the foulers grenne,
Escapth away? right so it fares us:
Broke are their nets, and we have escaped thus,
God that made heaven, and earth, is our help the^,
His name has saved us from these wicked men.
Qui confidunt. Psalm. cxxv. VV. K.
He describes the assurance of the faithful in their aflictions, and desires
their wealth, and the destruction of the wicked.

^ Such as in God the lord do trust, as ^ Mount Sion shall firmly stand, and
be removed ^ at no hand, the Lord will count them ^ right and just, So that
they shall be sure, For ^ ever to endure.

As mighty mountains huge and great, Jerusalem about to close.
So will the Lord be unto those, who on his godly will do wait.
Such are to him so dear, they never need to fear.
For though the rightous try does he, by making wicked men his rod:
Lest they through grief for sake their God, it shall not as their lot still be.
Give, Lord, to those thy light, whose hearts are true and right.
But as for such as turn a side, by crooked ways which they out sought,
The Lord will surely bring to naught, with works vile they shall abide:
But peace with Israel, for evermore shall dwell.
In conuertendo. Psalm. cxxvi. VV. K
This Psalm was made after the return of the people from Babylon, and shows
that the mean of their deliverance was wonderful, after the seventy years of
captivity forespoken by Jeremy. 25. 12. and. 29. 10.

^ WHen that the Lord again his Sio^ ^ had forth brought from bondage great,
and also ^ servitude extreme, his work was such, as ^ did surmount man's heart
and thought, so that we ^ were much like to them that use to dream: ^ our
mouths were with laughter filled then, ^ and eke our tongues did show us
joyful men.

The Heathen folk were forced then, this to confess,
How that the Lord for them also great things had don,
But much more we, and therefore can confess no les:
Wherefore to joy we have good cause as we begone
O Lord, go forth, thou can our bondage end,
As to deserts thy flowing rivers send.
Full true it is, that they which sow with tears in deed,
A time will come, when they shall reap in mirth and joy
They went and wept in bearing of their precious sede.
For that their foes full often times did them anoye:
But their return with joy they shall sure see,
Their sheaues home bring, and not impered be.
Nisi dominus. Palm. Cxxvii. VV.
It is not man's wit, power, or labor, but the free goodness of God that gives
riches, preserves towns and countrepes, grants noryshment and children.

EXcept the Lord the house do make,
And thereunto do set his hand: Sing this as the lords pra^^.

What men do build, it can not stand.
Likewise in vain men undertake,
Cities and holds to watch and ward,
Except the Lord be their safeguard.
Though ye rise early in the morn,
And so at night go late to bed,
Feding full hardly with brown bread:
yet were your labor lost and worn,
But they whom God does love and keep
Receive all things with quiet sleep.
Therefore mark well, when ever ye see,
That men have heirs to enjoy their la^d:
It is the gift of Gods own hand,
For God him self does multiplye,
Of his great liberality,
The blessing of posterity.
And when the children come to age,
They grow in strength and actiuenes,
In person, and comelines,
So that a shaft shot with courage,
Of one that has a most strong arm,
Flies not so swyft, nor does like harm
Oh well is him that has his quiver,
Fournished with such altilerye:
For when in peril he shall be,
Such one shall never shake nor shiuer.
When that he pleads before the judge,
Against his foes which bear him grudg
Beati omnes qui timent. Psalm. cxxviii. T. T
He describes the prosperous estate of them that be married in the fear of
God, joining with all the promises of Gods blessings, to all them that live in
this honorable estate, according to his commandments.

BLessed art thou that fear God, Sing this as the. cxxxvii.
and walk in his way:
For of thy labor thou shall eat, happy art thou (I say.)
Like fruitful vynes on thy house sides, so does thy wife spryng out:
Thy children stand like Olive plants, thy table round about.
Thus art thou blessed that fear God, and he shall let thee see:
The promised Jerusalem, and his felicitye.
Thou shall thy childrens children see, to thy great joys increase:
And likewise grace on Israel, prosperity and peace.
Sepe expugnauerunt Psalm. cxxix. VV. VV
He admonishes the church to rejoice, though it have been afflicted in all
ages, for God will deliver it, and the enemies, for all their glorious show,
shall suddenly be destroyed.

OF Israel this may now be the song,
eue^ from my youth my foes have often me noted
Athousand evils since, I was te^dre and young
They have wrought, yet was I not destroyed.
As yet I bear the marks in bone and skyn.
that one would think yt the plow me^ with their plowes
Upon my back have made their balkes far in:
for like plowd ground, eue^ so have I long forowes.
But yet the Lord, which does all things justly,
Has cut the ropes, and so stayed the wicked rage,
Even so shall all such perish shamefully,
Which hate Sion, or wish it any damage.
5 Al such men shall be like the gras that grows
Upon the wales, or tops of houses most hye,
Which suddenly, or one bewar, widereth:
So that no fruit on such herbs can gathered be,
Never man saw, that any mower mowed,
Such grass as that, or thereof his hand did fill:
Much les that he, which glaineth of yt is sowed,
Under his arm bare, some thing his house until.
Nor yet that he, that passes by that way
Says to the repers, God save you, or God speed,
No no man does wish them good luck, I say,
Or pray yt God, would for their work grant the^mede
Deprofundis clamaui. Psalm. cxxx. VV. VV.
An effectuous prayer of him that for his sins had sustained great
afflictions, and not withstanding, he fully trusts, and assures him self to
obtain mercy and forgeuenes of his sins, and at length delivers from all
euilles.

^ LOrd to the I make my moan. when dangers ^ me oppres. I call, I sigh plain
and groan. ^ Trusting to find reles. Hear now, O Lord, my ^ request. For it
is full due time: And let thine ^ ears aye be pressed, unto this prayer mine.

O Lord our God if thou way, our sins and them peruse:
Who shall then escape, and say, I can my self excuse?
But Lord thou art merciful, and turnest to us thy grace:
That we with hearts most careful, should fear before thy face.
In God I put my whole trust, my soul wayteth on his will:
For his promise is most just, and I hope therein still.
My soul to God has regard, wishing for him always:
More then they that watch and ward, to see the dauning day.
Let Israel then boldly, in the Lord put his trust:
He is that God of mercy, that his deliver must.
For he it is that must save, Israel from his sin:
And all such as surely have, their confidence in him.
Domine non est. Psalm. Cxxxi. M.
David charged with ambytion and gredyc desire to raygne, protests his
humility and modestye before God, and teaches all men, what they should do.

O Lord I am not puffed in mind, Sing this as the lamentatio^
I have no skornfull eye:
I do not exercise my self, in things that be to hye.
But as a child that wayned is, even from his mothers breast:
So have I Lord behaved my self, in silence and in rest.
O Israel trust in the Lord, let him be all thy stay:
From this time forth for evermore,
from age to age I say.
Memento domine. Psalm. Cxxxii. M.
The faithful, groundyng on Gods promise made unto David, desires that he
would establysh the same, both as touching his posterytic and the buylding of
the temple, to pray there as was fore spoken.

^ Remember david's trobles lord how to ^ the Lord he swear, and voud a vow to
Jacobs god ^ to keep for evermore I will not com within my ^ house, nor clyme up
to my bed, nor let my temples ^ take their rest, or the eyes in my head.

Till I have found out for the Lord, a place to set thereon:
An house for Jacobs God to be, an habitacyon.
We hard of it at Ephrata, there did we hear this sound:
And in the fildes and forrestes there, these voices first were found.
We will assay and go in now, his tabernarle there:
Before his for stole to fall down, upon out knees in fear.
Artic O Lord arise I say, into thy restyng place:
Both thou and the like of thy strength, the presence of thy grace.
Let all thy prestes be clothed Lord, with truth and righteousness:
Let all thy saints and holy men, sing all with ioyfulnes.
And for thy servant David's sake, refuse not Lord I say:
The face of thine anointed Lord, or turn thy face away.
The Lord to David swore in truth, and will not shrink from it:
Saying, the fruit of thy body, upon thy seat shall sit.
And if thy sons my covenant keep, that I shall learn each one:
Then shall their sons for ever sit, upon thy princely throne,
The Lord himself has chose Syon, and love therein to dwell:
Saying this is my restyng place, I love and like it well.
And I will bless, with great increase, her vittales, every where:
And I will satisfye with bread, the nedy that be there.
Yea I will deck, and cloth her pristes, with my salvation:
And all her saints shall sing for joy, of my protection.
There will I surely make the horn, of David for to bud*
For I have there, ordaynde for mine, alanthorne bright and good.
As for his enmyes, I will clothe, with shame for evermore:
But I will cause his crown to shine, more fresh then here to fore.
Ecce quam bonum. Psalm. cxxxiii. VV. VV.
This psalm conteyneth the commendation of godly and brother: therly amity,
which for thexcellencye thereof is compared to the most precious oil, wherewith
the Priests only and instruments of the tabernacle were anointed, Exodus. xxx.

O How happy a thing it is, Sing this as the. cxxxvii.
and joyful for to see:
Brethern together fast to hold, the band of amity.
It callth to mind that sweet perfume, and that costly ointment:
Which on the sacrifisers head, by Gods precept was spent.
It wet not Aarons head alone, but drencht his beard throughout:
And finally it did run down, his ritche attire about.
And as the lower ground does drink, the dew of Hermon hill:
And Sion with his silver drops, the fields with fruit does fill.
Even so the Lord does pour on them, his blessings manifold:
Whose hearts and minds without all guile, this knot do keep and hold.
Ecce nunc. Psalm. Cxxxiiii. VV. K
He exhorts the Levites that watch in the temple to praise the Lord.

^ BEhold, and have regard, ye servants ^ of the Lord, Which in his house by
night do ^ watch, praise him with one accord.

Lift up your hands on high, unto his holy place,
And give the Lord his praises due: his benefits embrace.
For why? the Lord, who did, both earth and heaven frame,
Does Sion bles and will conserve, for ever more the same.
Laudate nomen. Psalm. Cxxxv. M.
He exhorts all the faithful, of what estate so ever they be, to praise God
for his merueylous worcks, and specially for his graces toward his people,
wherein he has declared his majesty, To the confession of all Idolaters and
their Idols.

^ O Praise ye lord praise him praise him, ^ praise him with one accord, o
praise him still al ye ^ that be the servant of ye lord, o praise him ye that
^ stand and be, in the house of the Lord, ye of his court ^ and of his house
praise him with one accord.

Praise ye the Lord for he is good, sing praises to his name:
It is a comely, and good thing, always to do the same.
For why the Lord, has chose Jacob, his very own, you see:
So has he chosen Israel, his treasure for to be.
For this I know, and am right sure, the Lord is very great:
He is in deed above all Gods, most easy to entreat,
For what so ever pleased him, all that fulwell he wrought:
In heaven, in earth, and in the sea, which he has framde of naught.
He lifts up clouds, even from the earth, he makth the lightnings and rain:
He bringkth forth the winds also, He made nothing in vain.
He smote the first borne of each thing, in Egypt that took rest:
He spared there, no living thing, the man, nor yet the beast,
He has in thee, shewde wonders great, O Egypt void of vauntes,
On Pharao thy cursed king, and his severe servants.
He smote then many nacyons, and did great acts and things,
He slew the great and mightyest, and chefest of their kings.
Syhon king of Ammorites, and Og king of Basan:
He slew also the kingdoms all, that were of Canaan.
And gave their land to Israel, an heritage we see:
To Israel, his own people, an heritage to be.
Thy name O Lord, shall still endure, and thy memorial:
Throughout all generations, that are, or ever shall,
The Lord will surely avenge, his people all in deed.
And to his servants, he will show, favor in time of need.
The Idols of the Heathen are made, in all their cost and lands:
Of silver and of gold be they, the works even of men's hands.
They have mouths and cannot speak. and eyes to at have no sight
They have ears, that hear nothing, Their mouths, be breatheles quite.
Wherefore all they, are like to them, that so does set them forth:
And like wise those, that trust in them, or think they be ought worth.
O all ye house of Israel, see that ye praise the Lord,
And ye that be of Aarons house, praise him, with one accord.
And ye that be of Leuis house, praise ye likewise the Lord,
And all that stand in awe of him, praise him, with one accord.
And out of Syon, sound his praise, the great praise of the Lord:
Which dwells in Jerusalem, praise him with one accord.
Confitemini Psalm. Cxxxvi. N.
A most earnest exhortacio^ to give thanks unto God for the creation and
governance of all things, which stands in confessing that he gives us all
of his mere liberality.

^ PRaise ye ye lord for he is good, for his ^ mercy endures for ever, Give
praise unto the ^ God of Gods, for his mercy endures for ever ^ Give praise
unto the Lord of Lords, for his ^ mercy endures for ever which only does
great ^ wonders work, for his mercy endures for ever.

Which by his wisdom made the heavens, for his mercy endures for ever:
Which on the waters stretched the earth, for his mercy endures for ever.
Which made great light to shine abroad, for his mercy endures for ever:
As son to rule the lightsome day, for his merry endures for ever
The moon and sterres to guide the night, for his mercy endures for ever.
Which smote Egypt with their firstborn, for his mercy endures for ever:
And Israel brought out from them, for his mercy endures for ever.
With mighty hand and stretched arm, for his mercy endures for ever:
Which cut the red sea in two parts, for his mercy endures for ever,
And Israel made pass there through, for his mercy endures for ever.
And drouned Pharao and his host. for his mercy endures for ever:
Through wilderness his people led, for his mercy endures for ever.
He which did smite great noble kings, for his mercy endures for ever:
And which has slain the mighty kings, for his mercy endures for ever.
As Sihon king of Amorites, for his mercy endures for ever.
And Og the king of Basan land, for his mercy endures for ever.
And gave their land for heritage, for his mercy endures for ever:
Even to his servant Israel, for his mercy endures for ever.
Remembered us in base estate, for his mercy endures for ever.
And from oppressors rescued us. for his mercy endures for ever.
Which gives fode unto all flesh, for his mercy endures for ever.
Praise ye the God of heaven above, for his mercy endures for ever:
Give thanks unto the Lord of Lords, for his mercy endures for ever.
Super flumina Babilonis. Psalm. cxxxvii. VV. VV
The people of God in their banishment, seeing Gods true religion decay, lived
in great anguish and sorrow of heart, the which grief the Eaideons did so
little pity, that they rather increased the same daily, with tauntes, reproaches
and blasphemies against God, wherefore the Israelites desire God to punish the
Edomites who provoked the Babilonians against them, and moved (by the spirit
of God prophery the destruction of Babylon, where they were handeled so
tirannously

^ WHen as we sat in Babylon, ye rivers ^ round about: and in remembrance of
Sion the ^ tears for grief burst out. We ha^gd out harps and ^ instruments,
the willow trees upon, for in that ^ placemen for their use, had planted many
one.

Then they to whom we prisoners were, said to us tauntingly:
Now let us hear your Ebrue songs, and pleasant melody.
Alas (said we) who can once frame, his sorrowful heart to sing:
The praises of our loving God, thus under a strange king
But yet if I Jerusalem, out of my heart let flyde:
Then let my fingers quyte forget, the warblyng harp to guide.
And let my tongue within my mouth, be tide for ever fast:
If that I joy; before I see, thy full deliverance past.
Therefore (O Lord) remember now, the cursed noise and cry:
That Edoms sons against us made, when they razed our city.
Remember Lord their cruel words, when as with one accord.
They cried, on sack, and raze their walls, in despite of their Lord.
Even so shall thou (O Babylon) at length to dust be brought:
And happy shall that man be called, that our revenge has wrought.
Yea blessed shall that man be called, that takes thy children young:
To dash their bones against hard stones, which lie the streates among.
Confitebor tibi. Psalm. Cxxxviii. N.
David with great courage prayseth the goodness of God toward him, which is so
great, that it is known to foreign princes, who shall praise the Lord together
with him. And he is assured to have like comfort of God in the time following,
as he has had here to fore.

THee will I praise with my whole heart, my Lord my God always: Sing this as
the. cxivii. Ps.

Even in the presence of the Gods, I will advance thy praise.
Toward thy holy temple I will look and worship thee:
And praised in my thankful mouth, thy holy name shall be.
Even for thy loving kindness sake, and for thy truth withal:
For thou thy name have by thy word, auaunced over all.
When I did call thou heardest me, and thou have made also:
The power of encreasced strength, within my soul to grow.
Yea all the kings on earth they shall, give praise to thee, O Lord:
For they of thy most holy mouth, have hard the mighty word.
They of the ways of God the Lord, in singing shall entreat:
Because the glory of the Lord, it is exceeding great.
The Lord is hye and yet he does, behold the lowly spirit:
But he contemning knows a far: the proud and lofty wight.
Although in mids of trouble I, do walk, yet shall I stand:
Renewed by thee, O my Lord, thou will stretch out thy hand.
upon the wrath of all my foes, and saved shall I be:
By thy right hand. The Lord God will perform his work to me.
Thy mercy, Lord, endures for ay, Lord do me not forsake:
Forsake me not that am the work, which thine own hand did make.
Domine probasti. Psalm. cxxxix. N.
David to cleanse his heart from all hypocrisy shows that there is nothing so
hye. which God seyth not, which he confirms by the creation of man. After
declaryng his zeal and fear of God, he protests to be enemy to all them
that contem God.

O Lord, thou have me tried and known, my sitting doste thou knew:
And tysing eke, my thoughts a far, thou vnderstandst also,
My paths, yea and my lying down, thou compassest always,
And by familiar custom art, acquaynted with my ways.
No word is in my tongue, O lord, but known it is to thee,
Thou me behind holdst and before, thou layst thy hand on me.
To wonderful above my reach, Lord is thy cunning skill:
it is so hie that I the same, can not atteyne until.
From sight of thy all seeing sprite, Lord whether shall I goo?
Or whether shall I flee away, thy presence to escape froe?
To heaven if I mount aloft, lo thou art present there:
In hell if I lie down by low, even there thou do appear.
Yea let me take the mornings wings, and let me goo and hide:
Even there where ar the farthest parts where flowing sea does slide.
Yea even thither also shall, thy reaching hand me guide:
And thy right hand shall hold me fast, and make me to abide.
yea if I say the darkness shall, yet shrowde me from thy sight:
Lo even also the darkest night, about me shall be light.
yea darkness hides not from thee, but night does shine as day:
To thee the darkness and the light, are both alike always,
For thou possessed have my reins, and thou have couerd me:
When I within my mothers womb, enclosed was by thee.
Thee will I praise, made fearfully, and wondrously I am:
Thy works are marvelous, right well my soul does know the same.
My bones, they are not hid from thee, although in secret place:
I have been made and in the earth, beneth I shapen was.
When I was formeles, then thine eye, saw me far in thy book:
Were written all (naught was before) that after fashion took.
The thoughts therefore of thee (O God) bow dear are they to me?
And of them all how passing great, the endless nombers be?
If I should count them, lo their sum more then the sand I see:
And whenever I awake, yet am I still with thee.
The wicked and the blody men, of that thou would slaye:
Even those O God to whom, depart, depart from me, I say.
Even those of thee O lord my God, that speak full wickedlye:
These that are lifted up in vain, being enemies to thee.
Hate I not them that hate thee Lord? and not in earnest wise:
Contend I Lord against them all, against thee that arise?
I hate them with unfeigned hate, even as my utter foes
Try me O God, and know my heart, my thoughts prove and disclose.
Consider Lord if wickedness, in me there any be:
And in the way, O God my guide, for ever lead thou me.
Eripeme. Psalm. Cxl. N.
David complayneth of the crueltye falshed, and iniuryes of his enemies against
which he prays unto the Lord, and assures him self of his help and
succoure. Wherefore he provoke the just to praise thee and to assure them
selves of his tuicion.

Lord save me from the evil man, and from the cruel wight:
Deliver me, which evil do, imagine in their sprite.
Which make on me continual war, their tongues lo they have whet:
Like serpents, underneath their lyppes, is adders poison set.
Keep me, O Lord from wicked hands, preserve me to a bide:
Free from the cruel man that means, to cause my steps to slide.
The proud have laid a snare for me, and they have spread a net:
With cords, in my path way, and ginnes, for me eke have they set.
Therefore I said unto the Lord, thou art my God alone:
Here me O Lord, oh hear the voice, wherewith I pray and moan.
O Lord my God thou only art, the strength that saves me.
My head in day of battle has been couerd still by thee.
Let not O lord the wicked have, the end of his desire:
Perform not his wicked thought lest they, with pride be set on fire.
Of them that compass me about, the chefest of them all:
Lord let the mischef of their lips, upon them selves befall.
Let coals fall on them, let him cast, them in consuming flame:
And in deep pittes so as they may, not rise out of the same.
For no backbiter shall on earth, beset in stable plight:
And evil to destruction still, shall hunt the cruel wight,
I know the lord thafflicted will, revenge and judge the poor:
The just shall praise thy name, just shall dwell with thee evermore.
Domine clamaui. Psalm. Cxli. N.
David being greuouslye persecuted under Saull, only flicth unto God to have
succor, despring him to bridle his affections, that he may patiently abide
(...) God take vengeance of his enemies.

^ O Lord upon thee do I call, Lord have ^ thee unto me, and harken Lord unto
my voice, ^ when I do cry to thee, as inscence let my praiyer ^ be directed in
thine eyes, and the vplifting of ^ my hands as evening sacrifice:

My Lord for guiding of my mouth, set thou a watch before:
And also of my moving lipppes, O lord keep thou the door.
That I should wicked works commit, incline thou not my heart:
With ill men, of their delicates, Lord let me eat no part:
But let the righteous suite me Lord, for that is good for me:
Let him reprove me, and the same, a precious oil shall be.
Such smiting shall not break my head, the time shall shortly fall:
When I shall in their miserye, make prayers for them all.
Then when in stony places down, their judges shall be cast:
Then shall they hear my words, for then, they have a pleasant taste.
Our bones about the graves mouth, lo scattred are they found
As he that heaweth wod, or he that diggeth in the ground.
But O my lord my God, mine eyes, do look up unto thee:
In thee is all my trust, let not my soul forsaken be.
Which they have laid to catch me in, Lorke keep me from the snare:
And from the subtle grennes of them, that wicked workers are.
The wicked into their own nets, together let them fall:
while I do by thy help escape, the danger of them all.
Voce mea ad. Psalm. Cxlii. N.
David neither a stonied with fear, nor carried away with anger. nor forsed by
desperation, would kill Saul but with a quiet mind. directed his earnest
prayer unto God who did preserve hu^.

BEfore the lord God with my voice, did I send out my cry:
And with my streamed voice unto, the lord God prayed I.
My meditation in his sight, to pour I did not spare,
And in the presence of the Lord. my trouble did declare.
Although perplexed were my sprite, my pathe was known to thee:
In way where I did walk a snare, they slyly laid for me
I looked and vewd on my ryghthand, but none there would me knoo:
All refuge failed me and for, my soul none cared thoo.
Then cried I Lord to thee, and said, my hope thou only art:
Thou in the land of living art, my portion and my part.
Hark to my cry for I am brought, full low: deliver me.
From them that do me persecute. for me to strong they be.
That I may praise thy name my soul, from prison lord bring out:
When thou art good to me, the just, shall prese me round about.
Domine exaudi. Psalm. Cxliii. N
An earnest prayer for remission of sins, acknowledging that the enemies did
cruelly persecute him by Gods just judgment. He desires to be restored to
grace to be governed by his holy spirit, that he may spend the rest of his
life in the true fere and service of God.

Lord hear my prayer, hark the playnte, That I do make to thee:
Lord in thy native truth and in, thy justice answer me.
In judgment with thy servant, lord, oh enter not at all:
For iustyfyed be in thy sight, no one that lives shall.
The enmie has pursued my soul, my life to ground has thrown:
And laid me in the dark like them, that dead are long agone,
Within me in perplexity: was my accombred spryte,
And in me was my troubled heart, amassed and afflight.
Yet I record time past, in all, thy works I meditate:
Yea in the works I meditate, that thy hands have create.
To thee O lord my God, lo I do stretch my craving hands:
My soul desires after thee, as do the thirstye lands.
Hear me with speed, my sprite does fail hide not thy face me froe:
else shall I be like them that down into the pit do go.
Let me thy loving kindness in, the morning hear and know,
For in thee is my trust, show me the way that I shall go.
For I lift up my soul to thee, O Lord deliver me:
From all mine enemies: for I have hidden me with thee.
Teach me to do thy will, for thou thou art my God I say:
Let thy good sprite unto the land, of misery me convey.
with thy names sake with quickening grace a live do thou me make:
And out of trouble bring my soul, even for thy justice sake.
And for thy mercy slay my foes, O lord destroy them all:
That do oppres my soul for I thy servant am and shall.
Been dictus dominus. Psalm. cxliiii. N.
David prayseth the Lord with great affection, and humility for his kingdom
restored, and for his victoryes obtained, yet calling for help, and the
destruction of the wicked promisyng to acknowleg the same with song of praises,
and declares wherein the felicytie of any people consists.

Blessed be the lord my strength that does instruct my hand to fight:
The lord that does my fingers frame, to battle by his might.
He is my Goodness fort and toure, deliverer and shield:
In him I trust my people he, subdues to me to yield.
O Lord what thing is man, that him, thou hold so in price?
Or son of man that upon him, thou think in such wise.
man is but like to vanity. so pas his days to end:
As fleting shade. Bow down O Lord thy heavens and descend.
The mountains touch, and they shall smoke cast fourth thy lightning flame,
And scatter them, thine arrows shote consume them with the same.
Send down thy hand even from above O Lord deliver me:
Take me from waters great, from hand of strangers make me free,
Whose subtle mouth of vanity, and fondnes does entreat:
And their right hand is a right hand, of falshod and deceit.
A new song I will sing O God, and singing will I be.
On viole and on instrument, ten stringed unto thee.
Even he it is that only geues deliverance to kings,
Unto his servant David help, From hurt full sword he bringes:
From strangers hand me save and sheld, whoes mouth talks vanity:
And their right hand is a right hand, of guile and sutteltye.
That our sons may be as the plants, whom growing youth does rear:
Our daughters as carved corner stones, like to a palace fair,
Our corners full, and plenty may, with sundry sorts be found,
Our sheep bring thousands, in our strets ten thousands may abound,
Our oxen be to labor strong, that none do us invade:
There be no going out, no cry, within our strets be made.
The people blessed are that with such blessings are so stered:
Yea blessed all the people are, whose God is, God the lord.
Exaltabo te deus. Psalm. Cxlv. N.
This Psalm was made when the kingdom of David flourished. Wherein he
describes the wonderful providence of God, as well in governing man as in
preserving all the rest of his creatures. He praises God for his justice and
mercy, but specially for his loving kindness toward those that call upon him,
that fear him and love him.

^ THee will I laud my God and king, and ^ bles thy name for aye, for ever will
I praise thy ^ name and bles thee day by day, great is the Lord, ^ most worthy
praise, his greatness not ca^reach from ^ race to race they shall thy works
praise and thy ^ power preach.

I Of thy glorious majesty, the beauty will record:
And meditate upon thy works, most wonderful, O Lord.
And they shall of thy power and of thy fearful acts declare.
And I to publish all abroad, thy greatness will not spare:
And they into the mention shall, break of thy goodness great:
And I aloud thy righteousness, in singing shall repete.
The Lord our God is gracious, and merciful also:
Of great abounding mercy and to anger he is slow.
yea good to all, and all his works, his mercy does excede:
Lo all thy works do praise thee lord, and do their honor sprede.
Thy saints do bles thee and they do thy kingdoms glory show:
And blase thy power to cause the sons of men his power to know.
And of his mighty kingdom eke, to sprede the glorious praise:
Thy kingdom Lord a kingdom is, that does endure always.
And thy dominion through each age, endures without decay:
The Lord vpholdeth them that fall, the sliding he does stay.
The eyes of all do wait on thee, thou do them all releue:
And thou to each sufficing food, in season due do give.
Thou openest thy plentuous hand, and bounteously do fill:
All things what ever live, with gifts of thy good will.
The Lord is just in all his ways, his works are holy all:
Nere all he is that call on him, in truth that on him call.
He the desires which they require, that fear him will fulfill:
And he will hear them when they cry, and save them all he will.
The Lord preserues all those to him, that bear a loving heart:
But he them all that wicked are, will utterly subvert.
My thankful mouth shall gladly speak, the praises of the Lord,
All flesh to praise his holy name, for ever shall accord.
Lauda anima mea. Psalm. cxlvi. I. H
David showing the great desire he had to praise God, teaches that none should
put their trust in men, but in God alone: who is almightye and delivers
thafflicted nourishes the poor, sets prisoners at liberty, comfort the
fatherles, widows, and the strangers, and raygneth king for ever.

My soul praise thou the Lord always, My God I will confess: Sing this as the.
cxxxvii.

While death and life prolong my days, my tongue no time shall cease.
Trust not in worldly princes then, though they abound in wealth:
Nor in the sons of mortal men, in whom there is no health.
For why their breath does sone depart to earth anon they fall:
And then the counsels of their heart, decay and pearysh all.
O happy is that man, I say, whom Jacobs God does aid:
And he whose hope does not decay, but on the lord is stayed.
Which made the earth and waters deep, the heavens hie with all:
Which does his word and promise keep In truth and ever shall.
With right always does he proceed, for such as suffer wrong:
The poor and hungry he does feed, and lose the fetters strong.
The lord does send the blind their sight, the lame to limbs restore:
The lord, I say, does love the right, and just man evermore:
He does defend the fatherles, the strangers sad in heart.
And quite the wydow from distres, and ill men's ways subvert,
Thy lord and God eternally, O Syon still shall rain:
In time of all posterity, for ever to remain.
Laudate dominum, Psalm. cxlvii. N.
The Prophet prayseth the bountye, wisdom, power, justice, and providence of
God upon all his creatures. But specially upon his church which he gathers
together after their dispersion. Declaring his word and judgments so unto them
as he has don to no other people.

^ PRaise ye the Lord, for it is good unto ^ our God to sing, For it is
pleasante and to ^ praise, it is a comely thing, the Lord his own ^ Jerusalem,
he builds up alone, and the dispersed ^ of Israel, does gather into one.

He heales the broken in their heart, their sore up does he bind:
He countes the number of the stars, and names them in their kind.
Great is our Lord great is his power, his wisdom infinite:
The Lord releues the meke, and throws to ground the wicked wight.
Sing unto God the Lord with praise, unto the Lord rejoice:
And to our God upon the harp, advance your singing voice.
He couers heaven with clouds, and for the earth prepares rain:
And on the mountains he does make, the grass to grow again.
He geues to beasts their fode, and to, young ravens when they cry:
His pleasure not in strength of horse, nor in man's legs does lie.
But all in those that fear the Lord, the Lord has his delight:
And such as do attend upon, his mercies shining light.
O praise thy Lord Jerusalem, thy God O Syon praise:
For he the bars has forged strong, where with thy gaie he stays.
Thy children he has blessed in thee, and in thy borders he:
Does settle peace and with the flower. of wheat he fills thee.
And his commandment upon, the earth he sends out:
And eke his word with spedy course, does swiftly run about.
He gives snow like woll, hoar frost, like ashes does he spread,
Like morsells castes his ise, thereof, the cold who can abide?
He sends fourth his mighty word, and melts them again.
His wind he makes to blow, and then, the waters flow amayne,
The doctrine of his holy word. to Jacob does he show.
His statutes and his judgments he, geues Israel to know.
With every nation has he not, so dealt, nor they have known
His secret judgments, ye therefore, praise ye the Lord alone.
Laudate dominum. Psalm. cxlviii. I. P.
He provoke all creatures to praise the Lode in heaven, in earth, and in all
places. specially for the power that he has given to his people Israel, whom
he has taken so nere unto him.

^ Give laud unto the Lord, from heaven, ^ that is so hie: Praise him in deed
and word,

^ Above the starry sky. 2. And also ye his angels ^ all, armies royal praise
him with glee.

Praise him both moan and Sun,
Which are so clear and bright,
The same in you be done,
Ye glistring stars of light,
And eke no les,
De Heavens fair,
And clouds of the air,
His laud express.
For at his word they were,
All formed as we see:
At his voice did appear,
All things in their degree,
Which he set fast,
To them he made,
A law and trade,
For aye to last,
Extol and praise Gods name,
In earth ye Dragons fell,
All deep do ye the same,
For it becomes you well.
Him magnyfye,
Fire, Hayle, Ise, Snow,
And storms that blow,
At his decree.
The hills and mountains all,
And trees that frutfull are:
The Cedres great and tall,
His worthy prayie declare.
Beasts and cattle,
yea birds fliyng:
And worms crepyng,
That on earth dwell.
All kings both more and les,
With all their pompons train:
Princes and all judges,
That in the world remain,
Exalte his name.
young men and maids,
Old men and babes.
Do ye the same.
For his name shall we prove,
To be most excellent:
Whose praise is far above,
The earth and firmament.
For sure he shall,
Exalt with bliss,
The horn of his:
And help them all,
His saints all shall forthtell,
His praise and worthiness:
The children of Israel,
Each one both more and les,
And also they,
That with good will,
His words fulfill,
And him obey
Cantate dominum. Psalm. exlix. N.
An exhortation to the church to praise the Lord for his victory and
conquest, that he gives his fainctes against all man's power.

SIng ye unto the Lord our God, a new rejoicing song:
And let the praise of him be heard, his holy saints among.
Let Israel rejoice in him, that made him of nothing:
And let the sede of Sion eke, be joyful in their king.
Let them sound praise with voice of flut unto his holy name:
And with the timbrell and the harp, sing praises of the same.
For why the Lord his pleasure all, has in his peoyle set:
And by deliverance he will raise, the meke to glory great.
With glory and with honor now, let all the saints rejoice:
And now aloude upon their beds, advance their singing voice.
And in their mouths let be the acts, of God the mighty Lord:
And in their hands eke let them bear, a dooble edged sword.
To plage the Heathen and correct, the people with their hands,
To bind their stately kings in chains their lords in iron bands.
To execute on them the dome, that written is before:
This honor all his saints shall have, praise ye the lord therefore.
Laudate dominum Psalm. CL. N.
An exhortacion to praise the Lord without sease by all manner of ways for all
his mighty, and wonderful works.

Yield unto God the mighty Lord, praise in his sanctuarye:
And praise him in the firmament, that shows his power on hie.
Advance his name and praise him in, his mighty acts always:
According to his excellencye, of greatness give him praise,
His praises with the princely noise, of sounding tropet blow.
Praise him upon the viole and, upon the harp also.
Praise him with timbrell and with flute, orgaines and virginalles:
With sounding cimbals praise ye him: praise him with loud cimballs.
What ever has the benefit, of breathing praise the lord:
To praise the name of God the lord, agree with one accord.
The end of the Psalms of David in meter.
The. x. Commandments of almighty God.
Exodus. xx. VV. VV.
^ AT tend my people and give ear, of ferly ^ things I will thee tell Se that my
words in ^ mind thou bear, And to my precepts listen well.

I am thy Sovereign Lord and God,
Which have thee brought from careful thrall:
And eke reclaymed from Pharos rod.
Make thee no Gods on them to call.
Nor facyoned form of any thing,
In heaven, or earth to worship it:
For I thy God by reuengyng,
With grievous plages this syn will smite,
Take not in vain his holy name,
Abuse it not after thy will:
For so thou might soon purchase blame,
And in his wrath he would thee spill.
The Lord from work the seventh day cest,
And brought all things to perfect end:
So thou and thine that day take rest
That to Gods hests ye may attend.
Unto thy parents honor give,
As Gods commandments do pretend,
That thou long days, and good maies live,
In earth, where God a place does lend,
Beware of muder, and cruel hate,
All fylthy fornication fear:
Se thou steal not in any rate,
False witness against no man bear,
Thy neyghbors house with not to have
His wife, or ought that he caleth mine,
His field, his ox, his ass, his sclaue,
Or any thing, which is not thine.
A prayer.
The sprit of grace grant us (O Lord)
To keep these laws, our hearts restore:
And cause us all with one accord,
To magnify thy name therefore.
For of our selves no strength we have,
To keep these laws after thy will:
Thy might therefore (O Christ) we crave,
That we in thee may them fulfill,
Lord for thy names sake, grant us this
Thou art our strength, oh Savior Christ:
Of thee to speed, how should we mis,
In whom our treasure does consist.
To thee for evermore be praise,
With thy father in each respect:
And with thy holy sprite always,
The comforter of thine elect.
The Lords Prayer. D. Coxe.
^ OUr father which in heaven art, And ^ makst us all one brotherhod, to call
upon thee ^ with one heart. Our heavenly Father and our ^ God: grant we pray
not with lips alone, but ^ with the hearts deep sigh and groan.

Thy blessed name be sanctified,
Thy holy word might us inflame,
In holy life for to abide,
To magnifye thy holy name,
From all errors defend and keye,
the little flock of thy poor sheep,
Thy kingdom come even at this hour,
And henceforth euerlastyngly:
thine holy ghost into us pour:
With all his gifts most plenteously,
From Satan's rage and filthy band,
Defend us with thy mighty hand.
Thy will be done with diligence,
like as in heaven in earth also:
In trouble grant us patience,
thee to obey in wealth and woe,
let not flesh, blood, or any ill,
Preueile against thy holy will,
Give us this day our daily bread,
And all other good gifts of thine:
keep us from war, and from bloodshed,
Also from sickness, derth and Pine,
that we may live in quietness,
Without all gredy carefulnes.
Forgive us our offenses all,
Releue our careful conscience:
As we forgive both great and small,
which unto us have done offense.
Prepare us lord for to serve thee,
In perfect love and unity.
O lord into temptacion,
Lead us not when the find does rage:
to with stand his invasion:
Give power and strength to every age,
Arm and make strong thy feeble host,
with faith and with thy holy ghost.
O Lord from evil deliver us,
The days and times are dangerous,
From everlasting death save us:
And in our last need comfort us,
A blessed end to us bequeath,
Into thy hands our souls receive.
For thou (O Lord) art king of kings,
And thou have power ouerall,
Thy glory shines in all things:
In the wide world universal,
Amen, Let it bedone (O Lord)
That we have prayed with one accord.
The. xii. Articles of the christian Faith.
^ ALl my belief, and confidedce, Is ^ in the Lord of might, the father which
al things ^ has made the day and eke the night, the heavens ^ and the
firmament, and also many a star, the earth: ^ and all that is therein, which
pass ma^s reason far.

And in like manner I believe,
In Christ our Lord, his son:
Coequall with the deity,
And man in flesh and bone.
Conceived by the holy Ghost,
His word does me assure:
And of his mother Mary borne,
yet she a Uirgin pure.
Because mankind to Satan was,
For sin in bond and thrall:
He came and offered up him self,
To death to save us all.
And suffering most grievous pain:
Then Pilate being judge:
Was crucified on the cross,
And thereat did not grudge.
And so he dyed in the flesh,
But quickened in the sprite:
His body then was buried,
As is our use and ryte.
His sprit did after this descend,
Into the lower parts:
To them that long in darkness were,
The true light of their hearts.
And in the third day of his death,
He rose to life again:
To the end he might be gloryfyed,
Out of oll grief and pain.
Ascending to the heavens hie,
To sit in glory still:
On Gods right hand, his Father dear,
According to his will.
Until the day of judgment come,
When he shall come again:
With Angels power, yet of that day,
We all be uncertain,
To jude all people rightuously,
Whom he has dearly bought:
The living and the dead also,
Which he has made of naught.
And in the holy spirit of God,
My faith to satisfye:
The third parson in Trinity,
Believe I sted fastlye.
The holy and catholic Church,
That Gods word does maintain:
And holy Scripture does allow,
Which Satan does disdain.
And also I do trust to have,
By Jesus Christ his death:
Release and pardon of my sins,
And that only by faith.
What time all flesh shall rise again,
Before the Lord of might:
And se vim with their bodily eyes.
Which now do give them light.
And then shall Christ our savior,
The sheep and Goats divide:
And give life euerlastyngly,
to those, whom he has tried.
Which is the realm celestial,
In glory for to rest:
With all the holy company,
Of Saints and Angels blessed,
Which serve the Lord omnipotent,
Obediently each hour:
To whom be all dominion,
and praise for evermore.
A Prayer unto the holy ghost, to be song before the Sermon.
COme holy sprite, the god of might, Comforter of us all:
Teach us to know thy word a right Sing this as the. cxix. Psalm.
that we do never fall.
O holy Ghost, visit our coast, defend us with thy shild:
Against all sin and wickedness, Lord help us win the field.
Lord keep our Queen and her counsel, and give them will and might:
To persevere in thy Gospel, which can put sin to flight.
O Lord that geuest thy holy word, send preachers plenteouslye:
That in the same we may accord, and therein live and dye.
O holy Sprite, direct a right, the Preachers of thy word:
Thot thou by them may cut down syn, As it were with a sword.
Depart not from those pastors pure, but aid them at all need:
Which break to us, the bread of life, whereon our souls do feed.
O blessed spirit of truth, keep us, In peace and unity:
Keep us from sects and errors all, And from all papistrie.
Convert all those, that are our foes, and bring them to thy light:
That they and we, may well agree, and praise thee day and night.
O Lord increase our faith in us, and love so to abound:
That man and wife, be void of strife, and neighbors about us round.
In our time give thy peace, O Lord, to nations far and nigh:
And teach them all thy holy word, that we may sing to thee.
All glory to the Trinity, that is of mightes most:
The living Father and the Son, and eke the holy Ghost.
As it has been in all the time, that has been here to fore:
As it is now and so shall be. henceforth for evermore.
Dapacem domine.
^ Give peace in these our days o lord, great ^ dangers are now at hand,
thine enemies with ^ one accord: Christ name in every land: seek ^ to deface,
route out and race: thy true right ^ worship in deed: be thou the stay, lord we
the pray, ^ thou helpest alone in all need.

Give us that peace* which we do lack,
Through misbelief and ill life:
Thy word to offer thou do not slack,
Which we unkindly gainstriue.
with fire and sword,
This healthful word,
Some persecute and opprisse:
Some with the mouth.
Confess the truth,
Without sincere godliness,
Give peace, and us thy spirit down send,
With grief and repentance true:
Do pearce our hearts, our lives to amend,
And by faith, Christ renew.
That fear and dread,
War and bloodshed,
Through thy sweet mercy and grace:
May from us slide,
Thy truth may bide,
And shine in every place.
The complaint of a Sinner who craves of Christ, to be kept under his mercy.
^ WHere righteousness does say lord for ^ my sinful part: in wrath y^ should
me pay ve^gaunce ^ for (...) desert. I can it not deny, but needs ^ I must
confess, how yt continually thy laws I ^ do transgres. Thy laws I do
transgress.

But if it be thy will,
With sinners to contend:
Then all thy flock shall spill,
And be lost without end.
For who lives here so right,
That rightly he can say:
He sins not in thy sight,
Full often and every day.
Thy scripture plain telth me,
The righteous man offends:
Seven times a day to thee,
Whereon thy wrath dependth,
So that the rightwise man,
Does walk in no such path:
but he falth now or than,
In danger of thy wrath,
Then since the case so stands,
That even the man rightwise:
Falth often in sinful bands,
Whereby thy wrath may rise.
Lord I that am unjust,
And rightwisenes none have:
Whereto then shall I trust.
My sinful soul to save.
But truly to that post,
Whereto I cleave and shall:
Which is thy mercy most,
Lord let thy mercy fall.
And mitigate thy mode,
Or else we perish all:
The price of this thy blood,
Wherein mercy I call.
Thy scripture does declare,
No drop of blood in thee:
But that thou did not spare,
To shed each drop for me.
Now let those drops most swet,
So moist my heart so dry:
That I with sin replete,
May live and sin may die.
That being mortifyed,
This sin of mine in me:
I may be sanctified,
By grace of thine in thee.
So that I never fall,
Into such mortal sin:
That my foes infernal,
Rejoice my death therein.
But vouchesafe me to keep,
From those infernal foes:
And from that lake so deep,
Whereas no mercy grows,
And I shall sing the songs
Confirmed with the just:
That unto thee belonges,
Which art mine only trust.
Through perfect repentance the sinner has a sure trust in God that his
sin s shall be washed away in Christ's e^loud.
^ O Lord in thee is al my trust, give ear ^ unto my woeful cry: Refuse me not
that am unjust: ^ but bowing down thy heavenly eye, behold ^ how I do still
lament: my sins wherein I do ^ offend O Lord for them shall I be shent: Since
^ thee to playse I do intend.

No no, not so thy will is bent, To deal with sinners in thine ire.
But when in heart they shall repent, Thou grauntst with sped their just desire
To thee therefore still shall I cry, to wash away my sinful crime:
Thy blood (O Lord) is not yet dry, but that it may help me in time.
Have thee O Lord, have thee I say, To power on me the gifts of grace:
That when this life must flit away, In heaven with thee I may have place,
Where thou do reign eternally, with God which once did down the se^d
Where angels sing continually, To thee be praise world without end.
A thanks giving after the receyuyng of the Lords Supper.
THe Lord be thanked for his gifts,
And mercy evermore:
That he does show unto his saynctes Sing this as the. xxx vii. Psa

To him be laud therefore.
Our tongues cannot so praise the Lord,
As he does right deserve:
Our hearts can not of him so think,
As he does us preserve.
His benefits they be so great,
To us that be but sin:
That at our hands for recompense,
There is no hope to win.
O sinful flesh, that thou should have,
Such mercyes of the Lord:
Thou do deserve, more worthily,
Of him to be abhord.
Naught else but sin* and wretchedness,
Does rest within our hearts:
And stubburnely against the Lord,
We daily play our parts.
The sun above in firmament,
That is to us a light:
Does show it self more clean and pure,
Then we be in his sight.
The heavens above and all therein,
More holy are then we:
They serve the Lord in their estate,
Each one in his degree.
They do not strive for mastership,
Nor slake their office set:
But fear the Lord and do his will,
Hate is to them no let.
Also the earth and all therein,
Of God it is in awe:
It does observe the formers will,
By skillful natures law.
The sea and all that therein is,
Does bend, when God does beck:
The spirtes beneathe do tremble all,
And fear his wrathful check.
But we alas, for whom all these
Were made them for to rule,
Do not so know or love the Lord,
As does the Ox or mule,
A law he gave for us to know,
What was his holy will:
He would us good, but we will not
Avoid the thing is ill.
Not one of us that seeks out
The Lord of life to please:
Nor to the thing that might us join
Our Christ and quiet ease,
Thus we are all his enemies,
We can it not deny:
And he again, of his good will,
Would not that we should dye.
Therefore when remedy was none,
To bring us unto life:
The son of God, our flesh he took,
To mend our mortal strife:
And all the law of God our Lord,
He did it full obey:
And for our sins upon the cross,
His blood our dettes did pay.
And that we should not yet forget,
What good be to us wrought:
A sign he left our eyes to tell,
That he our bodies bought.
In bread and wine here visible,
Unto thine eyes and taste,
His mercyes great thou may record,
If that his spryte thou have.
As once the corn did live and grow,
And was cut down with since,
And threshed out with many stripes,
Out from his husk to drive,
And as the mill with violence
Did tear it out so small,
And made it like to earthly dust,
Not sparing it at all.
And as the oven with fire hot,
Did close it up in heat:
And all this done that I have said,
That it should be our meat:
So was the Lord in his ripe age
Cut down by cruel death:
His soul he gave in torments great,
And yielded up his breath.
Because that he to us might be,
An everlasting bread,
with much reproach and trouble great,
On earth his life he led.
And as the grapes in pleasant time
Are pressed very sore,
And plucked down when they be ripe,
Nor let to grow no more,
Because the ioyse that in them is,
As comfortable drink,
We might receive and joyful be,
when sorrows make us shrink.
So Christ's blood out pressed was,
With nails and eke with spear:
The ioyse whereof does save all those,
That rightly do him fear.
And as the corns by unity,
Into one lofe is knit:
So is the Lord and his whole church,
Though he in heaven sit.
As many grapes make but one wine,
So should we be but one:
In faith and love, in Chist above,
And unto Christ alone.
Leading a life without all strife,
In quiet rest and peace,
From envy and from malice both,
Our hearts and tongues to cease.
Which if we do then shall we show,
That we his chosen be:
By faith in him to lead a life,
As always willed he.
And that we may so do in deed,
God send us all his grace:
Then after death we shall be sure,
With him to have a place,
Robert Wlsdom.

^ Preserve us Lord, by thy dear word.

^ From Turk and Pope defend us Lord which ^ both would thrust out of his
throne, our Lord ^ Jesus Christ thy dear son.

Lord Jesus Christ show forth thy might,
That thou art Lord of Lords by right:
Thy poor afflicted flock defend,
That they may praise thee without end,
God holy Ghost, our comfortor,
Be our Patron, help, and succor:
Give us one mind, and perfect peace:
All gifts of grace in us increase.
Thou living God, in parsons three.
Thy name be praised in unity:
In all our need so us defend:
That we may praise thee, world without end.
A formst of proyer to be. used in private houses, every morning and evening.
Morning prayer.
Almighty God, and most merciful Father, we do not present our selves here
before thy majesty, trusting in our own merits or worthiness, but in thy
manifold mercyes, which haste promised to bear our Prayers, and grant our
requests, which we shall make to the in the name of thy beloved son Jesus
Christ our Lord: who has also commanded us to assemble ourselves together
in his name, with full assurance that he will not only be amongst us, but also be
our mediator, and advocate toward thy majesty, that we may obtain all
things which shall seem expedient to thy blessed will for our necessities:
therefore we beseech thee, most merciful Father, to turn thy loving
countenance toward us, and impute not unto us our manifold sins and
offenses, where by we justly deserve thy wrath and sharp punishment: but rather
receive us to thy mercy for Jesus Christ's sake, accepting his death and
passion, as a just recompense for all our offenses, in whom only thou art
pleased, and through whom thou can not be offended with us. And seeing that of
thy great mercyes, we have quietly passed this night, grant (O heavenly
father,) that we may bestow this day wholly in thy service, so that al our
thoughts, words, and deeds, may redounde to the glory of thy name, and good
ensample to all men, who seeing our good works, may gloryfye thee our
heavenly father. And for as much as of thy mere favor, and love, thou have not
only created us to thine own similitude and likeness, but also haste chosen us
to be heirs with thy dear son Jesus Christ of that immortal kingdom which
thou preparedst for us before the beginning of the world, we beseech thee to
increase our faith and know ledg, and to lighten our hearts with thy holy
spirit that we may in mean time, live in godly conuersatyon and integrity of
life: knowing that Idolaters, adulterers, covetous men, co^tentious persons
drunkards glottons, and such like: shall not in herite the kingdom of God.

And because thou have commanded us to pray one for another, we do not only
make request (O Lord) for ourselves, and them that thou have already called to
the true understanding of thy heavenly will: but for all people and Nations of
the world who as they know by thy wonderful works: that thou art god over
al: So they may be instructed by thy holy spirit, to believe in thee their only
Savior and redemer. But for as much as they cannot believe except they hear,
nor can not hear but by preaching, and none can preach, except they be sent,
therefore (O Lord) raise up faithful destributers of thy mysteries, who setting
apartal worldly respects, may both in their life and doctrine, only seek thy
glory. Contrarylye confound Satan, Antichriste, with all hierlinges, whom
thou have already cast of, into a reprobate se^ce: that they may not by sects,
schisms, heresies, and errors disquiet thy littell flock. And because (O
Lord) we be fallen into the latter days, and dangerous times, wherein
ignorance has gotten the upper hand, and Satan by his ministeres seek by
all means to quench the light of thy Gospel, we beseech the to maintain thy
cause against those ravening wolves, and strengthen all thy servants whom
they keep in prison and bondage. Let not thy long suffryng be an occasion,
either to increase their tirannye, or to discourage thy children, nether yet
let our sins and wickedness be a hinderance to thy mercies, but with speed (O
Lord) consider these great miseries. For thy people Israel many times by their
sins provoked thine anger, and thou punishedst them by thy just judgment,
yet though their sins were never so grievous, if they once returned from their
iniquity, thou receiuedst them to mercy. We therefore, most wretched sinners,
be wayle our manifold sins, and earnestly repent us for our former wickennes
and ungodly behauior toward thee: and where as we cannot of our selves
purchase thy pardon, yet we humbly beseech thee, for Jesus Christ's sake, to
show thy mercyes upon us, and receive us again to thy favor. Grant us, dear
father these our requests and all other things necessary for us, and thy
whole church, according to thy promise in Jesus Christ our Lord. In whose
name we beseech thee as he has taught us, saying: Our father. etc.

A prayer to be said before meals.
ALl things depend upon thy providence (O Lord) to receive at thy hands, due
sustena^ce in time conuenienie. Thou geuest to them, and they gather it, thou
openest thy hand, and they are satisfied with all good things. O heavenly
father, which art the fountain and full treasure of all good nes, we beseech
thee to show thy mercyees upon us thy children, and sanctifye these gifts
which we receive of thy merciful liberality grant us grace to use them
soberlye and purely according to thy blessed will, so that hereby we may
acknowledge thee to be the author and geuer of all good things and above all,
that we may remember continually, to seek the spiritual fode of thy word,
wherewith our souls may be norished everlastingly through our savior Christ:
who is the true bread of life, which came down from heaven, of whom, whosoever
ever eats, shall live for ever, and reign with, him in glory world without
end. So be it.

A thanks giving after meals,
LEt all nations magnifye the Lord, let all people rejoice, in praising and
extollyng his great mercyes. For his fatherly kindness is plentyfully showed
forth upon us, and the truth of his promise indureth for ever.

We render thanks unto thee (O Lord god) for the manifold benefits, which
we continually receive at thy bountiful hand, not only for that it has
pleased thee to feed us in this present life, geuyng unto us, all things
necessary for the same, but especially because thou have of thy free mercies
facioned us a new, into an assured hope of a far better life, the which thou
have declared unto us by thy holy Gospel. Therefore we humbly beseech thee (O
heavenly father) that thou will not suffer our affections to be so entangled
or roted in these earthly and corruptible things, but that we may always
have our minds directed to thee on high continually watching for the coming
of our Lord and Saiuour Christ, what time he shall appear for our full
redemption, To whom with thee, and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory,
for ever and ever. So be it.

A another thanks giving before meat.
Eternal and ever living God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who, of thy
most singular love which thou bear to mankind, haste appointed to his
sustenance, not only the fruits of thearth: but also the fowls of the air,
the beasts of thearth, and fishes of the sea, and have commanded thy
benefits to be received, as from thy hands with thanks giving, assuring thy
children, by the mouth of thy Apostle, that to the clean, all things are
clean, as the creatures, which be sanctified by thy word and by prayer, grant
unto us so moderatly to use these thy gifts present, that the bodies being
refreshed, the souls may be more hable to proceed in all good works, to the
praise of thy holy name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Sobeit.

Our Father which art in heaven. etc.

Another.
THe eyes of all things do look up and trust in thee (O Lord) thou geuest them
meat in due season, thou openest thy hand, and fillest with thy blessinge every
living creature: good Lord, bles us and all thy gifts which we receive of thy
large liberality, through Jesus Christ our Lord Sobeit. Our father. etc.

Another thanks giving after meat,
Glory, praise and honor, be unto thee most merciful and omnipotent Father,
who of thine infinite goodness, have created man to thine own image and
similitude: who also have fed, and daily fedest of thy most bountiful hand, all
living creatures grant unto us, that as thou have norished these our mortal
bodies with corporal food, so thou would replenish our souls with the
perfet knowledge of the lively word of thy beloved son Jesus, to whom be
praise, glory, and honor for ever. Sobeit.

God save the Church universal: our Queen and Realm. God comfort all them
that be comfortles. Lord increase our faith. O Lord, for christ thy sons
sake, be merciful to the common wealths where thy Gospel is truly preached,
and harbor granted to the afflicted members of Christ's body, and illuminate,
according to thy good pleasure, all nations with the bryghtnes of thy word.

So beit.

Another.
THe God of glory and peace, who has created redeemed, and presently fed us, be
blessed for ever and ever. Sobeit.

The God of all power, who has called from death, that great pastor of the
sheep, our Lord Jesus, comfort and defend the flock, which he has redeemed
by the blood of the eternal Testamente increase the number of true Preachers:
repres the rage of obstinate tirants, mitigate and lighte^ the hearts of the
ignorant relieve the pains of such as be afflicted, but especially of those
that suffer for the testimony of thy truth: and finally, co^fou^d Satan, by
the power of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Amen.
Evening prayer.
O Lord God, Father everlasting, and full of pity, we acknowledge and
confess, that we be not worthy to lift up our eyes to heaven, much les to
present our selves before thy majesty with confidence that thou will hear
our prayers, and grant our requests, if we consider o^^e own deseruinges,
for our conciences do accuse us, and our sins witness against us, and we
know that thou art an upright judge, which do not iustifye the sinners and
wicked men, but punishest the fautes of all such as transgres thy
commandments. Yet most merciful father, since it has pleased thee to
command us to call on thee in aloure troubles and adversities, promising even
the^ to help us, when wefele our selves (as it were) swalowed up of death and
desperation, we utterly renounce all worldly confydence, and flee to thy
so-souerayne bounty, as our only stay and refuge: beseching thee, not to call
to remembrance our manifold sins and wickedness, whereby we contynuallye
provoke thy wrath and indignation against us: neither our negligence and and
unkindness, which have neither worthily esteemed, nor in our lives sufficiently
expressed, the sweet comfort of thy Gospel reveled unto us: but rather to
accept the obedience and death of thy son Jesus Christ, who by offering up his
body in sacrifice once for all, has made a sufficient recompense for all our
sins. Have mercy therefore upon us (O lord) and forgive us our offenses.
Teach us by thy holy spirit, that we may rightly wey them, and earnestly
repent for the same. And so much the rather (O Lord) because that the
reprobate, and such as thou have for saken, cannot praise thee, nor call upon
thy name, but the repenting heart, the sorrow full mind, the conscience
oppressed, hungring and thirsting for thy grace, shall ever set forth thy praise
and glory. And albeit we be but worms and dust: yet thou art our creator and
we be the work of thy hands: yea, thou art our father, and we thy children:
thou art our shepeherd, and we thy flock thou art our redemer and we the
people who^ thou have bought: thou art our God, and we thine inheritance,
Correct us not therefore in thine anger (O Lord) neither according to our
deserts punish us, but mercifully chastyce us with a fatherly affection, that
all the world may know, that at what time soever a sinner does repent him of
his sin, from the bottom of his heart, thou will put a way his wickedness out
of thy remembrance, as thouhast promised by thy holy prophet.

Finally for as much as it has pleased thee to make ye night for man to rest
in, as thou have ordained him the day to travel, grant, (o dear father) that
we may so take our bodily rest, yt our souls may continually watch, for the
time that our lord Jesus christ shall appear for our deliverance out of this
mortal life, (and in the mean season that we, not ouercomen by any fantasies,
dreams, or other temptations) may fully set our minds upon thee, love thee,
fear thee, and rest in thee: furthermore that our sleep be not excessive or
ouermuche after the insaciable desires of our flesh: but only sufficient to
content our weak nature, that we may be better disposed to live in all godly
conuersatyon to the glory of thy holy name, and profit of our brethren. Sobeit.

A godly Prayer to be said at all times.
HOnor and praise, be given to thee (O Lord God almighty) most dear Father
of heaven for all thy mercies and loving kindness showed unto us, in that it
has pleased thy gracious goodness freely, and of thine own accord, to elect
and chose us to salvation before the beginning of the world, and even like
continull thanks be given to the for creating us after thine own image, for
redeming us with the precious blood of thy dear some, when we were utterly
lost, for sanctifying us with thy holy spirit in the releuing and succoring us,
in all our needs and necessities, for saving us from aldaungers of body and
soul, for comforting us so fatherly in all our tribulations and persecutions,
for sparing us so long, and geuyng us so large a time of repentance. These
benefits (O most merciful father) like as we know ledg to have received them
of thy only goodness, even so we beseech thee, for thy dear son Jesus Christ's
sake: to grant us always thy holy spirit, whereby we may continually grow in
thankfulness toward thee, to be led into all truth, and comforted in all our
adversities. O Lord, strengthen our faith, kindle it more in feruentnes and
love toward thee (and our neighbors) for thy sake. Suffer us not most dear
Father, to receive thy word any more in vain: but grant us always the
assistance of thy grace and holy spirit, that in heart, word and deed we may
sanctifye and do worship to thy name. Help to amplify and increase thy
kingdom, and what so ever thou sendest, we may be heartily well content with
thy good pleasure and will: Let us not lack the thing (O Father) without the
which we can not serve the, but bless thou so all the works of our hands,
that we may have sufficient, and not to be chargeable but rather helpefull
unto others: be merciful (O Lord) to our offenses, and seeing our det is great,
which thou haste for given us in Jesus Christ, make us toloue thee and our
neyghbors so much the more. Be thou our Father, our captain and defender: in
all temptations hold thou us by thy merciful hand, that we may be delivered
from all inconveniences, and end our lives in the sanctifying and honor of thy
holy name through Jesus Christ our Lord, and only savior. Sobe it.

Let thy mighty hand and out stretched arm (O Lord) be still our defense,
thy mercy and loving kindness in Jesus Christ thy dear son our salvation, thy
true and holy word our instruction, thy grace and holy spirit our comfort and
consolation, unto the end and in the end Sobe it.

O Lord increase our faith.

A confession of all estates. and times.
O Eternal God and most merciful father we confess, and acknowledge, hear
before thy divine majesty, that we are miserable sinners, conceived and borne
in sin and iniquitye, so that in us there is no goodness. For the flesh
evermore rebelleth against the spirit, whereby we continually transgres thy
holy precepts, and commaundeme^ts, and so purchase to our selves, through thy
just judgment, death and damnation. Notwithstanding (O heavenly father) for
as much as we are displeased with our selves for the sins that we have
committed against thee, and do unfeignedly repent us of the same: we most
humblye beseech thee, for Jesus Christ's sake, to shewthy mercy on us, to
forgive us al our sins, and to increase our holy spirit in us: that we
acknowledgyng, from the botome of our hearts, our own unrighteousness, may from
henceforth not only mortify our sinful lusts and affections, but also bring
forth such fruits, as may be agreeable to thy most blessed will, not for the
worthiness thereof, but for the merits of thy dearelye beloved son Jesus
Christ our only Savior, whom thou have already given an oblation, and offering
for our sins: and for whose sake, we are certenlye persuaded, that thou
will deny us nothing, that we shall ask in his name, according to thy will.
For thy spirit does assure our consciences, that thou art our merciful father,
and so love us thy children through him, that nothing is able to remove thy
heavenly grace and favor from us: to thee therefore (O father) with the son
and the holy Ghost be all honor and glory, world without end. Sobeit.

A Prayer to be said before a man begin his work.
O Lord God most merciful father and Savior, seeing it has pleased thee to
co^mau^d us to traueil, that we may releue our need, webeseche thee of thy
grace so to bless our labor that thy blessing may extend unto us, without the
which we are not able to continue: and that this great favor may be a witness
unto us of thy bou^tifulnes and assistance, so that thereby we may know the
fatherly care that thou have over us.

Moreover, O Lord, we beseech thee that thou would strengthen us with thine
holy spirit, that we may faithfully trauaill in our estate and vocation
without fraud or deceit: and that we may endeavor our selus to follow thine
holy ordinance, rather then to seek to satisfye our gridie affections or desire
to gain. And if it please thee, O Lord, to prosper our labor, give us a mind
also to help the^ that have need, according to that ability that that thou of
thy mercy shalt give us: and knowing that all good things come of thee, grant
that we may humble our selves to our neighbors, and not by any means lift
our selves up above them, which have not received so liberalla portion as of
thy mercy thou haste given unto us. And if it please thee to try and exercise
us by greater poverty, and need then our flesh would desire, that thou would
yet, O Lord, grant us grace to know that thou will nourish us continually
through thy bountiful liberality, that we be not so tempted that we fall into
distrust: but that we may pacie^tly wait till thou fill us not only with
corporal graces and benefits, but chiefly with thine heaue^lye and spiritual
treasures, to the intent that we may always have more ample occasion to give
thee thanks, and so wolly to rest upon thy mereyes. Hear us, O Lord of
mercy, through Jesus Christ thy Son our Lord.

Amen.
A Prayer for the hole state of Christ's church.
ALmyghtye God and most merciful father, we humbly submit ourselves, and fall
down before thy Majesty, beseching thee from the botome of our hates, that
this sede of thy word now sown amongst us, may take such deep rote, that
neither the burning heat of persecution cause it to wither, neither thorny
cares of this life choke it, but that as sede, sown in good ground, it may
bring forth thirty, sixty, and an hundredth fold: as thy heavenly wysdom
has appointed.

And because we have need continually to crave many things at thy hands, we
humbly beseech thee (O heavenly father) to grant us thy holy spirit, to
direct our petitions, that they may proceed from such a feruente mind, as
may be agreeable to thy most blessed will. And seeing that our infirmity is
hable to do nothing without thy help, and that thou art not ignorant with
how many and great temptations we poor wretches are on every side enclosed,
and compassed: Let thy strength (o lord) sustain our weakness, that we being
defended with the force of thy grace, may be safely preserved against all
assaults of Satan: who goes about continually like a roaring Lion, seking to
devour us. Increase our faith (o merciful father) that we do not swerve at any
time from thy heauenlyword: but augment in us hope and love, with a careful
keeping of all thy commandments: that no hardness of heart, no Ipocrisie, no
concupiscence of the eyes, nor inticements of the world, do draw us away from
thy obedience. And seeing we live now in these most perilous times: let thy
fatherly providence defend us against the violence of our enemies, which do
seek by all means to oppres thy truth. Furthermore for as much as by thy holy
apostle we be taught, to make our prayers and supplication for all men. We
pray not only for oureselues here present, but beseech thee also, to reduce all
such, as be yet ignorant from the miserable captivity of blindness and errors,
to the pure understanding and knowledge of thy heavenly truth, that we all
with one consent and unity of minds may worship thee our only God and savior.
And that all pastors, shepeheards and ministers, to who^ thou have committed
the dispensation of thy holy word, and charge of thy chosen people, may both
in their life and doctrine, befound faithful, setting only before their eyes
thy glory, and that by the^ all poor sheep, which wander and go astray, may be
gathered and brought home to thy fold.

Moreover because the hearts of rulers are in thy hands: We beseech thee to
direct, and govern the hearts of all kings, princes and maistrats, to who^ thou
have committed the sword, especially (O lord) according to our bounden duty
we beseech thee to maintain and increase the honorable estate of the Queens
majesty, and all her most noble cou^sellers, and maiestrates, and all the
whole body of this commune weal. Let thy fatherly favor so preserve them, and
thy holy spirit so govern their hearts, yt they may in such sort execute their
office, that thy relygion may be purely maintained, manners reformed, and sin
punished according to the precise rule of thy holy word. And for that we be
all members of the mistical body of Jesus Christ, we make our requests unto
thee, (O heavenly father) for all such as are afflicted with any kind of cross
or tribulation, as war, plage, famyne, sickness, poverty, imprisonmente,
persecution, banishment, or any other kind of thy rods, whether it be
calamity of body, or vexatio^ of mind that it would please the, to give them
patience, and constancye, til thou send them full deliverance of all their
troubles. Rote out from hence (O Lord) all ravening wolves, which, to fill
their bellyes, seek to destroy thy flock And show thy great mercyes upon those
our brethren in other countries, which are persecuted cast into prison, and
daily condemned for the testimony of thy truth. And though they be utterly
destitute of all man's aid, yet let thy sweet comfort never depart from them:
but so inflame their hearts with thy holy spirit, that they may boldlye and
cheerfully abide such trial, as thy godly wisdom shall appoint. So that at
length as well by their death as by their life, the kingdom of thy dear son
Jesus Christ, may increase and shine through all the world. In whose name we
make hurt humble peticions to thee as he has taught us. Our Father which
art in Heaven hallowed by thy. etc.

EINIS.
The Table.
A Table both for the number of the whole Psalms, and olso what leaf you may
find every of them.
A Psalm. Fol. 30 ALl laud and praise. 61 40 All people her. III 78 Attend my
people to my law. 186 82 A mid the prease. 204 B 81 Be light and glad. 201 119
Blessed are they. 302 128 Blessed art thou. 337 134 Behold and have. 344 142
Before the Lord. 360 144 Blessed be the. 363 D 83 Do not O Bod re. 205 E 127
Except the Lord 335 G 29 Give to the Lord ye 59 37 Grudge not to see 81 48
Great is the Lord. 109 54 God save me for thy 127 105 Give praises unto. 261
107 Give thanks unto 275 147 Give laud unto 271 H 12 Help Lord, for. 22 13
How long will. 23 Psalm. Fol. 51 Have mercy on. 121 56 Have mercy Lord 131 67
Have mercy on us. 153 73 How ever it be, yet 173 84 How pleasant is. 208 91 He
that within 228 I 5 Incline thine ears. 8 11 I trust in God. 21 20 In trouble
and aduercitie 40. 25 I lift mine heart 50 34 I will give laud. 71 39 I said I
will look. 89 40 I waited long and 91 43 Judge and revenge. 98 77 I with my
voice 183 92 It is a thing both. 231 100 In God the Lord. 245 101 I mercy will
and 246 109 I specheles scilence. 281 116 I love the Lord. 296 120 In troble
and in. 326 121 I lift mine eyes. 327 122 I did in heart. 328 L 6 Lord in thy
wrath re. prove me not. 9 Psalm. Fol. 16 Lord keep me for. 27 26 Lord be my
judge. 84 35 Lord plead my cause. 74 42 Like as the heart. 96 68 Let God arise.
154 72 Lord give thy judge. 169 86 Lord bow thine ear. 212 88 Lord God of
health. 215 130 Lord to thee I. 338 140 Lord save me. 356 143 Lord hear my.
361 M 23 My sheperd is the 48 45 My heart does now 10 62 My soul to God 143 71
My Lord, my God. 166 103 My soul give. 251 14 My soul praise 254 146 My soul
praise. 367 N 115 Not unto us. 291 124 Now Israll. 331 O 3 O Lord how are my. 5
4 O God that art my. 6 7 O Lord my God. 13 8 O god our lord, how 14 15 O Lord
within thy ta. 29 17 O Lord give ear. 28 18 O God my strength. 31 21 O Lord
how joyful 41 22 O God my God. 44 31 O Lord I put my. 64 44 Our ears have
hard. 99 51 O Lord consider my. 118 55 O God give ear. 128 62 O Lord thou
did. 140 63 O God my God. 145 64 O lord unto my voy. 146 70 O God to me
take. 165 79 O Lord the Gentiles. 196 94 O Lord thou do. 233 95 O come let us.
237 98 O sing ye now. 243 102 O here my prayer. 247 108 O God my heart. 279 117
O all the nations. 298 118 O give ye thanks. 298 123 O Lord that 330 129 Of
Israel this. 337 131 O Lord I am not. 340 133 O how happy a. 343 135 O praise
the Lord. 344 139 O Lord thou have. 353 141 O Lord upon thee. 358 P 38 Put
me not to rebuk. 86 106 Praise ye the Lord. 267 136 Praise ye the Lord. 347 147
Praise ye the Lord. 369 R 61 Regard O Lord for. 141 132 Remember David's 340 S
59 Send aid and save. 137 69 Save O God. 159 96 Sing ye with 239 125 Such as
in God. 332 Psalm Fol. T 1 The man is blessed. 1 14 There is no God. 24 19 The
heavens and the. 38 24 The earth is all. 49 27 The Lord is both. 56 28 Thou
art O Lord. 58 32 The man is blessed 67 36 The wicked with 79 41 The man is
blessed. 94 46 The Lord is our 105 50 The God of Gods. 113 53 The foolish man.
125 57 Take pity for thy. 133 65 Thy praise alone. 149 76 To all that now 181
80 Thou Lord that Isra 198 85 Thou have ben. 210 87 That city shall. 214 89 To
sing the mor. 218 90 Thou Lord haste. 226 93 The Lord as king 233 97 The Lord
does rain 241 99 The lord does rain 244 110 The Lord did. 283 112 The man is
blessed. 283 138 Thee will I praise. 352 145 Thee will I laud 365 V 75 Unto the
God we. 186 2 why did the Gentiles. 3 9 with heart and mouth. 15 10 what is the
cause. 18 52 why do thou tirant. 123 74 why art thou Lord. 176 111 with heart
I do. 284 114 when Israel by. 296 126 when that the Lord. 334 137 when as we
sat. 350 Y 33 ye righteous in. 68 47 ye people all in. 107 58 ye rulers that
135 66 ye men on earth. 150 113 ye children, which. 288 150 yield unto the. 375

These follow after the Psalms.
Attend my people. Our Father which art. All my belefe. Come holy spirit,
Give peace in these. where righteousness does. O Lord in thee is all my.
Preserve us Lord. The Lord be thanked. Also serten godly prayers.
These ye shall have in the beginning of the book.
Venicreator spiritus. Tedeum laudamus. Benedicite. Benedictus dominus.
Magnificat anima. Nunc dimittis. The Lamentation of a. The humble suit of a
sinner Quicunque vult. The Pater noster. The. x. Commandments
FINIS.
POST FVNERA VIRTUES

VIVET TIMEN

ETSI MORS. INDIES ACCELERAT



Imprinted at London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate, beneath Saint
Martines.

Cum gratia and priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis. perseptennium.

These books are to be sold at his shop under the Gate. 1562.


