THE HIGH-VVAY To Heaven: OR, The doctrine of Election, effectual Vocation,
Justification, Sanctification and eternal Life.

Grounded upon the holy Scriptures, Confirmed by the testimonies of sundry
judicious and great Divines, Ancient and Modern.

Compiled by THOMAS TVKE.

LONDON, Printed by NICHOLAS OAKS, dwelling near Holborne bridge. 1609.

TO THE Worshipful Master JOHN Leuesen Esquire.
SIR, many and great are the Privileges of the Faithful, and far more
excellent then any, which either are, or can be granted by any mortal Monarch
whatsoever.

For first, they were Ephe. 1.
elected of almighty God freely from all eternity to be partakers of his grace
in this world, and to be invested with immortal glory in the world to come.

Secondly, when they had revolted from God, and were become the vassals of the
Devil, Ephe. 2.
dead in sins, and the children of wrath, God in (...) ^
recall and gather them, and redeemed them from their servitude with the Per.
1.19 Reu. 5.9
blood of his own and only son Christ Jesus, who was 2. Cor. 5 21.
made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him,
assuming our iniquity to himself, and imputing his righteousness unto us.
Chrysostom. in ^phe. 1. ser. 1.
Magnum (autem) est, quod peccata remissa sunt, sed maius est quod per
sanguinem Dominicum remissa sunt. Now it is much that we should be redeemed by
God, who were Runna gates from God: but that we should be redeemed by the blood
of Act. 20.28.
God, by the blood of the son of God, who was Romans 9 5.
perfect God and Ion. 1 2. and 10.30.
perfect man, of the same substance, honor and ant^quitie with the Father; this
commends the wonderful Ion. 4.9 Romans ^.8
love of God unto us, and is a favor that all the world besides does want.

Thirdly, God does ^ud 1. 2. Thesa. 9.13. Ezekiel 3^.
refine and revive them, breathing into them the breath of life, 1 Cor. 6.11
the spirit of sanctification, who does reform, purge and alter them,
ruinating the cursed works of the Devil, and repairing, rectifying, and
adorning them by grace with goodness.

Fourthly, Heb. 1.6
God does (when he pleases) bath them in the waters of sorrow, and try them
in the furnace of affliction, to correct and cleanse them, and that his graces
in them may appear more fresh and shining, as flowers do in a shower, or as
the Moon does in the night.

Finally the Romans 2.78. 2. Cor. 5.1. 2. Tim. 8.
Lord will one day translate them out of the wide and wast Wilderness of this
wicked and woeful World, and will safely bring them into celestial Canaan,
where they shall live for ever with him in full freedom from all evil, and in
perpetual fruition of all felecity, so that as nothing shall be found in Hell,
which shall be desired, so nothing shall be desired in Heaven, which shall not be
found. Ibi laetitia sine tristitia, locus sine dolor, vitasine labor, lux
sine tenebris: ibi iuuentus semper vigescit, and nunquam senescit: ibi dolor
nunqum sentitur, nec gemitus vnquam auditur: ibi tristitia nunquam videtur, sed
aeternum gaudium possidetur: ibi est summa and certa tranquillitas, tranquilla
faelicitas, foelix aeternitas, aeterna beatitas and beata August.
Trinitas. There shall be mirth without mourning, a life without labor and day
without darkness, eternal happiness and happy eternity. Ibi nec malitia, nec
militia: ibi nec poena, nec poenitenria: ibi nec peccatum, nec perditio. There
is neither sin, nor sorrow: neither penalty, nor penitency: neither foe, nor
fighting: neither corruption, nor contention: amity, and no enmity: faith, and
no fraud: godliness, and no guile: love without lust ^ wisdom without wilines:
simplicity without simulation: perpetual solace, and solacious perpetuity,
prosperous security, and secure prosperity; Ibi nil intus, quod sastiolatur:
nil foris, quod appetatur: ibi rex veritas, lex charitas, possessio aeternitas.
There we shall neither loathe, nor long for. The King is veri^y, the law
charity, the possession eternity; yea the fruition of the eternal God, who
will be Bernard
(Mel in ore, melos in aure, and i^bilus in cord) All in all to them that love
him.

These things you may take a further view of, if you please, by perusing this
little ^ractate: which I dedicate to you as a testimony of my desire of your
proficience in holy learning. And thus hoping of your kind acceptance thereof,
I commend it to you, and both it and you to the Lord; desiring him to honor you
with his grace, (...) you may so know him in your youth, as that you may be
known of him in your age, and that serving him like a faithful Soldier
against sin and all sinful vanities in the Church militant, you may reign
also like a noble Victor with him in the Church Triumphant.

February. 16. 1608. Your Worships in the Lord, to be commanded, THOMAS TVKE.


(...) Eduardi Smithi ad Lectorem.
Laesciuae fa^iem Veneris laudare vetustas
Respersam naeuo garrula saepe solet.
Exhibet iste liber veneres naeuo sine castas,
Es laetam quicquid sternat ad astra Viam.
Eiusdem ad Momum.
Nigro si tibi mos been facta notare lapillo,
H^^ omnis maculis pagina sparsa foret:
Vanae at sicarpas tantummodo somnia Mome,
Creed tuss maculis non locus vllus erit.
Eiusdem ad Auctorem.
Ergo age, pensentur tibi tot mercede labores
A Eterna, dignam saecula nostra negant.
Exhibe, tend, doc^, condigna, salubria, Verae,
Christo, ^uibus, cunctos, carmin^, voce, stylo.
The names of such as are alleged in this book, beside the Scriptures.
A
AMbrose Angelome Anselme Aquinas Aristotle Augustine
B
Bid and Beza Bellarmine Bernard Bradford Bu^anu^ Basil
C
Calvin Cicero Chrysostom Clemens Alex Cameracensis Cyprian Cyrill
D
Danaeus
F
Fox Fulgentius
G
Greenham Gregory
H
Hugo and Haimo H^ome
I
Innocentius Isidore Isychius Iustine
K
K^^ke man
L
Lacta^tiu^ Luth^r
M
P. Martyr
O
Origin
P
Per^iu^ P^^lp^t Piscator Polanus Primasius Pr^^p^r
R
Radulphus Roffensis Rogers Remi^i^s Roil^^^
S
Sedulins and Sturmius
T
Tertullian Theodulus Trel^atius Tyndall
V
Vrsinus
VV
Willet
OF GODS Eternal Election.
CHAP. I.
The word Election has five significations. Three reasons to pro^ue that there
is an Election to life. Two reasons proving the necessary use of this Doctrine.
Four reasons to show that Ministers should teach it. Three duties to be done
concerning the handling of it.

ALL men are by a certain instinct of nature desirous of knowledge, (...),
Aristot.
and account ignorance evil and unseemly, like a defective body, or a
light-lesse house. For knowledge is the eye of the mind, N^scire and malum and
^urpe duci^us, Cic. 1. Offic.
the light of the soul, the ornament of grace and nature, and such riches, as
will swim with the master, when he suffers shipwreck, and sees his whole
estate to sink before his eyes.

Now the more excellent and commodious a thing is, the more worthy it is of our
knowledge. Therefore it is discommendable and uncomely for any man to be
ignorant of himself, and of the causes, the means and manner of his eternal
salvation, and redemption from horrible and intolerable misery.

To further this knowledge, my purpose is, out of the Scriptures, and by the
help of sundry learned and orthodoxall Writers, briefly to treat of Gods
Election, and the Execution of it: and so we shall (as in a Glass) behold, what
course the Lord has in his wisdom taken to manifest his grace unto us* and
to make us partakers of his glory.

Before I show what election is, I think it not amis^e. 1. To show the
significations of the word, because it is ambiguous. 2. To prove that there is
an Election. 3. And that the doctrine thereof ought to be learned. 4. As also
to show that it ought to be preached to the people. 5. and in what manner.

For the first; this word Election (or Choosing) has five significations. Luke
6.13.


First it signifies the choosing and assuming of a man to some work or office.
So Saul was chosen to be a King and Judas to be an Apostle: John 6.70
and of this Election is that speech of Christ to be understood; Have not I
chosen you twelve, and one of you is a Diuil? ^ur^n de praed. ^ o^. 36. Que. 2.


Secondly, it is taken for that Election, whereby the Lord does make choice of
a nation to be his people* upon whom he will bestow his laws and ordinances,
and more singular loue-tokens, then upon many other. Deuteronomy. 4.37 and 77. Psalm.
705.6
Thus the Israelites were Gods elect, though amongst them were many reprobates.
For this election was temporal in part, and but a Remnant in comparison were
elected as touching that eternal decree of life.

Thirdly it signifies the eternal decree of God for the separating and
adopting of some men to everlasting life. Polan de praedest.


Fourthly, it sometimes signifies the execution of this decree, ^uc. and Pol.
ibid.
or the separation of certain men in time by effectual vocation

Fifthly, Romans 11.7
it signifies in that speech of Paul, (The election has obtained) the Elect
themselves, Tit. 1.10.
as Circumcision is used sometimes for Circumcised. Bu^ we here use it in the
third signification. And so much for the word.

Now that there is such an Election, it is evident by these reasons.

First by express testimonies of holy Scripture. Matthew. 20 15. John 13.1^.
Act. 13.^8 2. Pet. 1.1^
Many are called, but few are chosen. I know (says Christ) whom I have chosen.
So many as were ordained to eternal life believed. Endeavor to make your
election sure. He is blind that cannot see the shining of the Sun at Noone.
Pro. 16.4. Mal. 1.3. Jude. 4.


Secondly, the Scripture shows that there is a Reprobation; therefore,
unless we shall say that all are reprobates we must needs grant an election.

Thirdly, the Scripture sets forth unto us the cause, the perpetuity, the
benefits and tokens of it: which were to no purpose if there were no election
at all.

Lastly, we have the consent of the Church in all ages. Prayedestinatione^
nega^e ^mmani^ ^st blasthemia. ug. 1^. 6. ^ypog.
It is (says Augustine) horrible blasphemy to deny Predestination.

Having now proved that there is an Election, I come in the third place to
prove the necessity of learning and understanding this doctrine; which I will
do with these two reasons. The first is this. Vid. H^b. ^turm. de ^raed. These.
1.


That doctrine ought to be learned, which serves to declare Gods glory.

But the doctrine of election does manifest the glory of God. For first, it
shows that we are elected to the honor of God, and to the praise of his
glorious grace. Secondly, it argues and illustrates his essential properties,
as his omnipotency, omniscience, eternity, mercy. Thirdly, this doctrine does
both demonstrate and defend the free grace of God against all contrariant
heresies and errors, and will arm us against many impetuous enemies of the
truth; therefore it is a doctrine worthy to be learned.

Secondly, that Doctrine is necessarily to be learned, which is profitable to
us in the course of Christianity: but the doctrine of election will avail us
much in the running of this race. For first, it releiues our faith against
diffidence, showing that our salvation hangs not like a Meteour in the air,
but is firmly fixed upon the love of God in Christ. Secondly, it furthereth
our Spiritual joy, in that it teaches that the love of God is Constant, Ier.
31.3. and 32*40. 2. Tim. 2.19
and his decree concerning our welfare is Eternal. Thirdly, it eclipseth the
pride of the heart, showing that Gods dignation, and not man's dignity, his
favor and not man's faith, his mercy and not man's merit is the fountain and
foundation of man's felicity.

Fourthly, it prouokes us to true gratitude and the practice of all good works:
Tit. 3.5.
because it teaches to ascribe our salvation wholly to the grace of God, Ephesians.
1.4
and not to our own goodness: as also that we were elected to be holy, and
not to follow the swinge of the flesh, and to go a whoring after our own
lusts. Fifthly, this doctrine ministers comfort to us, and helps our patience
in adversity. Romans 8.^^
For it teaches that we are predestined to wear the crown of thorns with
Christ, as well as the crown of glory: and that, as we are covered with the
grace of God as with a Canopy, whiles we live in this world, so we shall be
honored with immortal glory in the world to come; therefore this doctrine
ought to be learned and remembered.

Fourthly, it is fit for Ministers to acquaint their people with this doctrine.
The reasons are these. Polanus and ^^rmius de praed.
First Christ and his Apostles, and some of the old Prophets have commended
this doctrine unto the Church, and did teach it the people. But it were
grievous sacrilege to deprive the poor people of that, which GOD does
vouchsafe them; and transcendent impiety to deny the preaching of that in the
Church, which God does teach in his word for the good of the Church. For
whatsoever is written in the word, Romans ^5.4
it is written for our learning, that through the consolation of the Scripture
we might have hope.

Matthew. 28. Mark. 16.
Secondly, the Gospel ought to be preached unto all, both learned and
unlearned: but the doctrine of Election is a principal part of the Gospel; yea
the whole Gospel is enclosed within the ^osome of this doctrine, if we respect
both the decree it self, and the execution and accomplishment of it together:
therefore it ought to be promulged and made (...) unto all.

Thirdly, this doctrine is very useful and solatious, and may be applied to
many notable purposes. For it shows us the true causes of all our happiness.
Secondly, it confuteth the Pelagians, who ascribe salvation to men's own
strength and merits: and utterly ouerturneth the opinion of Election for works,
or faith foreseen. Thirdly, it serves to correct the course of those that
hinder their own happiness by their presumption, diffidence, incredulity,
profaneness, sensuality, and other irregular and irreligeous courses.
Fourthly, it proves the deity of Christ. For in that he has elected us unto
life, Polan. ibid
we conclude that he is very God. Fifthly, as it testifies the love of God unto
us: so likewise it serves to inflame us with love toward him. For who would
not love him, of whom he is so loved and to whom he is so much obliged? And
to omit many uses which might be made of this doctrine, it shows the great
power and authority that God has over men, in making choice of whom he list
to be his vessels of honor, and temples for his Spirit to inhabit. And
finally it teaches us to love our brethren, who are elected by the same God,
and for the same ends that we our selves are.

Fourthly, Ministers are by Paul's example bound to teach their people the whole
counsel of God, and to keep back nothing which is commodious: Act. 10.
therefore they must teach them this doctrine. Lastly, Ministers must not
suppress or keep back that which is revealed, but rather proclaim and
diuulge it. Deuteronomy. 29.9.
For things revealed (as this is) belong to us and to our children for ever, as
Moses writes. Yea, they ought to do it the more diligently, that they may
preserve them from those infectious errors, which many turbulent and erroneous
spirits do publish to the world, and stay them from abusing this so holy a
doctrine (as many do) to licentious and luxurious living. Instii lib. 3* c.
2^. ^ 1
The judgment of Calvin is worthy to be embraced, who says; We shall never
be thoroughly persuaded that our salvation ^oth flow from the Fountain of Gods
free mercy, Ibid sect 3
until we be acquainted with his eternal Election. The Scripture is the
School of the holy Ghost, wherein as nothing is omitted necessary to be
known, so nothing is taught, but that which is expedient for a man to know. We
must therefore beware that we do not keep the faithful from that which the
Scripture delivers concerning Predestination, le^t we seem maliciously to
defraud them of that, Vide Aug. lib. 1. de praedest. sa^. c. 20.
which God does afford unto them, or reprove his Spirit as if he had
revealed things fit for some considerations to be concealed.

The fifth and last thing to be considered, is the manner of propounding and
handling of this doctrine. Here these duties must be observed. First, that this
doctrine be derived only from the word of God, and not fetched from the forge
of man's brain. Calvin. ibid.
For the word is a sure Rule to direct our understanding. And it is the
chiefest point of sobriety to make GOD our Schoolmasters when we learn, and
then to leave learning, when he leaves teaching. When he leaves speaking, then
we should leave inquiring. He which curiously pries into Gods secrets, runs
himself into an inextricable labyrinth, and finds not that wherewith his
curiosity may be satisfied.

Secondly, this doctrine ought to be delivered in convenient and fit terms,
that the truth thereof may be discerned, and no point obscured, and that the
sublimitie and majesty thereof be not eclipsed and debased.

Thirdly, it is fit that before this doctrine be preached to the people, the
Minister do first acquaint them with more familiar points of Religion, that his
labors may be more prosperous and beneficial. These things have been
delivered by way of a Preface. I will now speak of the decree of Election, and
of the Execution of it.

CHAP. 2.
What Election is. There be two distinct acts thereof. The causes of it,
Efficient, Material, and Formal. Three ends thereof. Six effects of it. Two
subjects of it. Fifteen prerogatives of the Elect. (...) properties of
Election. Many signs thereof are set down.

Keck. Syst Theol. l. 3. c. 1.
ELECTION to everlasting life is the special decree of God touching the
conferring of eternal salvation by Christ the Redeemer, to certain men, Perk
de praed.
of mere mercy and good will. Or, The degree of Election is that, whereby God
has appointed some unto his glorious grace, in the obtaining of their
salvation and celestial life by Christ. Aug. de fide ad P. cap. 35.
Or it is (as Augustine teaches) the preparation of a free donation, whereby
God has made us vessels of mercy before the creation of the world, unto the
adoption of the sons of God by Jesus Christ. ^eck. ibid.


In the decree of Election there are two distinct preordinations, or acts of
the divine counsel; the former concerning the end, the latter concerning the
means tending unto the end.

This the holy Ghost seems to have taught most clearly, Rom, 9.11. where he
says; That the purpose which is according to Election, might remain firm. By
which we see a distinction put betwixt the purpose of God and his election. And
in Romans 8.29, 30. The decree is expressly distinguished from the execution of
it, which the Apostle places in vocation, justification and glorification.

The first act in the decree of Election is a part of the divine purpose, ^erk.
de ^raed. p. 9.10
whereby God does assume certain men to be created (passing by all other,)
unto his everlasting love and favor, and by assuming them does make them
vessels of mercy and honor.

The second act is the purpose of saving or of conferring glory; whereby God
does ordain and separate the same men being to fall in Adam, unto salvation
and celestial glory.

These two acts must not be severed, but distinguished. The former is of men to
be created, and the latter is of men, that are both created and corrupted. By
the former, men are ordained unto grace: and by the latter, the means are
subordained, whereby grace may be conferred and declared. For this latter
prepares a way for the complement and execution of the former.

The efficient cause of Election, Opere Trinitat^s ad (...). Aug.
or the Electour is God Almighty, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost For such
works, as are wrought by God upon the creature, are common to the three
persons, the manner of working peculiar to each of them being reserved. And the
Scripture expressly shows that the Father and the Son did elect us, Ephesians.
1.4. John 15.16. For howsoever Christ himself is elected, Is. 42.1. Matthew.
12.18 1. Pet. 1.20.
as he is our Mediator, yet as he is the eternal Word or Son of the
Father, he does elect as well as the Father. Now seeing the work of election
belong to them, 1. John 5.7
we may not exclude the holy Ghost, who has one common Godhead with them.

The cause which moved God to elect those which are elected, was his mere
good will, and nothing else, as appears by these reasons.

First by the word of God. Ephe. 1.5
He has (says Paul) predestined us according to the good pleasure of his
will. Romans 11.5
At this time also a reservation is made according to the election of grace.

Secondly, if Christ did not merit as he was a man, to be united to the
person of the word, and to be borne wholly void of sin, there is no cause for
us to think but that our election unto life is of the free grace of God. But
Augustine does confidently and most truly teach, Tom. 7. lib. 7 de prae. C 15
that the man-head of Christ was thus advanced for no merit of work thereof,
but freely had it. Therefore it is absurd to think that we were not elected
of Gods free grace.

Thirdly, if the Patriarch Jacob was elected by grace* Polan. de praed. ^ag. 3^
then Election is of grace: but the former is true, as Paul does witness, Rom
9.^1. Before the children were borne, and when they had neither done good nor
evil, that the purpose of God might remain according to election, not by
works, but by him that calls, it was said unto her, the elder shall serve the
younger. Therefore we also are elected of grace.

Fourthly, Ephesians. 1.6.
God has elected us (as the Apostle teaches) for the commendation of his
glorious grace: but if election be not of ^race* then grace deserves not all
the praise, but we ourselves have something whereof we may glory.

Aug ibid.
Fifthly, let us consider the judgment of antiquity. Augustine says; A^ he
(that is Christ) (...) predestined to be our head, so are we^ to be his
(...) hers. Humana hic merita (...). Le^ men's merit^ h^^e (...) silent, which
perished in Adam. Contra Iul. Pel. Tom. 7.
(...); And let the grace of God be^^e the ^way and reign. And again; In one
and the same cause one (...) forsaken, and another is taken ((...) assumitur,
gratia pr^stante, non merito) in mercy, Contra Iul. ^elag. l. 5. c. 3
and not of merit. And again; He has elected none worthy, but by electing him
he has made him worthy. It is the grace of God, whereby he has elected me,
not because I am worthy, Tract. 86. in Ioh. Epist. 105. ad Sex. In Enchir. ad
Laur. c 98. Ad Hebid. Quaest. 10.
but because it vouchsafed to make me. Videte charissimi: See (my beloved) how
that he does not elect men good, but makes those to be good whom he has
elected. And elsewhere he says, that God loved no other thing in Jacob, then
his own free mercy. He loved Jacob by his free mercy, and hated Esau by his
just judgment. Hierome also speaking of Jacob and Esau says, that the
election of the one and the reiection of the other, does not demonstate their
merits, but the will of the Elector and reiector: and further also confesses
that it is in the power and will of God to elect or reject a man, without good
or evil works. In cap. 8. lib. 2. Regum.
Angelome also says, that Christ has predestined some to eternal liberty,
quickening them by his gracious mercy.

Finally, this truth will appear, if we shall remove the false causes which
might seem to persuade God to choose us for his people.

First, therefore we are not elected for foreseen (...), Keck. Syst Theol. l.
3. c. ^.
as these arguments ensuing will sufficiently prove unto us. First, God is the
primarie and principal author of all his actions. Now the supreme and first
ground or author, depends of no external ground or beginner. But God should
depend of an external ground, if he could not elect whom he would, unless
faith did move him. Secondly, every cause is before the effect: now Faith is
alter Election, as the Holy Ghost shows when he says: So many as were
ordained to eternal life believed. It was well said of one, Christ first
apprehends us: and this apprehension of his works in us the apprehension of
faith, whereby we lay hold upon him. Faith is a mean, which tends to the end,
whereunto the elect are ordained. Wherefore seeing that Election must needs be
before the end, it must also be before Faith, which is a mean leading to the
end. Thirdly, faith is not the cause of vocation and justification, moving God
to call and justify, therefore it is no impulsive cause of election. For ^he
cause of the cause, Quicquid est causa causae, est etiam causa causati.
is the cause of the thing caused. If faith then were the cause of Election, it
should be also the cause of vocation which is an effect thereof. But it is not
so, as the Apostle teaches, Tit. 5.^. Lastly, the Scripture no where says,
that we are elected for foreseen faith. What reason then have we to believe
it? We conclude therefore that we are not elected for faith: and with Iustine
Marti^ we call those blessed: Qui sunt praesciti vt crederent, Contr^ (...).
Which are fore-knowne that they should believe. And we say according to
Augustine, Tom 1. l. 1. ^e praed. sanct. c. 17.
that those are elected (Non qui eliguntur quia crediderunt, sed qu^ eliguntur
vt credant) which are elected to believe, not because they have believed. 1.
Cor. 7.25
I have obtained mercy (says Paul) that I should be faithful: Cap. 3.
Non quia fidelis ^ram: not because I was faithful, as Augustine speaks.

Secondly, we are not elected for any foreseen works. For first the Apostle
excludes all works, from being the causes either of election or of reprobation
Romans 9.11, 12. And teaches that Election is not in him that runs, that is,
it is not to be attributed to his industry or endeavors. Secondly, good
works can merit nothing of God, because he is the author of them, and they
are due unto him, and are not equivalent and proportionable to his grace.
Thirdly, we are elected that we should be holy, Ephe. 1.4.
and should do good works; and therefore it were absurd to imagine that good
works did move God to elect us. Hierome says: The Apostle says not he has
elected us -- Cum essemus sancti, Apolog. ad Ruffin.
when we were holy, sed vt essemus, but that we should be holy. And Augustine
says. The election of grace does not only prevent or go before men's works,
but before faith, whence all good works do flow.

Thirdly, Election is not made for the will of man, or for that man would it.
For the Apostle painely professes, Romans 9.16. Polan. lib. de praed.
that it is not in him that wills, but in God, which shows mercy. By will,
is meant the cogitation, desire or endeavor of our mind, which the holy Ghost
excludes from Election. Secondly, the will of man is not eternal, and
therefore cannot be the cause of eternal election. For the efficient cause
must go before the effect in time, or at least in nature. But the will of man
is not in nature before Gods election, much less then in time. Lastly, if we
were elected for our own will, many gross absurdities would ensue. First, the
grace of God should be subject to men's wills, as Prosper affirms: Polan.
ibid.
that is, the grace of Election should be inferior to the will of man, as the
effect is to the cause: the will of man should be more excellent then the
grace of God. Secondly, it were (as Prosper says) to make the beginning of
salvation to be in him that is saved. Thirdly, it were in man's power to be
either an elect, or a reprobate if he would. Fourthly, all certainty of
Election would be taken away, seeing the will of man is instable and
uncertain. Fifthly, election would be casual, as depending upon the will of
man, which is mutable, and so God should be made an Idol of Fortune, that is,
he should choose if man would, and not choose if man would not. We conclude
therefore that the will of man, is not the efficient cause of Election.

Fourthly, God does not elect any man for his birth or beauty, or for any
prerogative or excellency in his person* Romans 2.11
For God is no accepter of persons: and these things are not before Election,
but come after it. Secondly, Deuteronomy. 7.7.
that which Moses says of the general election of all the Isralites, may be
as truly said of the special election of all true Isralites, that God has
not chosen them for their multitude, but of his own love, nor for any dignity
in them, but of his own mere mercy. We see God respected not the eldership
of Cain, but choose Abell: he regarded not the riches of N^bal, the wisdom
of Achitophel, the beauty of Absalom, the comeliness of Saul, the princely
blood of Iezebel, neither were all the seed of Abraham elected, Col. 1.12.
as was Abraham. It is God, who makes us meet to be partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints, and not any prerogative or dignity in us. We call
Christ our Savior, because he by his dignity and merit has deserved our
salvation of God for us: even so we might be called our own Electors, if we
did move God to elect us by our dignities or prerogatives. Finally God
respects not these things in saving us, ^
therefore neither in electing us. For if they did move God to elect us, they
should also persuade him to redeem and save us, which is against the Scripture
in many places. Polan. lib. de praedest. page 45.


Finally, the merit of Christ is not the efficient or impulsive cause of
election, though it be of salvation. For the efficient cause of election, which
is without beginning, must also be without beginning: but the merit of Christ
is not from eternity: therefore it is not the efficient cause of eternal
election. Secondly, if Christ himself, as Mediator, was elected from all
eternity, then his merit is not the cause of electing. but the former is true
out of Peter, the latter therefore is also true Thirdly, the effect of eternal
election is not the cause thereof: but the merit of Christ is the effect of
election. For God did not elect us, because Christ was to die for us: but on
the contrary, Christ did therefore die for us, because God had elected us in
him. Therefore the merit of Christ is not the efficient cause of Gods election.
Instit. l. 3. ^. 21. s. 7.
Wherefore we do conclude, and with Calvin we do auerre according to the
truth, (Hoc consilium quoad Electos in gratuita eius misericordia fundatum
esse) that the foundation of Gods Election is laid in his free mercy. He will
have mercy, Romans 9.15.
on whom he will, and chooses whom he pleases. And so much for the efficient
and impulsive cause of election.

The material cause, or matter of Election is threefold: first in which, that
is in Christ the Mediator: secondly about which, and that is about certain
men: thirdly of which it does consist, (of which last we now entreat) and that
is the counsel of God. For election is nothing but the counsel of GOD, for
the separation of some men to eternal life.

The formal cause is the ordination, assumption and separation of certain men
from all others, to the fruition of present grace and future glory.

The ends of Election are three.

The former concerns God, Bucan loc. 36. Quaest. 32.
that does elect: the 2. latter concern those that are elected. The first is
the glory of God, and the celebration and declaration of his mercy. Romans 9.23.
That he might declare the riches of his glory upon the vessels of mercy,
which he has prepared unto glory. Ephesians. 1.6. Sturm de praedest. These. 6. 1.
Cor. 10.13.
He has chosen us to the praise of his glorious grace. The glory of God is the
supreme end of all things, therefore of election. And if we be commanded to
make it the scope of all our actions, we need not doubt but that God does aim
at it in all his.

The second end of Election is, Ephesians. 1.4.
that we should be holy and blameless before God. Augustine says well; He
chose us not because we were then holy, neither yet because we would hereafter
prove holy: but he rather chose us to this end, that in the time of grace we
might be holy through good works.

The third end, is the salvation and glory of the Elect. Therefore they are
said to be Ordained to eternal life, Act. 13.48. Romans 9.23. 2. These. 2.13.
and prepared unto glory, and chosen unto salvation. We may not think that
Election is the absolute will of God without any end. It were impiety to
attribute such a will to God, as has no scope or end proposed to it. For if
nature do nothing in vain, or to no end and purpose, much less does God.

Ephe. 1. Act. 13. Rom 8. Polan. de praed. page 60
The effects of Election are the meditation of Christ, adoption, vocation,
saving faith, justification and glorification, which comprehends two things:
first regeneration or sanctification: in which is contained perpetual
repentance (that is, auersion from all evil, and conversion unto God) love,
righteousness, the hatred of sin, the study of good works, calling upon
God, true humility, a desire to see Christ, constancy in professing the true
faith to the last gasp. For Gods Election is the root of all the gifts of God
in us: Perk. in Gal. c. 4. Polan. de praed. page 59
and the foundation of all his saving benefits.

Secondly, glorification comprehends in it the complement and fruition of all
glory in the life to come: that is, of all holiness and happiness with the Lord
forever.

The Subject of Election is double. The first, Ephe. 1.4.
is the subject in whom we are elected. This subject is Christ: He has chosen
us in him, says Paul. Now we are not elected in Christ, as he is God, or the
Word simply so considered. For in this respect he is our Elector, as he says
himself, Io^. 13.18.
I know whom I have chosen. Neither are we elected in him, as a mere man. For
a mere man was not fit for us to be elected in. But we are elected in him, as
he is God-man, our Head and eternal Mediator, in whom God has placed all
spiritual blessings, which he would communicate to us in his good time.

And we are elected in Christ, Call. Inst. i. 3. c. 22. s. 1. de Praed.
because we were not capable in ourselves of so great excellency. He only (as
Polanus truly teaches) is the fit mean, in whom we were elected, considering
that by election, there is made an union and conjunction of us with God the
electour. Calvin alleging that speech of Paul, Gal. ibid.
(He has chosen us in Christ) says that it is all one, as if he had said that
God, because he found nothing wor^hie of his election in all the seed of Adam,
did therefore turn his eyes unto his Christ, that he might elect members as
it were out of his body, whom he would take unto the fellowship of life.
Perk. de praedest.
It were therefore very absurd to dream of any election out of him; he being
the foundation of the execution of Election in respect of the beginning, means
and end. Note; man simply considered is the object of election in respect of
the preordination of the end: but man corrupted if we regard the ordination of
the means, that tend unto the end. Romans 8.30. 2. These. 2.13. Tit. 1.1. 2.
These. 3.2.


The other subject, is the Object of Election, or the persons that are elected.
And these are not all the sons of Adam, without exception of any. For first,
he that takes all and refuses none, cannot properly be said to choose. For
election supposes a reiection. He which makes a choice, refuses some.
Secondly, whom God electeth, he does also glorify. But all are not glorified:
therefore all are not elected. Thirdly, saving faith is peculiar to the Elect,
and not common to all, and is a true effect of Gods election. Now many being
destitute of true faith for ever, it must needs be that they are also out of
Gods election. Fourthly, the Scripture shows that some are elected, and some
refused, Rom, 11.7. The Elect have obtained it, but the rest are blinded. Pro.
16.4. Comment. in 1. Reg. ^ap. ^.
God has made the wicked for the day of evil. Gregory says well: Deus miro
mod^, God being the creator of all alike, has admirablie fore-elected some,
and forsaken others. Now why God electeth not all (Ne quaeramus scrupulosius,
si errare nolumus, Aug.) If we would not err, we must not be too curious in
enquiring. Sum. 1. part. quaest. 23. art. 5.
Aquinas says truly, God has no reason but his will, why he should elect
some to glory and cast away others. Neither does God offer the lest injury,
though he do not choose all, because he is not tied to choose any. His Lordship
is over all, his authority is absolute, he may do with his own what he will.
Who can hinder him? We are all to him as clay in the hand of the Potter. He
will have mercy on whom he will, Romans 9.18.
and whom he will he hardens. The rich man of a rout of beggars sets his
love on one, and passes by the rest without wronging any. A man entertaines
one into his house, and passes by many other without any injury done unto
them; and shall we think that God may not lawfully choose or refuse whom he
pleases? God (says M. Green-ham) is debtour to none, and therefore shows
mercy to whom he will. We may assure our selves that his reasons are most
just, though unknown to us. For the depth of his counsels cannot be sounded.
Expos. in John c. 37.
Therefore Gregory says well; Let no man desire to search out the cause why
one is elected, when another is repelled, because his judgments are
unsearchable, and his ways past finding out.

Seeing then all men are not elect men, let us see who are the elect, and what
their number is.

For the first, whosoever is, or shall be saved, the same is undoubtedly
elected. For both these propositions are infallibly true. 1. Whosoever is
elected shall be saved. Greenham These notes may be better inserted toward
the end of the ^racta^e, where the notes of eternal life are set down.
2. And whosoever is or shall be saved, is elected. Now these are undoubted
Notes of salvation. First, to esteem the word of GOD more then our appointed
food, Job 23 12. And to cover to be fed with it, that we may grow thereby. 1.
Pet. 2.2.

Secondly, to be swift to hear, slow to speak, and slow to wrath, laying
apart all maliciousness, and the excrements of sin, and receiving with
meekness the word that is grafted into us, that it may save our souls. Iam.
1.21.

Thirdly, to meditate in the word night and day, and to alienate our selves
from the counsels and ways of the wicked. Psalm. 1.1.2.

Fourthly to walk uprightly before God, and to be of a pure and sincere
spirit. For blessed are those that are upright in their way. Psalm. 119.1. And
blessed are the pure in spirit, Matthew. 5.8.
for they shall see God. And this sincerity and purity of heart may be
discerned by these two notes. First when we have respect unto all the
commandments of God, laboring to know them if we do not: and if we do, to
do after them according to the measure of grace we have received. Secondly,
if we be desirous and labor to use all and every one of those means, which
God has ordained in his word, to bring us unto purity of heart: and if in
doing these things, we simply and singly seek to approve our selves unto God,
without either looking for praise or profit, rebuke or loss from men, and when
we seek not chiefly these outward things at Gods hands, Greenham.

The second thing to be considered, is the number of the elect, concerning
which, these 3, conclusions are worthy to be weighed.

First, that the elect, considered apart simply by themselves, are exceeding
many, constituting the whole Church of God, which is the mystical body of
Christ. Ephesians. 5.23
Many shall come (says Christ) from the East and West and shall sit down with
Abraham, Matthew. 8.11
Isaac, Romans 5.19
and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven. Paul says that by the obedience of
Christ Many shall be mad righteous. Reu. 7.9
John says he saw an Innumerable Multitude of all nations and tongues, which
stood before the Lamb, clothed with long white robes, and palms in their
hands. Augustine says, Lib. 3. de doct. Christ. cap. 34 Lib 1. de voc. gent.
(Electorum quidam quasi ^^ndus est) that there is as it were a certain world
of the Elect. And Ambrose says that there is in the Elect (...) fore-knowne
(Specialis quaedam vniuersitas) a special kind of universality, (vt de toto
mundo totus mundus) That the whole World out of the whole world, and all men
from all men seem to be taken unto life. So then we say that the number of
Gods elect considered by themselves alone is great.

Secondly, Matthew. 7.11
the Elect in comparison of the Reprobate and damned are but few. For strait
is the way of life, Math. 20.^6.
and few there be that find it. And many (says Christ) are called, but few
are chosen. Christ's Flock is but a little flock. Luke 12.32 Romans 9.27 Is.
10.27 Heb. 11.12
And Paul out of Esaias says, that though the number of the children of Israel
were at the sand of the sea (as indeed they were) yet shall but a remnant be
saved. Which point must be well considered, because some have imagined that
God has elected all. But if this were true, then either all should be saved,
or else God is changeable, and does alter his purpose of himself: or else is
overcome and drawn to change it by some other, which things cannot but offend
a judicious and godly ear.

Thirdly, the number of the Elect is certain and defined. God knows them all,
and they can neither be diminished nor increased. Instit. lib. 2
It is truly said of Trelcatius, Electorum and reproborum numerus and
numeratus certus est, qua^uis vterque nobis non certo compertus. The number of
the Elect is certain, both how many they are, and who they are, although it
be not certainly known to us. God knows them and their number, though man
do not. This was also the judgment of Augustine, who speaks thus; Decor. ^
gra c. 13*
These things I speak of them, who are predestined unto the kingdom of God
(Quorum it a certus est numerus, vt nec addatur eis quisquam, nec minuatur ex
eis) Whose number is so certain, that neither any can be added to them, nor
taken from them.

Having now spoken of the persons that are elected, it will not be amiss
briefly to set down their prerogatives, which no reprobate can partake of.

First, God knows them, 2. Tim. 2.19.
and approues and loves them. Now if the grace of earthly Princes be in so
great request, what price can be set of his love, who is the Prince of all
Princes, and the grand Commander of all the world?

Secondly, a lively and true saving faith pertaines to them only: Tit. 1.1.
Acts. 13*48 Instit. l. 3. ^. 22. s. 10.
and therefore Paul calls it the faith of the elect; and the scripture says,
that so many as were, ordained to eternal life believed. Calvin says that
faith is a singular pledge of Gods fatherly love, laid up in store for those
his sons, whom he has adopted. And this gift is very excellent. For by Faith
we live, by Faith we walk, by Faith we are justified and our hearts
purified, by it we vanquish the world, and without it, it is impossible to
please God.

Thirdly, effectual vocation and conversion unto God belongs not to the
Reprobate, Romans 8.30
but to them, Whom (...) has fore-knowen and predestined, them he calls.

Fourthly, the redemption from sin and misery, and the righteousness which
is by Christ is theirs, and theirs alone, Is. 53.6, 12. 1. Cor. 1 30 Gregory
says well; Homil. in Ezeck.
Pro electorum vit^ vsque admortem se tradidit author vitae: The Lord of life
laid down his life, that they might live, In 2. Reg. cap. 7
which were elected unto life. And Angelome, says; Quae est gens in terra alia
what other people is there in the earth (praeter populum electum) besides the
elect: for which God, the son of God, vouchsafed to come into this world as
into Egypt, that taking upon him the shape of a servant, he might redeem unto
himself with his blood an acceptable people studious of good works.

Fifthly, Col. 3.12
they only are adorned with the special graces of the spirit: they only are
sanctified and renewed. Sent. l. 2. c. 5 De verb. Apost ser. 1
Isidore says; Spiritual grace is not distributed unto all (sed tantummodo
electis donatur) but is given to the elect only. Nature (says Augustine) is
common to all men, but not grace.

Sixthly, salvation belongs to none but to them. Romans 11.7. What then? Israel
has not attained that he sought: but the Election (that is the Elect) has
obtained it, and the rest have been hardened. Faith in Christ is theirs only:
Ioh. 3.16 Mark. 16.16
and he that believes in him shall be saved, but he that will not shall be
damned. As the Elect are the only true members of the Church militant: so they
shall be the only members of the Church triumphant. Psalm. 33.12
Therefore we may boldly say with the Psalmist; Blessed is that Nation, whose
God is Jehovah, even the people, that he has chosen for his inheritance. Psalm.
65.^
Blessed is the man whom thou chusest and causest to come unto thee.

Seventhly, none of the Elect shall be wholly seduced, nor utterly decline and
perish. For Christ takes it for granted that the Elect cannot be seduced,
Matthew. 24.24. John 10.28 Ier. 32.40.
and says concerning his sheep; I give unto them eternal life, and they
shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of mine hand. And the
Lord has promised to stand by them, and to put his fear into their hearts,
that they shall not depart from him. Psalm. 94.14.
Surely (says the Psalmist) the Lord will not fail his people, nor forsake
his inheritance. In 7. cap. Ioh.
Gregory says that temtation does hide the light of righteousness in the
heart of the elect oftentimes (sed non interimit) but puts it not out, and
makes it pale and quiver (sed funditus no^ extinguis) but does not extinguish
it altogether. Saint Augustine says well; Peter's faith failed not in his
heart, when open confession with the mouth failed him.

Eighthly, God does cause his Angels to protect and guard them: Psalm. 34.7.
The Angel of the Lord pitcheth round about them that fear him, and delivers
them. And as Paul speaks, Heb. 1.14*
they are ministering spirits, sent forth to minister all for their sakes,
which shall be heirs of salvation. Augustine says, Lib. 1. ^ ^.12.
This also I esteem a very great benefit, in that the Lord has given me an
angel of peace to keep me from my birth to my death. Matthew. 24.^1.


Ninthly, God shall send his Angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and they
shall gather together his Elect from the four winds, and from the one end of
the heavens unto the other. Matthew. 25.33, 34, 41.
Christ also when he comes to judgment, will set them on his right hand, and
say; Come ye blessed of my father, take the inheritance of the kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world. But he will place the
Reprobate on his left hand, and pronounce unto them the doleful sentence of
condemnation, saying; Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is
prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

Tenthly, the Elect shall judge the Reprobate. 1. Cor. 6.2, 3.
Know ye not (says Paul) that the Saints shall judge the world? Know ye not
that we shall judge the Angels? Their faith and piety shall condemn the
wicked, and bereave them of excuse: and as the Justices sit about the Judge* at
the As^ses, so shall the Elect attend upon CHRIST at the last judgment, and
shall subscribe unto his sentence, and applaud his proceedings.

Moreover, all men, but especially all ministers ought to endure all things for
their sakes. ^. Tim. 2.10
I suffer all things (says Paul) for the Elects sake, that they might also
obtain the salvation, which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory.

Luke, 18 7, 8
Again, God will avenge his Elect, though he seem slow in revenging those
wrongs, Zach. 2, 8
that are done unto them: For they that touch them, do touch the apple of his
eye.

Furthermore, God for the love he bears to his Elect, he will shorten the
days of cruelty and calamity. Mar. 13 20
For the Elects sake (says Christ) which he has chosen, he has shortened
those days of tribulation.

Moreover, the Elect fight with the Lamb, against Antichrist and his kingdom,
which shall by the Lamb be overcome. Reu. 17.14.
For he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings: and they that are on his side, are
called, and chosen, and faithful.

Besides, the Elect need not dread death and damnation. Romans 8 33
For as the Apostle speaks, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
Elect? It is God that justifies who shall condemn? Finally, 1. Ioh. 5.13 ^.
Pet. 1.10 Psalm. 15
the Elect may be assured in this life of their eternal election unto life:
Therefore Peter exhorts us to make our Election sure: and the holy Ghost sets
down the notes of those, that are the true members of the Church, and shall
rest upon Gods mountain. Now this certainty may be had two ways. First, by
the inward testimony of Gods spirit, which gives testimony to our spirit,
Romans 8.16
that we are the sons of God. Secondly, Gal. 5.22
be the effects of election (as are the fruits of the spirit mentioned by Paul)
which God appropriateth unto his Elect, and which are as a ladder, by which we
may assend as it were up into heaven, Keck. Syst. The. l 3.42.
and easily discern if we be elected. Because (as one well says) Election
includes the means* therefore we must determine of it by the means. The
Apostle says, that whom God foreknew, he did also predestinate to be like to
the image of his son, and does call, justify, Romans 8.30
and glorify them. Therefore by conversion we may hence infer that those are
elected, whom he does conform unto his son, and effectually call, justify
and regenerate; these being necessary means, by which God does accomplish his
eternal election.

Now this prerogative is the greater, and more to be respected, for these
reasons.

First, M. Rogers page 496.
because the Elect may have better assurance of his election to salvation, then
any man can have of the things he holds in this life by seal, writing,
witness, or any other way, that Law can devise or prescribe.

Secondly, the longer we live, the better we may be assured: the longer this
assurance is inioyed, the stronger we may find it.

Thirdly, this certentie does beger exceeding joy. For what can raise the like
joy in our hearts, as this, that we know that we shall see the good pleasures
of the Lord in the land of the living, and shall have an house not made with
hands, but eternal in the heavens? And what greater joy can any man desire to
enjoy, then to be assured that he is elected to eternal joy?

Fourthly, this assurance is the more excellent, considering the woe of the
Reprobates which want it, and the wearisome sights and inexplicable terrors of
such as are swallowed up of despair.

Fifthly, this privilege is the more to be accounted of, because we may enjoy
it daily through our life, and for that the longer we be partakers of it, the
sweeter it is unto us.

Lastly, this assurance is an infallible argument of true faith, by which we
come to Christ, we approach to the Father, ^hrys ser. le fide.Romans 4.20 Heb. 11.1
and hasten to heaven. For faith is an enemy to doubting and incredulity, and
is an undoubted certenty or persuasion.

Thus much concerning the subjects of Election. It remains yet to speak of
the properties and signs thereof, and thence we pass to the accomplishent of
it.

The properties of it, are especially three.

First it is most free, without all obligation, conpulsion, external
instigation, or preuision of future preparations, merits, faith. For has not
the Potter liberty over his clay, to make of the same lump, Romans 9.21
one a vessel unto honor, and another a vessel to dishonor? Who can compel
the Almighty? Or what is before his will? Why did he make no more worlds then
one? Why did he make choice of the Israelites above all nations? Why made he no
more kinds of creatures, or set no more Suns to shine in the heavens? Who
art thou, that thou dare dispute with God? The will of God (says Austen) is
the cause of all things that are. Degen. cont. Man.l. ^.c. 2. Hugo de S. Vict.
Is. 46.
And Hugo says that of Gods will, which is the cause of all things, there is
no cause. Deus est liberrimum agens. God is a most free Agent, and does
whatsoever he will. Therefore Aquinas says well* Sum. 1. par qu. 23. art. 5
that the difference betwixt the saved and the damned, proceeds from the
principal intentions of the first Agent.

Secondly, the decree of Election is from all eternity, not only before we
did believe, but before we were. Romans 9.11
Gods Election and reprobation was past upon Jacob and Esa^ before they were
borne, and ere they had done good or evil. And the Apostle teaches, that God
did choose us before the foundation of the world. Ephesians. 1.4 In Tit 1
Sedulius* says that God purposed with himself (ante omnia mundi tempora)
before the beginning of the world to save those that believe. In like manner
also S. Austen says; He fore-knew us before he made us, Lib 5 de craedest.
and elected us in his foreknowledge (Cum n^ndum fecisset) when yet he had not
made us. And again; intra mundum facti sumus, and ante mundum electi sumus:
we were made after the world, but we were elected before the world. D.
Willet. in Ioh 17. lect. 16.
For (as one says well) like as David was anointed and appointed to be king,
long before he entered to his kingdom: and as Moses was designed to be the
deliverer of Israel, forty years before he exercised his office: so the Elect
of God, were long ago ordained to salvation, though the accomplishment thereof
they must expect with patience.

Thirdly, the election of God is constant, perpetual, immutable, and
inviolable. For the principles and first grounds of things, are stable and
immovable: and that which is contingent, mutable, and uncertain is therefore
barred from being an original or ground. Now the decree of election is the
foundation and scaturidge of salvation; therefore it is certain, steadfast and
unchangeable. Secondly, God the author of Election is an immutable,
irresistable and constant Agent, or Architecht, and does seriously and
effectually separate and elect some men unto himself, and therefore his decree
cannot but be fulfilled. Iam. 1.17 Mal. 3.6
Thirdly the Scripture is evident in auouching this truth. My counsel (says
the Lord) shall stand. Is. 46.10. 2. Tim. 2.19. Vrsin de Chr. rel. par. 2
The foundation of God (says Paul) remains sure. The decree of Election is
called a foundation for two causes. First, because it is the beginning and
wellspring of our salvation, and of all the means tending to salvation. Kek.
l. 3 Syft 7 Theol.
Secondly it is so termed, for the surenesse and firmness of it, because the
same is never shaken, but remains immutable. For every foundation has this
necessary condition, that it be strong and steady, so as that the rest of the
building may stay upon it surely, and not be removed. And such a firm
foundation is Gods election. For whosoever are elected, shall still remain
elected, and shall never be rejected. Ioh. 6.36
This is my fathers will (says Christ) that of all which he has given me I
should loose nothing. Those whom he loved ever, he loves for ever. Ioh. 13.1
De fide c. 35
Firmissime tene: Hold (says S. Augustine) most assuredly, and nothing doubt
at all (Neque perire posse aliquem) that neither any of those can perish, whom
God has predestined unto the kingdom of heaven, nor that any of those can
by any means come, whom he has not predestined unto life. Now if none of
the Elect can perish, then Gods election remains constant.

So much for the properties: the Signs of Election are many.

First, the love of God is the ground of election. D. Willet on Ioh 17. ^ect.
15. Genesis 43.34
And Gods love is best known by his best gifts; the best things he reserueth
for those whom he best loves. As Joseph sent unto Benjamin more messes of
meat, Genesis 45.22
and gave him richer gifts, and more costly suites of apparel, then to the
rest of his brethren: so the Lord bestows the best gifts upon his own
children. Now the graces of regeration, the spiritual gifts of faith, hope,
and love, are without all comparison the most principal. Therefore he that
has faith, hope and love, may assure himself of Gods love, and that he is (
in electorum albo) in the rank and roll of Gods elect; these being infallible
tokens, and undoubted effects of Election, and forerunners of eternal life.

Secondly, M. Perk. on Gal. 4. v 9
there is (as one has excellently delivered) a knowledge in God, whereby he
knows who are his: and this knowledge brings forth an other knowledge in us,
whereby we know God for our God. There is an election in God, which works in
the Elect another election, whereby they choose God for their God. The love
whereby God loves us, works in us another love, whereby we love God. Christ
first apprehends us, and this apprehension of his, works in us the apprehe^sion
of faith, whereby we lay hold upon him. Hoec ille. If these things therefore be
in us, we may conclude infallibly that we are the elect of God. For they are
the fruits of his love and the works of his spirit, and therefore irrefragable
testimonies and tokens of Election. The sun by his light shines upon us, and by
the same light we view and behold the sun. To conclude; these also are sure
signs of Election, which I will set down as I find them in the works of
that zealous Preacher.

1. A rebuking of sin inwardly, M. Green^ham.
a poverty of spirit from thence, and a mourning therefore. 2. A being cast
down in our own conceit, and a meekness wrought thereby to bear our
punishment. 3. An hungring after the righteousness, which is in Christ, and a
prizing of it above all earthly things. 4. A musing upon* and a desire to
think and speak of heavenly things. 5 A conflict of the flesh and spirit, and
therein by practice, the power of the spirit getting the upper hand. 6. A
purpose unfeigned (upon strength received) of vowing ones self wholly to the
glory of God, and good of our brethren. 7 A resignation of our selves into Gods
hands.

8 An expecting of the daily increase of our souls health, and our bodies
resurrection. 9. An acknowledgement of our offenses, with a true purpose to
leave them. 10 The forgiving of our enemies, and a delight in Gods saints. 11.
A desire that after death the Church of God may flourish and have all peace. 12.
A spirit without guile: that is, an unfeigned purpose always to do well,
howsoever our infirmities put us by it.

Now though a man shall not find all these things always in him, there is yet
matter of true comfort, if he find any: It is sufficient to prove it true
fire, and not painted if there be smoke or heat only, though no flame: If
there be but breath, it is enough to show life, though the body stir not, and
one Apple is sufficient to prove the tree to live: so one good and constant
motion or resolution of grace, is sufficient to prove a man's election unto
glory. By this we may know that we belong to God, Perk. ibi.
if we find any impression of the grace of God in us. But if all these signs
be wanting, yet we may not despair, but commend our selves to the grace of
God, and use the means of salvation. For a man may be elected, though for a
time he live unconverted, and in his sins, as we see by the examples of
Paul, and of the thief upon the Cross. Though this be true, that Whosoever is
converted is elected: yet this is not true, that Whosoever is not converted,
the same is not Elected. Because the Elect may be for a time aliants from God
and unregenerated, as were the Ephesians, Corinthians, Ephe. 2.1 1. Cor. 6.11
Col. 2.13 1. Pet. 4.3 sen. 6.5
Colossia^s: yea al me^ are such by nature.

Having thus described Election, I proceed to the accomplishment, or execution
of it.

CHAP. III.
What the execution of Election is. Four Arguments to prove the ordination of
the means: These means are common or special. Of the former there be two.
And of the latter two.

THE Execution of Election, is the dispo^^tion, using and application of all
secondarie causes or means, by which as by certain degrees or steps, God does
accomplish his decree, and come to the end of it.

For we must know, that as God does ordain the end, so he does subordaine and
apply the means, which tend unto the end. Hoz. 2.21.
This the Lord shows by that speech in Hoseah; I will hear the heavens and
they shall hear the earth, and the earth shall hear the corn, ^he wine and
the oil, and they shall hear Israel. Even so, as God has by his election
appointed certain persons to salvation: he does likewise appoint and apply the
means, turmius de ^redest. These. 8.
and makes them walk in the way, which leads to salvation.

The truth of this assertion is evident, by these 4. reasons following

First, none of the years of understanding were ever saved without the
regeneration of the Spirit, without faith in Christ, without repentance toward
God, without love to the Saints, and final perseverance; for these things are
every where urged in the Scriptures: therefore the Elect were predestined
unto these means, by which they might come unto eternal life, which is their
end.

Secondly, Romans 2.9.
God threatens eternal destruction to the wicked and unbelievers, but
promises eternal happiness to all penetent, faithful, Ezekiel* 18.21
righteous and godly men, which perseue in piety unto the end: therefore b^
these means of Predestination the Elect do clime up to heaven and attain to
life.

Thirdly, the Apostle does expressly place effectual vocation and
justification, Romans 8.30
betwixt predestination and glorification as the forerunners and antecedents
of it.

Fourthly, the very word Predestination, does teach as much. For predestination
is not only the preparation, Sturm. 16. Keck. Theol^ lib 3.
constitution, and ordination of the end, but of the means also, which tend
unto the end. Predestination (says Augustine) is the preparation of the
benefit of God, by which those are most certainly delivered, who are
delivered. And Aquinas says, that three things are of be considered in
predestination; the Destination of the counsel, the execution of the same, and
the means (causas medias) of the execution. These two principles are therefore
to be remembered.

First, that Whosoever are elected to eternal life as to the end, the same are
also elected and ordained to the means of that end.

Secondly, that the First cause does not abolish or take away the second.

Thus we have showed, that God does execute his decree of Election by means,
and that the means and the end are inseparably conjoined.

These Means are of two sorts. Some are such as serve for the execution of the
decree, both of Election and Reprobation indifferently. Others serve only for
the Execution of Election, by which the Elect are distinguished from the
Reprobate.

Those common means are two; the creation of man, and the permission of his
fall, or his fall permitted. Genesis 1.27 Eccle 7.31


The Creation of man is the forming of man, according to the image of God, but
yet in a changeable condition. Here we must remember these 2. things. First,
that God created the substance of soul and body, and that he gave them
certain faculties and powers, and that withal there was placed in them true
righteousness, knowledge and holiness without any prauitie, Cyr. l. 8. These. ^. 1.
diste^per, or iniquity. But yet (as Cyrill truly speaks) Our father Adam
was of a mutable disposition, and had by nature ability to love justice and
hate iniquity, and contrariwise to embrace iniquity and to refuse justice.
For God properly and by himself is constant and immutable: and if any thing
else continue constant it is through him, who is bound to none, Isa. 46.10.
but will do whatsoever he will. A Goldsmiths makes a costly Jewel, beset
with pearls and precious stones, and void of all deformity, but yet so makes
it, that if it fall, it may be cracked and broken: so God made man most perfect,
and garnished his nature with excellent graces, and gave him power to continue
in the same perfection if he would: yet did he not make him so unchangeable
but that he might both fall, and by falling break and loose his excellency,
as the event declares.

Secondly, we must know that Adam was no private person, but represented all
mankind. And therefore we stood and fell with him. For he was the root and we
are his branches: he was the spring, and we the streams: he was as the head,
and we are as the members. As the King, his Nobles, Knights and Burgesses do
represent the whole realm in the Parliament: even so did Adam represent the
person of his whole posterity. Whatsoever he received of God, he received it
for himself and for all his progeny: and what he lost, he likewise lost for
himself and for them all; as we see a man by high treason does taint his
blood, and disgrace his posterity. In Triph.
Iustine says: By sinning Adam made his posterity obnoxious unto death, and
made them (vniuerso) All guilty of his first offense. In Psalm. Poenit.
The Lord (says Gregory) did so make Adam, as that he might procreate
children without sin, if he continued in the obedience of his Creator: but
because the soul of man refused to obey her Lord, the procreation of children
is in sin.

We see now that Creation is a mean of the execution of Gods election. For a
man must first be, before he can be saved. Yet it is no special, or peculiar
means. For all that are created shall not be saved, some shall be damned. All
men (says Prosper) are of God created: Prosp. Resp. ad cap. Gal
but of this universality (or company) some are to be damned with the
Devil: others shall reign with Christ.

The Permission of the fall is that, whereby God suffered Adam and his sons to
revolt, and fall into sin, and did not hinder the fall, which he could have
done, if it had so pleased him, But he would not hinder it, because such was
his pleasure for certain causes best known unto himself. In the mean, let
no man think that God was injurious. For 1. he was not indebted to us to
confirm us by his grace* and to keep us from declining. 2. this fall was by
God permitted, for the greater benefit of all his Elect. For their glory
procured by Christ (which had never been, if man had never fallen) does far
surpass the glory, which was given them in their creation. Expos. in 1. Reg.
cap. 4.
Great are the evils (says Gregory) which we suffer by reason of that first
offense: but what faithful man would not endure greater, rather then want so
great a Redeemer?

Thirdly, though God (not bound to let) did permit this fall, yet it is not to
be ascribed unto him, as to the cause thereof. For he did not incline his
heart to sin: he did not infuse the least corruption into his soul: neither
did he withdraw any grace before inspired into him: but he fell by his
free will, through his own default, at the persuasion and suggestion of the
Devil. Tertullian says truly; Lib. 2. aduers Marc.
As God brought man into the state of life: In ser. quod Deus, etc. Aug. ad
Art. 14.
so man brought himself into the state of death. The beginning and root of
sin is in our selves, says Basil. It cannot be (says Austen) that he which
raises us from sin, should make us fall into sin. ^sal. 5.4
Thou art not a God (says David) that loves wickedness: Lib. 1. ad Monim.
neither shall evil dwell with thee Man therefore (as Fulgentius says) has the
cause of his iniquity in his own proper will, and not from Gods
predestination. Aug. ad 10. Art.
If any man decline from justice and piety, he runs headlong of his own
will, he is drawn by his own concupiscence, he is beguiled through his
persuasion: Nihil i^i Pater: the father has no oar in this boat, the Son is
no agent of this sin, the holy Ghost is no worker of this wickedness. And
though we should say, that God willed that revolt; yet we must know that God
did not will it ( positive) so as to produce, effect, or give being to it: but
( negative and desere^do) because his will was to leave Adam to himself, and
not to preserve him from reuolting, that he might be proved by temptation,
and that it might appear what the creature is able to do, when the Creator
shall withdraw the staff of his grace, Lib 4. Stre
and cease to support. Therefore we conclude with Clemens, That the fault of
man's choosing of that which was forbidden, is not to be transferred (or
ascribed) unto God.

Thus we see the second means of the Execution of Election, Which is a very
necessary mean. For if a man had not fallen, then had there been no place for
vocation, justification by Christ, and sanctification by the Spirit. But though
this mean is necessary, yet it is not appropriated to Election* because then
all that fell, should be restored. But as Ambrose says: Liberatur part
hominum, part pereunte: as some are delivered, so some are destroyed. The
wicked (says Job) are kept unto the day of destruction. Job. 21.30
The righteous only shall be saved.

CHAP. IIII.
What effectual Calling is? the parts causes, effects, subjects, place, time,
manner, properties and signs of it, are declared.

THvs much concerning the common means, serving for the execution of Gods
Election. The special are these three, Effectual Voca^ion, Justification, and
Glorification; that is, (as Trelcarius says) The gracious beginning, Insti
lib. 2.
proceeding, and the glorious accomplishing and consummation of the blessings
of God.

For the first: Perk on Gal c. 5. ver. 13.
Effectual vocation (or calling) is an action of God translating men from the
kingdom of darkness to his own Kingdom. And it is two-folde^ Extraordinary,
and Ordinary. Extraordinary vocation, is an immediate and special work of the
Spirit, whereby without outward means he smites the heart, and inwardly
speaks to the soul, and by the infusion of grace does make the heart to
answer his call, and draw near unto him. This calling without the ministry
of the word, is very rare and unusual. But the Lord, that is above means, is
not tied to means, but can work without means, when it pleases his Majesty
so to do.

Effectual vocation, Rolloc. de voc. c. 1.
which is ordinary, is that, Whereby God calls out of darkness into his
marvelous light, from the power of Satan unto God, those whom he knew from
eternity, and predestined unto life, of his mere favor, by the
promulgation of the covenant of grace, or preaching of the Gospel. Or;

It is, Perk on Jude. v. 1.
when grace is not only offered, but given also by God through the effectual
working of his Spirit in our hearts: which is the beginning of grace in us,
he himself laying the first foundation of it, by giving power to receive the
word, to mingle it with faith, and to bring forth the fruits of new
obedience,

This ordinary effectual calling has two parts; Inuitement and Admission.

Inuitement, M. Perk. on Gal. 5.1^
is when God offers remission of sins, and life everlasting to them that
believe: Outwardly, by the preaching of the Gospel: Inwardly, by the
inspiration of heavenly desires.

Admission is, when men are entered into the kingdom of grace: and it is either
outward, or inward. Outward admission is made in Baptism. Inward admission is,
when men are taken out of old Adam, and by faith ingraffed in to Christ;. For
by this insition into Christ, men are made real members of Gods kingdom: Haec
ille.

For the better conceiving and understanding of this Calling, these points
ensuing are worthy our consideration.

The efficient cause of effectual Calling is Almighty God. 1. Cor. 1.9.
By him we are called unto the fellowship of his Son. He has called us with
an holy calling. 2. Tim 1.9 1. Pet. 2.9.
Ye are (says Peter) a chosen generation, that ye should show forth his
virtues that has called you. 1. Pet. 1.15
And again, As he which has called you, is holy, that is, God: so Jude 1.

But here we must beware that we do not separate the persons. For it is a
work common to the Trinity. One says well: M. Perk. on Gal. 5.13.
God the Father (does call us) in Christ by the Spirit: for he is absolute Lord
of all his Creatures, and therefore he may call out of the kingdom of
darkness into his own kingdom whom he will.

His instruments are the Ministers of the word, and therefore are called
Conorkers, Fathers, Saviors. His ordinary outward means, is the preaching of
the Gospel. He has called you by our Gospel, 2. These. 2.14.
says Paul. The Law serves to prepare the heart for grace: but it is the oily
drops of the Gospel, that by the power of the Spirit do soften the heart and
make it supple and pliable: it like Balm does revive and comfort the heart.
Romans 1.16
The Gospel is the power of God (that is the instrument of Gods power) to
salvation to all that believe. Afflictions also, losses, cros^es, sickness,
good examples, and the like, are by Gods blessing good preparatiues of grace:
but the preaching of the Gospel is the proper instrument of the Spirit, for
the effecting of grace. By it, God speaks to the ear of the soul, and by it
as by a Pipe, he conueyes his graces into the cisterne of our hearts.

Now GOD, when he calls a man, Rolloc. de voc. c. 1.
performs a double work of grace.

First, he does illuminate us by his holy Spirit, infusing a new and heavenly
light into our mind, being so blind before, as that it, neither saw, ^. Cor.
2. l 24
nor could see the things which do belong to the spirit of God. The natural
man (says Paul) perceives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him, neither can he know them. In like manner also in the
will, which is altogether perverse, and wholly fallen from God, he works an
uprightness, and in all the affections a new holiness. Hence proceeds that
new man, which is created after God in righteousness, Ephe. 4.24
and true holiness.

Secondly, he causes us being enlightened and thus changed, to apprehend his
mercy, to desire and affect our amendment, and to answer unto his call, Psalm
27.8
like David: When thou said Seek ye my face, mix heart answered unto
thee, O Lord, I will seek thy face. Psalm. 40.6.7
When God had pierced David's ear with the augur of his Spirit, he answered,
Lo, I come.

The primary cause, or the foundation of this vocation is the free grace of
God. Gal. 1.15. ^relc. Instit. l. 2.
For this Vocation is of gift, and not of merit: of Grace, and not of Nature,
God calling whom he will, and again, whom he will, either not calling, or not
calling them effectually. The Apostle says, that he has called us with an
holy calling, not according to our works, b^t according to his own purpose and
grace. 2. Tim. 1.9.


The meritorious cause of this effectual Calling, is the merits of Christ. For
Christ has merited in our behalf that the Holy Ghost should be sent into us,
to illuminate and adorn our hearts with his graces.

The matter whereof this Vocation does consist, is a special, powerful and
inward work of the Spirit.

The form, and (as it were) the life and soul thereof, is the illumination
and information of the mind, and an efficatious bending, conforming and working
of the heart and will, whereby it becomes obedient to the voice of God, and
returns (as it were) an audible and lively Echo into his ear.

The end is double: first, the glory of God, and the commendation of his
mercy, to whom we must ascribe both grace and nature, and of whom we have
received our souls and bodies, yea, and the very soul of our souls, which is
his Spirit. The second end of this vocation is our deliverance and translation
out of ignorance, infidelity, sensuality and rebellion, unto spiritual grace
and glory. For we are called out of darkness into light, 2. These. 2.14
that we might walk in light, and no longer serve the Prince of darkness. We
are called out of the world, unto God: to the end that we should relinquish
the lusts of the world and serve God, that walking uprightly before him in this
world, we may reign (like Princes) with him in the world to come.

The effects and fruits of this Calling are; a reformed judgment, a fleshy
heart, a yielding unto the Lord, a s^ight from the works of darkness, an
attentive and hungry ear, a spiritual relishing and receiving of the
solacious and sweet promises of the Gospel. When a skillful Musician has once
strung, tuned, and struck his instrument, it sends out many pleasant and sweet
soundes: so when the Lord has once breathed his Spirit of life in at the
nostrils of our souls: when he has once tuned the strings of our sinful
hearts, and has touched them with the finger of his spirit, he makes them send
forth many delectable and harmonious sounds, wherein he takes delight. When
Christ had cried to Lazarus, being dead, and said, Ioh. 11.43, 44
Lazarus Come forth! He forthwith revived, and came forth of the grave. Acts
9.40
So when Peter had said to dead Tabitha; Tabitha arise! She opened her eyes
immediately, and sat up. Even so, when he shall vouchsafe to call a man with
his powerful voice, and shall effectually speak unto the heart and say, Arise
thou that sleep in thy sin, come forth of the grave of iniquity, stand
up, and walk in the ways of righteousness. his call is so mighty, and his
word so powerful and unvanquishable, that the man to whom he does so speak,
must needs awake, arise, come forth and walk. The voice of the Lord (says
David) is mighty: Psalm.29
the voice of the Lord breaks the Cedars: it deuideth the flames of fire: it
makes the Wilderness to tremble, and discovers the Forests.These are the
effects of that voice. Thunder.
In like manner, the voice which God speaks to the ear of the soul in his
effectual Vocation, is so mighty and so glorious, as that it rendeth the
heart and makes it tremble, it discovers the soul and diuides in twain, and
peirceth into the most secret places of it. Josh. 6.20.
And look as at the sound of the seven Trumpets the wall of Jericho fell flat
down: and as at that efficatious voice of Christ, Job. 18.6.
saying I am he, his enemies that came to apprehend him, went away back-ward
and fell to the ground: even so when Gods voice shall sound in a man's ear, and
when Christ shall speak effectually unto the heart, the walls of hell shall
reele and totter, the fortresses of iniquity shall be ruinated, the castles of
sin shall be cast down, our spiritual enemies shall be driven backward,
the strong man Satan shall be fettered, and his cursed works dissolved. These
are the admirable effects of this glorious voice: these are the worthy works
of Gods effectual Calling. We may therefore justly say; The voice of the Lord
is mighty, The voice of the Lord is glorious and brings wonderful things to
pass.

The subjects of this effectual vocation, or the persons, that are effectually
called, are not all of all sorts and fexes without exception of any, Romans 8.30
but the Elect of God. And therefore Paul says that God has called those,
whom he did foreknow and predestinate. ^s. 54.13
And Esaias says; all thy children shall be taught of the Lord: he says not
All without exception, but all the children of the church. Acts 13.48
As many (says Luke) as were ordained unto eternal life believed, that is,
were called unto the faith. M. Perk. on ^ude 1
Knowledge is not common to all. It is not given to All to understand the
mysteries of the kingdom: Matthew. 13.1.
these things are hid from most of the wise of this world, Matthew. 1^.^.
and revealed unto babes. Now if knowledge be given to some, and not to others,
then consequently faith. For they which have not known cannot believe. And if
all men do not believe, then all men are not called. ^olan. de ^raedest.
^olleck de voc. c ^^.
For saving faith is an indissoluble companion of effectual vocation: and by
faith we answer Gods heavenly Calling.

Romans 8.30 Gal. ^.6
All that are effectually called, are also justified: but we are justified only
by faith: therefore justifying faith may not be severed from those that are so
called. ^. These 3.2 Romans 8.30.


Now All men have not faith therefore all men are not called. Furthermore, all
that are called, shall be saved, and shall persevere unto the end in grace.
Therefore Augustine says, that to those that are predestined to the kingdom
of God (as all, that are effectually called, Decor. and gra^. c. 12 epist. 163
are) is given the gift of perseverance, and that the Church on earth loses
none, but those that are wicked, and admits none into heaven, but such as
are good. Now all men do not persevere, therefore all are not effectually
called: all are not glorified, therefore all are not pertakers of this kind of
calling. Finally, God vouchsafes not an outward calling unto all: all men have
not heard of the Gospel, and therefore it may seem absurd, that God should
vouchsafe an inward calling unto All, seeing he does not vouchsafe an outward
by the preaching of the Gospel. Yea* this were to make grace as large as
nature, or (as Peter M^ryt^ speaks) to turn grace into nature, if we should
say, ^oc. com. clas 3. c. 1
that God did effectually call all. We conclude therefore that the Elect are
the only Subiect^ of this vocation. For (as Ha^^o speaks, In 1. Tim. cap. 2
the Lord has not drawn nor does draw all men to himself, but (omnia electa)
all that are elect, both of all kinds and countries. Lib 1. in Isa. cap. 1
And forsaking those (as Beda writes) whom he knows not for his own, he
turns himself to visit and illustrate their hearts, whom he has
predestined to eternal life.

In like manner Cameracensis truly says, that he gives some gifts of special
grace to one, which he gives not to another; In lib. sent. 1, 4, 12. art. 2
as faith, and the grace that makes a man gracious, and such as are the
effects of Praedestination: and such an one is effectual Calling.

The subject, or place wherein this work of the spirit is performed, is the
heart and mind. For the Holy Ghost by this work does enlighte^ the mind to
see, and incline, and mollify the heart to yield, and to make answer to his
call. The Termini or things from which, and unto which we are called, are
darkness and light, vice and virtue, prophannesse and holiness. For as Paul
says; God has not called us unto uncleanness, 1. These. 4.7 Col. 1.13.
but unto holiness: and has delivered us out of the power of darkness, and
translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son. 1. Pet 2.9
And Peter likewise shows, that this our calling is from darkness unto
light. As by our outward calling we are taught to relinquish the works of
darkness, Tit. 2.14
and to follow virtue and godliness (for this the Gospel teaches) even so by
our inward and operative calling, we are by God instructed, and caused to
abandon sin, and to pull our necks out of the Devils yoke, and to disclaim
his ways, and on the contrary to listen and yield to God, and to subject our
selves unto his will. The things then from which God does call us, are Sin,
Satan, and the World. For these are enemies to his glory, these conjure
against his kingdom, these are enemies to our peace and welfare, and labor
the downesull and destruction of our souls.

The state whereunto we are called, Rolloc. de voc. t. 1.
is light, God himself, and that blessed condition of man in Christ. For this
condition is most excellent and happy, replenished with much joy, many
comforts, and peace unspeakable. We are called to holiness and grace, which
are undoubted forerunners of happiness and glory.

We are called to God, the father of lights, the fountain of felicity, Iam.
1.17
the wel-spring of life, the giver of all grace, Psalm. 16.11.
in whose presence is the fullness of joy: and at whose right hand there are
pleasures for evermore.

The time of this calling, is either general, or particular.

The general time, is in this life before death. For after death there is no
calling, neither outward nor inward. God offers and confers his grace in this
life only: this is the time of mercy: after this life there is nothing but the
expectation and possession either of happiness, or of misery without
possibility of mutabilitie.

The particular time of any man's caling is not revealed, M. Perk. on Jude. 1.
Acts 1.7
but laid up in the secret counsel of God, in whose hands times and seasons
are. Yet the extent of the time is large enough, though stinted, eue^ the time
of this life: some the Sixth hour, some at the Ninth, and others at the
Eleventh. David, John Baptist, and Timothy were called young; Onesimus, the
Ethiopian Eunuch, and S. Augustine were men grown, and the Thief was called
upon the Cross, ready to die.

Here further we must understand, that when God did first begin this work
of grace, we are no way A gents, Ephe. 2.1
being dead in sins, but mere Patients, God himself being the only Agent
before he has revived us by his spirit. Perk on Matthew. 23 37
When a man is dead, chafe him and r^bbe him, put Aquavitae into him to warm
him at the heart: when this is done, take him by the hand, pluck him up, and
bid him walk: for all this be will not stir the least joint, neither can he.
All chafing and rubbing, all speech and persuasion, and all helps in the world
be in vain, unless the soul be restored to the body. Even so, no
persuasions offered to the mind, nor good desires to the will are of any
moment till the image of God standing in holiness, which is a conformity to
the will of God, and the very soul of our souls, begin to be restord. First,
God must illuminate the mind with a new light, and he must imprint in the
will, a new quality or inclination, and in the heart new affections: and he
must give to the will the act of wel-willing: and so a man being revived, and
the will being acted and moved by God, Phil. 2.13.
who works the will and the deed, it also acts and moves by his grace. And
thus the will is not merely passive, but passive and active also: first
passive, and then active. And hereupon it is, that Prosper says; Contra
collat. 12
That which is repaired in us, is not repaired without us. For when God does
call and convert us, after that he has quickened us by his Spirit, he does
make us answer his call and desire to come and turn unto him. So then by the
way, let us remember to magnify the grace of God, In soliloq. c. 15.
and to say as Austen says; That I fell, it was of my self: but that I rose,
l. 3. in 1. Reg. 7.
it was of thee. Gregory says, that our good desires themselves are
ministered unto us through the grace of God. Anshelmus says: De medit. Red. c.
^.
A te habeo defi^erare: a te habeo impetrare: That I do desire, I have it of
thee: and that I do obtain, De lib. arb. c. 16.
it is of thee. He (says Augustine) works both to will and to work, by
ministering most effectual power unto the will. ^n. her. c. 23.
He preuenteth the unwilling, that he may be willing, and pursues him that is
willing, that he will not in vain. And so much for the time of Vocation.

The Properties thereof are four.

First, it is most free. For God calls whom he pleases. Contra gent. l. 1.
c. 44.
He vouchsafes grace to whom he lists. We may not (says Aquinas) inquire
why he should convert these, and not those: because this depends upon his bare
pleasure. Therefore Augustine upon John says; Lib. 3. c. 161.
If thou woulst not err, then do not desire to determine wherefore he should
draw this man, and not that. And again he says; Lib. de bono pers. cap. 8
Of two wicked persons that are of years, why the one is so called, as that he
follows the Caller, and the other either not called at all, or not so called,
as that he follows him that calls him, his judgments are unsearchable. He
calls effectally whom he will: and he hardens whom he will. And albeit he
call many with an outward calling, to whom he vouchsafes not his operative and
inward calling, yet we must not acaccuse him of cruelty or injustice, but
rather admire his judgments. It was well said of that holy man; Aug. de verb.
Apost. Sermon. 11.
Will thou dispute with me? Wonder with me, and exclame O the depth! Let us
both consent in fear, lest we perish in error. God is our sovereign Lord,
Job. 37.23. and 36.26.
and tied by no bond to any man. We cannot find him out: he is excellent in
power and judgment, and abundant in justice: and we know him not.

Secondly, this vocation is an irreuocable, constant and vncheangeable act of
Gods Spirit. Romans 11.29
Those that are once effectually called by God, man continue so for ever. Romans
11.26
For the gifts and Calling of God are without repentance. God is faithful
(says Paul) by whom y^ are called, ^. Cor. 18 7.
Who shall also confirm you unto the end, that ye may be blameless in the
day of our Lord Jesus. And to the Philippians he says; I am persuaded that ^e,
Phil. 1.6.
that has begun this good work in you, will perform it until the day of
Jesus Christ. Willet on Jude. Lect. 1 Zach. 4.9.
Like as Zerubabel did both lay the foundation of the Temple, and finish the
work: so God will establish and make perfect the work begun in us at our
vocation. Therefore Augustine boldly affirms that those are not in this
Calling, Epist. 39 ad Paulin.
which do not persevere unto the end. Now the reason why those that are thus
called, do not fall away, Perk. on Jude. 1.
is fourfold. The first is Gods election, which is unchangeable, and
therefore also faith and other the fruits of election cannot be wholly lost and
ruined. Romans 1. in. 1. Tim. 1.
This (says Chrysostom) is the property of faith (nunquam penitus decidit,
aut omnino turbatur) it never wholly perishes, neither is it altogether
troubled. The second is the promise of God in the covenant of grace* in which
he promises that he will stand by us, ser. 32.42.
and make us also to stick to him. The third is the intercession of Christ, who
has prayed effectually for our co^seruation in the world. And the fourth is
because we are the members and subjects of Christ, John, 17.11.15.^0.
who is a puissant and gracious Prince, and a most perfect and blessed Head,
and therefore we may be sure that he will protect and preserve his subjects,
profligate and extirp their enemies, and convey spiritual sense and motion by
his spirit into all his members. So that if they fall, yet they shall not fall
away: if they sin, yet they sin not with full consent of will. Rom, 7, 29
For they hate and nill in part the evil, which they will: and they do not
make a trade of sinning, but the spirit remaining in them, causes them to
return to God, and to recover themselves by true repentance. To conclude this
property* God, when he calls a man he performs these four works of grace
First he quickens him and gives him power to answer his call. Secondly, he
gives an execution of this power, and makes him to answer. Thirdly, he gives
continuance of that power: yea and adds a fourth, which is an execution of
that continuance: and so it comes to pass that none of Gods Called do fall
quite away* but though they fall* Psalm. 37.24.
yet shall they not be cast off, for God puts under his hand.

Thirdly this vocation is a very excellent work of God.

For first, it is an undoubted token of election: Instit. lib. 3 cap. 24. l. 2
for God by his vocation does (as Calvin teaches) manifest his election, which
otherwise he keeps hidden in himself. And therefore effectual vocation may
be properly called the Testification of Gods election.

Secondly, Vocation is the first act of grace upon the heart. Now the first
light and liberty which a close prisoner se^s and enioies, is most joyous and
solacious.

Ad Paul in epist. 106.
Thirdly, God (as Augustine speaks) by his election did adopt his people to be
as sons: but yet we see that the^ take not possession of so great a benefit,
until they be called: on the contrary, we set that those which are called,
do now enjoy a certain communication of their election. Vocation puts us into
an actual possession of Gods love.

Fourthly, God by calling his elect, does (as Calvin affirms) admit them into
his family, Calvin. 16.
and centoine himself unto them that they may be one.

Fifthly, this inward vocation is an infallible pledge of salvation For God
denies the special efficacy of his spirit to the reprobate for the
illustration of his sovereignty and glory; Call. eod. cap sect. 2.
and appropriates it unto his Elect for the demo^stration of his mercy.

Sixthly, the excellency of the Agent does oftentimes commend the act. But it
is that great God, who swayeth the scepter of the whole world, 1. Tim. 6.16
and dwells in the light that no man can atteine unto, it is he that
inhabiteth eternity, 2 Timothy 1.9. 2 Cor. 4.6.
and spanneth the heavens with his fist, who calls us with this calling. God,
that commanded the light to shine out of darkness, is he, which has shined
in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the
face of Jesus Christ. He, and he only is our effectual Caller, and neither
man nor Angel.

Seventhly, this calling is an argument of admirable power in God, and of his
infinite mercy to us. For as he showed his power in creation, in making things
to be that before were not: even so he manifests his power in his effectual
vocation, in calling men (that were dead in sin, and worse then nothing by
their own deserts) to live the life of grace, and in breathing into them the
breath of life, which was utterly expired by their fall in Adam. Yea the Lord
may seem to exhibit more power when he calls men, then when he did create
him: for at his creation there was none to hinder him: but at his vocation
there were many hinderers and great impedime^ts, (though all inferior unto
GOD). There is the Devil and his suggestions: there is the World and her
incantations, scandals and allurements: and there is our own flesh, the
rebellious corruption of the heart. All these God must vanquish, and he must
persuade and incline our wills, and of nillers make us willers, before he perfect
and accomplish in us this his glorious and thrice-happy work of grace.
Secondly this calling is a notable testimony of his grace and mercy to us* in
that it pleased him to shine upon us with the light of his spirit, and to cast
his gracious eyes upon us, who were by sin more loathsome then a carrion, and
more stinking then any dunghill. What are we, that God should be mindful of
us, and visit us with his grace? The Stars are unclean in hi^ sight: how
much more man a Worm, ^ob, 25, 5, 6
even the son of man, which is but a worm? As God declared his goodness in
creation by communicating a being unto things, that had no being: even so the
same God does manifest his mercy in vocation by ministering life unto those,
that before were miserable, and void of life. And indeed there is more goodness
showed, more grace exhibited in restoring a man out of his grievous and
inextricable misery, and in curing him of his cursed blindness, then in
giving him a being, having none before, and in making him to see, having no
sight. To raise a dead soul from the death of sin unto a supernatural life,
is a greater work of mercy, then to raise a dead body from bodily death to
live a natural life.

Eighthly, this effectual calling does far surpass our natural propagation
or procreation. For in this we are but taken (as it were) out of our father
Adam: but in the other we are both taken out of the first Adam wholly
corrupted, and set also into the second Adam Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 1.30
Who of God is made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and
redemption.

M. Perk. on Iu^e. 1.
Lastly, this calling (that the excellency thereof may yet appear) ratifies
all our covenants with God. Men in their Baptism enter covenant with God, but
often start from it, and will not stand to it, so as the covenant is only
made. But when as a man is effectually called, the covenant is not only made,
but truly accomplished, and that on man's part, Haec clariss^ Perk

The fourth and last property of effectual vocation, 2. Pet. 1.10.
is that it may be discerned by certain signs thereof.

This estimation or discerning of it, is two fold, infallible, and coniecturall.

Coniecturall discerning or determining of it, is especially when in our
judgment of charity we deem of others, as of the called of God, by their
outward profession and conversation in the world. Romans 1.6.7. ^ Cor. 1.2
And thus Paul calls the Romans and Corinthians Sancts by calling, whereas
notwithstanding it is not improbable, but that there were some hypocrites among
them. For visible Churches are like a uet, where in is taken both good fish and
bad: or a barn, wherein is cockle and good corn: or a garden, in which grow
both stinking weeds and pleasant flowers, the nettle as well as the rose.

The certain and infallible discerning and determination made of effectual
vocation, is either when by a special and extraordinary revelation from God,
one man discernes and determines infallibly of the calling of another: this (I
say) is performed, when it is performed by a special work of God. For he alone
understands the heart. Cor. 2.1^
For what man knows the things of a man, save the spirit of a man which is in
him? All is not gold that glisters. ser. 17, 9 10.
The heart is deceitful and wicked above all things, who ca^ know it? I the
Lord search the heart and try the reiues.

Or else secondly, this infallible determination and discerning is made, when a
man determines of, and discernes his own vocation by certain works of Gods
spirit, which are infallible testimonies and tokens of it, and by which we may
make our calling sure, 2. Pet. 1.10
as Poter would have us.

The signs of effectual Calling are these.

First, the Calling of God works in us another call, whereby we call upon him,
and seriously seek unto him and desire his grace. Now to desire the help of
grace is the beginning of grace. Aug. de cor. and great. c. 7.
To call upon God constantly and sincerely for his grace, is a work of grace,
and therefore an undoubted token of our calling unto grace.

Secondly, D Willet on Ioh. 17.6.
the attentive hearing of the word is a mark of our effectual vocation. For
as a man is judged to be sick and diseased, when his stomach cannot brook nor
digest wholesome meats: so the soul of that man cannot be sound, to whom the
word of God has no pleasant taste. But when a Man can say with the Prophet
David; Thy word is sweeter to me, Psalm. 19.10. and 119.14, 3
then the honey or honey comb: by this we may gather an assured trust that we
are given unto Christ, if we do continue in having delight still. For otherwise
a sick man may have some while a relish of his meat, when there is some
intermission of the disease, but it holds not long; so is it with them that
have for a while some taste of the word of God, and afterward fall away; Haec
Clariss. Will.

Thirdly, the Sheep of Christ are such, as are called home out of the vast
wilderness of this world unto Christ their shepherd. Therefore by what notes
these Sheep are discerned, by the same a man may know his calling. Christ
says, that his sheep know him, hear his voice, and follow him. John 10.
If therefore we know, acknowledge and embrace Christ, if we hear and hearken
unto his voice to do it, if we study to resemble, imitate and follow him in
love, meekness patience, humility, justice, fidelity, truth, confidence
and compassion, we may assure our selves that we are his Sheep, effectually
called home into his fold.

Furthermore, the Romans are by Paul entitled the called of Jesus Christ.
Romans 1.6.
The Corinthians are said to be Saints by calling. 1. Cor 1.2. 2. These. 2.14.
The Thessalonians (some of them at lest) were effectually called. Now Paul
says of the called Romans, that they obeyed from the hear^ unto the form of
the doctrine, Romans 6.17.
whereunto they were delivered. Of the called Corinthians he says, that in
all things they were made rich in Christ, 1. Cor. 1.5, 7.
and were not destitute of any gift: and that howsoever some of them were
before their calling notorious sinners committing ^orrible and transcendent
enormities ^et now since their calling they were rashed and sanctified and so
become new men. 1. Cor. 6.9, 10, 11.
And as concerning the Thessalonians he says, that the Gospel was not to them
in word only, but also in power, 1. These. 1.5, 6, 9.
and much assurance, and that they became followers of him and of the Lord, and
received the word in much affliction, with joy of the holy Ghost, 2. These 1.3,
4.
and turned to God from Idols to serve the living and true God, and increased
in faith and mutual love, and were patient and faithful in all their
persecutions and afflictions. So then if with the Romans we perform hearty
obedience to the word: if with those Corinthes, we be rich in spiritual
graces, and have purged our hearts by true repentance from our former
iniquities* if we be mortified and renewed: if like those good Thessalonia^s we
receive and believe the Gospel, if we follow the Lord and his faithful
ambassadors, if we entert^ine the word with ioyfulnesse notwithstanding all
afflictions, if we turn to God from all our own Gods, our own delights and
vanities, to which we had wedded our hearts, if our faith increase, and our
love abound, and if we have patience and faith (as they had) in all our crosses
and afflictions, then may we assure ourselves that we are effectually called,
as they were.

Finally, 2. Pet. 1.10.
Peter, exhorting us to give diligence to make calling sure, adds that if we
do these things we shall never fall. Verse 5.6.7.
Now what these things are he shows; to wit, that they would joint virtue
with their faith, and with virtue knowledge, and with it temperance and with
temperance patience, and with patience godliness, and with it brotherly kindness,
and with brotherly kindness love. If therefore these graces shine within us, and
be fast rooted in our hearts, and united in our lives, we may assure our
souls of our effectual calling* if we do these things, we shall never fall:
and if we shall never fall, then may we safely conclude that God has
effectually called us to light and glory.

And thus much concerning effectu-vocation, which is the first mean whereby
God executes his eternal Election.

CHAP. 5.
What Justification is. All the causes of it. Five effects of it. The subjects
and time of it. Five properties thereof. Four tokens of it.

THE second is Justification. For those, Romans 8.30.
whom he calls effectually in time* he also justifies actually in time. To
justify is to repute or account one just. Pro. 17.15. He which justifies the
wicked, that is* he which reputeth and judges him to be just, is an
abomination to the Lord. Luke 16.15. You justify your selves before men; that
is, You would be esteemed just. To be justified is to be cleared, or to be
reputed, judged, and pronounced just.

To be justified then before God, is to be reputed and esteemed righteous in
his sight.

Justification therefore (in his proper signification) is an Acceptance, Call.
inst. l. 3. c. 11. s. 2.
whereby God esteems us as righteous being received into favor. Or

Trelc. Instit. l. 2.
Justification is a judicial and gracious work of God, by which he judges
the Elect (being in themselves obnoxious to the accusation and curse of the
Law) to be just by faith for Christ through the imputation of his justice, and
that unto the praise of his glorious grace, and to their own salvation.

The principal efficient of Justification is God the Father, in the Son, by
the holy Spirit: Mark. 2.7. Romans 8.33. Is. 43.^5. Greg in Psalm. poen.
For who can forgive sins but God alone? It is God that iustifies. I (says
the Lord) even I, am he that puts away thine iniquities. It (...) meet that
he should be our pardoner, who was our Creator, and that he should be the
giver of grace, who was to all the author of nature. Trelc. Inst. l. 2.
It is his office to absolve the guilty, by whose justice he was made
guilty: It belo^gs to him to pronounce a man to be just, whose will is the
rule of justice: it is his prerogative to give sentence of life and death,
because he is by nature, right, and office the highest Judge.

The instrument, whereby the benefit of Justification is offered and
proclaimed, is the Gospel: Acts. 5.20. Act. 13.16. 2. Cor. 5.^8.
which therefore is called the word of life, the word of salvation, the word
and ministry of Reconciliation.

The outward instruments* whereby our justification is sealed and confirmed to
us, are the two Sacraments, Romans 4.11.
and thereupon Circumcision is called the Seal of the righteousness of faith.

The inward Sealer of our justification is the Holy Ghost, who testifies and
seals it to our consciences so as that we may persuade our hearts of it

The Ministers, and lively instruments, for the proclaiming, testifying and
pronouncing our justification to us are the Messengers and Prophets of the
Lord, according to that of Christ* whose sins ye remit, Matthew. 18.18.
they shall be remitted to them: and whose ye retain they shall be retained.

The only internal instrument, whereby we apprehend and receive the grace of
justification offered unto us by God, Perk. on gal. 2.20.
is a true saving faith.

Justifying faith is a gift whereby we apprehend Christ and his benefits.

Or, it is a work of Gods Spirit in the heart, whereby we receive and lay hold
on Christ's obedience, for the pardon of our sins with God, and his accepting
of us as righteous in his ^ight.

The author of faith is God. For unto us It is given to believe. Phil. 1.29.
This is the work of God (says Christ) that ye believe in him whom he has
sent. Faith both begun and finished is the gift of God, as Austen truly
teaches. Ioh. 6.29. De praed. c. 9. 1. Cor. 13.13. 1. Tim 1.5. Ioh. 1.12. Gal.
3.14.


The proper form and life of faith is not charity, which is a distinct gift
of God, and a fruit of unfeigned Faith, but the Apprehension and Application
of Christ, and his benefits unto our selves particularly.

The proper object of a saving faith is Jesus Christ, God-man, 1. Tim. 2^*
and Mediator betwixt God and man, Remigius says; In 10. Psalm.
My whole faith is in Christ: by him alone I believe that I am justified and
saved. Li. 2. in Mar. ^. cap. 8
And Beda says; The scope of my faith is Christ: the end (or mark) of my
faith (whereat it aymeth) is the Son of God.

Now to be justified by faith, is to be justified of God for the righteousness
of Christ apprehended by faith: Instit. l 3. c. 11 s. 2.
or (as Calvin speaks) he shall be justified by faith, who being excluded
from the righteousness of works, apprehends the righteousness of Christ by
faith, wherewith he being invested does appear in the sight of God as
righteous, and ^ot a sinner.

So that faith does justify in respect of her object only, and not as any
meritorious or proper efficient of justification. ^ucan Loc. 31. quaest. 35
Even as the hand that receives the treasure which is given, does not make the
receiver rich, but the treasure it self: so neither the work or action of
faith does justify us, but Christ himself, whom we do apprehend. And this
faith, be it weak or strong, is yet able to receive the righteousness of
Christ: even as a palsy or shaking hand, may receive a jewel of a king as
truly, though not so firmly, as the hand that is whole and sound.

And further, this saving faith is the only hand, whereby we do receive
Christ and his merits. Gal. 2.16.
No man is justified by the works of the Law, but by the faith of Jesus
Christ. Ser. de humil.
Basil says; This is to glory in the Lord, when a man does not boast of his
own righteousness, but does acknowledge that he is destitute of true
righteousness, and that he is justified by faith alone in Christ. Sermon. de fide
and luce (...).
Chrisostom says; Without faith no man has obtained life: but I am able to
show that a faithful man both lived and obtained the kingdom of heaven without
works. For the thief did only believe, and was justified. It was well said
by Roffensis* Fides faeta bonis operibus, iustificat ante partum: Faith being
big with good works, Non preced^nt iustifi^andum sed sequuntu^ ^ustificatum.
does justify a man before it bring them forth. For as S. Augustine says;
Good works do not go before him, that is, to be justified, but follow him
that i^ already justified. And though good works must never be severed from
faith in the person justified, yet they must be sundred in the act of
justification. Though the eye be not alone, yet it sees alone: and though the
head consult and invent alone, yet it is not alone, but joined to the body: so
though faith be not alone in the faithful man, yet it alone does justify.

And thus we see how to esteem of faith, the Sacraments, and the Ministers of
God, always remembering to ascribe our justification unto God, Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, Matthew. 6.12 Ephesians. 4.32. 1. Cor. 6.11. In Romans 4. and 5.
as the proper and principal efficient thereof, as the Scriptures teach us*
and confessing with Primasius, that God does justify the wicked (per solam
fidem) by faith alone, and not by works.

The internal impulsive cause of Justification (which moves God to justify
us) is his grace and mere benevolence and not our works past, present, or to
come, how glorious so ever. Paul says, we are justified freely by his grace,
Romans 3.24. In Psalm 30
And Augustine says, that it is the ineffable grace ^f God, that he which is
guilty should be justified. Because all men are shut up under sin: the
salvation of man (as Anselme says) does not now consist in the merits of men,
Comment in Romans c. 11
but in the mercy of God. Yea Bellarmine himself ingeniously confesses that
by reason of the uncertainty of our own righteousness, De inst. l. 5. c. 7.
and the danger of vain glory ( Iutissimum est) it is the safest course to
repose our (fiduciam) Whole confidence (in solu De^ misericordia) in the Sole
mercy and goodness, of God.

Now then we must not imagine that this grace of God is procured by our works,
but that it does proceed freely from the Lord. No merit of man (says Anselme)
does go before the grace of God. In 5. c. Rom
Thou have done no good (says Augustine) and yet remission of sins is given
thee. (...) Psalm. 31.
Let thy works be marked, and they are found evil. If God should reward those
works according to their due* he should condemn them. But God does not give
thee the punishment that is due, but gives thee grace, Do not and great. cont.
Pel. cap. 4.
which is not due. And again he says; The grace, without which neither
Infants, nor men of years can be saved, is not paid by deserts, but given
without desert: and thereupon is called grace.

The external impulsive cause* or meritorious efficient of our justification
is not our own works, virtues or obedience. First because they be the Lords
due, by virtue of many bonds. Luke 17.10.
When we have done all that is bidde^ us, we have done but our due, no more
then we were bound to due. Now shall we think that the discharging of one
duty can satisfy Gods justice for the omission of many duties, and the
commission of many faults? Secondly, all our righteousness is as a stained
cloth* Gregory says, Mor. (...) 6*^ 14. and l. 21. c. 15 and lib. 5.^7.
All m^ns righteousn^s i^ found to be unrighteousness, ^f God strictly judge it.
Our very justice being brought to the rule of Gods justice, is injustice: and
that stinketh in the s^uerity of the Judge, which shines in the estimation of
the Worker.

And albeit our good works are perfect in respect of the Spirit, from whom thee
first flow, yet are they polluted when they pass from us, because they ru^
through our corrupted hearts and wills, as fair water which runs through a
dirty channel: Shall we now say that our perfect righteousness can merit any
thing of that righteous Judge, before whose justice nothing polluted can stand
uncondemned? Lib. 9 con^es. cap. 13


Woe unto the laudable life of men (sath A^gustine) if God should examine it and
lay aside his mercy. Thirdly, our best actions are not answerable to the
benefits of justification. But in reason he which means to merit any thing,
must bring that which is equal to that which he seeks to merit. fourthly he
that will merit of another, must not think to merit of him, vn^esse he bring
some thing of his own to merit with, and not that which is his, of whom he
does intend to merit. But all our virtues, our Faith and good works are Gods
(so far as they be good) and not ours. For what have we, 1. Cor 4.7. Ioh. 15
5.
which we have not received? Without me (says Christ) Ye can d^e nothing. Of
our selves we are not able to think one good thought When we e^ther believe or
work, Fulg. l 1. ad Mon.
though that faith be ours, and albeit the works ^e ours, yet when we have
them, we have them not of our selves, Lib. ^. de bono pers. c. 7.
but they are giu^n of God. Whatsoever (says Augustine) Cornelius wrought well
(Totum D^o dandam est) it must all be ascribed unto God, lest any man happily
should exalt himself. Therefore it is absurd to think we merit any thing by
good deeds Fifthly, good works in nature follow Iu^tification. Augustine
says; De spir. and lit. c 26. Expo. inclinat ep. ad R^m
Justification goes before the doers of the law. M^^ being justified by
believing, begin af^erwards to live righteously. Rom 4.5.
And Saint Paul says that God does justify the Ungodly. By which then it is
plain^ that no man is justified for his works. Finally, we have the sentence
of the Scriptures with us, and the judgment of the ancient Church. Gal. 2.16.
We have believed in Jesus Christ (says Paul) that we might be justified by
the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the lame: because that by the
works of the law no flesh shall be justified. God both saved us, not according
to the works of righteousness which we have done, Tit 3.5.
but according to his mercy. Epist. 71.
Ambrose says: Let no man glory in works, because no man is justified by his
works. In Psalm 67
Augustine faith: The ungodly is justified by faith without the merits of good
works. In Rom 8
Primasius says: It is Gods purpose to justify the wicked by faith alone,
without the works of the law, Sermon. in C^^nt. 23. Ser 61 in Cant.
or any other merits (of ours) whatsoever. H^mini^ iustitia, indulgentia De^.
Gods pardon (says Bernard) is man's righteousness. My merit (says he) is
Gods mercy. We conclude therefore* De Vita ^eata and la^.
saying with Ambro^e; We are not justified by works* but by faith: because
fleshly (...) is an impediment to work: and with Primatius, In 4. c Romans
God does justify the ungodly, but not by works, which ^e wants. For if he
should justify him according to works, he must be punished, and not delivered.

The external mo^^er then and meritorious efficient of our Justification is
Christ by his obedience. 2. Cor. 5.21
For God made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that ^e should be made
the rightousnesse of God in him. Romans 3.24
We are justified through the redemption, that is in Christ Jesus, whom God
has set forth to be a reconciliation, through faith in his blood* Ad Ponif.
^. ^. c. 4.
Augustine says; Christ alone has (...) the punishment for us without his
(...) demerits, that we might obtain grace by him without good merits. Christ
(says Basil) is true righteousness, (...) ^iuin^ (...).
who is made unto us of God, righteousness, wisdom* sanctification and
redemption. Pe^k. on Gal. 216.6.
As the (...) covered the dike and the Decalogue: so he covers (...) sin,
and he hides our bodies and souls from the furious indignation and vengeance
of God.

Now the obedience of Christ, is twofold* active and passive. The former
stands in his perfect fulfilling of the Law: the latter is contained in his
passion both in life and death.

By the passion of Christ our sins are remitted. Therefore Peter says: 1.
Pet. 2.24
that he bare our sins upon the Cross. Reu. 1.5.
And John likewise says: that he washed v^ from our sins in his blood. And
long before them the Prophet Esaias says: Esa ^3.5
that he was vvounded for our transgressions, and by his stripes we are healed.
^om 3, in Marc.
Remission of sins (says Chrysostom) is on the blood of Christ. His death
(says Am^^ose) is the justification of sinners. ^n. 4, cap ad Galat.
By it gods justice is fully satisfied, his wrath is appealed, and ^ll
punishments temporal and eternal deserved by sin are quite removed.

By his fulfilling of the Law we are reputed and esteemed righteous. Romans 10 4
For Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness unto every one, ^. Cor. 1.3*
that believes. ^e was made unto us of God righteousness. Romans 5, 1, Sermon in
Cant. 6.1*
By the obedience of this one, mani^ shall be made righteous. Lord (says
Bernard) I will remember thy righteousness only: for that is also mine. For
thou art made unto me righteousness of God. Now this his righteousness is not
ours, but his originally, and is made ours by Gods tree imputation. It is
imputed to us and by God accounted ours (Christ being our Surety, and standing
in our stead) and so appropriated to us, as if we had performed it in our own
persons. Sermon. ad ^il Temp. Ep. 190.
Bernard says that the righteousness of Christ is imputed to us. And again;
the justice of another is assigned unto man, because he wanted his own. The
satisfaction of one is imputed unto all. And no man must think it strange that
the obedience of Christ could satisfy for the disobedience of all the Elect,
and make them to be reputed righteous with God. For in that it was the
obedience of God, that is, of that holy man, Act. ^0.28
who was true God, it was of endless merit, and of inualuable value with the
Lord. The perfection and merit of this obedience comes from the dignity of his
person, that did obey. And though justification be through Christ, yet God may
be said to justify freely, because it comes freely to us, we do nothing for
it: and because also it was his free love, John. 3.16,
which moved him to send his son to suffer for our sins and to fulfill the Law
fully for us. Neither must any man imagine that Christ did not fulfill the Law
for us, but for himself only, and consequently that his active obedience is
not imputed to us. Romans 10.4.
For Christ is not only our redemption, but he is also the perfection of the
Law for us that believe in him. Whereupon it is that Ambrose says; He has
the perfection of the Law, who believes in Christ. ^ucan. Lo^ 31. qu. 14.
Moreover Whole Christ is given unto us with his benefits. Otherwise, if his
Passive obedience were only imputed to us, it would follow that ha^fe Christ
were only given us ( Patientem, non Agentem) to wit, as he is a Patient, and
not an Agent, or dooer of those things, which are pleasing to his Father, and (
auferentem peccat^) only as he takes away sin and death, and not ( aff^rentem
iustitiam) bringing righteousness. (...). 9*6
But he was not borne for himself, but for us, and was given unto us, that he
might both do for us the things that were to be done, and suffer the things,
which were to be suffered. ^^k on Gal. 2.16.
Again* Christ as man fulfilled the Law for* himself: that he might be in
both natures an holy high Priest, and so continue. Nevertheless as Mediator,
God and Man, he became subject to the Law, and in this regard he did not
fulfill t^^ Law for himself, neither was he bound so to do. Neither must
this seem strange to any, that the Law should both exact obedience, and the
penalty too. For howsoever in the state of innocence, the Law threatened the
penalty, and only exacted obedience: yet since the fall, it does both exact
obedience, and the punishment. The threatening of the Law exacts the punishment:
the precepts exact obedience. And albeit Christ has kept the Law fully for us,
yet none must from thence conclude, that therefore we are not bound to keep
the Law. that (says one) which Christ did, M Perk. ibid.
we are not bound to do for the same end, and in the same manner. Now he
fulfilled the law in way of redemption and satisfaction for us: and so do not
we fulfill the Law, but only in the way of thankfulness for our redemption.
And though we be bound to obey the Law, yet we must not think that God will
reject our obedience for the weakness of it, as he would have rejected
Christ's, if his had been imperfect. For he was our Mediator, and therefore
his obedience was of necessity to be most perfect, or else Gods justice had
not been satisfied, and so we had perished: and besides, all our imperfections
and defects whatsoever are covered with his perfection as with a veil, and so
our weak obedience is accepted, and not contemned. Finally for our comfort we
must know, that if we respect the Truth of that righteousness, which is imputed
to us, wear accounted as truly righteous before God, ^re^^. ^ stit lib. 2.
as Christ himself is: but if we regard the quantity and subject, Christ is
more just, the^ we, Because he is originally and actually righteous, but we by
imputation: he is subiectiuely just and by inherency, but we by application and
relation in him and unto him. And yet we must not therefore think our selves
to be redeemers. For his obedience is imputed to us only for our own
redemption, Perk ref. Cath.
and not as it is the price of redemption for all the Elect. As for example,
Christ's righteousness is imputed to Peter, not as it is the price of redemption
for All, but as it is the price of redemption for Peter. And so much for the
efficient causes of our Justification.

The matter of justification (according as are the parts thereof) is twofold;
Remission of sins, and Gods accepting of us as righteous men.

Remission of sins is a gracious act of God, whereby for the merit and
satisfaction of Christ he does perfectly forgive both the fault and punishment.
Ephe. 1, 7
Therefore Paul says that by him we have redemption through hi^ blood, Romans
8.1. Heb. 1.3. 2 Cor. 5, 1
even the forgiveness of sins according to his rich grace: and that there is
no condemnation to the^, that are in Christ Jesus, who has by himself purged
our sins, and by whom the Father has recon^iled v^ unto himself. Now it were
absurd to think that the punishment is ret^ined, when the sin is remitted: For
if the proper cause be defaced, then the effect thereof must needs be also
abolished. If the body be removed, the shadow thereof remains not. So if sin
be pardoned, the punishment is remitted. As for the crosses, which the
faithful suffer, they are to be reputed curses or penalties of vengeance
inflicted of God as of an ireful and direful Judge, but they are to be esteemed
only as trials, or as punishment of castigatio^ imposed of god, as a loving
father desiring the welfare and weldoing of his children. Reu. 3.19. Heb. 12.6.
^. 11.
As many as I love (says the Lord) I rebuke and chasten: He scourges every
son, which he receives. If therefore ye be without correction, whereof all
are partakers, then are ye bastards, and not sons. Now no chastening for the
present seems to be (...), but grievous: yet afterward it brings the (...)
fruit of righteousness, unto the^ which are thereby exercised. The Lord tries us
by afflictions, as gold is tried in the furnace with fire. He keeps us by the
cross within our limits, as water is held in with banks. And with the thorny
hedge of troubles and vexations he keeps us within our own walks and
pastures, being by nature given to break out and stray. Therefore David says,
Before I was afflicted I went astray: Psa. 119.6^71*
but now I keep thy word* it is good for me, that I have been afflicted,
that I may learn thy statutes. Blessed is the man, whom thou chastisest. For
it is certain, God scoureth away the infirmities of his Saints by many
afflictions. It is the Lord, which sends crosses to his children to save
the^, that they freese not with the wicked world in their dregs. Lib, 4. Ep. 4.
For this end (says Cyprian) the Lord rebukes, that he might amend us: to
this end he mends, that he might save us. De p^n, et confe^.
Augustine says that sorrows before pardon of sins are the punishments of
sinners: but after pardon, they are the trials and exercises of just men. And
so for death it self, the sting and strength thereof, which is sin, is
abolished by the death of Christ upon the cross, 1 Cor, 15 56. Rom, 4.25,
and therefore is to be reputed but as a trial or chastisement, whereby the
Lord does teach us humility and the flight of sin, and does exercise and
prove our faith, fortitude and patience.

And though in respect of sin it be the entrance of Hell, yet through the
death of Christ, it is become the gate of heaven, and as Cyprian speaks (
Ianua vitae) the door of life. It does (as it were) convey us out of the
wilderness into Canaan, out of a troublesome Sea into a quiet haven, and out of
earth into heaven, from woe to weal, and from men to God: yea it becomes the
death of sin, that first gave life to it. De Christ. rel. par. 2.
We conclude therefore this truth with Vrsinus, saying, God does not hate us,
neither has he a will to punish us for those sins for which Christ has
sufficiently satisfied: in whom also we have remission of those, (sins of
omission) and all other our sins, so that by his only merit we are reputed
righteous before God.

The second part of Justification is Gods gracious acceptance, whereby he does
for the merit of Christ's active obedience by faith received of us, account us
just and pure, and honors us with the crown of life. And in this respect we
may truly be said to be just, perfect and holy men: because we stand clothed
with the most perfect righteousness of Christ, which is reputed ours, in which,
appearing before our heavenly father, we do receive a blessing, as Jacob did
of Isaac, Gen 27.15 27.
having on his elder brothers garments. Neither must it seem strange unto us
that we should be accepted righteous for the righteousness of an other. For
albeit this righteousness be Christ's, primarily and by way of inherence, yet
it is ours by Gods donation and by the application of faith; Bucan Loc. 31. qu.
27.
As the payment of our debt is another man's, so far forth as it is discharged
by him: but it is our payment, as it is imputed to us. Aquinas says well: The
head and the member is as one mystical person, and therefore the satisfaction
of Christ pertains to all the faithful, as to his members.

The form or formal cause of Justification is not faith, love, nor any other
virtue, neither is it an infused quality, or habitual sanctity inherent in us.
For this were to confound justification and sanctification, which are very
different acts, Bucan. Loc. 31. qu. 22. Romans 4, 2, Phil, 3, 9,
as we shall hereafter show. But the righteousness of Christ imputed,
considered as it is imputed of God, is the form of justification. Or, Trel^.
Instit. lib. 2.
the proper and only true form of justification is the free imputation of the
righteousness of Christ, by which the merit and obedience of Christ are applied
to us by virtue of that near communion, whereby he is in us and we in him. Now
God is said to impute the righteousness of Christ unto a man, when he does
adiudge, decree and give it to him, and account and reckon it as his own, and
for the merit and worthiness of it does pardon and acquit him, and repute him
righteous. Epist. ad Diog^.
O sweet exchange (says Justin Martyr) O unsearchable vvorkemanship, O
benefits surpassing all expectation, that the iniquity of many should be
covered in one just person, and that the justice of one should make many, that
are unjust, to be reputed just. If one (says Bernard) did die for all, then
all died: Epist. 190. ad Innoc.
to wit that the satisfaction of one might be imputed unto all, as that one
bare the sins of all. Now Christ bare our sins and was made sin for us, 2 Cor.
5.21.
not as if our sins had been infused into him, and had been inherent and
inhabitants in him, but because they were imputed to him, and reputed his, as
if they had been committed by him, he supplying our place, as our Surety and
Mediator: even so his righteousness is made ours, not as though it were infused
or translated into us as a thing inherent and inhabiting in us, but because it
is reputed ours and imputed freely to us, as if we our selves had wrought it
in our own persons. And of this opinion was S. Augustine, Euchi. cap, 41. In
explic. cat. a Pare^ edit. 1589 page. 448.
We are the righteousness of God in him, as he is sin in us, to wit, by
imputation. With whom consents Vrsinus, the imputation of the righteousness of
Christ is not the transfusion of righteousness or of qualities into us, but the
absolution from sins in the judgment of God, for the righteousness of an other.
For justification and remission of sins are the same. For to justify is for
God not to impute sin unto us, but to accept us for righteous, and to absolve
or pronounce us just for the righteousness of Christ imputed.

The end of Justification in respect of God, is the glory of God in an
admirable composition of justice and mercy; of justice, because he would have
his son to satisfy for our sins, rather then that they should escape
unpunished; and of mercy, because it pleased him to impute and appropriate the
satisfaction of his son unto us, rather then we wretches should be destroyed.
Ob.
But some will perhaps imagine that God showed neither justice, nor mercy: no
justice, because he punished an innocent for the nocent, and set his teeth on
edge, whereas they had eaten the sour grapes: and no mercy, because he
forgave none without a satisfaction. Ans.
It is true indeed that the innocent was punished: but yet it was done
willingly, and not by constraint* and he was of the same nature with the
nocent, and was also such a potent innocent, as that he did satisfy the
justice of the Judge to the utmost, and conquer all his punishments with
facility. Neither must we deem the mercy of God to be withheld, or not
exhibited because he did not forgive without a satisfaction For first, it was
of his sole benignity and perfect mercy, without the preuision of any merit,
that he came to satisfy, who made the satisfaction for us. 1 Ioh. 4.10
Herein (says John) is that love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us,
and sent his son to be a reconciliation for our sins. Secondly, it is his
grace that he does apply the satisfaction of his son unto us, who were
disposed thereunto by no gift, or merit. Thirdly, we must consider that Gods
justice is so infinitely absolute, as that we could not be justified without a
Mediator. Note.
God could not forgive sin without a satisfaction. For otherwise what need
was there that the soon of GOD should be brought (as he was) to such horrible
misery and to such an accursed death? A kind father would try any way, rather
then he would expose his own and only son to extreme terrors and misery.

And lest any man should imagine that it is in Gods power to remit or to
retain sins like debts, we must know that there are two kinds of debts. For
there is a debt, which eclipseth and hurts the honor of the Creditor: and
there is also a debt which does not touch it. Reck. Syst, The, li, 3. c, 3
If the debt do not hurt his honor, it may with great increase of honor be
rmitted without any recompense at all, as when a king forgiueth his servant
the debt of some thousands of c^ovvnes. This debt, as it did not hurt the
majesty of the king, so it might be forgiven without any hurt to his
majesty. But if debts do hurt the honor and majesty of the Creditour, and
do directly impugn his nature and glory, without doubt they cannot at his
pleasure be remitted without satisfaction. And such debts are sins, at which
infringe the rule of Gods eternal will, and are enemies to it, so as that
they cannot be purged and forgiven without a penalty, but Gods justice and
vprightnes will be diminished.

But yet though his mercy could not shoulder out his justice, or any whit
eclipse it, yet his justice did not bereave him of his mercy. For of his own
mere mercy he found out the way to redeem and save us, when we did not so
much as think of any such thing, and therefore as we ought to admire the
severity of his justice: so we should also magnify his endless grace and
mercy.

The ends of Justification in respect of our selves are* that we may be
pleasing unto God, that we may have peace of conscience, and true tranquillity
of mind, that being redeemed from misery we might be saved, and finally
that we should strive against the stream of our own corruptions, and keep a
constant course in piety: or (to use the words of Zachary) That we being
delivered out of the hands of our enemies, Luke 1.74.75.
should serve him without fear all the days of our life, in holiness and
righteousness before him. Tit. 14.
For Christ gave himself for us, that we should be zealous of good works:
and bare our sins on the cross, that we being dead to sin, 1. Pet. 2.2 4
should live is righteousness. Loc. 31. quast. 44.
To this end (says Bucanus) are we justified by faith for Christ, that the
old man being abolished by the efficacy of Christ crucified, Christ may live
in us, and we by the study of good works, may show our selves thankful unto
God for so great a benefit. Therefore Paul almost in all his Epistles, draws
his doctrine of sanctification and good works, out of the doctrine of Faith or
Justification, as the effect out of the cause, or as an necessary consequent
from the Antecedent: H^c, ille. In like manner Augustine says: Tom. 4. lib. 1
ad simplic. Resp ad 2. quaest.
Christ died for the wicked, but not that the wicked should remain dead, but
that being justified, they should be converted from wickedness, believing in
him which justifies the ungodly. For God hates impiety. And again: Grace
does justify (or he iustifies by grace) that he which is justified might like
justly* So then one maine end of our justification is, that abandoning all
iniquity we should lead our lives in sanctity*

The effects and consequents of Justification are diverse.

The immediate effect of Justification is adoption, Reck Syst. Th. li. 3. c. 7
by which the Elect do now actually please God, as his sons and coheires of
Christ For so soon as the Electare absolved from their sins, they are
forthwith adopted into the right and privileges of the children of God.

A second effect of Justification, is peace of conscience: to wit, when we
perceive our selves to be delivered from our sins, before Gods judgment seat,
and the judgment of our own conscience. Romans 8 1. Romans 5.1.
For there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ: and being justified
by faith, we have peace with God, even that peace, Col. 4.7.
which passes all understanding: whereas there is no true peace to the
wicked: but they are like the raging sea that cannot rest, Is 57.20.
whose waters cast up mudde and mire: or else they are structen with a
spiritual Apoplexcy, which has reaued them of all true sense, and are so
benumbed in their conscience, that they can feel nothing till it be roused and
awaked.

Thirdly, our justification makes us have access to God by prayer, with
confidence to be heard for Christ For sin was the Makebate and wall of
partition, betwixt God and us: now our sins are done away, when we are
justified, and therefore with boldness we may approach unto the throne of
Grace. Rom 8.15.
We have now received the Spirit of adoption, ^eck. 16.
by which we cr^e Abba Father: that is, by which we conceive very good
hope in him, to whom we pray like suppliants, that he will in fatherly
affection tovvard us, give us th^se things we stand in need of.

Fourthly, Justification begets patience in afflictions, and makes a man
rejoice in the midst of tribulations.

Being justified by Faith, we have peace to Godward* Romans 5.1, 3
Neither that only, but also we rejoice in tribulations, knovving that
tribulation produces patience: to wit, through the persuasion of our
reconciliation unto God, and our assurance that all things, Rom 8.28.
how bitter and grievous soever, do work for the best unto them that love
God, and are pleasing to him.

Lastly, Glorification is an inseparable companion, and a notable effect of
Justification. Being freed from sin and made servants unto God, Romans 6.22.
ye have your fruit in holiness, and the end everlasting life. The obedience
of Christ by grace imputed to us, and by Faith received of us, works in us a
desire, care, and endeavor to obey God. His death for which our sins are
remitted, works in us another death, whereby we die to sin* And his glorious
righteousness, wherewith we are invested, and made to be reputed righteous,
does merit for us eternal life and glory.

The subject of Justification, or the persons, that are justified, or to whom
Justification does belong, are the Elect of God, and the sheep of Christ: even
all that are predestined unto life. For therefore the Scriptures speak on
this sort: Is 53.6.
The Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of us all. Ioh. 10.15
I lay down my life for my sheep. Whom he did predestinate, he has also
justified. Rom 8.30, 32.
Who spared not his own Son, but gave him for us all: how shall he not with
him give us all things also? But for what us? (says Augustine) Even for them
which are fore-knowen, In Io^. ^ract. 45. In c. 5. ad Romans
praedestinated, justified and glorfiied. Haimo says: Christ has taken away
in the Elect, not only original sin, In Leuit. l. 17. c. 2.
but all actual offenses also, and has moreover given the everlasting life
Radnulphus also says: that the blood of the High Priest Christ was the
expiation of all Believers.

I add further, that the Elect are the only persons, to whom this worthy
work of God belongs, and none but they. Is 53.11, 12 Matthew. 26.28. Heb. 9.28.
First, the Scripture is evident: By his knowledge shall my righteous servant
justify Many. He bare the sin of many. His blood was shed for many for
the remission of sins. He was once offered to take away the sins of many
The Scripture says, Many, and not All, Matthew. 1.21.
without the exception of any. Thou shall call his Name Jesus: for he shall same
his people from their sins. Now all are not his. For his people are his
sheep: and his sheep are the devils Goaets: all are not his sheep. Ye
believe not, Ioh. 10.26.
(says Christ) for ye are not of my sheep. Some men have never faith,
therefore some are never justified. Secondly for whom Christ did not pray,
Perk. de praed.
for them he did not sacrifice: because to intercede and to sacrifice are
conjoined.

But Christ prayed only for the Elect and for Believers, and in praying, did
offer himself to the Father. Ioh. 17.9, 19, 20. This is don by sacrificing
himself, and making his sacrifice meritorious.
I pray for them (says Christ) I pray not for the world, but for them, which
thou have given me: for they are thine. And for their sakes I sanctify my
self. I pray not for these alone, but for them also which believe in me.
Origin says accordingly ( Hom. 9. in Leuit.) that Christ prayth Only for
those which are the Lords portion. Augustine says: There is a world of the
damned: for this world Christ prays not. And there if a world of those that
are to be saved: for this world Christ prays. And likewise Cyrill: In Io^ lib
11 cap. 14.
The Lord Jesus putting a difference betwixt his and such as were not his: for
those only (says he) I pray, which keep my word and have taken my yoke.
For to whom he is a Mediator and High Priest, on them only he bestows the
benefit of Meditation Therefore the Elect and faithful are only justified and
redeemed by Christ.

Perk. de praed.
Thirdly, Christ gave himself, that he might sanctify to himself a peculiar
people, that is, a people selected out of others as a precious treasure, and
his own proper goods. Therefore it was not Christ's intention, to give himself
to be a ransom for all, and every one alike.

Lastly, regeneration and life eternal belong not to all. All men do not die
to sin, and live to God: and the kingdom of God shall be given to them,
Matthew. 20 23. Reu. 22.15 Romans 8.30.
for whom it is preprared. Many shall be excluded. Therefore all are not
justified. For they that are justified, shall be also glorified. Isychius says;
In Leuit. l. 6. c. 23.
that Christ who suffered for us, has delivered us from sin and from the
bondage of it. And Augustine more plainly: Sermon. 44. de ver. 6. Apost.
Every one that is generated, is damned: and no man is delivered, but he, that
is regenerated. And again, God gave a great price, Sermon 109.
and bought those, whom he does revive. It is manifest therefore that the Elect
are only partakers of the merits of Christ, and justified in the sight of God.
For whereas Christ is said to take away the sins of the world, D. Willet ^n
Ioh. 17.^ Ioh. 1.29.
here the world only: that is, the universal company of the Elect, which are
taken from all degrees and callings in the world, is to he understood. For
there is as it were a little world of the Elect. Hist. l. 4. c. 1^
Eusebius says; Christ has suffered for the salvation of the world of those,
that shall be saved. And S. Augustine having made a distinction of Worlds*
says; Tract. 87. in Ioh.
that this world, which God does reconcile unto himself in Christ, and which
is saved by Christ, and to which every sin is remitted through Christ, is
elected ou^ of the maligning, damned; 1. Tim. 26.
and defiled world. And though the Apostle say that he gave himself a ransom
for all men: yet we must in no wise therefore conclude, that all are justified
without exception. For the word All, Pol. t. l. 2. c. 2.
(as Aristotle in his Politiques has observed) signifies either every one in
particular, and then it is taken distributiuely: or else Not each particular,
and then it is taken collectiuelie, and signifies any, not each: many and not
al without exception of any. Whereas then the Apostle says* that Christ gave
himself a ransom for All: he means al believers, of what condition or
country soever. Neither (...) it any new thing that the word All should be
taken in such a sense, Piscat. dis. (...). de praed. quaest. 1. par. 49.
seeing the like examples may be found: as in Luke 11.42. Woe be to you,
Pharisees, for you, ^^the mint, and rue, and ( (...)) all herbs that is,
Matthew. 4.23 Matthew. 3 5 in Epist. ad ^^m. c. 5.
herbs of every kind. So Christ is said to heal Every disease, that is,
all kinds of diseases. All Judea is said to go out to John Baptist. Multi and
Omnes in Paulo idem sunt. Many (says Sedulius) and Al are the same with Paul.

It is true indeed (I grant) that the obedience of Christ (being the obedience
of God) was in it self sufficient to have procured the Justification of all
without exception: but if we respect either Gods decree, or Christ's intention,
it is appropriated to the Elect, and belongs to none but them.

Lib. 4 de Mist. missae. cap. 4.
Innocentius says: His blood was shed in regard of efficiencie for those only
which are predestined: but for all men in respect of sufficiency. Su^^m. de
v^^it. Matthew. 26. v. 7.
In like manner Aquinas: the merit of Christ was alike to all in regard of
sufficiency, but not as concerning efficacy. Howsoever his blood and merits
were in themselves sufficient for the justification and saluatition of all men,
yet they did not effectually procure them for all, but only for the Elect, to
whom they were ordained and intended, and of whom alone they can be rightly
received and embraced.

Now those that are justified, must be considered in a double condition.

One, according to nature, Trelc* inst. l. 2.
the other according to supernatural grace.

According to nature they are sinners (for he justifies the ungodly, Romans
4.5.) and therefore obnoxious to the accusation, and malediction of the Law
(for cursed is every man that continues not in all things, Gal 3.10.
which are witten in the Law to do them.) But according to supernatural
grace, they are believers: or ingrafted into Christ by faith. For the
righteousness of God, is made manifest by the faith of Jesus Christ Unto all,
and upon all that believe. And (...) much for the persons, whom God does
justify.

The time of Justification is in this life, with some sooner, and with others
later; but with none at all after this life is ended. Vrs^inus says well,
Remission of sins is given to all the Elect and to them alone. Yet all the
Elect have not always remission of sins: but all Believers have it always,
because they only have remission of sins, who believe that they have it. But
this the Elect do and always believe: but then first, when they are converted,
and endued with faith. Yet in respect of the fore-determined purpose of God,
they have always remission of sins.

And a^beit, Romans 3.22.
sanctification do often by some fruits thereof appear before justification,
yet this in nature is before the other We see the light usually before the
Sun in the morning: and the brook does often offer itself unto our eyes
before the spring.

The Properties of Justification are five.

First, it is most excellent: Romans 4.5. Romans 3 25 Ephe. 5.2.
and that in respect of the Iustifier, which is God: (...) respect also of the
meritorious efficient thereof, which is Christ and in regard of those admirable
effects which it does pro^u^e, one amongst the rest is this, which I add unto
the former, whereof we have already spoken: to wit, that it gives a man the
right use of the good creatures of God which he has created to be received
with thanksgiving of them that believe* 1. Tim. 4.^
^or unto the pure (which men are* when they be purged by faith in the blood of
Christ) ^l things are pure: but unto the that are defiled (as every one is,
Tit. 1.15.
until God do justify him) and are unbelieving, is nothing pure, but even
their minds and consciences are defiled. The Reprobates therefore and
Unbelievers abuse the gifts of God, De not. him. l. ^. c. ^8.
rather then use them. Therefore (as Danaeus speaks) God does fatten them in
this world as H^gs for the slaughter. On the contrary, those that are now
justified by faith in Christ, do use them lawfully. For they are fed of God,
Dan ibid.
as his household servants. They are not thieves and Usurpers of them as the
wicked are, but they hold them as lawful heirs and owners of the world: (...).

Secondly, Justification is a most free act* performed freely by God without
coaction, or the least inducement by any dignity present, or foreseen to be in
us hereafter. For being absolute Lord of all, he may show mercy on whom he
lists. We are by nature all the children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3
and the vi^^als of the devil, destitute of all true grace and subject to the
curse: and therefore it is a wonder that we are not all consumed. We must
needs then confess, that the free grace of God in Christ has made the
difference. Orat. 4 (...). Romans 3.24
Chrysostom according to the Scripture truly says: that God of his grace
alone does justify our kind, and not through our good deeds, labors, nor
recompense. In ep. Rom
And Theodulus says: Christ is the Author of righteousness, to them that
believe in him, even unto them that had done nothing righteouslie. Here then by
the way we may remember, that our Iuctification is free, in regard of us, that
did not deserve it: and free also in respect of God, who did freely devise and
dispose the means thereof and freely works faith within us, by which we do
apply it to us. But it is not free, but justly performed in regard of Christ,
who by his all-sufficient merits did deserve it, and by desert acquire it.

Thirdly, Justification is one absolute, entire, and individual act. Keck.
Syst, ^he, li, 3. c, ^
It is once only acted essentially and directly in this life, although it it
be diverse times renewed and applied a fresh: to wit, when the person justified
does fall into sin, and repent. Now though Justification be a most perfect and
plenary work of God, yet we come to the full persuasion of it but by degrees:
and though God at once forgive a man his sins by an absolute act, which
admits neither increase nor decrease* yet that man receives his pardon by such
a faith, or such a persuasion of faith, as is not always one, but sometimes
stronger, sometmies also weaker, ebbing and flowing like the salt waters,
sometimes appearing, and some times hidden, like the sun, with a thick mist or
duskie cloud.

Fourthly, Justification is an immutable, inviolable and irreuocable a^^ of
God. Peccata semel remissa nunquam redeu^t: sins being once remitted, are never
after called into question. And he that is once of God for Christ reputed
righteous shall be reputed righteous forever. If it sho*d be otherwise, it were
either long of God or of our selves; but not of God, who is on changeling: I am
the Lord, Mal. 3.6.
I charge not: nor of our selves: ^. Pet. 1.5.
for we are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, and so
governed by his spirit, ^. Ioh. 3.9
as that we neither do sin, nor can sin with full consent of will, and
without the reluctation and conflict of the spirit. The Godly and ungodly do
oftentimes commit the same offense if we respect the act, but it is not the
same, Stur^ de ^praed* These 12.
if we consider their manner of acting it. The godly sin against their
conscience: but not against their full conscience. But the ungodly sin
against their (...) ^^conscience, and that ^ully:

And therefore albeit a man that is justified* fall into some grievous sin, as
David did, yet grace is not utterly put out, neither has he lost the benefit
of his justification* though for a time he feel it not.

Now this property of immutabili^ty is very rare and excellent by much to be
preferred to all earthly things* For Riches remain not alway^* Pto. 27.24
nor the the crown from generation to generation. Pto. 31.3^.
Favor i^ deceiptfull and beauty i^ vanity. The fashion of this world
passes away. ^ Cor 7.31
And what (...) life? It is even a vapor that appears for a little (...),
(...). 4.^4.
and afterward^ vanish^th away. Is. 40.6.
For all flesh is grass: and all the glory of man is as the flower of grass.
The grass withers* 1 Pet. 1.24
and the flower fa^leth away: but the justification of a sinner remains for
ever* It is enacted and enrolled in heaven it shall not be repealed and
obl^ter^ted upon the earth.

Fifthly, Justification may be perceived and known, and that three ways. First
by the suggestion of Gods spirit. Secondly by faith* which is a certain
assurance or persuasion of the love af God in Christ. Now a man may assure
himself of faith, ^f the^^ two things be in him. First if he love God for God
himself, and his neighbor truly, as himself. For love accompanies faith, as
the light does the sun. 1 Timothy 1.5.
Indeed it proceeds from faith: and as Gr^gor^^ says* Quantum (...), ta^tu^^
(...). As is our faith (...) our love. Secondly, a man may assure himself of
Justifying faith if he do strive against his doubtings, and with an honest
heart do will to believe, and unfeignedly desire to be reconciled unto God,
and do with a^l, constantly use the good means, that God has ordained to
beget and increase faith. M. Perk. ^^ Galat. 2.^6
For God accept^ the will to believe for faith it self, and the will to repent,
for repentance. The reason hereof i^ plain. Every supernatural act
presupposes a supernatural power or gift: and therefore the will to believe
and repent, presupposes the power and gift of faith, and repentance in the
heart. Thirdly a man may come to be assured of his Justification by certain
infallible tokens and (...) of it: some whereof I will here set down. M. Green
^am.


The first is a joy most unspeakable and glorious, wherewith our hearts must
needs be ravished, when we see ^ur selves by the righteousness of Christ of
the free grace of God* redeemed from death, delivered from hell, and freed from
the fearef^ll condemnation of the wicked.

The second is the peace of conscience. While sin and the guilt of sin
remained, there was no peace nor quietness to be found, but fear within*
terrors without, and troubles on every side. But when our sins are once
nailed to the cross of Christ, and forgiven us, then the winds are laid, the
waves are settled* the sea is calmed, the soul is quieted, and imparked within
the pales of peace.

Thirdly (that no man may think fleshly sottishnes, and the stupour of the
spirit to be found security and true tranquillity; being indeed but like a
ca^me before some violent, no o^^^agious temp^st) we may know that our peace
is good, and that (...) f^^^^on is past with God, ^f w^ (...) a promptitude and
(...) to d^e that which is good. (...) a man does find (...) for the
forgiveness of si^nes, Greenham.
(...) love of God constrains (...), (...) ^^y: which he conceiueth* (...)
him, and puts life into him for (...) pe^^o^mance of those things, which are
pleasing unto God. His understanding, is enlightened* his judgment is refo^^ed,
his affections are b^^^r^d, his ioies are in heaven, his desire are to
Christ-ward* his walk is t^ Canaan, his course to Jerusalem, (...) his anger
is consumed upon his own^ corruption. For we must know (...) when God does in
p^te ri^hteousne^ unto a man to prevent his d^m^^tio^ by sin, then he does
also inf^se righteousness into him to ^inder the ^^^^nation of sin. Therefore
Paul ioyne^ both together, when he says that Christ is made unto us
righteousness^ (...) and redemption: 1 Cor. 1 30. 1 Cor. 6 ^^
and when he t^ls his Corinths, that they are v^^sh (...) and justified So
then he that ci^cumciseth the fore skin of his heart by true repentance, he
that wa^^eth against all his lusts, and truly st^^^h to serve the Lord in all
his p^ec^p^s* he may know for certain^ that God ha^h cut the cords of his
sins, and has cast them all behind^ him But ^^^^e are many circumcised to
(...) not to the Lord: M Greenha.
they are the cir^u^^^sion of the King and of the Queen they leave ma^y gross
sins p^^^shable by imprisonment, but for others as great, but not p^nal, they
pass over. These men must know what so long as they addict themselves to their
known enormities without repentance, they are out of the kingdom of Christ
and are not clothed with the robes of his righteousness, but co^^red with the
rotten rags of their own wickedness For those, that are in Christ, walk not
after the flesh, Romans 8.^ Gal. 5.2
but after the Spirit. They, that a^e ^is, have crucified the flesh vv^th the
affections, and the lusts. But to live in sin, is to take sin down from the
cross, and to put life and spirit into it.

1 John. 3.1^
Finally, as S. John teaches, we know that we are translated from death to life
(which is in our justification) because we love the Brethren. For it is
impossible for him rightly to love a righteous man in Christ, who is not as yet
himself made righteous by Christ. But when a man is once ^^s^ified by God, he
will then begin to love a just man for God. Love lo^es his like. One just man
will love another. Martin Luther faith that a man may try and know whether h^
be incorporated into Christ, or not, by this, that as he feels his heart
cheered and sweetened by the feeling of Gods promises and favor written in his
heart, so such a man (as no man is but he, that is justified) ha^h forthwith
regard of his Neighbor, and helps him as his Brother, cares for him,
lends him, gives him, comfort and coun^elleth him; yea and briefly, he
is grieved if there be none, toward whom he may be se^uice^ble: he is
patient, tractab^e, and truly friendeth all men: he does not esteem the
te^porall pleasure and pride of this life, he judges no man, he defameth no
man, he interprets all things to the best part. Finally, when as he sees not
the matter go well with his neighbor as that he faints in faith, waxes cold
in love, he prays for him, he reproves him according to his calling: he is
sorely grieved if any man commit any thing against God or his Neighbor. And
all this proceeds from the root and juice of Gods grace, for that the
bountifulnes, love and goodness of Christ, has sprinkled and replenished his
heart with sweetenes and love, that it is a pleasure and joy for him to do good
to his Neighbor, and is grieved for his sins, as Samuel for Saul.

By these and such like works of grace, a man may come to a certain knowledge
of his Justification. Which how well worthy it is of our knowledge, they can
best tell, which feel. the comfort of it most. And let no man think it
imp^ssible to be discerned by man, because it is performed by God without man.
For though it be acted by God in heaven, yet it produces many notable graces
in man upon the earth, by which it may be perceived as a vine by her grapes, or
as a lamp by her light. Neither let us be induced to think that justification
is a changeable or reuokable act of God, and that a justified man may fall from
grace and perish, and that therefore there can be no certainty made of the
continuance of it. For nothing can separate us from the love of God, Romans 8.39.
wherewith he loves us in Jesus Christ our Lord. Who has redeemed us with his
blood. Sermon, 109
He (says Aug.) who has bought us for so great a price, will not that they
should perish, whom he has bought. ^ex. page 1248.
Master Tyndall says thus. Christ is thine, and all his deeds are thy deeds:
Christ is in thee, and thou in him: neither can thou be damned, except Christ
be damned with thee. We conclude therefore according to the truth* that as
Justification is irreuocable, so it is discerneable. Let him doubt (sath M.
Philpot) of his faith, that lists: Fox. page. 1825.
God give we always grace to believe that I am sure of true faith, and favor
in Christ.

And so much concerning justification, the second mean ordained for the
execution and demonstration of ^^ds eternal Election.

^rga Dei bonitas veniam no^ dimidiabi^,
Aut nihil, aut totum, to lachryma^te dabis.
CHAP. VI.
What sanctification is. All the causes of it are expressed. Four effects of
it. The subjects, terms and time of it. Nine properties thereof. Ten tokens of
it.

THE third thing, wherein the Apostle places the execution of the decre of
Election, is Glorification. Whom he has foreknowne, predestined, effectually
called and justified, them ^e has also glorified.

Glorification is the communication or free donation of true holiness and
happiness to them, that are elected, called and justified. For glory
comprehends in it both holiness and happiness. Holiness is one degree of
happiness, and happiness is the highest degree of holiness. No man is holy,
but the same is happy: and no man can be happy, but he must be holy Grace is
the inchoation of glory, and glory is the consummation of grace He that sits
in the throne of grace, is truly entitled to the crown of glory: and it is
one point of glory to be a man of grace A gracious man may be rightly styled a
glorious man.

Glorification then comprehends in it two things, Sanctification in this
world, Aquinas ait Deum nos du ^s^r^er glorificasse. 1. per. ^rofectum virtutis
and gratia. 2 per exaltationem gloriae.
and the collation of eternal happiness in the world to come. Of both these
we will entreat in order.

Sanctification or Regeneration is a benefit of God, whereby our corrupt nature
is renewed to the image of god by the Holy Ghost, Polan. Part. The lib. 1. Or
sanctification is an inward change of a man justified whereby the image of God
is restored in him.

Hippocrates says of Physic that it is an adiection, and a subraction; Lib,
de flatibus.
and Adiection of things wanting, and a Subtraction of things redounding in the
bodies of men. Even so sanctification is a removing of the corrupt humors of
our souls, and an adiection or infusion of spiritual graces, which are
wanting. It was excellently said by one. M. Greeneham.


The wise men (says he) which were expert in nature, could say that in every
generation there is a corruption. And we see that the seed sown is much
changed before it grow up, and bear fruit. Then needful it is that in
regeneration there be a corruption of sin, so that as the seed in the ground,
so sin in our mortal bodies may decay, that the new man may be raised up,
the Spirit of God taking possession of our souls.

Now this transformation of a man is very requisite to salvation. Heb. 12.14.
For without holiness no man shall see God. If we will not live to God by grace
upon the earth, we shall not live in glory with him in the heavens. If we
will not die to sin in this world, Ezekiel. 18.31 Romans 6.23.
we shall not escape death, the wages of sin, in the world to come. If we do
not live to God in holiness in this life, we shall not live in happiness with
God in the life to come. It is not only necessary in him that is to be saved,
that sin be abolished by remission, but that it be likewise mortified by
regeneration. Neither is it only requisite that a man stand righteous by the
imputation of righteousness, but that a man also be righteous by the infusion
of righteousness.

Sanctification is not derived to us from our parents. For parents must be
considered two ways. First as they are Man, the children of Adam. Secondly as
they are holy men, sons of the second Adam: and thus they do not beget their
children, though their holiness be a means to make them to be reputed holy
with men, 1 Cor. 7.14
and accounted the children of the Church. But they produce their children as
they are men, and corrupted in their father Adam, and so convey nature
corrupted in Adam to them, although they be regenerated. Take wheat, M. Perk.
on Jude. 1.
make it as clean as you can, sow it and it will come up, not as it was sown,
but in stalk, blade and ear, and it brings up as much chafe, as ever it did,
though none were sown with it. Even so parents though sanctified by grace, do
bring forth children, that are unholy.

But the fountain and proper Efficient of our sanctification and holiness is
almighty God, Ephe. 2, 10
whose workmanship we are, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, Col. 1.13.
and who (in mercy) has translated us out of the kingdom of darkness into the
kingdom of his beloved son, Ephesians. 2.4.5
in whom he has quickened us through his love, and has lifted him up with his
right hand to give repentance unto Israel. Act. 5.31.
And albeit our Sanctification be the work of the whole Trinity, yet it is
immediately performed by the holy ghost: therefore by a peculiar epithet he is
called Holy, and we are said to be borne of the Spirit, 1 John, 3, 5 1 John, 3,
9 Matt, ^, 1, Bucan Loc. 3. q, 27,
who is also compared unto seed, and unto fire and water. Unto seed, because
of his virtue, as it were of seed, the faithful are renewed, and created
new men, that being dead to sin they might live unto God. Unto fire, first
because he does eat out the dross of sin, and consume our lusts, and so refine
us: secondly because he does enlighte^ our minds, and shine like a lamp, and
show us the way, wherein we ought to walk: and lastly because he does set us
on heat, Greenham.
and inflame us with a zeal of Gods glory, with a care of our duty, and
with a love of all mankind. And unto Water, Bucan, ibid*
because he does refresh us, and extinguish our spiritual thrist, and because
he does water us being destitute of all the juice of life, and make us
fertile, and (finally) because he does wash away the filth of our hearts,
Joel. 2, 28 Is, 44, 3
and is povvred out like water upon Believers. In like manner also he is
compared to the Northern and Southern winds, Cant. 4, 16,
to the Northern, because he does pinch and dry the luxurious humors of our
hearts, and cool the unnatural heat and swelling pride of our souls, and
kill those worms of wickedness, which ly (as it were) at the very root of our
hearts. And to the Southern, because he does comfort us with his warm
blasts, and moisten us with his sweet showers, and dissolve our frost bitten
affections, and make us to sprout up and look fresh like flowers.

The meritorious cause of sanctification is Jesus Christ, who by his death and
obedience has merited for us, that the holy Ghost should be given us to
refine and purge us. And therefore he is said to be made of God unto us
Sanctification. 1 Cor, 1, 30
As by Adam our nature is corrupted: even so by Christ it is restored.

The Ministers of the word are gods lively Organs, Act, 26, 17,
which he uses to draw men out of the territories and regiment of the Diue^
into the kingdom o^ his son* Paul is said to be sent to convert the Gentiles
from darkness unto light: 1 Cor, 4, 15
and to the Corinths he says, In Christ Jesus I have begotten you by the
Gospel.

The instruments, which he uses to this purpose are the word and sacraments.
Gods word is compared to fire and to an hammer. Ier. 23.29.
For through his blessing it does break our marble hearts, and burn up our
sin like stubble, and kindles in us a zeal of his glory, 1 Cor. 1.21
and a true love of righteousness. And by the foolishnes of preaching it is his
pleasure to save them, that believe. And as concerning the sacraments, they
represent and seal unto us our insition into Christ, our new birth, and our
progress and spiritual nutrition unto eternal life.

The matter of Sanctification, are the parts whereof it does consist. The parts
or acts of sanctification are two; the Remotion of evil, or Mortification,
and the Substitution of good, or Vi^ification.

Mortification is a part of Sanctification, whereby the power, M. Perk. o^
Jude. ^.
strength, and tyranny of original sin is weakened, and also by little and
little abolished. The ground whereof is the power of Christ's Godhead, or the
efficacy of his death, which being by faith applied, is as a Corafine to
consume the corruption of our nature. Polan. part. Theol. l. 1.


Vivification is the second part of our Regeneration, when as we are raised up
to a new spiritual life, that we might live unto righteousness. Or it is a work
of the spirit, by which true Christian habits, virtues, and dispositions are
infused and increased in us. And this substitution of good, or Quickening is,
Perk. ib.
Where Christ dwells and reigns in our hearts by his spirit: so as we can say,
we henceforth live not, but Christ in us.

The ground of this, is the virtue of Christ's resurrection, or the power of his
Godhead raising up his Man head, and releasing him of the punishment and
tyranny of our sins: which virtue and power is as a Restoratiue to restore
and quicken us, that we might live unto God in holiness and newness of life.

Mortification then is of the Old^ man, which is the vitiositie and distemper
of our nature derived from Adam the first.

Viuificatio^ is of the New man, which is the nature of man refined and
restored to the image of God: and this is derived from Adam the second, Col.
2.3.
in whom are hid all the tre^sures of wis^^^* knowledge and holiness.

The form of Sanctification is the very translation and alteration of the
heart and life: or a spiritual reduction and conversion of a man by God from
the uncleanness of sin, to true purity and Christian sanctity.

The ends of our Sanctification are the glory of God, the salvation of our
souls, the edification of our Brethren, the beautifying of our honorable
prosession and calling, the silencing of Athiests and profane Mockgods, the
alluring of others unto God and godliness, and that we might be something like
God our father* and Christ our elder brother, and gather assurance to our
souls that we^ are in the state of life.

The effects of Sanctification are first the true love of God, our selves, and
our neighbors. Secondly, a serious desire to do all good duties, and to avoid
all the courses of sin and wickedness. Thirdly it makes him, that is
sanctified, to covet and labor for the renouation and conversion of others.
Finally, it is the root of all those good fruits we bring forth and bear.
For if the fountain be altogether corrupt and foul, the waters must needs be
also naught and fithy. For who can bring a clean thing out of filthiness?
There is not one. But when a man is once truly sanctified, though not fully,
the good works he does, are then truly holy, though not fully.

The Subjects of Sanctification, or or the persons sanctified, are such as are
elected, called and justified: and therefore the Apostle says, Romans 8.30.
that whom God predestined, called and justified, he did also glorify. These
and none but these are truly sanctified. For God sanctifies those only, whom
he makes to be Temples of his spirit: but all men are not such: yea, there are
a number in the world, that sit in perpetual darkness, and worship the very
devil. Indeed a Reprobate may seem holy, but he is not holy, but is like a
fair apple rotten in the heart: or to a wound that has a skin drawn over it,
but yet festers inwardly. And they may live amongst Gods holy one (as Frogs and
fishes in one pond) but they are not of them, but indeed pertain to another
state.

1. Cor. 1 30
And finally, Christ is sanctification to those only, to whom he is wisdom,
righteousness, and redemption: which he is not unto all, but unto his own
people only.

Now why Christ does not communicate holiness unto all, as Adam did
corruption, Danaeus de not. l. 2. c. 16
the reason is, because the manner, by which Adam does communicate his evils
unto all and every one, is natural, to wit, generation, and humane nature: but
the manner by which Christ does communicate his benefits, is supernatural: to
wit, faith, and the grace of God, whereof all men are not pertakers: for it
depends on Gods Election. Therefore whosoever have humane nature, the same
are sinners. But they only are renewed, who are possessed of faith.

Furthermore, those which are sanctified, must be considered in a twofold
estate: first, as they are in themselves till God do work upon them, and that
is, loathsome and ugly, dead in sins and trespasses. Ephe. 2.5.
Even when we were dead in sins, has he quickened us together in Christ.
Secondly, as they are made by grace, and that is a royal priesthood, 1. Pet.
2. 9 1. Cor. 3.16, 17
an holy nation, and the Temples of God, and of his Spirit.

Finally, these things are worthy to be known concerning the regenerate.
First, their Country, Dan. ib. e^ Grynaeo.
which is heaven: Secondly, their Parents, to wit, the holy Ghost and the
Church: Thirdly, their Essential parts, these are an intelligent soul and an
organicall body: Fourthly their food, which is the word of God: Fifthly, their
disposition or condition, and that in the mind is a divine light, and
reformation in heart: Sixthly their war-fare or endeavors, which is the flight
of the pleasures of the flesh, and of fleshly vanities: Seauenthly their
Religion, and that is true godliness, and faith in Christ: Lastly their
consummation, which is eternal life.

The objects, or two terms of Sanctification, are corruption and sin to be
diminished and extirped: and Christian holiness to be planted, inpired and
augmented.

The subject in which this sanctification is wrought, ^. These. 5.23.
is the whole man according to both soul and body, yea, and life also. Yet
here by this way we must observe that sanctification does not alter the very
substance of a man, but only his corupt and sinful qualities. M. Perk. on
^ude. 1.
It rectifieth, but abolisheth not affections. It corrects and moderates mirth,
and sorrow, and such humane passions, but takes them not quit away, It tunes the
iarring strings of a man's heart, but it breaks them not in pieces. Even as the
fall of man did not abolish a man's essence, but corrupt his faculties, even so
the raising up, and the renouation of a man does not after his very substance,
but does only change his corrupted qualities and powers.

Now the Sanctification of the soul consist first in the alteration of the
mind, whreby ignorance is by little and little abolished, and the mind
enlightened to know the true God and his mercy in Christ, and to know a man's
self and to see his secret corruptions againg the ^aw, and to know how to
behave himself unto God and man: a^ also to approve the things of God, and to
mind and meditate on things spiritual and celestial. Perk. ib.


Secondly it consists in the renouation of the will. Which is when God gives
grace truly to will good: as to believe, fear, and obey God. But yet this will
is weak and not without resistance and contention made by the flesh, Perk. ib.


Thirdly, it consistes in the sanctification of the memory, which is an
openesse by grace to keep good things, specially the doctrine of salvation.

Fourthly, it stands in the regeneration of the conscience, as when it is
fitted to give true testimony to a man's heart of the remission of his sins,
and of his care to serve God.

Fifthly, it consists in a spiritual transformation of the affections, as love,
joy, sadness, anger, fear and such like, whereby a man that is justified, does
so temper them by his reason refined, and by the light of the Law, with the
help of Gods Spirit, that they do not break out (as in the wicked, that
give the reigns to their lusts) but may be held in some good order; howbeit
in this life, this is done with much strife and reluctation, and is rather
affected then effected.

Sixthly, it consists in the sanctification of the appetite or desires, Keck.
Syst. Tho. 3.6.9
by which a man justified obtains conformity with good reason and Gods law
in the desiring of meat, and in other things which appertain to the appetite:
Perk. ib.
Or the sanctification of the appetite stands in the holy ordering of our
desires in meat, drink, apparel, riches, and. And in the practice of three
main virtues: sobriety, chastity and contentation: by which the appetite must
be governed. Polan. part. theol. l. 2.


Sobriety, is a continence from superfluous meat and drink* and from a
wilful macerating and afflicting of the body. Polan. ib.


Chastity is a continency from wandering lusts, and from all impuritie, both
in wedlock, and out of it.

Contentation is when a man is contented with his present estate* whether rich
or poor, noble or inglorious. Col. 4.11.12.
Paul says, I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content.
I can be abashed, and I can abound: every where in all things I am instructed,
both to be full, and to be hungry, and to abound, and to have want.

Lastly, the sactification of the soul consists in a Christian resolution, and
constant endeavor with all our forces to please God, and to testify our love
unto him in the serving of our neighbor* and seeking our own salvation: and
withal flatly denying of our selves: Perk. ib.
Which is, first, when we hold God to be wiser then we are, that so we should
be both directed, and disposed of by him. Secondly, when we account him more
careful for us, then we our selves can be, and so rest well satisfied with
what condition of life soever he sets us in.

The Sanctification of the body is that, whereby the members thereof are made
fit instruments for the soul regenerated to work the works of God with; it
being become obedient to the mind illumined and the heart reformed, through
the work of the Spirit, who now has made it the Temple of his holiness,
whereas before it was a slave to the flesh, 1. Cor. 6.19
and a shop of iniquity and uncleanness.

The Sanctification of the life is a visible reformation of it, when as it is
dedicated to God and good duties, those sins being abandoned, which reigned
in it in former times. And so much for the Subjects of Sanctification^ where
remember that this work of the Spirit is wrought in the whole man: and that it
belongs only to the faithful and Elect of God. Civil moralities, outward
formalities, and such graces, as do only bridle and repress sin, may
befall the reprobate: but Christian virtues, and such graces, as do supplant
and suppress sin in our souls, such works of the Spirit* as do revive and
restore Gods image, are appropriated to believers.

The time wherein Sanctification is wrought, is in this life; in some sooner,
in others later, but in none after this life, if we respect the beginning of
it, and not the finishing. For it is begun ever before death, and never
after. He that would be saved in the life to come, must be sanctified in this
life. None live like victorious Princes in the Church triumphant, but such as
have been courageous soldiers in the Church militant.

The properties of Sanctification are many.

First, it is a most gracious and free work of the Lord, without all
obligation or merit of ours. For the Spirit of God blows with his blasts of
grace both when, Ephe. 2.4.8
how and where he lists. And the Apostle teaches us that our quickening and
salvation, is through the great love and grace of God. Lib. 2. de praedest.
san. cap. 15.
It is not given us (says Augustine) for any merit (to wit of ours) that we
are borne again of water and of the Spirit: but it is freely given: and if
faith have brought us to the lauer of regeneration, we must not therefore think
that we gave something before, that saving regeneration might be given as in the
way of recompense.

Secondly, this new birth is so needful, as that without it we cannot be
saved. The kingdom of grace is the suburbs of the kingdom of glory: he
therefore, that walks not through the suburbs, shall never enter into the
City: a man must be in the kingdom of grace, or else he shall never be
admitted into the kingdom of glory: no grace, no glory: no holiness, no
happiness, no heaven, no heavenly honor. Ioh. 3.3.
Except a man be borne again, Lib. 1. ad Simplic. q. 2.
he cannot see the kingdom of God, neither in this world nor in the world to
come. There are (says Augustine) certain beginnings of faith, like unto
conceptions: but yet, that a man may come to eternal life, it is not only
needful that he be conceived, but that he be also borne.

Thirdly, Sanctification is an irresistable act of the Spirit. For when the
holy Ghost does seriously intend to sanctify a man, he does so work upon
him, that he shall willingly yield, how unwillingly so ever his will be by
nature. Aug. 16.
On whom God shows mercy (says that learned Father) he does so call him,
as he knovveth convenient for him, that he may not reject him, which calls
to him. The same may be said concerning sanctification.

Fourthly, our Regeneration is but once begun, howsoever our holiness
sometimes increases, and sometimes decreaseth.

The Scripture speaks but of one new birth. Tract. in Ioh. 11. c. 12.
As there is (says Austen) one fleshly generation, neither can there be made
a return into the womb: so is there one spiritual regeneration. Semel enim
nascimur, semel quoque renascimur, We are once borne, and we are once born
anew. We are but once brought forth by our natural mother, once begotten by
our natural father: so we are but once begotten of our heavenly father, and
but once brought forth and borne of our spiritual mother, which is the Church.

Fifthly, Sanctification is an infallible argument of eternal salvation. Grace
is the testification of glory: and glory is the promised compensation of
grace. 1. Tim 4.8.


Godliness has the promise of this life, and of that which is to come.
Greenha^.
When we have received mortification and sanctification is hansels of Gods
mercies, the^ may we hope for heaven: for they that have received grace,
shall also receive glory. And as we have behaved our selves in the kingdom of
grace in this world, so it shall be done unto us in the kingdom of glory in the
world to come. Holiness is a sign of honor: and the more we have of
holiness, the more we shall have of honor.

Sixthly, sanctification is a very excellent and commodious work of God. First
because it is wrought by his own finger, and by his own hand engraven upon the
tables of our hearts. Perk. on Gal. 5.3.
Secondly that it is a Reformation and change according to the whole law of
God, and contains in it the seeds of all good duties. Thirdly, because without
it our life is most vile and despicable, wholly corrupt and sinful. For (as
Augustine says) how can he live justly, Lib, 1. ad Simp. q 2.
that is not justified? How can he live holily, who is not sanctified? Or
how can he live at all, who is not raised up to life?

Seauently, Sanctification is in this life imperfect. Sin is not all at once
consumed: but the scum thereof is almost continually boiling and walloping in
us, foming out much filthy froth and stinking savors. If we say (says John)
that we have no sin, 1. Ioh. 1.8.
we deceive our selves, and truth is not in us. Li. 3. in ^. Reg. 6.
There is none so holy (says Gregory) which has not in him some corruption
which he may lament. Li. 6: cont. gent. c. 13.
No man (says Lactantius) can be without sin so long as he is burdened
with the garment of his flesh. Death must end the conflict betwixt the flesh
and the spirit. So long as we live sin will not die. I^ie will live, till the
Oak be hewn down. Before there be an universal clensing, Greenh.
there must be a dissolution of nature. The body must first rot before grace
shall reign without disturbance. It is true indeed, that the corruption of our
nature is abolished in Baptism in respect of guilt and condemnation, but not
in regard of existence. Concupiscence (says Ambrose) is taken away in
Baptism (Non vt non sit, sed ne obsit) Not as touching the being of it, but in
that it shall be no impediment of salvation to them, that are baptized with
water and the holy Ghost. For it is to such no Prince, but a Rebel only: it
neither shall damn them, nor dominere within them. M. Greenh.
But as a Serpent cut in diverse pieces has but certain relics of poison,
and remnants of fiercenes in the maimed members and mangled parts thereof, and
is not able to exercise the like violence to a man, as when it was whole and
perfitlie membred: so howsoever some relics of sins remain in our old, but
in our martired Adam, yet it has no such force or fierceness to prevail
against us, at when it was in perfect age, being then like to a mighty
Monarch, rather then to a poor prisoner.

And although those that are regenerated may be termed just and perfect, yet it
is only in comparison of the wicked, who are in bondage under sin, and
respect of Imputative righteousness: and for that they are perfect because
(like Infants) they have all the parts of a Christian* and not the perfection
of those parts. All the seeds of saving graces are sown in their hearts, but
they have not the ^ull groath of them in this life. No man is so vvashed,
Remeg. in ps. 24. In 6 c. To.
but he may have dusty feet, traveling after his washing. And as Ans^lme
speaks, The body of sin is destroyed, not that in bred con^upiscence should
be on the sudden consumed and quite extirped i^ the very flesh, that lives:
but that it may be no let to him, that is dead, in whom it was, when he was
alive. It is destroyed not from having a being vvhiles we are alive, but that
we should not be compeld to serve it. Sin shall be, but it shall not be to
reign, but rather that the regenerate man may vex and afflict it like a most
odious enemy, and cut off (as it were) the hands and the feet thereof, Judge.
1.6.
(as Adonibezeks were by the Israelites) till at length it be clean defaced.
The truth of that which has been spoken, will evidently be seen by this
comparison. Take a vessel full of water: M. Perk on Jude 1.
let a portion be taken out, and an equal portion of hot water be put in, it
becomes luke-vvarme all of it, partly hot, and partly cold: even so every man
is a vessel of water filled with corruption to the bri^^: if a part of his
corruption be taken away, and a proportional part of holiness put instead of
it, the whole man becomes partly holy, partly unholy. And albeit holiness
and sin be contrary, yet may they be both in one subject as light and darkness
in the air at the twilight, being there remis^y and neither of them
predominant or absolute victour, but remaining in continual combat. Now the
reasons, why the Lord does not finish man's sanctification in this life, may be
these. First, that we might seek after perfection more earnestly, and covet it
more ardently. Secondly that despising this world, we might the more affect our
heavenly life, as knowing that our perfect sanctification shall not be wrought
till we come into heaven. Vrsine.


Thirdly that we might be humbled and exercised in faith, patience, prayers,
and skirmi^hing with the flesh, and might not wax proud with a conceit of
perfection, but daily pray, Enter not into judgment with thy servant, Psalm.
143.^
O Lord, Forgive us our trespasses. Calvin says, Mat. 6.12.
that our reparation is not finished all at once, but that God does abolish the
corruption of the flesh by degrees i^ his elect, That they may exercise
themselves in repentance all their life, and know that of this warfare there
is no end, but i^ death.

Fourthly the Lord thus does tha^ we might exercise and take notice o^ our
spiritual wisdom and Christian fortitude and magnanimity, in defeating the
wiles of sin and the plots of the Devil, Revel. 1.6.
and in contending (like courageous Kings) against all our spiritual
adversaries, and finally in disdaining to give place to the flesh, that
abominable and filthy wretch.

Fifthly, the Lord does hereby demonstrate his liberty and absolute authority
over us, that he is not bound unto us by any bond of duty to perfect his
graces in us in this life. For then it should be injustice in him not to do it.
Psalm. 145.17.
But God is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works, and can
not offer the least injustice.

Sixthly God thus does to manifest his mercy to us, and to teach us
thankfulness to him, who pardons our weak obedience, and accepts of our
poor holiness and imperfect perfection.

There are with God two courts of Justice. M. Greenh. Ius censoriu^* ^us
pratori^.
The first is the Kings bench, where there is strict justice: the other is the
Chancerie, where there is a mitigation of that strict course of Justice. In the
first Court there is none found just: in the second court of acceptance some
are accepted for just men. In this Court God accepts our imperfect holiness,
our poor endeavors, our weak resolutions, our imperfect desires, motions and
meditations, if they be faithful, and entire, and directed to the right ends;
and for his Christ does pardon all their defects. Which argues mercy on his
part, and claims gratitude on ours.

Lastly the Lord thus does to demonstrate his providence and power in
protecting and conseruing us against so many puislant and pernicious enemies,
as we are begirt with; notwithstanding our great unworthiness, weaknesses and
imperfections. And so much for the seventh property of Sanctification.

Eighthly, this work of the Spirit is never clean extinguished. The gifts of
God are without repentance. Romans 11.29
The graces of God are not in his children as morning mists, Greenh.
but as well builded towers to continue all assaults. Phil. 1.6.
As he has begu^ the work of sanctification, so he will make an end of it.
For what should hinder? His good will is constant, and his might is over all.
Sin, Satan and all the enemies of our souls whatsoever are with him as chafe
before a whirlewinde* or as flax before a flame of fire. His eye is waking and
allseing, his wisdom is infinite, his essence every where, and his mercy
endures for ever. What then can, what shall hinder his work? He has joined
us to Christ, Hos. 2.19.
who shall disioyne us? He has wedded us unto himse^fe, what can divorce us?
He is with us, who can be against us? Christ is our King, and we are his
subjects, we need not therefore doubt of his favor and protection. He is our
Architect, he has built us upon a rock, Mat. 16.18
and has said that hell gates shall not prevail against us. 1. Cor. 6.1 9.
We are the Temples of Gods spirit, who is no idle, nor regard less
Inhabitant. Our holiness (I confess) may suffer an eclipse and be diminished,
but it shall never be fully wasted and abolished. ^. Cor^. 8. De cor. and gra^.
cap. ^2.
For God will confirm us by his grace. He (says Augustine) who makes men
good, does make men to persevere in good. And therefore out state by Christ is
surer then our condition was in Adam. For though he was made perfectly good,
yet he had not the grace of perseverance in that good. But to us it is given to
persevere. M. Pe^r^o^ Gal. 3.
Believers are of the bone and flesh of Christ: now there is no part of the
bone and flesh of Christ that dies. They that are sanctified, are reserved
unto Christ, Jude 1.
and therefore they shall not fall away from Christ. They believe in Christ:
but faith (as Chrysostom says) is petra fixa and infracta) a rock fixed and
inviolable. Hom. 1. in 2. Tim. 1.
It will shine (like a star) in the night of adversity, and savors most
(like Camomell) when it is trodden upon. Hope is the anchor of the soul* it
will endure both winds and waves. Heb 6.19.
And love is strong as death. Charity (says Austen) which may be left, Cant.
8.6. Decr. de pae. ^it. d. 2. c. 2. 1. Ich. 3 9.
was never true. Whosoever is borne of GOD sins not, neither can he sin,
because he is borne of God. If a sanctified man cannot sin with a full swinge
of the will, and if he cannot live long in sin without repentance, then
assured he cannot fall from grace and perish. Luke 12.32.
It is our Fathers good pleasure to give us the kingdom of heaven, and
therefore we shall not miss it. It remains the^ as an undoubted truth that
the work of sanctification shall never be demolished, ^o^. page 1655.
and that a sanctified man shall never perish. Master Bradford says well, Our
blindness and corrupt affections do often shadovv the sight of Gods seed in
Gods children, as though they were plain Reprobates: Whereof it comes that
they praying according to their sense, but not according to the truth, desire
of God to give them again his Spirit, as though they had lost it, and he had
taken it away: which thing God never does indeed, although he make us to
think so for a time. And so much for this eight property.

Ninthly, sanctification may be discerned. 1. Cor. 3.16.
The child of God may be sure of his new birth. The Apostle says, know ye not
that ye are the Temple of God, 1. Cor. 6.19.
and that the Spirit of God dwells in you? know ye not that your body is the
Temple of the Holy Ghost that is in you? know ye not your own selves, 2. Cor.
13.
how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates? It is possible then
that these may be known. Fox. page 1640.
Know for a certain (says Master Bradford) that as the Devil goes about
nothing so much as to bring you in doubt whether you be Gods child: so
whatsoever shall move you to admit that dubitation, be assured the same to
come of the Devil.

This assurance of our Sanctifi^ation may be obtained* not only by the inward
suggestion of the holy Ghost assuring our spirits of the same, but also by
certain undoubted testimonies and tokens of it: some whereof: will here annex.
^ Ioh. 3.8 7.


First, He that commits sin is of the Devil: but whosoever is borne of God
sins not. Wherefore if we do not commit sin with full consent of will: if
when we do sin, we do not continue in it, but recover our selves by true
repentance, as Peter did, Mark. 14.^^
then may we know that we are not the Devils slave but Gods child.

Secondly, 1. Ioh. 5.1.
whosoever believes that Jesus is that Christ, is borne of God. It is then a
certain token of a man's regeneration to believe distinctly that Jesus the
son of Marie is that anointe^ king, priest and prophet, which God has raised
up for the salvation of hi^ soul, and of the rest of Gods Elect.

1. Ioh. 5.1.
Thirdly, Every one which ^ouet^ him which did beget, loves him also which
is b^gotten of him. 1. Ioh. 4.7.
Whosoever therefore does truly love the child of God for his fathers sake
does love God himself: And every one that loves, is borne of God, and
knows God.

Fourthly, All that is borne of God, overcomes this world, 1. Ioh. ^4.
that is, says M. Beza, whatsoever strives against the commandments of God.
Wherefore if a man vanquish the vanities, the vain allu^ements, and allur^ing
enchan^ments and wicked obstacles of the world, and keep a constant course in
pity, he is undoubtedly the true child of God, and a very Saint.

Fifthly, He that is begotten of GOD, 1. Ioh. 5.18.
keeps himself, and that wicked one touches him not.

When a man then does keep continual watch and ward over his heart, and is
circumspect in his walking, Ephesians. 6.12.
and begi^ds himself with the armor of God, and is fearful to offend him,
he does give an undoubted testimony of saving grace within him.

Sixthly, when a man will rather forsake the world, then God, he does plainly
show that he is not of the world, but belongs to God, and to his kingdom.

Seventhly, to grieve for sin because it offends God, and hurts his own soul,
is a notable sign of a mortified heart.

Eighthly, a sanctified man does manifest the grace of his heart by sanctifying
the name of God, and by conuersing with sanctified men, as also by seeking the
sanctification of others. For ( bonum est sui diffusiuum) a good man does love
to communicate his goodness, and not to keep it locked up in his own breast.

Ninthly, it is an infallible sign of holiness, when a man does more and more
^ontend against his own unholiness, and labors continually to draw nearer
and nearer unto God by holiness.

Lastly, to feel our inward corruptions, a desire to be^ ^b^^ (...) them, an
avoiding of the occasions o^ sin, and an anger against ourselves for our
sinning do evidently show that the Spirit of God has taken possession of our
hearts, and has begun to work a most happy change w^thin us. Where these
graces are, there i^ also the God of grace, the Spirit of grace, a man of
grace, a true dying unto sin, and a living unto God, sin is dismounted, the
sinner is renewed: for Gods image is restored.

CHAP. 7.
Three things wherein Justification and Sanctification agree. Seven points in
which they dissagree.

BY this which has been said we may easily see wherein Justification and
sanctification concord and differ.

They agree, first, ^ucan. Loc. 31. q. 31.
in their efficient cause: for God is the author of them both through the merit
of Christ.

Secondly they have one instrume^tall cause, which is faith^ of the former, by
receiving it: and of the latter by effecting it.

Thirdly they agree in their scope and end. For they both (...) tend to one
end: (...) justification, as the cause: and sanctification, as the way.

Now as they do accord in some things, so they discord again in other: and
their difference may appear in these things ensuing.

First, M. Perk. on. Jude. 1.
in that justification is out of a man; sanctification is within him.

Secondly, justification absolueth a sinner, and makes him stand righteous at
the bar of Gods judgment; sanctification cannot do this.

Thirdly justification brings peace of conscience; so does not sanctification,
but follows that peace. Hac ille.

Fourthly, justification consists in the imputation of righteousness;
sanctification in the infusion of righteousness.

Fifthly justification is acted at once, sanctification is done by degrees:
holiness is not made up at once like a pellet in a mould, but successively,
and at leisure. We are neither perfect men, nor perfect new men in our full
dimensions, so soon as we are borne. Our perfection in this life consists
rather in the pardon of sin, then in the perfection of sanctity. But
justification in this life is perfect.

Sixthly they differ in respect of the manner in which they are wrought. For
justification is wrought by the right of donation: Trele* Instit. lib. 2.
but sanctification is by the way of alteration.

Lastly they differ in regard of durance. For Justification shall have an end
with this life; but sanctification shall continue for ever.

And thus much for Sanctification, Trele. ibid.
the first part of our Glorification.

CHAP. VIII.
What Eternal life is. The causes of it. Three effects of it. Who shall live
this life, where and when. Seven properties of it. Two signs thereof are
expressed, and the tractate is concluded.

THE second part o^ degree of Glorification actiuely taken, is the collation of
eternal happiness in the world to come.

This happiness is that glorious estate of Gods saints, which is prepared for
them in the heavens: and it is called Eternal life.

Eternal life (as Vrsinus does describe it) is the eternal being of a
Regenerate and glorified man: which being is to have the image of God
restored, according to which, man was at the first created, that is, to be
endued with perfect righteousness, wisdom, and felicity, or with the true
knowledge and love of God ^^^ed with eternal joy. Or m^re ^^^fly* It is a
perfect conformity of man with God, consisting in ^^e true and perfect
knowledge and love of God, and in the glory of both soul and body.

The primarie efficient cause of this glorious condition is God of hi^ ^^^re
favor, Luke 12.32.
without any merit of ours* For as Christ teaches it is our Fathers good
pleasure to give us the kingdom. Ephesians. 2.8*
We are saved (says P^^^^,) by grace* not according to the works of
righteousness which we had done, Tit. 3.5
but according to his mercy he saved us.

The meritori^us* Efficient of our life and happiness is Christ alone, without
any personal desert of ours. Ioh. 14.1^.
Therefore he is called the Life. And the Apostle does express it notably,
Romans 6.23
when he says that the Wages of sin is death, but everlasting life is the
gracious gift (Charisma) of God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Bernard says:
Sermon 10. de An^^nt.
No man can deserve eternal life by his merits. Eternal life (says Haymo) is
paid to none of debt, Super euang ^e^tuag.
but is given of free mercy. Romans 6.
When a^ (says Anselme) the Apostle might have said, everlasting life is the
wages, he chose to say, but everlasting life is the gift of God, that we
might hereby perceive that God does bring us to eternal life, not for our
merits, but for his own mercy. We must therefore ascribe all to the mercy
of God, and to the merit of our Savior. In Ezech (...). 7.
Let us not (says Gregory) trust in our vveepings, nor in our works, but in
the allegation (or intercession and pleading) of our Advocate. ^n Psalm 1. Peni^.
And again, Not relying upon my merits, I do beseech thee to save me, but
presuming upon thy sole mercy I hope to obtain that, which I do not by my
merits. And albeit eternal life be called a Revvard, yet it is not of merit,
but of mercy, not causallie as procured by them, but consequently, following
the^ as a recompense of our labors. ^^st. l. 3. c. 18 s. 2.
Let this (says Calvin) be grounded in our heart, that the kingdom of heaven
is not a stipend of servants, but an inheritance of sons: which they only
shall obtain which are adopted of God to be sons, Romans 1.16.^7.
and for no other cause then for this adoption, which depends only of the
mercy of God in Christ.

The instrumental cause offe^ing and proclaiming salvation is the Gospel.

The instrument receiving and applying it is faith. ^ph. ^.8.


The cause sealing it inwardly to our souls is the spirit of God.

The external and isntrumental seals thereof are the two sacraments.

Thus we see the Efficients of our eternal life, and are taught to say with
Ber. that good works are the way to the kingdom, but not the cause of
reigning.

The matter whereof this life consists, are those admirable good things,
which God has prepared, and which Christ has purchased for the Elect, Which
for any wit of man to conceive, for any tongue to relate, or for any pen to set
down is altogether impossible. Greg. in Euang.
What tongue can tell (says Gregory) and what understanding can comprehend
how great the ioies may be of that celestial city? It is not in man to
understand (says S. Basil): In Psalm. 45.
For there shall be things, which eye has not scene, nor care heard of,
neither has it entered into the heart of man, what things God ha^h prepared for
them that love him.) Nevertheless we will set down some of them, as we find
them revealed and delivered to us.

In that life the^e shall be no earthly or sinful misery.

Reu. 27.^ Reu. 22 3
There shall be no sin at all, no sickness, no sorrows, no disease nor
malady, on cross, no curse, no vexation, nor calamity, no defect nor
deformity, no tumults, nor troubles, no pain* nor penury. All tears shall
be done away, Reu. 21.4.
al evils removed, al sin abolished, all wants supplied.

And again in this life there shall be a perfect plenarie and perpetual
possession of all good things, even of GOD himself, Reu 21 3
who is goodness it self, and who will be all in all unto all his Elect
There shall be perfection of knowledge, 1 Cor. 13.12.
no de^ect in love, 1 Ioh. 3.2 1 Cor. 13.10. Phil. 3.21. 1 Cor. 15.12. Reu. 22 4
happy in mortality, certain security* constant amity and secure
tranquillity. The soul shall have perfection of virtues, the body shall be full
of beutie* strength and agilitie: the whole man shall enjoy fellowship with
God, fellowship with the lamb fellowship with the Angels, a happy society, a
sweet communion. 1 These. 4.17.
All holiness all happiness, all joys shall be inioyed. To conclude: Dan.
12.3. Psa. 16.1*^.
we shall reign like kings with the king of kings for ever with fullness of
grace in our hearts and a dia^em of glory on our heads, Reu 22.5
celebrating an everlasting Sabbath, Is. 66.23
and singing an Allelu^^h to the Lord for ever.

The form^ of this life is that unspeakable splendour, and that most excellent
order, and well ordered excellency of that happy condition.

The end^ of this life are, first: that God might manifest and ( ipso f^ct^)
fully ratify his exceeding love unto us. Secondly, that we might enjoy the
full fruit of Christ's death and passion Thirdly, that we may receive the ^eward
of our labors, and know that it is not i^vaine to serve God. And lastly, that
we might acknowledge the wonderful mercy of God unto us, and celebrate his
name for ever.

The effects of this life are these, first by reason of it we are made like
unto the Angels. Mat. 22.30
Secondly, we are by it become to be actually partakers of the dignity of
Christ. Thirdly, it can not but produce wonderful gratitude in those which do
enjoy it.

The Subjects or the persons that shall live this life, Revel. 21.7. Math.
25.45 Is. 66.24.
are the Elect and obedient children of God. For the reprobate shall be
tormented in endless, easlesse, and remediles tortures.

The place in which this life shall be led is the Paradise of God, the highest
heavens. 2. Cor. 5.1.


The time is after this life, for the soul immediately* Revel. 14.13.
and for both soul and body after the day of judgment.

The properties of this life are many.

M. Perk. on Gal. 1.15.
First, the salvation of them that believe is more sure, thou the whole frame of
heaven and earth: because it is founded in the vocation of God, Romans 17.2^*
which is without repentance, in the counsel of separation and in the pleasure
of God.

Secondly, it is a most holy life. For in it we shall be complete and without
spot and wrinkle.

Thirdly, it is a most delectable and sweet life. For (as Bernard truly
speaks) Whatsoever is amiable, it shall be there, and nothing shall be away,
which shall be desired.

Fourthly, it is an all-sufficient life. For it shall stand in need neither of
meat, drink, clothing, sun, moon, nor any other help of this life. Reave.
21 2^ Reu. 22.5.
We shall be satisfied with God, and he shall content us fully.

Fifthly, this life i^ inconceivable: it cannot be thoroughly discovered or
described by any. Who (says Bernard) can comprehend in this life, how great
the glory of the Saints of God shall be in the life everlasting?

Sixthly, this life is an everliving life: Math. 25.4^
it shall continue world without end. As the terrors, and the most terrible and
horrid torments of the wicked shall continue always: 2. These. 1.9.
so shall this solatious and sweet life of the godly. Romans 2.7.
Their death shall never see life: Dan. 12.2.
and the life of these shall never see a death. The death of those and the life
of these are euer^liuing, and neuer-dying.

Lastly this life may be discerned in this life of him, ^. Cor. 5.1.
that shall live in it in the life to come We know (says Paul) that if our
earthly house of this tabernacle be destroyed, we have a building given of
God, in house not made with hands but eternal in the heavens. These things
(says John) I have written unto you that ye may know, Ioh. 5.13
that ye have eternal life. ^ob. 19.25 26* 27.
I am sure (says Job) that my redeemer li^^th, and he shall stand the last on
the earth: and though after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet shall I
see God is my flesh: whom I my self shall see, and (...) shall behold. When I
awake (says David) I shall be satisfied with th^^e image, Psa. 17.15.
that is when I rise from the dead, ^oc. ^9. ^uaest. ^3.
as ^^ca^^ does interpret it. By th^s it appea^eth that a man may know his
future happiness.

The S^^^^ of et^rnall life are two

Job. 3.16. Mar. 16.16
The first is true faith in Christ. For whosoever believes, shall not perish,
but shall be saved.

The second are good works performed with an upright heart, in conscience of
Gods commandment, and to an honest end. Psalm. 15.1.
The Psalmist asking who shall rest on Gods holy mountain, receives answer
as by oracle from heaven, that he shall there rest, that walks vprightl^, and
works righteousness, and speaks the truth from his heart. Thus says the
Lord, ask for the old way, Ier. 6.16.
which is the good way, and ye shall find rest ^^r your souls. Pro. 12.26.
Life (says Solomon) is in ^he way of righteous^^^, and in that pathway there
is n^ death. Math. 25.
And our Savior shows that those are the Blessed of his Father, and shall
inherit eternal happiness^, who manifest their love to his af^^^cted members
by their works of me^cie, and he that receives a Prophet in the name of a
Prophet, Mat. 10.4^
shall receive a Prophets reward: and he that receives a righteous man in the
name of a righteous man shall receive the reward of a righteous man.

Thus now we see in part what our eternal glory shall be in the world to
come, wherewith we shall be all replenished, though not all alike: even as we
see vessels different in bigness may be all of them filled full to the top,
though one of them hold more then another. As we have excelled one another
upon the earth in grace, so we shall excel one another in heaven in respect of
glory. If we have gone before others in discharging of our duty in this
world, we shall also surpass them in dignity in the world to come.

They that be wise shall shine indee^ As the brightness of the Firmament: Dan.
12.3.
but they that turn many to righteousness, shall shine as the stars for ever
and ever.

Now the GOD of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, the
great Shepherd of the sheep through the blood of the everlasting covenant,
make us meet to do his will in all good works, that having served him in
this life in the kingdom of grace, we may also reign with him in the life to
come in the kingdom of glory, Amen.

Trin. vni Deo Gloria.

