CONCERNING THE HOLY EVCHARIST, and the Popish BREADEN-GOD, TO THE MEN OF ROME,
as well LAIQVES as CLERIQVES, By THOMAS TUKE.

ANNO M.DC.XXV.

TO THE COURTEOUS READER.
Whilst Sun does shine, Ama^t eam (id est veritatem) lucente^: oderunt eam
redarguentem. Quia enim falli nolunt, and fallere volunt, amant eam, cum
seipsam indicat: and oderunt eam, cum seipsos indicat. August Conf^ss. lib. 10.
cap 23.
and does not burn,
Men willingly to it do turn:
But, if it once wax hot, they fly,
And hide themselves from't by and by.
So truth, that is pleasing, giving light,
Is grievous, if it once do bite,
And oftentimes procures a foe,
Whereas base flattring does not so.
For man would have full scope in's ways,
And gladly have of all men praise.
He would not be supposed to stray,
Although he be quite out of's way.
Truth's like honey, put to a sore,
Which makes the place to smart the more.
Of carnal minds such is the case,
So feign they would hold on their race.
To be discovered, fanned, and tried,
Grieves them as much, as to be tied.
Yet welcome medicine, that does heal,
And welcome they, that truly deal.
Sore eyes indeed the light do shun,
And Batts, and Owls love not the sun*
The Thief delights in the night,
But honesty does love the light.
The honest heart, the single ^ye
Is very loath to tread awry:
And therefore deemes the light full dear,
And him, that speaks the truth, will hear,
It studies to be truly wise,
And would not be abused with lies.
It therefore gives it self to pray,
To read, hear, search, both night and day.
And, when the truth it has found out,
To loue't, and own't, it does not doubt.
Glory, and greatness, and fear, and shame,
Gain, that is so loved, and worldly fame,
Carnal pleasure, and contentment,
Friendship of men, Amicus Socrates, amicus Plato, magis amica veritas, dixit,
Aristoteles.
to errors bent,
The honest heart, the single eye,
To truth does these things vilify.
Yea life, that is so dear to man,
To keep the truth, Nil adde^dum legi, nihil auferendum Scripturae, Cyril.
Alex. in Johan lib. 11 cap. 23.
forgo it can.
And that is truth, to be believed,
Which from the Scriptures is derived.
For that in faith makes but a breach,
Which holy Scriptures do not teach.
All Teachers should their teachings square
By them: Per scripturam Deus loquitur omne quod vult, Gregor^Moral. li. 16
cap. 16.
for they Gods will declare.
THEY fully show the Church, and truth lay out:
To follow other Guides is to stray out.
They, they are Faiths perfect Rule, and Measure,
The Touchstone of truth, Chrisost. scriptura^ vocat exactissimam trutiuam,
and guomo^em, ac regulam, in 2 Cor. homil. 13. in fine.
and Matchless Treasure*
Thine in the truth, truly, THO. TUKE.

TO THE MEN OF ROME, as well LAIQVES, AS CLERIQVES.
PRiests make their Maker Christ, ye must not doubt.
They eat, drink, box him up, and bear about.
Substance of things they turn: nor is this all;
For both the Signs must hold in several.
He Is whole Under the shows, as they ta^ke of bread and wine.
in the bread, whole in the cup.
They eat him whole: whole they suppe;
Whole in the Cake, and whole ith cup.
This with you all does go for verity*
To hold contrary is mere heresy.
This is, pure, pure Catholic, pure divine.
And thus feast ye; he with his Christ, thou with thine;
Without bread and wine indeed:
For this is your Roman Creed;
Whom ye make, on him ye feed.
The bread and wine themselves away are gone.
Shows of them tarry still, but Substance none.
They make their God, and then they eat him up.
They swallow down his flesh, and blood up sup.
They Will taste no flesh on frydayes (that is not good)
But of their new-made God, and of his blood.
And as the Whale did Jonas, so they eat
Him up alive, body and soul, as meat.
As men eat Oysters, so on him they feed;
Whole, and alive, and raw, and yet not bleed.
This cookerie, voyed of humanity,
Is held in Rome for sound divinity.
And is not this strange to hear,
That God, whom, ye say, ye fear,
Ye should eat, as belly cheer?
The Graver, Painter, Baker, even these three,
Your Priests have reason for to magnify.
Perhaps the Baker thinks, he merits more*
Yet both advance their honor, and their store.
For they with their gentle feat
Help them to money and meat,
Making Gods, to beg and eat.
And now me thinks I hear old Laban say, Genesis 32.

See, they have stolen and borne my Gods away.
Me thinks, Judge. 18. 2. 24.
I hear and see that mountineer,
Michah of Ephraim; who did idols fear,
Chiding with the Danits, for that they had
Took's Priest, and Gods away, which made him mad*
Me thinks I see the Philistines bereft 2 Samuel 5. 21

Of their vain Gods, 1 Chronicles. 14. 12.
which they to David left:
And how that noble Worthy made them be
Destroyed of his souldjers presently.
Both men and beasts (a thing to be deplored)
May bear away the things, of you adored.
The things ye worship with your heart and mind,
Men like your selves, can burn, can melt, can grind.
Baruchs base things (a shame it is to think) Bar. 6. 12. 22.

Can mar the things, ye worship, and make stinck.
And is not this great folly,
More then childish vanity,
To dote on things so silly?
The foolish Heathens were not all so mad:
For they devoured not the Gods, they had.
The Vid Basil. schol in Psalm. 11^. Lactan. lib 2 cap 2. Aug. in Psalm. 113.
^o^. C. 2.
wiser knew their Vanities were wood,
Or such like stuff: not Gods, nor flesh and blood.
But ye, as if bewitched, do count, and call
That poor thing God, Maker, and Lord of all,
Which is plain bread in substance, very bread,
Made of wheat flour, ground, with man's hand, and knead.
This, which is bread, which all men so will say,
Which have not lost all sense, or thrown't away,
This ye do say, ye do believe it is,
Not bread in truth, but the true God of bliss;
Even Jesus Christ, God-Man, flesh, blood, and bones,
Wherein you are stupider then they, then stones.
O God! What is a man, even at his best,
If not of thee with heavenly wisdom blessed?
Grievous errors does he swallow,
And in sin perversely wallow,
Not regarding what may follow.
Poor Laique! There is one thing more for thee;
The Cup of Blessing thou art forced to flee. Council. Constant. sess. 1^

Eat thou may by law: but thou may not suppe;
The Priest is he, that is worthy of the cup.
Take Christ thou may under the breaden sign:
But not touch him under the show of wine.
A Prince perhaps by favor with his lip
Is suffered after's Priest to take a sippe.
And is this a Priestly feat,
Thus the people for to cheat,
Who should drink as well, as eat?
But Laymen are not Priests: (who says they are?)
And therefore ought not in that Cup to share,
Why? Are not Princes lay men? yet They may,
And do drink of the cup, as men do say.
T^'eleuen, or twelve, (for choose ye whether)
When they first received altogether,
Their Master being by, then were they all
As Sheep: the text Disciples does them call.
And furthermore, If laymen may not drink,
Because they are such, Why may they not then think
It lawful for them to refuse to eat,
For the self same reason, of that sacred meat?
Or, who can justly say, and not deluded,
That Laiques from the Cup are quite excluded,
When Christ says, Drink ye All of this, as tho
He spoke to Priests alone, and to no more;
And yet that, when he said those Words, Take, Eat,
To Priests and people too he meant that meat?
At Rome no drink's allowed, but only meat:
Yet Paul does bid men drink, 1 Cor. 11.
as well, as eat.
There sits one with brazen face,
That usurps a Bishops place,
Who dares thus Christ's flock disgrace.
Now to the Man of Might, who says, he can
Do that, which is not in the power, of man;
Who can make Christ of bread (he is so divine)
As Christ of water once did make true wine.
Angel, nor King, nor Artizan of skill
Can this; the Priest alone, and he at's will.
Others, who can make bread out of their grist,
Must leave their bread to him, to make it Christ.
Make stones to be men we know that God can:
And the Priest braggs he can make bread a man.
Make a God of a man we know men can:
But his art lies in making God a man;
So, as if Christ had not took flesh before,
Yet without flesh he should be now no more.
Nor can the nimblest Baker work a cake
So soon, Per v^rba co^s^cr (...) ver^ and (...) panis, ita producitur and
quasi generatur Christus i^ altari, ade^ potenter and effica^^ter, ut si
C^ristas necdum esset incarnatus, per haec verba Hoc est corpus me^m,
inc^rna^ctur, cor^u^que huma^um assumeret, (...) graves theologi docent.
Cornelius Cornelij a lapide Comm^^. in E^a^ 7. 14.
as he his cake a man can make.
Four words, repeated with a voice submisse,
Will serve to make vp's man and God, I wisse.
These four alone, Hoc Est Corpus Meum,
Will work the feat: there needs no greater sum.
Indeed, the Priests intention should concur,
Or else the work may chance to take a blurre.
For, as they do say, This most Rare Invention
Will scarcely take without the Priests intention.
But yet here we must all know,
That all Priests can not thus do;
The Roman can: but no more.
Natural Parents, be they never so good,
Are Gods instruments but of flesh and blood.
To get, or make a Soul's not in their power:
But he a perfect soul can make each houer.
Both soul and body are alike to him:
That shall not want a power, nor this a limme.
Paren^s their children get: they make them not.
They get them like themselves, with stain and spot,
But he no gett^r is allowed to be,
And wife he does by vow with horror flee.
He Is only a maker, and but of one:
If he make not that one, he makes just none,
And, whereas children by degrees do grow,
That, which he makes, is made at once: not so,
Full holy also, pure, void of all sin,
Having no soil without, no fault within.
Yet he, that makes him, is not without both:
Which if not he, yet others often loath.
And which is strange, he may not get a man:
But yet make God he may, and thinks he can*
And, whereas others works may be destroyed,
His, he belieues, is not to be annoyed.
I ask then of this man, this man of might,
Who does so far surmount each mortal wight;
Is thy mouth the virgins womb? Is bread her seed?
Are thy words the Holy Ghost? Is this our Creed?
What? Does a Temple make the Architect,
That thou of bread thy maker the should erect*
Or does a Servant use to make his Lord,
That Priests to theirs a being do afford;
O presumptuous Undertaker!
Never Cake could make a Baker:
And shall a Priest make his Maker?
Indeed, we see some men by Priests made stones:
But who sees them make bread flesh blood, and bones*
They rather merit faith, that say, they can
Sooner make a man bread, then bread a man.
That, though Unnatural, has often been:
This, Supernatural, was yet never seen.
Tell me: Was not Christ before thy bearing?
And hundreds of years before thy sheering?
Was he not a man before thine anointing?
And must he yet be made at thine appointing?
Does he not still abide in humane flesh,
That yet he must be made of thee afresh?
And sooner too, then thou thy self wast made,
Either man, or of this Man-making trade.
What a kind of brow have thou,
That do say, Thou make him now,
Since thou took'st thy Priestly vow?
Have thou Priests power from the man Christ received?
So thou will say, or else I am deceived.
With what face then dare thou say, Thou him make,
Of whom thy self and power, thou say, thou take?
As if a Justice should say, he makes the King,
Of whom he does receive his Iusticing:
As if a child should say, he makes his sire,
Or color'd clothes should say, they make their diar.
Thus ye dim the noone-day-light,
And against sense and reason fight.
Holding, Writlesse, what is not right.
Perhaps you will say, Christ Jesus is not made
Of bread: but that the bread away does fade,
And that his body follows in it is stead,
It being only there now, and not bread.
Well: be it so, yet thus his body's made
Here still on earth to be: which is gainsayd,
By Christ himself, by Peter, John 12 and 17. Act. 3.
and our Creed:
To whom we could add more, if there were need.
For Austin, Vigill, and others agree,
That Christ is not now on earth bodily.
And vain it is to plead the power divine,
Which out of darkness can make light to shine.
Which of just nothing can make things to be,
And can make dead things live, and stone-blinde see,
And most easily do the things, which can
Be comprehended of no brains of man.
Make it appear by holy Scriptures light,
That God does will and work these things, ye fight
For, with such earnestness, and then we will
Confess your power, and applaud your skill.
But till ye prove by Written word,
That God to these things does accord,
To make faith of them were absurd.
We read of Christ twice made: and that is all;
Of Woman, and under Law, Is this small,
Unless thou also make him at thy will Gal. 4.

By thine high creating power, and thy skill?
Is It not enough for him, and for us all,
That he was Once borne, and Once under thrall,
But that he must yet also, day by day,
By you be made, and offered, as ye say?
So, for faith ye fancy teach,
And for truth men's dreams ye preach,
Making in Gods Church a breach.
What a silly thing is this, thou make,
Which for the Lord Jesus Christ, thou take?
Which, Idol-like, can neither hear, nor talk,
Nor see, nor feel, nor smell, nor one jo^t walk,
Which can do nothing for ought does appear:
But's fit all wrong, that is offered, for to bear.
Which can not save it self from catte, nor Dog,
From Rat, nor Mouse, nor from the grunting Hog.
Fie that such a sorry thing,
A mouse can in danger bring,
Should be counted for thy King,
Hezekiah says the Assyrian king
The Gentiles Gods into the fire did fling,
Because they were not Gods: for so he says; Is. 37. 19.

Which plainly shows the fondness of your faith.
For this, ye say the Priest has made, ye call
God almighty: and yet the same may fall,
Or by plain force be cast into the fire,
By Turks or Moors, or flung into the mire.
May not men then boldly say,
It does your handiwork bewray,
When they see it hurled away?
What a kind of vile servitude is this,
Thou make him serve, of whom thou look for bliss;
To coop him in a piece of bread in show,
Where he must stay a time, and must not go?
A pretty Godlin sure; now in thine hand,
Then boxed up, to carry by sea, or land.
Now in thy mouth, and by and by in the maw:
Oth' Altar now, then in some solemn shaw,
Riding about in the streets, to grace that man,
Who dares do that, which justly no man can.
Yet more; This God, ye seem so to adore,
Ye basely prostitute to knave and Whore;
Teaching that the Wicked his flesh may eat,
Whereas Christ Jesus is to such no meat. Ioh. 6. 51.

For he, Ioh. 6. 56.
that eats his fles;h and drinks his blood,
Shall live: Aug. de civi. dei. li. 21. ca. 25 Bedain
and therefore sure he must be good.
Yea he, 1. Cor. 6.
that eats Christ's flesh, in Christ does dwell:
But they in him do dwell, that is kept for hell.
He must be of Christ's flesh, that eats his flesh:
And only those with it he does refresh.
Indeed, Aug. in Ioh. tract 26.
the Sacrament thereof ill men
May eat: but bane it is unto them then.
But it it self Whosoever does eat, Ambros. de sacram. lib. 5. cap. 4.

To him it is no bane, but wholesome meat;
Able to nourish, and preserve the spirit,
And to do that, which no man can by's merit.
He, Johan. 6. 57.
that eats of this bread, that eats of me,
Shall live by me, says Christ, eternally.
And he eats Christ, Aug. trac. 26 in Johan. and sermon. circa sacr. fer. pasc.
that does aright believe,
And being knit unto him does receive,
And draw forth of him that by faith, which may
Sustain, preserve, and feed him night and day.
Whereas your Christ, ye say, ye take and eat
With hand and mouth, both good and bad, as meat,
I ween, ye say not now, ye tear and grind
Him with your teeth in pieces, as I find.
But, that ye mouth him, that ye all profess,
All, all of you alike, both more and less.
O the great stupidity
In absolute foolery,
And senseless impiety!
What Is become of all those Christ's, Priests have made?
Do all those hosts of wonder bide? or fade?
Do they stay below? Or ascend on high?
Or turn they back to bread, and wine? Or die?
Or are any by digestion wrought,
And into men's spirits, or bodies, brought?
Or is not he, that yet in heaven does stay,
Able to feed and keep us every way,
But that there must be still a new creation
Of him, after your strange imagination?
One Christ bides: but all those fly.
One Christ lives: but all those die.
One is true: the rest a ly.
When ye have eat them, Exodus 14.
ye may say, as of yore;
The eye, Ioh 20.
that has seen them, shall see them no more.
He abides, that is above.
Him we fear, and him we love.
These below do nothing prove.
Alas, alas, there needs no fabrication
Of him still by Priests for man's sustentation.
Jesus Christ both yesterday, Hebr. 13.
and to day,
Is our food, and rock, the Selfsame, for ay.
Great need we have all to take him,
And fear, least we should forsake him:
But can not, nor need not make him.
Honey we read found in a Lion dead: Judge. 14.

But not of Worms in God incarnate bred.
Yet in this thing, for Christ ye do adore,
And whose almighty aid ye do implore,
Even in this very thing a worm has bred,
Even on this very thing a worm has fed*
The silly Ientles may in these things breed:
Plain cralling Magots may on these things feed.
For shame then forsake this toy,
Which the Church does so annoy,
And in truth delight and joy.
Ye show us clothes, which* ye say, Saints have worn,
As ye would persuade us, which are not torn*
As yet with time, but incorrupt, as were
Th'Izraelites in their walk of forty year. Nehe. 9. 21.

And yet many an age is come, and gone,
Since the Saints did last put them off, or on,
Whereof I find your reason to be such;
Forsooth, their sacred bodies did them touch.
Why then should putrefaction at all
These Accidents, ye talk so off, befall?
How is it that vermin are in them engendered,
Seeing Christ's blessed body's in them tendered?
How is it, that filthiness is there discovered,
Where Jesus Christ, our Lord, God-Man lies covered.
Is It, because his body can not them touch?
Or for that of virtue it has not much?
Or is it, because theirs his did far exceed?
Or else for that no other Wonders need?
Yet such a Wonder, showen unto the eye,
Would with men be of no small potencye,
Being void of fraud, and no forged tale:
Whereas your, so much talked of, Wonders fail;
Things, which neither sense, nor Scriptuees do teach:
But which even ye your selves do feign, and preach.
Indeed, we would confess you made,
If sense or Scriptures lent you aid:
But by both them ye are gainsayd.
Saint Austin writes, Tract. 59 in Johan.
even what himself believed,
That the Disciples Jesus Christ received,
That they that heauen-come bread of life did eat,
Which is to true Belieuers drinck, and meat.
Yet Judas, who to avarice was wed,
Ate not the Lord, but only ate his bread.
But by your learning, seeing that the bread
Is turned into Christ's flesh, on's flesh he fed.
For seeing Christ under those shows does lie,
Eat Christ he must, which Austin does deny;
Saying that he ate the bread of the Lord
Against the Lord, A thing to be abhorred.
Neither are bare shows of bread bread in kind,
And therefore Austin was not of your mind.
For he held the Traitor on bread did feed:
Whereas ye say, There Is naught, but shows, indeed.
Yet one word more, Absit a nobis vt ^a, qu^e per sensus corporis didicimus,
vera ^sse dubitemus. Aug. de Trinit. li. 15. cap. 12.
Because ye do from hence
Send packing with disdaigne all humane sense.
Far be it from us, says the selfsame Father,
That we should be at all in doubt, or waver,
But rest assured that, what senses pure,
And vncorrupt, do teach us, that is sure,
And true, the very selfsame things, they seem:
No other things, then those, we do them deem.
I pray you, show then, why we should not trust
Our senses here, as if they were accursed,
Since that in other precepts of the Lord
They stand us in great stead to keep his word.
For by our sense we can put difference
Twixt man and man: and so do reverence.
By sense twixt man and beast discern we can,
Between a father and an other man.
By sense we may perceive they are but stocks,
Which fools adore, who are themselves but blocks.
By sense men are let see how for to keep
Their fingers from their neighbors ox, and sheep.
And finally, by sense men learn much good,
And avoid the shedding of guiltless blood.
Now tell me, Why should sense be trusted here,
And yet so utterly denied there?
For tho to sense it does appear,
That bread and wine are truly there,
Yet ye say Nay, and nothing fear.
We are not certain that Christ's Disciples did
Receive the Eucharist, whiles he lay hid
In's sepulcher, starke-dead: but yet they might
Have boldly took it then, and done but right.
And say they had: if that, ye hold, were good,
Then had they eat and drunk him flesh and
blood,
Hot, and alive, when as in truth he lay,
Not quick but dead, as do the Scriptures say.
Or, will ye say the Sacrament did lack
Its virtue, as being for a time kept back,
Or quite extinct, until he rose again?
Or that his body, as void of life, as pain,
Was really, and substantially,
Presented in that sacred Mystery?
Either of which ye shall as soon make clear,
As make the Sun at midnight to shine here.
Whereas to faith Christ absent present is,
And dead, might live to faith, we are sure of
this.
Whilst here he was, he present was to sense:
But absent from it now he is gone hence.
His blessed body present was, from days
Of old, to true belieuers faith always.
He ever with them was by the power of faith,
By which he dwells in them, Ephesians. 3. 17.
the Apostle says.
Not come in flesh, yet was he come to faith,
Slain from the beginning, Rev. 13. 8.
as Scripture says.
And hence it is, that they of old by Paul
Are said the very same spiritual 1. Cor. 10. ^*

Both meat to eat, and drink to drink, which we
Our selves receive by faith, not carnally.
For meat and drink, which are spiritual,
Are not to be eaten and drunck as carnal.
This food, they fed on, Gen 3. 15. and ^2* 18.
is that Promiss'd Seed,
Which they received by faith, and so did feed.
And still by faith, Gal. 3. 19.
if true, is to be taken,
And not with hand, or mouth, as ye would feign.
For faith can see things a far off with ease,
And on them, as upon things present, seize.
Faith for the soul is as much, as the eye,
Hand, mouth, throat, and mawe are for the
body.
But some of you stick not to say, The Lord
Deceived you, As one (...) Paul's cross i^ Queen Mary's da^es* D. Lessius de
sum. bono l. 4 c 2 page 568 lin. 23.
if deceived ye be, with his word.
Forsooth, because he says, This is my body.
A bold conceit it is: both blind, and frothy.
For, if it please you to weigh this Scripture
With other Scriptures, or in peace endure
To see it for you done in love by others,
(Who are, if ye be Christ's, in truth your Brothers)
Ye may clearly see, if ye will permit
Your will to be directed by your wit,
That these same words do bear an other sense,
Then that, ye go about to fetch from thence,
View well the places, ye see quoted here,
And ye may plainly see what IS means there. Genes. 17. 10. and 41. 26. Exodus
12. 11. and 13. 9. and 31. 13. 16. Esaias. 5. 7. Ezekiel. 37. 11. Zach. 1. 9. Math.
13. 37. Luke 8. 11. Gal. 4. 24. Rev. 1. 20. and 4. 5. and 5. 8. and 11. 4.

To put IS for SIGNIFIES is not rare,
As he soon may see, that to see does care.
Neither is this exposition new,
But old: no youth, as that, that is brought by you.
For herein your Mothers wit,
Neither sense, nor holy Writ,
Nor antiquity does fit.
As for that Offering of Christ, ye hold,
I wonder much wherefore ye are so bold.
Search the Scriptures: ye can not find it there.
Or look to reason, and you are never the near,
His own One's enough, Heb. 10, 10. and 7, 27, and 9, 28.
all-able and good.
Nor is sin pardoned without shedding blood.
And therefore yours, Hebr. 9, 22.
without such effusion,
Is naught else at all but mere delusion.
Yours either is the same with his, or not:
If it be not the same, then have ye got
An other Gospel besides that he tought.
But if it be the same with that he wrought,
Then do ye offer him in blood, and slayen,
Which ye can not, Romans 6, 9.
would ye never so feign.
Christ is no more on earth, but is above.
He says as much: John 12, 8. and 17, 11.
and that does you reprove*
I say again, that must have consecration,
Which unto God is made a right oblation.
And who dare say, that is not a devils limme,
That Jesus Christ is consecrate by him.
By one offering has he consecrated
For ever them, Heb. 10, 14
that are sanctified.
He consecrates us, and his act is stable.
To consecrate him we are all unable.
See then the straits, whereinto ye are brought,
Whiles ye forsake the ways inth' Scriptures tought.
To the Scriptures then give ear:
And, what God speaks in them, hear;
Holding fast the truth in fear.
Now do I speak to all you men of fire,
Who hotter are, then reason does require:
There Is one thing, I would gladly have you show,
Wherefore your choler should so strangely flow,
That nothing will suffice you, but the blood
Of such, as think your doctrine is not good,
But new, and naught, concerning your Oblation*
Of Christ, and of your Transsubstantiation?
And yet both ye and we agree in this,
That Jesus Christ, our life, in heaven now is.
We both believe he died upon the Tree,
And offered up himself most willingly.
We both acknowledge his own one oblation,
Made on the Cross, is our propitiation*
We neither of us doubt, but hold he is
A true and perfect man, God, Lord of bliss.
More, Both of us affirm, and not deceived,
That he is given in the Eucharist, and received;
Given of God, and received of the godly,
Which come fitted for that sacred Mystery.
And yet, forsooth, this will not serve our turn,
But that as Heretics we needs must burn.
And why as Heretics? Because we say,
There Is no such offering of him day by day.
(Yet confess we that a Representation
Is in the Sacrament, of his oblation,
Who Once offer up himself for sin, Hebr. 9. 28. and 10. 12.

But since that Once has never offered bin;
Not properly, but in a type, or, figure,
Whereof we certain are: of yours not sure.)
And for because we say, as sense does teach,
And as both Scriptures and old Doctors preach,
That bread and wine do truly there remain,
And not in show only, as ye do faigne,
Teaching men to believe under a curse,
That their substance is gone: and which is worse,
Turned into the flesh and blood of our Lord:
Which ye press upon men with word and sword.
Now for because we do not hold this turning,
Ye hold us, as heretics, worthy burning.
Well, what is past, let that suffice.
Wake, and learn for to be wise.
Hate not men for hating lies.
The great and mighty God, that has made all,
Christians and others, both great and small,
Allows you not to take away man's life
Through bitter zeal and unadvised strife:
Allows you not his creatures blood to spill,
For crossing of your private thoughts and will.
Foul shame it is that men's own fond opinions,
In Christendom should cause so great divisions.
A shame it is, such Boasters of Antiquity
Should be so faulty in devising Novitie.
O that all humane understanding might
Once become subject to the Scriptures light:
That all would truly yield, and nothing grudge,
To make them their Sole Rule of faith, and Judge,
O that charity, so much talked off, might
Once among Christians obtain her right.
O that God, whose Great Name we all confess,
Were better served, and offended less.
If filthy Lucre, Pride, and base Ambition,
Which are the Workers of so great confusion,
Were once abandoned, and that men would go
Roundly to work, the naked truth to know,
Preferring it to all things else beside,
Then should our Lord be better glorified.
Then factions soon would cease:
They, that vex, would seek to please,
And Christ's kingdom would increase.
Then they, that now the holy Church do rend,
Would all their wits and labors for it spend,
Then factious Nicknames soon would all be left,
Neither should men of peace be so bereft
The truth, that now is banished,
True love, which now is vanished,
Would both be better cherished.
Now to the plain, and wel-minded Roman,
Who is misled, I am returnd' again.
The truth, ye should be taught, I will not tell,
That which your learned Priests do know full well.
The Cup is yours all as well as the Bread,
As in the sacred Scriptures ye may read. Mat. 26. 27*

The Substance of the bread and wine remain Mar. 14. 23.

After their Consecration, 1 Cor. 11. 28* 29.
that is plain.
They are Afterward, what they were Before:
And yet afterward they are something more.
Even as the Priest, now ordered will confess,
He Is what he was, yet more by this access.
As for their Essence, They are the Same, they Were:
But for Use, an other I mean service, office, or condition.
nature they bear.
Tho then their proper nature does endure,
Yet in their service they are changed it is sure.
For, once hallowed, they are a Sacrament
Of Christ's body and blood, upon us spent.
Bare Signs they are not: they are also Seals,
And exhibit the grace, the word reveals.
The signs thou take at the hand of a man:
But God gives thee his Son; for no man can.
And, when thou comm'st unto this Sacrament,
Believing, humbled, and true penitent;
Thou art hereby put into sure possession
Of Jesus Christ, and of his blessed passion.
As truly as thou take the bread and wine,
So truly are Christ's flesh and blood made thine.
His benefits alone thou do not take:
But Christ withal, who dyed for thy sake.
The fruits are thine: the tree is also thine,
Even as the substance of the bread and wine.
Yea fast thou art united to thy Lord,
Who does himself, and his to thee afford.
To say That Men Prepair'd Do Eat His Flesh,
And drinck his blood, their souls for to refresh,
Even his very flesh, and his very blood,
May well be said, if it be well understood.
And saving faith, by which we do believe,
Is that, by which we eat him, and receive.
Or say, how this is done, we do not know:
Yet the faithful do it, although no more.
But, if thou do not thither come prepared,
Then, though thou take this holy Cup and Bread,
Yet do thou not the Bread of life receive:
But do in truth thy foolish heart deceive.
For, who so comm's without due preparation,
He eats and drinks unto his own damnation;
It being certainly no small offense
To rush on these things without reverence.
And yet too many do, as may appear
By their ill lives, after they have been there;
Following the courses, they ran before,
Whereby they anger God so much the more.
Too many also themselves do occupy,
Not in themselves, but in this Mystery,
Searching and sifting it with carnal wit:
Whereas to try themselves were far more fit:
But chiefly now, since God has drawn his sword,
And does not to us speak alone by word.
The grievous judgments, which make many cry,
Should move us all our selves in time to try.
But yet more, know that holy Writ does teach,
(That which the holy men of old did preach)
That the signs themselves are dignified
With the names of the things signified.
And this is for their honor done, and more;
Even for to raise our hearts, from things before
Our eyes, unto the things, that are above,
Which here are tendered to us of free love.
This is truth: it is no lie.
This is true Antiquity.
The other's new, and silly.
Glory be to God on high, and to men truth, And love, and peace, through Jesus
Christ, by the mighty working of the Holy Spirit, Amen, and Amen. March vii.
1624. Tho. Tuke.

A POSTSCRIPT To the Reader.
THese lines subnexed were brought me by a friend some eighteen months ago,
from an author unknown unto us both. Which occasioned me to write these, thou
see. If I have used, or abused any of them, or all, I crave pardon of their
Author, and give him free leave to do so with mine, if he be in vivis, as I
hope and wish, and be so pleased.

PRiests make Christ's body and soul, you must not doubt.
They eat, they drink, they box him up, and bear about.
One is too little, bread and wine holds him several.
So we dine; I with my Christ, thou with thine.
Is thy mouth the virgins womb? is bread her seed?
Are thy words the Holy Ghost? is this the Creed?
O presumptuous undertaker,
Never cake could make a baker,
Yet the Priest can make his maker.
What Is become of all those Christ's, which Priests have made?
Do all those hosts of Hoastes abide? or do they fade?
One Christ bides, all these fly.
One Christ lives, all these dye,
One is true, the rest a lie.
FINIS.

