A goodly treatise of faith, hope, and charity necessary for all Christian me^
to know and to exercise themselves therein translated into english.

Prynted in South warke, For James Nicolson.

Anno M. D. xxxvii

1537.

The translatoure.
There are many now a days that use great disputacions and reasonynge of
faith, thinking to have faith wha^ they can reason much of it. They know that
by faith only a man is justified, or made ryghteous, but yet they know not the
ground and pyth of faith, whereby a man is made righteous. Ye true faith can
better be felt inwardly, than it can be expressed with words. It is planted in
at the ear by hearing of the word of God, it is grounded and roted in man's
heart, by the operacyon of the spirit, workynge in the same word, and finally
(seeing it can not be hyd) it bresteth out in doing of charitable deeds, the
which the faithful knows to be acceptable unto God. And by this workynge or
endeavor to please God, he conceaueth an hope to obtain everlasting life,
wherein he shall rest in joy with God: not of duty, as one that were hired
thereto, but only of Gods bounteous goodness and mercy. The dyuels also have
an hystoricall faith of Christ, and believe al to be true yt is spoken of him
through out all the scripture: for they can not improve nor deny the treuth of
it. But seeing they conceive not such an opinion of God, as namely, that God
is their redimer that by him and by none other (be he never so holy) they be
saved, that in him only they ought to rejoice, to trust, and to be conforted:
therefore is not their ^ayth auaylable or an occasyon unto salvation but rather
(as says saint James) a cause to fear and tremble. It is not enough to be
baptized, and to know by heart all yt articles of our faith although every one
that will be called a Christian is bound to believe and to know the^) but he
must also express them in his living. If I be leave God to be a father, and a
creator or maker of heaven and earth, and all that is therein of naught, and yet
do not seek all aid, conforte, and goodness at him: how can I have a true
faith or believe in him? how can I say truly: I believe in God the father
almyghtye? etc. Harken how God complayneth by his prophet Micue. 1. Should not
a son honor his father (says he) and a servant his master? If I be now
a father, where ^^ mine honor? If I be the ZORDE where I am feared? says
the ZORDE of hoostes. As though he would say: who declares his faith that he
has to me? who soueth me as a son his ather? not for any respect or regard of
advantage that he can obtain by it: but of the inward and natural mocyon of
love that he has to my goodness Or who fears me as a servant? that dredeth
punishment for transgressynge of his lords commandment. For as says
David: They are all gone out of the way, they are all become unprofitable,
there is none that does good: no not one By this is it euyde^t what small faith
is found in the world now a days and how little declaracyo^ of the same:
specialy of those that can and do most reason, and dispute of it. This I say,
and that in verbo domini that I would of god they uttered less words of
faith, hope, and charity: but declared them more by outward deeds of ye same.
To speak divinity makes not a divine, but to live divinity. If wyshyng?
might do good, I would hartelye wyshe every one that can speak much of
divinity the same mind, that saint Augustine was in wha^ he said: The
unlearned stand up, and take in ye kingdom of heaven, and we synke to hell
with all out learning. If we did take once hartye grace to us and busyed our
selves to live the Gospel, than should not we need to be asked a count of our
faith, than should we go on progress from virtue to virtue, than should out
light lyghten the weakelynges, lest they do offend at Christ the head
corner stone But alas for pytye, the great punyshmentes wherewith God does and
will punysh us comme upon us because there is no faithful nesse, there is no
mercy, there is no knowledge of god in the land: but swe^tynge lyeng
manslaughter theft, and aduoutrye have the over hand, and one bloodshed dyng
so! owes another. etc. Dse. 4. Look through the whole flock of them that will
be seyers of god, that is y^ cytesyns of Jerusalem: Seek through her streets
also if ye ca^ find one man yt does equal and right, or yt labors to be
saythfull: and I shall spare him (says the LORD) For though they can say: The
LORD lives, yet to they swear to deceive. Where as thou: o LORD lokest only
upon says and treuth. Christ himself has prophesied these peryllous times of
ours saying: Wha^ the son of man comes, suppose ye y^ he shall find faith
upon earth? As though he would say, no. Ye where faith is not, there is an
vnberme^t of wyckednesses: as says Esaias. 59. There is equite gone aside, ^
rightcousnesse sto^deth afarte of. Treuth is falledown in y^ street, and the
thing y^ is plain and open, may not be showed. Ye y^ treuth is laid in
preson, and he y^ refrayneth himself from evil, must be spoiled. Is it not a
pyteous case to hear ye prophets thus complain upon our wickedness, ye
Christ himself? What do we think that shall become of us after this vapoure
rather tha^ life? What and if one man had gotten all the world, should it
profit ought unto his soul after his departing hence? seeing he is come
naked into this world, and must depart naked out of it again. Why do me^ set
so lytie by faith? and regard (...) or charity as a thing lyttel worth? where
as. ^ Paul not ^stondinge dot call love the greatest of the three theological
virtues

That thou may therefore (good tender) crercyse theselfe in these three holy
virtues, as namelye faith, hope and charity or love: I have translated to thy
behofe this lyttel treatise, treatinge of the same: whose brefenesse I trust
shall draw thy mind to ye reading of it. For by manifest scriytures (the which
be here sufficientlye brought forth) thou may perceive y^ power of faith
whereby man is saved y^ which causes man to conceive an hope of y^ life ever
lasting. And thus of inward joy and gladness he breaks forth unto deeds of
charity, whereby he declares his in ward gift of faith. So y^ finally he ca^
not choose but hope to come unto life eternal y^ which greu^t us he yt created
and redimed us. Ame^.

The treatise of faith
The first chapter treats of the Faith in Christ, and what is a true Faith.
Faith is described plain ly unto us in the epistle to the Hebrews after this
manner. Faith is a sure confidence of things Hebre 11
which are hoped for, and a certainte of things which are not seen Herby we
mayese which is the true faith, namely, that we abide and look to obtain mercy
of the LORD: where as we find naught in us yt is worthy of Gods mercy, nor se
the good that God has promised us, but only trust in him, because he is
merciful. Wherefore receauynge the word that witnesses unto us and bears
record of his goodness, we have a sure hope in God by faith that he shall show
his goodness and tenderness toward us by his bou^te ous mercy. But hereto is
requyted of us that we rest with our whole heart upon this promise of mercy,
reioycynge in sprete therein, and by faith render us in love and thankfulness
to God.

Thus have we a sure testymony that we are come to a good faith for we can
find none other fundament whereon the sinful soul may test, save only if we
can hope that God will be a merciful father, through the death of IESV
CHRIST. This is it that Paul says: No man can lay another fundament, save
1. (...). 3.
that which is laid already, that is CHRIST IESV. Such faith causes a man to
walk confidently and to be sure minded to Gods goodness, wherein he can
rejoice, so far as he can believe to obtain so much as God has declared and
promised by his word. Now because he believes the same, therefore is his
spirit endued with godly joy by the sprete of God, which did appear and
teach him the same by faith.

Wherefore says Paul: Ye have not received the sprete of bondage Romans ^.
to fear any more, but ye have received the sprete of adopcio^, whereby we
cry Abba dear father. The same sprete certifieth our sprete that we are the
children of God. When a man feleth this by faith, and his heart rejoices
therein, then has he rest and quietness in his conscience, having no respect
to his own works or deservings, but only to CHRIST: which has set him
atone with the father, through his bitter passion and death. Thus gives he
only CHRIST the glory of his rede^pcyon, and beholds hence forth no
creatures more. It is sufficient to him to know God in his goodness,
beleuynge that mercy and goodness shall be showed unto him of God, and rejoices
in that he has a merciful father in heaven, and in all things he co^ceaueth
a good opinion of God and his goodness. Such faith causes him to rest and to
be content, with all that the LORDS will is to do with him. Whether it be death,
hell, sin or deuell, none can make him abashed. For as long as a man clyueth
to Gods word, beleuyng yt God has overcome all euel through his love to ward
mankind, the^ is he at rest and peace in all yt can betyde or chance unto
him, being certified, that seeing God loves him, he shows mercy and
kyndnesse in all that he does unto him: and all man kind. Whether it be tha^
anguyshe, painfulnesse, or any danger that can happen unto man other in body
or soul, yt comes al to his auayl. Only if he ca^ believe, and be persuaded
in himself yt God loves him. For one friend forbeareth much of another y^
which natural love causes. Wherefore if natural love can forbear wrong of a
friend: how much more ought we to forbear y^ good, that is sent us of God to
our salvation.

Seeing faith is a gift given of God, it is necessary we turn our selves
lowly unto the LORD, desiring him humbly to prepare our hearts and make them
willing to accept his word with joy. As much as we love Gods word, so
much shall we be conforted and made glad in sprete by faith in all that ye
word has promised us. Seeing God is hyd in his word, ye and is the word it
self, therefore if we receive the word then by faith and with joy, we shall
receive so much as God has said and promised by his word. CHRIST, which is
the blessed word of the father, gives him self with his goodness in to al
faithful hearts, and makes him self with all his goodness common, taking
us to his grace: ye with all the wickedness that is in us.

When we have sinned, than will God have us to admonysshe him of his promise:
if we than pray with a faithful heart, he shall remember all that he has
promised, and shall have mercy upon us, to fulfill his promise and word.

This knew David what time he said: The word of the LORD Psalm. 32.
is treue, and al his works are faithful. Upon this trusted the same David
when he had sinned, he put god in mind of his words, saying: Against the
only have I sinned, and Psalm. 50.
done evil in thy syghte: that thou myghtest be justified in thy sayenges, and
shuldeste overcome when thou art judged. As though he would say: LORD. I
have trespassed, I pray the remember thy word that thou haste promised unto
the sinners which turn again from their sins, namely, that thou will
receive a sorrowful sprete unto thy mercy. Wherefore thou ought to receive me
unto thy grace, that thou myghteste be found ryghteous. Shewenge such mercy
unto the sinner according to thy promise, than shall thou discomfyte thine
enemies with the treuth, which will judge and estyme the as one that does not
according to his word.

When David now knew inwardlye that he had optayned mercy of the LORD, than
did he praise and thank God in all his words and deeds saying: The LORD is
gracious and merciful, long sufferynge, Psalm. 144
and of great goodness. The LORD is loving unto every man, and his mercy
is over all his works. The LORD is ryghteous in all his ways, and holy in
all his works. The LORD is nigh unto all them that call upon him: Ye all such
as call upon him faithfully. And even thus is it with us: We can praise and
thank God so earnestlye, and rejoice so greatly in his goodness, as we can
believe that mercy, and kyndnesse can be showed by him. Though the law did
utterly da^ne us, and hell would swalow us up, and though all syn, and other
enmyes would ouerrunne us: yet must we abide sure upon God, and se what
CHRIST has deserved and given us by his bitter passion, and what he has
promised, and and tha^ shall faith work her work. If we have received the
word in faith through the holy ghost than shall we obtain mercy, and life in
the mids of death, and of sin. Without hope did hold up our head, and the
promyses sonke in our hearts, we must needs be drowned in despair. Hope
says: My son despise not the self in thy syknesse, but ^^^ll. 38.
pray unto the LORD and he shall make the whole. The sinful man beholding
God, and knowing him by his word (that is) that he is merciful, not willing
the death of a sinner, he lyfteth up his head with a lusty courage saying: I
shall not Psalm. 118.
dye, but live, and show forth the works of the LORD. The LORD chastenynge
has chastened me and not delivered me unto death. Open unto me the gates of
ryghtwysnesse, and when I am entered than shall I confess the LORD. That is
the gate of the LORD, and the ryghtwyse shall enter in through it. All this
faith and confyde^ce had de David, for he was sure fyxed upon Gods promyses.
When his sins would oppress him, than turned he unto the LORD, and his
word, the which when he trusted unto, he rejoiced in the LORD. All this
caused the word that was believed: If he had been weak in the faith, he would
have thought continually that he must be damned.

Wherefore he said. Without the LORD had helped a little while Psalm. 117.
my soul should have dwelled and abyden in hell. David sought none other
comfort, save only, that he would fulfill that unto him, which he had
promised him, and beleuyng this he was conforted, saying: Psa. 118.
Think upon thy servant as concerning ye word wherein thou causedest me to
put my trust, that conforted me in my lowlynesse: ye thy word has relyued me.

Herby may we discern the true faith, namely, that a man is fixed and grounded
upon God and his word, that is to say, that he shall and will give so much, as
his promise is, and yt ye sinful soul can be conforted therein: or else is it
not possible to know God in his goodness. If God be not known in his
goodness by his word, how should any man rejoice in his goodness, or
conceive any Exo. 15. 16 and. 17.
hope to come to his mercy? What time as the children of Israel had sinned
greueously against God, murmuring against him, and so provoking him to
anger, and after that worshippynge the golden calfe, so yt he would have
destroyed the whole multitude of them: Moses like a true and faithful servant
of God, seeing that God was angry, and being willing to apeace his wrath
again, he knew no nearer nor feater way to reconcyle the people again unto
God, than to offer a faithful heart: wherewith he did knowledge God to be
mercyful, kind and longesufferynge, showing mercy in thousands. Moses was
surely fixed upon this ground, that is, that the LORD was merciful: But
seeing his mercy was turned in to wrath by reason of the multitude and
greatness of the sins, he perceived that it was not possible unto Exo. 32.
man to find grace by God: Wherefore he began to admonyshe him of his kind
and fatherly love, and to remember all that which he had promised unto Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob. Thus was the LORD pacyfied, so that he did not the evil
that he had spoken against the people. This had David seen in spre^ (that
is) that God in his wrath should remember his conuenaunt saying: My conuenaunt
will I Psalm 88.
not break, nor disanull the thing that is gone out of my lyppes. David Crod.
32 Psalm. 98
witnesses of faithful Moses, which brake and turned the wrath of God when he
admonysshed him of his promise. The LORD (said he) would have destroyed the
people had not his chosen and elect Moses stand for them against the
misdeeds.

When the sins be accomplysshed, and the sinner knows not whether to turn
him, than is there no counsel better then to submytte him self before God,
praynge that he may take his Godly word to heart, and to know thereby what
mercy and forgiveness God will show unto the, that trust in him, and knowledge
him by his fatherly love, The LORD requires naught of us for our sins but
an heavy and contrite sprete, a willing heart to leave synnynge, and an hu^gry
soul to fulfill the will of God. More over when we be most forsaken, and when
our sins and the judgment of God do most grievously oppress us, then is it
time for us to know which be the true faith, and when we ought to have our
sight and mind most surest fixed upon God. Unto the sinner is God mercyful,
wherefore says Paul: This 1. Tim. 1
is a true saying, and by all means worthy to be received, that CHRIST IESV
came in to the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief. Notwithstanding,
for this cause optained I mercy, yt JESUS CHRIST might pryncypally show in me
all long pacyence, to the ensample of all the^ which should believe in him
unto eternal life. Furthermore says Paul: Where abu^dau^ce of syn was Romans 5
there was yet more plenteousnesse of grace. Now where true faith comes,
there shall it not be inquired, what there is deserved. or what a man is worthy
to have, or how impossible it is for a man to come unto the mercy of God. For
there is nothing in man that is worthy of mercyfulnesse: and faith beholds
God only, and that which he has promised with his word, and that the LORD
is mercyful, and will show mercy unto all them that seek him in the treuth. This
causes the sinner to conceive an hope to obtain mercy by our LORD though
to himself it seem impossible. This may we se by Abraham, which being (...).
17.
old hundredth years, and Sara his wife four score and ten, herd that they
should have a son in their old age. Which thing when he herd it, it seemed
unto him impossyble, as it might also to any man: for there was no hope of any
fruit. But seeing it was God that promised it, and that Abraham gave faith unto
the word: therefore did he hope contrary to hope, and believed against nature,
Roma. ^
and this faith is rekened him for ryghtwysnesse. Not because of of his works,
nor because of the circumcisyon or vncyrcumcysyon: but seeing he believed, he
did give God the glory, and optayned mercy.

This is not only written to know how Abraham became ryghteous by his faith,
but also for our instruccyon, if we believe. CHRIST dyed for our sins, and is
risen again for our iustyfycacyon. This thing earnestly believed shall also save
us: for faith consydereth only how much God may and will give of his
goodness.

Wherefore, let us that be faithful rest only upon CHRIST IESV that has saved
us, although our misdeeds be many and great. Let us trust and lean hard to
Gods word, it is enough that God has promised it: This doing we be sure and
may rejoice that we be come to the true faith. This faith had Abraham. He was
promised that through his son Isaac his sede Gene. 22.
should so increase, as the stars of the sky. After this did God command
him to offer the same son and to stay him. Abraham being stayed in God and
his promise, was ready to accomply she Gods will.

Thus is Abraham become ryghteous by the deed (that is) Abraham by this work
has testified, and declared his faith to be good and true before God, thus be
his works counted ryghteous before God through faith: As witnesses Saint
James This all is spoken now to know a Iac^. 1.
true and good faith, namely. Not only to believe God to be a merciful and
good father: but also to believe that God through his mercy will receive a
sinner to grace: and that he may come to the favor of God. Such faith
causes a man to rest and ^cane on God only, and so earnestlye to rejoice in
the goodness of God, as does he that fyndeth a treasure of great value.

We speak not of a feigned faith, as the deuels have, or as the wicked do
believe, nor of such an hystorycall faith as to believe, that CHRIST was
crucyfyed: but we speak of such faith, and confydence, wherebye we are
assured that the goodness, and mercy of God is ours, and that all is ours
that is in God: that he is merciful unto us: that we can rejoice in him, and
walk confydently in him, all this is the operacyon of faith.

Such faith causes mortyfycacyon of the flesh with all his concupiscence,
Gala, 5.
when he has felt once by faith the exeeadynge goodness, that he has
found by the LORD. Should not such a faithful soul rejoice in the LORD
his God by true love? and use all spiritual glory? Such faith causes a man
to captiuate and presone his wit, understanding, and will wholly under Gods
word, and rejoice only in God, saying with David: My soul wayteth Psa. 61.
only upon God, for of him comes my help. He only is my strength, my
salvation, my defense, so yt I shall not greatly fall. And again: Turn again
then to thy rest (O Psalm. 114.
my soul) for ye LORD has given the thy desire. And why? thou have delivered
my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my fete from falling. I will
walk before the LORD in the land of the living.

Paul, what time he was come to such earnest faith, said very joyfully: I
showed not my self among 1. (...). 2.
you as though I knew any thing save only JESUS CHRIST, even the same that
was crucyfied. It is not sufficient to say: I believe that the Note.
holy church believes, or as mine elders have believed, but a man must search
and prove how he believes. For by his own faith shall a man be acceptable to
God. If he will procure to obtain ought of God, he must turn him to God and
knowledge him by his own faith, that he is his LORD and redimer. Abraham saw
God in sprete through his lively faith and rejoiced. This faith ^orageth a man
against death, in it a man seyth his life: For (according to the witness of
all scriptures:) The just lives by his faith. Abat. 2. Romans 1. G^l. 3. Heb. 10
11. Tim 1 Gal. 5


and This faith is not subdued unto the law: for the faithful accomplissheth
the LORDS will in the sprete, through love. So that he fulfylleth all that the
law commands. Not because it is a commandment of ^he law: (for the law
gives only knowledge of sin) but because he ^ath a love to the
commandments, and is ready to do all that is acceptable to God. Wherefore
says Paul: Through the law I am dead Gal. 2.
unto the law, that I might live unto God. I am crucyfyed with CHRIST, yet do
I live: Nevertheless now not I, but CHRIST lives in me for the life which I
live now in y^ flesh, I live in the faith of the son of God, which loved me
and gave himself for me. Again says Paul that God has made us accepted in
Ephe. 1.
the beloved son, in whom we have redempcyon through his blood, namely, the
forgiveness of sins according to the riches of his grace.

Seeing then that (according to these testimonies of scripture) the work of
our redempcyon is accomplyshed in us by CHRIST: therefore must our sinful
soul knowledge yt excellent work in CHRIST only, and in him only rest by
faith. For CHRIST said: No man comes to the father, but only by me. And: if
Ioh 14.
ye are the father ought in my name Ioh. 1^.
he shall give it you. But seeing faith is a gift of God, therefore must we
lowly and humbly pray the LORD to have pity upon us, and increase our faith,
yt we may know his goodness dewly by faith, and rejoice in him. Of this gift
speaks Paul saying. By grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your
selves. Ephe. 2.
For it is the gift of God, not of works, lest any man should boast himself.
For wear his workmanship created in CHRIST IESV unto good works, to the
which God ordained us before, that we should walk in them. When man fyndeth
rest, and quietness in his conscience by faith beleuynge that all that is in
God, is to man's behofe, that is a sure token that such a man is come to the
faith which gives health. For faith certifyeth him that CHRIST has overcome
death, hell, sin, and the devil for him.

As great as his faith is, so much also can he rejoice in God, Praise God, and
thank God which has received his sinful soul to mercy, not for the works
of ryghtwysnesse that we have done, but according to his mercy has he saved
us.

Thus much now is said to know the true faith: namely, to rest only upon
CHRIST, and to knowledge our redemption, and salvation by CHRIST'S death,
according to his word. The which grant us the father through his well-beloved
son CHRIST.

Amen.
The second Chapter treats of yt inestimable, great mercy, that we do
purchase, and optaine by the lively faith For true says ca^ not be idle, but
brings unto him that possesses her plenteous salvation.
When Paul would comfort the sick, or stablyshe the weak in faith more and
more than did he often rehearse and (as a man might say) bette in them the
glad tydinges of the Gospel: Certifienge them to what great mercy they were
called, when God gives them a good will to receive his word with joy, and to
rejoice over all the goodness that the Gospel assures us of. This fruit which
the Gospel brings with it, and gives us ought we hyghelye to thank God
for, and to rejoice for cause of so manyfolde gifts, and treasures minystred,
and given us by him, thanking, and praysynge God which has opened our eyes,
and inward syghte: So that we may dewlye knowledge our salvation by CHRIST
IESV and rejoice in him only.

This is the intent now wherefore Paul does so earnestly admonyshe us not to
receive such gifts in ^ayne, but that the word of God be fruitful in us by
faith, and love, that God might be praised, thanked, and honored for his
workynge so wonderfullye, mercyfully, and gloriouslye in all faithful hearts.
Therefore says Paull: We are bound to give thanks al way 2. Tess. 2.
unto God for you brethren beloved of the LORD, because that God has from the
beginning chosen you to salvation in the sanctifyenge of the spirit, and in
beleuinge of the treuth, whereunto he has called you by our Gospel, to
obtain the glory of our LORD JESUS CHRIST. Farther more says Paul After
that ye herd ye word of treuth, Ephe. 1.
namely, the gospel of your salvation, wherein when ye have believed ye were
sealed with the holy sprete of promise, which is the earneste of our
enheritaunce to our redemption, that we might be his own to the praise of
his glory. And again: Because we know (brethren beloved 1. Tess. 1.
of God) how that ye are elect. For our Gospel has not ben with you in
word only, but both in power, and in the holy ghost, and much certainte. In
all these foresaid reasons are we exhorted, to receive the godly word with
great lust, and love, prayenge the LORD humbly to give us grace that we may
take it to heart, and receive it as a glad tydinge that is showed, and
promised us by the word. Paul what time he preached the word of God, he
thanked him, and said: for this cause we thank God without 1. Tes. 1.
ceassynge, because that when ye received of us the word of the preaching of
God, ye received it not as the preaching of men, but (even as it is of a
treuth) the word of God, which works in you that belefe.

It is not sufficient that we can Nota
babble much of the word, and have many treatyses and books thereof: but we
must also be changed and renewed in the spirit through faith of the word in
our living, so that we can rejoice in spirit, being sure that the word of
God has ended a great glorious work in us. By faith of the word must we
be renewed in sprete, and in conuersacyon: so ye we can rejoice in sprete
being assured that the word of God has fullended a glorious work in us. By
faith in the word must we be certyfyed that much is given us of the LORD.

By faith must we try our lives. This word works myghtelye, when it is
received in faith: for Roma. 5.
CHRIST reconcyled us by the father, when we were yet enemies unto him. We are
approached and Ephe. 2,
come near unto God by the faith in the word, where as before we were
strangers: so that we be even elect, and chosen chylderen. Ioh. 15.


CHRIST says: Now are yecleane, because of the word that I have spoken
unto you. Abide ye in me, and I in you. Alas we be all dettours, our sins
will depreasse us, our conscience is of times grieved, when she douteth whether
to turn herself. We find naught in our self, whereof we might have aid,
or comfort. But if we could behold CHRIST only in our trouble, and pondre
by our self the profit of his passion, and remember the mercy promised unto
us by Gods goodness: How earnestlye should we than rise from our synnefull
life? saying with a lustye courage: Wherefore should I mystruste? he dyed for me
which shall judge me, and he has also were safe to call me, I will rise and
seek my LORD my God. He may da^ne, but I am sure he will Esa. 3.
save. The LORD is our judge, the LORD is our law geuer, the LORD is our
king, he shall come himself, and save us. if Romans ^.
God be with us, who can be against us? which did not spare his own son,
but him has he given for us all: how shall not he give us all things with
him also? Who will lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that
makes ryghteous, who will than condemn? It is CHRIST that dyed, ye rather
which is raised up again, which is also on the ryghthande of God, and makes
in tercession for us. We have CHRIST for aspecheman, for a mediator, and 1.
Timo. 2. 1 Johan. 2
an apeacer of Gods wrath, whose blood calls for mercy for us. By CHRIST
have we a sure, Ephe. 2.
and fre entrance to the father.

When the sinner seyeth all this in the scripture, and can stand sted fast
upon these witnesses, than may he perceive right well that they be written to
our comfort, that the sinner might hope to obtain Romans 15.
mercy by the father. If he submytte himself unto God, the LORD shall
accomplish his promise in him, and steare the sinner to repentance. All this
comes by the word which the sinner hears, and takes to heart: for so
myghtely works it in a man. Therefore does Paul call the word or gospel y^
power of God, saying: I am not ashamed of the Gospel of CHRIST: for it Romans 1.
is the power of God, which saves all that believe thereon, the Jew first and
also the Greek: For in it y^ righteousness yt is of value before God is
opened, which comes out of faith into faith, as it is written: The just shall
live by his faith. Again says Paul: The word of the cross is folyshnesse 1.
(...). 1
to them that peryshe, but unto us that are saved it is the power of God. In
these aforesaid scriptures is it evident that God does and will work a mighty
and blessed work: namely, that he will turn and convert a sinner through his
words. Let us therefore call earnestly upon him, desyryng him to pour out his
word ferue^tly upon us, and to work therewith mightily in our hearts. Peter
preaching the word did I. tu. 2
convert three thousand men at one time. Scripture says that what 2. Par. 14
yt time the children of Israel fought against the Morians, in their anguyshe
they called upon God, and he herd them because they believed on him. And again
there is written: The eyes of the LORD behold the 2. Par. 16.
whole earth, and give strength unto them that trust in him with a perfect
heart. And again there is written: And Judah was greatly conforted, 2. Par. 13:
for they trusted in the God of their fathers. And of Asa says the scripture
that he called upon ye LORD 2. Par. 14
his God, and said: LORD, it is no difference with the to save by fewor by
many. Help us O LORD our God: for our trust is in ye, and in thine name we
come forth against this multitude. Such like prayer made king Iosaphat in his
anguyshe, and 2. Par. 20.
ye LORD did help him. By this may we perceive ye power of faith, which he
requires of us: namely, that we must look upon his word and what he requires
of us: Again what he has promised us, how faithful he is of his promysse, and
true in his word. Considering this we may be steadfast in his word, and
follow the counsel of Syrak, writynge in Ecclesi. 2.
his book called Ecclesiasticus: Believe in God, and he shall help the: order
thy way aryght, and put thy trust in him. Hold fast his fear and grow
therein. O ye yt fear ye LORD, take sure hold of his mercy: shrenk not away
from him, yt ye fall not. O ye yt fear ye LORD, believe him, and your reward
shall not be emptye. O ye yt fear the LORD put your trust in him and mercy shall
come unto you for pleasure. O ye yt fear the LORD, set your love upon him, and
your hearts shall be lyghted. Co^sydre ye old generacyns of men (O ye children)
and mark them well: was there ever any one co^fou^ded ye put his trust in ye
LORD? Who ever continued in his fear, and was forsaken? Or whom did he ever
despise, that called faithfully upon him? etc. And again in the same chapter:
They that fear the LORD, will not mystruste his word: and they that love him
will keep his commandments. etc.

Thus is it euydent that faith must needs be a work glorious and puyssaunt,
whereby man optayneth so much of the LORD. How could any man comprehend and
perceive the power of faith? and that by Ioh. 1.
faith we are one with God. Ihon says: That God has given all me^ power to
be the children of God. Matt^. 9
Christ said: All things are possible Ioh. 11.
unto him that believes. And again If ye believe, ye shall se the glory of
Math. 17.
God. And again: If ye have faith as a grain of mustarde sede, ye may say
unto this mountain: Remove hence to yonder place, and he shall remove, another
shall any thing be impossible unto you.

Now seeing God works so gloriously in all faithful hearts: then is it
convenient that we humbly beseke him to teach us to trust in his word. For we
shall rejoice so much in his goodness, and look for so much aid and comfort
at his hand, as we can Susa^n^. ^
trust in him, and in his word. We ^ede of Susa^na, that what time she was in
her most distress and anguish being judged wrongfully to death, she syghed
and prayed to God, trustyng steadfastly in him, and ye LORD delivered her.
Daniel also when he Bell. ^
was cast in ye Lyo^s den was not hurt of them: for he trusted in God.

The godly word comes not for naught, it works wonderfully when it is
received in faith. Therefore does saint James erhorte us Iac^. 1.
to receive with meekness the word that is grafted in us, which is able to
save our souls. A man can not err, so long as he can testyfye his life to be
led according to Gods word. If a man have his myndefixed upon man's
inuencyons, or invented holiness: he may surely be dysquyete and
confortlesse. But so long as a man has his eyes fixed upon God and his word,
bearing Gods commandments in his heart: so long does that man walk in
sekernesse, being assured of all ye is expressed by Gods word and is sure of
his sauegarde and comfort: according as Paul says:

All men are liars, but God is true. The son of God is the wisdom Romans 3
of ye father, Who so now does yield him self unto the word, receauyng thereby
the wisdom of the father: the same is driven from death unto life by the
sprete of God. Syrak says: Eccl^. 4
that wisdom breaths life in to her children, and receaueth them that seek
her. It follows then that they which have once assayed god by his word in the
wisdom of God: that those I say may come to complete life. But it is
contrary with the worldly wisdom, as witnesses Paul, saying: In so much
1. Cor. 1
as the world by the wisdom there of knew not God in his wisdom it pleased
God through folyshe preaching to save them that believe.

When Paul was minded to convert any man, then would he lay nothing before
him, save only Gods word, saying: I have begotten you in CHRIST IESV through
the gospel. Wherefore I exhort you, be ye my folowers, as I am IESV CHRIST'S.

So long as a man redresseth his life according to Gods word, so long shall
he come walking the right way of salvation, and rejoice in his conseyence:
For all that the word of God does utter is concerning either mercy or in ward
consolacyon. Peter says: Ye know of the preaching yt God ^ct^. 10.
sent unto the children of Israel, preaching peace through JESUS CHRIST. Of him
bear all the prophets witness, that through his name, all they that believe in
him, shall receive remission of sins. Luke also writing CRISTES words
says: Thus Luct. 24
is it written, and thus it behooved CHRIST to suffer, and the third day to
tyse again from the dead, and to let repentance and remyssio^ of sins be
preached in his name amo^geal nations. This knew Esaias before hand when he
said: Like as the rain and snow comes down Esaias. 55.
from heaven, and returns not thy there again, but waters the earth, makes
it fruitful and grene, that it may give corn and bread unto the so were: So
the word also that comes out of my mouth, shall not turn unto me void
again, but shall accomplish my will, and prosper in the thing whereunto I
send it. Hereby we are taught, that like as the earth is made fruitful of
the rain that God sends: so shall we also be renewed and be fruitful, if we
knowledge God a right by his word, and rejoice in all that he has wytesafe to
warn us of by his word. Ye we shall mortifye the flesh with all his
desires, and he joined to God.

He that cleueth unto god, becomes one sprete with him: and optayneth all
goodness with him. A man rejoices so much in God, as he is knytte with him
by faith, and is diligent in all things to forther his glory. The old father
Symeon beholdynge the little babe, and Luce. 2.
being sure in wardlye that he was his saueoure: (for he looked for him by his
faith) rejoiced in his heart, desiring to go to his rest by bodily death: for
his eyes had seen the save guard of men. Even so likewise we, if we had seen by
faith the love which God bears to ward us, how hartelye should we then yield
oureselues unto death? For faith certyfyeth the heart that God is a mercy full
father, and that mercy shall be showed unto us by ye death of IESV CHRIST. We
can obtain no greater reward than to believe that God is with us, and we
being with the LORD are safe. Steven Actuu^. 7.
seeing heaven open by faith, said incontinentlye. LORD receive my sprete.
For this cause said Paul: Because therefore that we are iustyfyed by faith,
we have peace with Roma. 5.
God through our LORD JESUS CHRIST, by whom also we have an entrance in
faith unto this grace, wherein we stand. Here lo is no mencyon of works, or
of y^ law: for by the works is noman iustyfyed. But the works must break
out through love, and declare our inward faith, by workynge of charitable
deeds. Job was ashamed of all his works, and was not so bold Job. 9.
as to lift up his head before his LORD God, but submitted himself lowly
unto him: ye though there had been found some right wy sucsse in him. David also
said: LORD Psalm. 142
enter not in to judgment with thy servant, for in thy syghte shall noman
living be justified. Nevertheless God willing to certifye us what we may
obtain by faith, he showed us that by pure, and only love, and mercy he
takes the sinner to grace, without any regard of deeds: so that mercy
should be showed to us of promise, and not of Roma. 4
duty. Therefore ought we to give all glory unto God only. David P
witnesses this same saying: Blessed are they, whose unrighteousness is
forgeuen, and whose sins are covered. Blessed is the man unto whom the LORD
imputes no syn, and in whose sprete there is no gyle. Herin may you perceive
the manner of tustifienge, namely, that God will of pure mercy forgive the
sins, requyrynge but only steadfast faith of us. Wherefore, a sinner
perceiving that by the goodness of God only he is come to grace, he ought
to give him only for it all praise and honor Paul says: If Abraham were
made righteous through Romans 4.
works, then has he wherein to rejoice, but not before God. But what says
the scripture? Abraham believed God, and it was counted unto him for
righteousness. Unto him that goes about with works, is the reward not
rekened of favor, but of dewty. But unto him yt goes not about with works,
but believes on him that iustifyeth the ungodly, is faith counted for
righteousness, for by the law comes but knowledge Romans 3.
of sin. But now without adding to of the law is the ryghtwysnesse which
avails before God declared, having witness of y^ law and prophets: but I
speak of the ryghtwysnesse before God, which comes by the faith on JESUS
CHRIST, unto all, and upon all them that believe. Here is no difference: for
they are all sinners, and want the praise that God should have of them.
Without deseruynge are they made ryghteous, even by grace, through the
redempcyon that is done by CHRISTEIESV: who^ God has set for a mercyseate
through faith in his blood, to show the righteousness which avails before
him, in that he forgeueth the sins, which were done before under the
sufferaunce of God. And again: We hold therefore that a man is rustifyed by
faith, without the works of the law. etc. Thus far be the words of saint
Paull, wherein he teaches us, that by faith we obtain all righteousness,
and not by our own procuryng of such strength is the grace of faith.

When God perceaueth in us a faithful heart which seeks him earnestlye,
dredynge, and fearing him: tha^ does he communicate, and join himself unto
such one, geuynge himself wholye over unto him, with all that is in him. For
a man optayneth by faith all that, which God has promised unto the y^
faithful saie^g. I will spouse ye unto me forever. I will marye the unto Dsee. 2
me in right wysnesse and mercy. I will mary the unto me in faith, and truth
and thou shall know the LORD. All the law, and commandments stretche
thereto, namely, that we should fulfill them, and live so, that our good works
may testyfye, and declare our faith, and love, that we have toward God.

But seeing we be frayl, and oftymes fall through weakness of the flesh:
therefore shall we endeavor our selfs to rise again with a good will,
syghynge for our misdeeds, asking mercy with a sorrowful sprete. When we
behold our sins, then let us humblye beseke God to give us a faithful
heart. For if God syeth an hungrye soul in us, which longs for the
righteousness of faith, and that we do so procure grace by God, as by one
which can comfort the sinner: than shall the LORD receive such a faithful
heart unto his grace. For faith and love cause a man to have always a good
opinion of God.

Ye it is the best, and most excellent gift that we can have to be
comforted in God, and in his gift. For as our opinion is of him, so shall he
please us. And even as faith is a gift of God, geu^e freely to man: so must
this opinion of God come freely of him also. If we knowledge him for a mercyful
father, than shall we rejoice in his mercy, trusting in his goodness, and
are mercy at him with a cheerful mind. But if we knowledge him for a
dredefull judge: than shall we not rejoice in his goodness, but ever fear,
and tremble before him: for we feel no certentye of his goodness. Such men can
not rejoice in God, nor look for any comfort of him. Wherefore Paull does
exhort us very earnestlye to love, that thereby we might know God a right,
reioycynge in all his goodnesses, and so to praise and thank him, saying: But
above all things put ^oios. 3.
on love, which is the bond of perfectness. And the peace of God rule in
your hearts, to the which peace ye are called also in one body, and se that
ye be thankful.

Let the word of CHRISTEIESV dwell in you plenteouslye, in all wisdom.
Teach, and exhort your own selves with Psalms, and hymns, and spiritual
songs, which have favor with them, singing in your hearts to the LORD. And
what so ever ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of the LORD IESV, and
give thanks unto god the father by him. All this must come by faith. For as a
man rejoices in God: even so shall he praise him, thank him, and even breast
out in singing to him, as to one by who^ health and salvation is happened unto
him: Yet though the flesh will cause him to sin, and grieve him inwardly. But
if he knowlegeth God for a merciful father: then is he conforted again by his
goodness, as witnesses Paul saying: God which is rych in mercy, through his
great love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in sins, has
quickened us with CHRIST. Than is God merciful unto us, and a father of mercy,
given unto us with al his goodness, and then are we saved by his goodness: when
we can believe through faith y^ rede^pcyon and iustifycacyo^ declared by his
word. Therefore says Paul: If a man believe Romans 10.
from the heart, he shall be made ryghteous: and if a man knowledge with the
mouth, he shall be saved.

For the scripture says: Who so Esaias. 28.
ever believes on him, shall not be confounded. Seeing then that faith was so
necessary, therefore was CHRIST so diligent, even to beat it in us: As for an
ensample, to the syke of the palsy he said: My Math. 9
son be of good cheer, thy sins are forgeuen the. And to the woman of
Canaa^: O woman, great is Math. 15.
thy faith: be it unto the, eue^ as thoudesyrest. And again to Martha he
says: I am the resurreccyon Ioh. 11.
and the life, he that believes on me, shall live, though he were dead
already: And who so ever lives and, belyueth on me, shall never dye. Item to
the woman that was syke of the blody issue, he said: Daughter be of good
conforte, thy Matt^. 9
faith has made the safe. Thus is it evident that all is ascribed unto faith,
and not unto us. For our works can stretch no farther, save only to show
our willing heart, and to yield thanks unto him which through
vnoutspeakeable love has saved us. And thus doing we give only God the honor
for all y^ good which he works in us. Look upon the second to the Hebr^es.
And in the elenenth chapter he says: Without faith it is impossible to please
God. For Heb. 11.
he that comes unto God, must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder
of the^ that seek him. And again: We know yt a man is not ^al. 1.
made righteous by y^ deeds of ye law but by ye faith on JESUS CHRIST. We have
believed also on JESUS CHRIST, that we might be made ryghteous by the faith on
CHRIST, and not by the deeds of the law. Ihon also says: All that is borne
1. Ioh. 1
of God, overcomes the world: and this is the victory that overcomes the
world, even our faith. Who is it that overcomes the world, but he which
believes that JESUS is the son of God? And further in the same chapter: These
things have A written unto you, which believe on the name of the son of God,
that ye may know how that ye have eternal life, and that ye may believe on
the name of the son of God.

And this is the fre boldness which we have toward him, that if we ask any
thing according to his will he hears us. Lo, how if a man believes, (that is)
if he sets his trust upon the goodness of God only, he is herd, and
optayneth all that he requires of the LORD, as Mark Matt. 11.
also witnesses. Paul what time he preached the forgiveness of sins (...).
13. 14, 16.
he did always ascribe it unto faith: that we might know the virtue and power
of CRISTES death, and that we should give all glory and praise unto him, which
has received us unto the faith by his goodness. JESUS preached the Gospel of
ye kingdom M^^. ^
of God, saying: The time is ^ulfylled, and the kingdom of god ^s at hand,
amend your selves, and believe the gospel.

Here might some men say: ye speak so much of faith, and that man ^s
justified by faith only, and not by works: Where as saint James nevertheless
says, that faith with but works is dead. Truth it is, and he says well:
For without there ensue Nota.
forsakynge and lothsomnesse of sins, and without a man rest and rejoice
only in God, having respect to none other creature, sekyng help or conforte
at the same: Then is it a toke^ that he is not wholly fixed upon God, nor puts
his trust in him. So long as a man rejoices in synnynge, so long is not God
his joy. As long as man comes not to God with more love and thankfulness,
nor can quyete him self with God: so long has he not the true faith. The
true faith mortifyeth the sins, that the outward works may testifye of the
inward faith. Thus doing optayneth God the glory, which will work
wonderously in all them, in whom he has poured his word by faith. Therefore
said CHRIST: Let your light so shine before men, that they Math 5 1. Pet, 2
mayese your good works, and glorifye your father which is in heaven.
Scripture witnesses every where yt faith must make new creatures, Pha. 2
orels should it not work, ye work wherefore God sent his word. Not that works
iustyfye a man: But seeing man is iustyfyed by faith, therefore is he called
justified or ryghteous for doing the works of faith: For the works be called
ryghteous before God, by reason of faith. Here upon brings saint Jacob. 1
James Abraham and Rahab as proves, saying: Will thou understand O thou
vain man, that faith without deeds is dead? Was not our father Abraham
iustyfyed through works, when he offered Isaac his son upon the altar? Thou
seyst how that faith wrought with his deeds, through the deeds was the faith
made perfect: and the scripture was fulfilled, which says: Abraham believed
God and it was reputed unto him for righteousness, and he was called the
friend of God. etc. If Abraham had douted on Gods promise, when he would have
offered his son: then had not his faith been right nor sufficyent. Rahab
Iosu. 2
also showed her faith, where by she let the spies go, showing them which
way they should go. She believed steadfastly that God should cause the children
of Israel to win the city of Jericho, and by yt faith was her faithful
work accepted before God. God looked first upon Abell and then upon his Gene. 4.
gift. The scripture has shut up al Gal 3.
under sin, that the promise should come by faith on JESUS CHRIST, given unto
them that believe. Hereby we may se that faith only justifies (that is:) When
we forsake all creatures, submyttynge out selves, and pass by all man's
inuencyons or holiness, falling and leaning to CHRIST only, saying: O LORD
I knowledge health to be happened unto me by the. LORD augme^t thou my faith.
CHRIST said: I am Ioh. 5.
the light of the world he that follows me shall not walk in darkness, but
shall have the light of life. And again in the same chapter: If ye continue in
my word, then are ye my disciples, and ye shall know the truth, and yt truth
shall make you fre. Though the faithful fell to synnynge, yet remains God a
friend unto the faith and love that he fyndeth in a man: his promyses unto the^
that believe are so manyfold. David Psalm. 36
says: If the ryghteous falls, he shall not be bruised: for the LORD does
stay him with his hand. Paul says: Then is there now no damna Romans 8.
cyon unto them that are in CHRIST IESV, which walk not after ye flesh, but
after the sprete. For the law of the sprete (yt brings life in CHRIST IESV)
has made me fre from yt law of sin and death. Saint Ihon also 1. Ioh. 3.
wrytteth saying: Who so ever is borne of God, synneth not, for his sede
remains in him: and he can not sin, because he is borne of God.

Though a man be weak after the flesh, and thereby fall to sin: yet Nota.
does God love a man for the faith whereby he loves God. When he falls, his
fall is not unto dead: for his sprete is without gyle. The LORD suffers the
ryghteous to fall, lest he stand to much in his own conceate: but that he
ask mercy with all his heart. The ryghteous falls seven times in one day,
and ryseth again. The LORD takes the faithful for his best beloved, and
reserueth him to his mercy. Solomon says: The ryghteous Prou. 10
labors to do good, but the ungodly uses his increase unto sins. Our
prayer is that we may abide by the glad and joyful tidings of the gospel.
For he that Matt. 16.
believes, and is baptized shall be saved. I bring you tidings of (...). 2
great joy which shall happen unto al people: for unto you is this day borne
the Saueoure, even CHRIST the LORD.

Thus far is now said of the mercy, which we vptayne by faith: For true
faith ioyfuily received, excludynge al ye is contrary to CHRIST brings a
great health with her.

The third chapter shall treat how hurtefull unbelief is, and what is the
cause that men be so cold and strange in Godly matters and in love toward
God.
When we consydre our first progeny, then is it euydent unto us, that the
nature of man is created to ye likeness of God in will, reason, and
understanding: following God through wysedom, and by knowledge of the
creatures, And that man was joined with a perfect heart unto God, using him with a
co^plete knowledge. Upon this has Gene. ^.
God set him in the paradyse of pleasure, geuynge him a commandment, namely,
ye he should not eat of the tree of knowledge of good and evil. This
commandment was given unto Ada^ by God, to ye intent ye he would prove,
whether he would abide steadfast by his word and co^mau^dme^t, or not. But ye
deuel, which was minded to bring sin and death in to the world through
unbelief, occasioned to it by his envy to mankind, he has stered the serpent
(which was the sotyleste creature of all creatures) to say unto the woman:
Ye, has God said Gene. 3
in deed: Ye shall not eat of all manner trees in the garden? Then said the
woman unto the serpent: We eat of the fruit of the trees in y^ garden: But as
for the fruit of the tree that is in the mids of the garden, God has said:
Eat ye not of it, and touch it not, lest ye dye. When the Serpent now
perceived that Euastode weakly upon Gods word, for she said: lest we dye
(where God nevertheless had said: Look in what day so ever thou eatest
thereof thou shall dye the death:) he did assault Eua first, to make her dout in
Gods word, and to bring her from it. Now when he had her so far: than
brought he her yet farther, saying: Tush ye shall not dye ye death. For God
knows that in what day so ever ye eat of it, your eyes shall be opened, and
ye shall be as God, and know both good and evil. And the woman saw that the
tree was good to eat of, and lusty unto ye eyes, and a pleasant tree to make
wise: and took of the fruit of it, and did eat, and gave unto hit husband
also thereof, and he did eat. Thus have they both left Gods word, and have
done their will, and fulfilled their desire and lust. Thus has man cast him
self away through mysbelefe transgressyng gods word and commandment.

The lust and desire that Adam conceived in his first appetite does yet remain
in him: for we are of the same flesh and substance and also follow the^ ature
of it. We are so sore wrapped in mysbelefe, that it is also unto us the cause
and occasyon of all sin: so that we be naturaly children of wrath, by
inspiracyon of yt prince of the air, which is a sprete, workynge in the
children Ephe. 2.
of mysbelefe, fulfyllynge the pleasure of the flesh: for the which Tollo^. 3
the wrath of God comes upon the children of unbelief. When man now leaving
the word of God, regards not God, following his own wit and wisdom:
than is his heart and mind darkened and drawn away, trusting more to his
own wisdom, then to his LORD his God. And his heart conceaueth nothing
save the lust and desire of the flesh, of the which he is led captyue: so
that he axeth no more counsel at God. This does David complain saying: The
Psalm. 13
foolysh bodies say in their hearts: Tush, there is no God. They are corrupt
and become abominable in their doings, there is not one that does good. The
LORD looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to se if there were any
that would understand and seek after God. But they are all gone out of the
way, they are altogether become unprofitable, there is none that does good: no
not one. All this comes by mysbelefe, and when man sets no more by God and
his word, nor has no more lust unto him. For if man did abide by God, and
beheld always the wondrous and glorious works, which the LORD has declared
unto us by his benefytes and goodness: it were not possible that he should
forsake his LORD his God, but should always be gyded of God and his word,
seeking at him only all his comfort and health. But seeing he is deceuered
from God and his word, and will stand to his own wysedom, which is but
plain ^oly: therefore is he rest less, and to his LORD his God is he
unfaithful: as witnesses Esaye saying: He that is unfaithful deals
unfaithfully. David also says: Esaias. 21.
They kept not the co^uenau^t of Psalm. 77
God, and would not walk in his law. They forgot what he had done and the
wonderful works that he Aba^ut. 2.
had showed for them. In all this have they sinned, and did not believe in his
wonderful works: for the soul of the unfaithful is not steadfast nor true
in her self. By all these euydences and reasons are we taught, that all
wickedness is come in the world by mysbelefe: for through mysbelefe has man
but slender knowledge of God: and according as he has knowledge of God, so
much loves he God, and rejoices in his goodness. This mysbelefe does so
keep a man bound in sinfulness, that he can not feel or perceive any goodness
to come unto him from the blessed LORD.

Though he say that he believes CHRIST to be crucyfyed, and that he has
suffered the paynfull death, which the deuyls also believe: yet believes not he
so, as one yt can rest in this death only, and as one yt is fully per suaded to
have mercy and forgeuenes thereby of ye LORD. For if he could believe this, he
should both love God, and rejoice wholye in him, not lokynge about for to
obtain any other mercy of what creature soever it were. It should suffice him
to know God which will receive him to his mercy. Wherefore, the cause why me^ be
so could in love toward God, and so strange from him is, that they know him
so little, and that they have so small perceuerau^ce of yt love that he has
toward us. Lo, what unkindness comes by mysbelefe as when man is not fully
certyfyed in his heart, that God will give us so much, as he has promised us
by his word: ye so little is man inwardlye rejoiced, and comforted, as he does
believe, and is assured in his conscience that God is, and will be good unto us.
For if he knows not God in his goodness, how can he rejoice in his
goodness? Thus is it euydent that man abides presoned of his own wit and
wisdom through unbelief. This caused Esaye to say. Therefore comes my
people Esa. 5
also in captyuyte, because they have no understanding. David also speaks of
thus miserable estate saying. O LORD, how glorious Psalm. 91.
are thy works, thy thoughts are very deep. An unwise man will not know
this, and a fool will not understand it. And again in another place. They
will not be learned Psalm. ^1.
and understand: but walk on still in darkness. Who so is not lyghtened
through the word of the LORD to know the LORDS way, and to perceive his
salvation by the faith in God, that man walks in darkness altogether,
finding no resting place for his sinful soul, having a weak hope to find
salvation by the LORD. This is it that David said. They believed not in God,
and put Psalm. 77.
not their trust in his help. Esaye calls us out of this darkness
saying: Esaye, 50,
Who so walks in darkness, and no light shyneth upon him, let him hope in the
LORD, and hold him by his God. How could a man have any hope or trust in his
heart, seeing he is not stedfastlye persuaded that mercy can be optayned, for
the which he may hope: seeing ye hope and lo^gyngefor comes by faith.

Because now that man does not believe, therefore can he also not hope any such
good as is promised hi^ by faith, another ca^ he love dewly the geuer of ye
good, yt has promised him so much of it: this may we perceive by ye children
of Israel: ye LORD promised to give Abraham al ye lo^d of Canaa^ Gene. 15.
and afterward wha^ he would have sent Moses unto Pharao, to deliver the same
people, he promised unto Moses Exodus 3. Deuteronomy. 1.
to give the^ ye land yt flowed with milk and honey. Now yt god was minded thus
to do, yt did he show evidently in deliueryng yt people from Pharaos hands,
leadyng the^ strau^gly through the reed see, and fedinge them with heavenly
bread. But how happened it? For when they had any lettynge by the way, by
reason of their mysbelefe and unthankfulness, and had forgotten the benefytes
showed unto them of God: than fell they to murmuring, and deceuerynge from
God, and his word. Again, what ^u. 13. 14
time as the spies had searched out^ the land of promise, and came, and showed
all things unto the chylderen of Israel, how they had seen great giauntes
in comparison of whom they were but greshoppers, and that the indwellers of the
land were strong and mighty men, and that their cities were high walled. The
chylderen of Israel hearing this were sore astonnyed, murmured against God,
Moses, and Aaron, saying: that they would turn back again in to Egypt. All
this murmuring came of mysbelefe. For if they had stand steadfastly to his
word and bydden sure by his promyses, they should have answered and said: We
shall ouercoeme that nacyon right well, and take the land in possessyon,
though they were thousand times stronger: For the LORD has promised and given
it us. But seeing they fell from gods word, and his promyses, leaning to their
own polyce and strength, therefore seemed it unto them impossible. Nevertheless
it was possible with God, and through God, as his word did assure them.

Seeing than yt God made such a promise unto them, and that they decyuered
from his behestynges: therefore had they no hope to take in the land of
promise: Wherefore they were unworthy of it, and have not entered in to the rest,
which God promised them. For this cause comes Paull and warns us of this
wicked unbelief, saying: Let us fear Heb. 4.
therefore lest any of us forsakynge y^ promise of entering in to his rest,
should seem to come behind: for it is declared unto us as well as unto them.
But the word of preaching helped not them, when they yt herd it believed it
not. By these reasons is it declared unto us euydently how hurtefull mysbelefe
is unto us. We ca^ do God no more wrong, nor bring more loss unto our soul,
than in yt we give no more crede^ce to his words, which not withsto^ding is
faith full unto us in all his promyses.

This also complained CHRIST to ye Jews saying: The father which Johan. 5.
sent me bears witness himself of me. Ye have another herd his voice,
norsene his shape at any time: You have not his word abiding in you, for ye
believe him not, whom he has sent. I am come in my fathers name, and ye
receive me not: If another come in his own name, him shall ye receive. How can
ye believe, which receive praise one of an other, and seek not the praise which
is of God only? If ye believed Moses, ye should believe me also: For he has
written of me. But if ye believe not his wrytynges, how shall ye believe my
words? ye will not come unto me that ye might have life. He yt believes not
God, has made 1 Ioh. 5.
him a liar: because he has not believed the record that God has testyfyed of
his son. And this is the record: even that God has given us everlasting
life. And this life is in his son. He that has the son of God, has life.
Hereby is it euydent, that if we covet to be conforted in God, tha^ shall we
seek it in his word, and take record of the same, how we may come to his
mercy. So much faith as we give to his words, so much shall our knowledge
be also of his goodness, and so much shall we be comforted of him. How can
we be fully comforted, seeing we do so sore wauet and stand not steadfast in
his word, which his goodness does declare unto us? For all that does
conforte us comes of God. The father loves Johan. 13.
the son, and has given all things in his hands. Whosoever believes Joan. 3.
in the son, has life everlasting: But he that believes not in the son,
shall not se life, but the wrath of God abides upon him. This does scripture
specifye unto us, that we should know the cause and occasyon of all euel: that
is mysbelefe, and it is the cause yt we know not God, nor have any love toward
him. Now when the love of God is banyshed, than does man lyghtelye fall to all
manner of wickedness. Therefore said CHRIST: When the holy ghost comes he
shall rebuke the world of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment. Of
sin, because they believed not on me. Of righteousness, because I go to the
father. Woe be unto them Eccli. 2.
that are lowse or heart, which put not their trust in God, and therefore shall
they not be defended of him. Again: They that fear the LORD, Prou. 18.
will not mystrust his word: and they that love him will keep his
commandments. Thus may we se how yt when man knows not what God has
commanded him, nor stands steadfastly upon God through faith: how then (I
say) he falls unto extreme unkindness, without any dredyng of God.
Mysbelefe therefore is the cause and occasion of al sins, whereof man shall be
judged. For if ye first man had bydden fast by Gods word, he should not have
fallen to synnynge: Therefore said CHRIST: The works yt I do in my fathers Ioh.
10.
name, they bear witness of me: but ye believe not, because ye are not of my
sheep. Baruch also says: But Baruch 3.
how happens it Israel that thou art in thyn enemies land? thou art waxen
old in a strange contry, and defiled with yt dead. Why art thou become like
unto them yt go down to their graves? Even because thou have forsaken the well
of wisdom. Truly, if thou had walked in the way of God, thou should
have remained still safe in thine own land. Even this same complains the
LORD also by Jeremy the prophet, Ierem. 2
saying: What unfaithfulness found your fathers in me, yt they went away
so far fro me, falling to lyghtnesse, and being so vain? They thought not
in their hearts: Where have we left the LORD, that brought us out of the land
of Egipte? that led us through the wyldernes, through a desert and rough land.
etc. And continently after in ye same place: For my people has done two euels:
They have forsaken me the well of the water of life, and dygged them pyttes: Ye
vile and broken pyttes that hold no water. And it follows also: Thine own
wickedness shall reprove the, and thy turnynge away shall condemn the: that
thou may know and understand how hurtefull a thing it is that thou have
forsaken the LORD thy God, and not feared him says ye LORD God of hoostes.

Wherefore, when we behold our selves duly, remembrynge the worthynes and
excellency of y^ chosen soul, which of right should be a bryde of IES US
CHRIST: for of nature can not she be refresshed nor comforted but, only of
God.

What so ever she seeks beside him, that makes her disquyete and
comfortless. For this cause is it needful for us to lift our eyes up
toward heaven, besekynge him humbly to conforte us with his own presence.
Another is this accomplyshed, but only when the LORD declares his goodness
unto us by his word, and that we then rejoice in all the goodness which he
has promised us therein. If we forsake ye word, then shall the soul become
cold and strange from god This confirms Jeremy saying: I will cast you out
of this land, in Ierem. 16.
to a land that ye, nor your fathers know not: and there shall ye serve
strange gods day and night, there will I show you no favor. That man
verily has no rest which falls to any shape^ creature, or to any inuencion
and ymaginacyon of man. Where man does yet procure righteousness and saluacyo^
by his own mother wit and wisdom, there does not god work his work. This
may be tried by many places of scripture CHRIST did not show many tokens Romans
1.
there where was no faith, because ye they knowing yt there is one God, have
not praised him as God, nor thanked him, but became vain in their
ymaginacyo^s, and their folyshe heart was blinded. Wha^ they counted themselves
wise, they became fools. And why? Eue^ because (says Paul) Romans 10.
they know not the righteousness which avails before God, and go about to
maintain their own righteousness: and thus are not they subdued unto ye
righteousness which is of value before God. CHRIST is ye end of the law
vnto-ryghteousnesse for every one yt believes. For God so loved the world, that
he gave his Ioh. 3.
only son, that woe so ever believes in him should not peryshe, but have
everlasting life. Lo how saluacyo^ comes by faith. Who so therefore does not
receive the word by faith the same abides in darkness and da^ynacion: as
CHRIST witnesses in the same place, saying: But he that believes not, is
condemned already: because he believes not on ye name of the only son of
God. But this is the condemnacion: that the light is come in to the world, and
men loved the darcknesse more then the light, for their works were evil. Who
so ever does evil, hates the light, and comes not to ye light, that his
deeds should not be reproved. Here in are we informed that it is Gods will,
that all men be saved: and that we shall knowledge the fathers love, which has
given us CHRIST to be our Saueoure: and that we should knowledge our
salvation to come by him, which has accomplyshed the work of our health in
us. But seeing many men do not turn them selves to God ward, walking after
their own will and desire: therefore cannot they have knowledge of the salvation
that is promised and given us by CHRIST. Man must utterly forsake him self,
with all that is in him, and rest upon CHRIST only: by whose death we may
find saving health. But alas Lollo. 2.
for pytie there be many vain and pufte up in their fleshly minds, which hold
not them selves to the head and word, another come to CHRIST to be humbly
taught of him. This is the cause why ye Pharisees came not to God, but said it
that Job did prophecy aforehande, saying: They say unto God: Go Job. 21.
from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. What manner of fellow is ye
Almighty, that we should serve him? What profit should we have to submytte our
selves unto him? Esaye also says: Thou have Esaye. 57.
had trouble for the multitude of thine own ways, yet saydest thou never: I
will leave of. Thou thynkest to have health or life of thy self and therefore
thou beleuest not that thou art sick. Ye, hear what O see the prophet
says: I drove Ephraim, Judah plowed, and Jacob O see. 10
played the husbandman, that they might so we unto righteousness and reap the
fruits of weldoynge: that they might plowe up their fresshe and new tylled
land, and seek the LORD till he came, and taught the^ righteousness. But now
they have plowed them wickedness, therefore shall they reap sin, and eat ye
frut of life. Seeing thou put thy confidence in thine own ways, and
leanest to the co^fide^ce of thy worthies, there shall grow a sedicyon among
thy people. By this is it evident that man remains in his unfaithfulness
through his own wisdom. For the LORD will teach us with his word only, if we
covet to walk aryght in his way. Al is but foolyshnesse, be man never so well
learned, if he knew naught of God. Therefore says Paul: The word of the 1.
Corin. 1
cross is foolyshnesse unto the^ yt perish, but unto us that are saved it is
the power of God. For it is written: I will destroy the wisdom of the Esaias. 29
wise, and will cast away the understanding of the prudent. For so much as the
world by the wisdom thereof knew not God in his wysedom. it pleased God
through foolysh preaching to save them that believe. If 2. Cor. 4.
our Gospel be yet hyd, it is hyd in them that are lost: among whom the
God of this world has blinded the minds of them, which believe not, that the
light of the Gospel of the glory of CHRIST (which is the image of God)
should not shine unto them. And in another place says Paul: Because they
received not the love of the treuth, 2. Tessa. 2.
that they might have been saved: therefore shall God send the^ strong
delusyon, that they should believe lies, that all they might be damned, which
believed not the treuthe, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. It has been the
LORDS will always to draw every man unto him both by benefytes, and words.
But when he seyth the hearts to remain still hard, and perverted, than
threateneth he the unbelieving, yt they shall come to naught, if they do not
receive his word, saying: The kingdom of God shall Math. 21.
be taken from you, and shall be given unto y^ Heythen, which shall bring forth ye
fruits of it. And who so falls upon this stone, (that is CHRIST) shall be
broken^^ pieces: and look upon who^ it falls, it shall grynde him to poul^^r.
This is fearful to hear of him, that i^ offended at Gods word through
mysbelef, another does knowledge through love his salvation to be therein: but
withstandeth it by all means possible. They that be offended and dashe at the
stone (that is CHRIST) they be not drawn to him through his goodness, but be
rather peyered, perverse, and myndlesse. Ye and they become enemies of God by
the law: whereby they be brought to greater fear, than can well be swaged and
redressed again by Gods word.

When the stone (that is the blessed Nota.
CHRIST) shall fall upon the mis believing, and forsake y^ sinner trustyng in
his blindness, being despised of God for his obstinacy, and beating his
judgment without mercy at the day of dome: than shall the unbelieving se
how grievous it is unto him, that he has not received CHRIST in his word. The
LORD said: He yt is not with me, is against Math. 12.
me. He that gathers not with me, scatters. For he that seeks
righteousness, notbeholding CHRIST only with a pure mind, he dasheth against y^
stone. Now grievous it is to offend at y^ stone, and to be offended at CHRIST,
do many places of scripture specify unto us. CHRIST is set to a fall, and to
an Luce. 2.
vprising again of many. But well is him whose trust is in ye LORD his god. Be
it known unto you therefore Actu^. 13.
ye me^ and brethren, ye through this man (y^ is CHRIST) is preached unto you
ye forgiveness of sins, and from all the things, whereby ye might not be
justified in the law of Moses. But whosoever believes on this man is
justified. Beware therefore that it come not upon you, which is spoken in the
Prophets. Behold ye despysers, (...). 2.
and wonder at it, and peryshe: For I do a work in your time, which ye shall
not believe if any man tell it you. And again in the same place said Paull and
Barnabas to the Jews: It behooved first the word of god to be spoken unto
you, but now that ye thruste it from you, and count your selves unworthy of
everlasting life: lo, we turn to the Gentyles. Oh LORD who ca^ perceive how
hurtefull the worldly wisdom is? The Bishops, Pharisees, Prestes, and
Lawers through their own wisdom would not submit them selves to the humble,
and meke faith of CHRIST, but rather drew the other people from the faith in
CHRIST, saying: Does any of the rulers or Pharisees believe on him? But the
commune Johan. 7.
people which know not the law, are cursed. Thus were the Publicans and open
sinners (which believed in CHRIST) despised of them. Ye because the commune
people Luce. 7. Johan. 12.
followed CHRIST, therefore have the Bishops and Prestes taken counsel how to
slaye CHRIST. CHRIST also when he saw that the covetous Pharisees did mock
him, he said: Ye are they that iustyfye your selves Luce. 16.
before ^^n, but God knows your hearts. For that which is hye among men, is
abominacyon before God. And again said CHRIST: Why know ye not my speech? Even
Johan. 8.
because ye can not abide the hearing of my words. And again: I am come to
judgment into his Johan. 9
world, that they which se not, might se: and that they which se. might be made
blind. And some of the Pharisees that were with him, herd this, and said
unto him. Are we then blind also? JESUS said unto them: If ye were blind, ye
should have no sin: But now that ye say wese, therefore remains your sin:
That is as much, as though CHRIST would say: He that will se his salvation
by his own wysedom, he is blind: For he looks not upon God, but is blind in
himself. But he that looks not upon himself, but seeks his salvation in
CHRIST, he is lyghtened of God. This witnesses saint Paul, saye^g Roma. 9.
The Heythen which, solowed not righteousness, have ouertake^ righteousness.
But I speak of the righteousness that comes by faith. Israel followed the
law of righteousness, and attained not unto the law of righteousness. Why
so? eue^ because they sought it not out of faith, but as it were out of
deserving of works. For they have sto^bled at the stomblynge stone, as it is
written. Behold, I lay in Syon a stone to Esaye. 28.
stomble at, and a tocke to be offended at: and whosoever believes on him,
shall not be confounded.

Here have we now herd what hurt unbelief brings, whereby a man becomes
could and strange from God. For through unbelief has a man small
perceuenaunce of God or godliness. Ye where God is not duly known, there is
man idle, and can have no godly lust, nor favor unto God. But yt father has
given us CHRIST his only son, according to his love toward us (even his
godly word) that we should harken to him, and learn to know y^ way of
salvation through his word. Thus has CHRIST called us lovingly namely us yt
were of a disquiete and troubelous heart, geuingvs knowledge of his fatherly will
through faith, yt we should be comforted in his word, which brigeth al mercy with
it. If our heart be ready to accomplish yt will of god according to his word,
and not to depart through any straung learni^g, tha^ are we surely called of
hi. For Iho^ says. Whosoever transgresses, and abides 2. Johan. 1
not in the doctrine of CHRIST, has not God. He that abides in the doctrine
of CHRIST has both the father, and the son. And again: If no man will
receive you, Math. 10.
nor hear your preaching, depart out of that house or city, and shake the
duste from your fete. Treuly I say unto you: It shall be easyer for the loud
of Sodoma, and Gomorra in the day of judgment, tha^ for yt cuie. Thus may
youse y^ damage Math. 9
and hurt of mysbelese, the which causes a disquyeted heart, and remorse of
conscieure, and an heart ye is comfortless, ye a continuance in sinfulness.
Wherefore CHRIST saying the multitude, having blind leaders, he is moved with
pitye upon them: for they were pined away, and dispersed, as sheep having no
sheep herd. And CHRIST said unto his disciples. The harvest is great, but
the laborers are few. Wherefore pray the LORD of the harueste to send forth
laborers into his harvest. Now louyngly will the LORD have pytye upon us,
seeing he calls us so swetelye to his godly word, that we abide not in
damnacyon. 2. Tes. 3
Paul says: Brethren, pray for us, that the word of God may have fre
passage, and be glorified as it is with you, and that we may be delivered from
unreasonable, and evil men. This grant us y^ heavenly father, through JESUS
CHRIST his son.

Amen.
Here ends the treatise of faith and hope.
Here follows the treatise of love and charity.
Of the love that God has toward us, how stronglye love works in us, and
how hurtefull the worldly love is.
PEace and mercy from God the father through IESV CHRIST. Ye entyerlye beloved,
ye that hunger to come to ye knowledge of ye love yt God has to us ward ye must
turn your selves humblye to the blessed LORD, desiring him to make your
hearts wyllinge to receive his word joyfully, and to knowledge that love in the
spirit by faith, the which the LORD showed us so frendlye through his word.
His love is not known, but only through his word, the which only gives us
true witness that God loves us. So far stretches our knowledge of his
love, as we have gotten it out of his words by faith. The LORD shows us
suffycyentlye in his words that he loves us.

As God is true and faithful in his promises, so may we lyghtelye get
perceueraunce of his love by his own words. Ye even that god has promised,
that he loves us, were enough to rejoice in, if we could believe dewly, and
not to seek about for any other lovers. It should be enough for us that God
loves us, and we should rejoice in his love: For his love is only true,
bounteous, holy and good. That the world, and al men do love me, that does
not auayll me, another does it comfort, nor save me: but that God does love me,
yt is a comfort unto my sinful soul. For god gives salvation holiness,
righteousness, and rede^ptio^ through his love. The world with all her
louelynesse, gives naught save da^nacion, hell, sin, and death. Therefore can
ye soul find another rest nor peace therein. For the soul may be comforted in
her own nature, and strength with God only, and with his love. Now when man
hears this, and perceaueth it, than must his heart leap up for joy toward
God, which loves him. Thus becomes be equal, and like unto God, so y^ he
is so minded in love to Godwarde, as God again is minded to him, saying with
cheerfulness: Is it not a great thing, that such a LORD loves me, that
draws all men to him: and that because I should be partaker of all the good
that of his love he has promised to give unto all them, that knowledge him by
his love. He that is sure of this love, says boldelye: Who can now danger
me? Who ca^ condemn me? For God so loves me y^ he will save me. Now do I
fear no there death nor hell: For God that loves me has overcome death, hell,
and sin for me. Let arise now against me castles, strong holds, ye the
gates of hell, and though I were i y^ mids of death, yet shall not they hurt
me. For God, that has al powers in his hand, does love me. Them that God has
elect, and chosen, Roma. ^.
them has he called: and whom he has called, the^ has he also made
righteous, and whom he has made righteous, them has he glorified also. What
shall we say than unto these things? if God be on our side, who can we be
against us? which spared not his own son, but has given him for us all:
how shall not he give us all things also with him? Who will lay any thing to
the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that makes ryghteous, who will then
condemn?

For as much than as the chylderen Hebre. 1.
have flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part with them: that
he through death, might take away the power of him, which had lordshyppe over
death that is to say the devil: and that he might deliver them, which
through fear of death were al their life time in danger of bondage. For he in
no place takes on him the angels, but y^ sede of Abraham takes he on him.
Wherefore in all things it became him to he made like to his brethren, that he
might be merciful, and an High Priest in things concerning god, to make
agreement for the sins of the people. For us that he himself suffered, and
was tempted, he is able to, succurre them that are tempted. Who could now be
comfortless, if he were persuaded in his mind hereof? Who could not rejoice in
spret having found such a redemer? Who saw ever such a love? Herein 1.
Ioha^. 4.
is love, not that we loved god, but ye he loved us, and sent his son to make
agreement for our sins. The love Roma. 5.
of God is shed a broad in our hearts by the holy ghost, which is given un to
us. For when we were yet weak according to the time, CHRIST dyed for us
ungodly. When we were yet enmyes, CHRIST reco^cyled us unto Roma. 4.
the father, which was given for our sins, and raised up for our
righteousness sake.

Obou^teful LORD, how did love drive you to us ward, what time ye did look so
lovingly upon us with your fatherly pity? For, because ye might show your most
excellent love yt ye bear toward us, therefore did ye yield your selves unto ye
bitter death: yt we might knowledge al our salvation, and rede^ptio^ in you
only, and reioycei you. Oh who ca^ feel ye botto^ of your love, what tym as we
se, and perceive what inestimable price ye gave for our rede^cio^? with your
faithful and true word have ye assured us of your love: with your precious
blood have ye scaled it: with your death have ye confirmed it: and bequiethed
and left us the testament of love, to the forgiveness of sins O how
glorious are we estymed in roure syghte father? even as elect and chosen
chylderen, had in great reputacyon of you through love.

Lo, what love the father has showed us, that we should be called the 1.
Johan. 3
chylderen of God, and also be the same. We are now the childeren of God, and
yet has it not appeared what we shall be. But we know that when he shall
appear, we shall be like him: for we shall se hu^ as he is.

O wonderful love? Who could Nota.
comprehend and understand, that the natural man, (which was so pytyfully
destroyed through Adams sin, and comme in the devils power) should so be
lykened unto God, and to have optayned such fellowshyppe and communion with
his inestimable goodness. By nature we were chylderen of the wrath of God, and
could not rise again by oureselues. But God not willing to be wroth forever
upon his handy work has called to remembrance his natural love and pytie:
and thought how that he had created us after his likeness, after he had once
poured him self in us through his tender love. Thus was he myndefull of us
through himself, and did show mercy: his love steared him to it, and our
fraylnesse has he taken to his mercy. For he saw we were flesh and faydynge
heye, not being able to stand, without ye assystaunce of his goodness. He
was also myndful of that which he promised unto man, hearing the deep desires,
and the humble syghinge of the ryghteous: which longing for his coming, did
call for him, yt he should she we his love to the strayeng and lost nature.
Wherefore the father has opened his fatherly heart, sendynge us his word, his
only son: that he might be for us y^ only mediator, speech man and swager
of Gods wrath, which should overcome death, hell, sin and the deuell, which
should accomplish for us the work of salvation through his death, whose
flesh and blood should call for mercy for us unto ye father. Who should not
now knowledge his glorious state, where unto the LORD has called use. Who can
now feel and perceive this love, and not rejoice inwardly? For he has given
every one power to be the children of God, that Ioh. 1.
believe in his name. Who can come to higher estate, the^ to be elect children
of him, that only has power to exalte his friends?

When CHRIST had called his beloved disciples to his love, the^ comforted he
them always in their passions, saying: I am among you as a mynister. As for
you, ye at they that Luce. 22.
have bydden with me in my temptacyons. And I will apppoynt ye king dome unto
you, even as my father has appointed me, that ye may eat and drink at my
table in my king doine, and sit upon seats, and judge the twelfe trybes of
Israel. No ma^hath Ioh. 15.
greater love, the^ to set his life for his friend. Ye are my fre^des, yfye do
ye I command you. I call you not servants: for a servant knows not what
his lord does. But I have said that ye are friends. For all that I have herd of
my father, have I showed unto you. Ye have not chose me, but I have chosen you,
and ordyned yt ye go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit continue: yt
whatso ever ye ask ye father in my name, he should give it you. Unto you it is
given to know ye mystery of ye kingdom Math. 1^
of heaven, but unto the^ it is not given. With these aforesaid sayenges are we
greatly comforted, in yt we se how much the LORD will do unto them ye he loves.
Now common makes he him self with all his kingdom? willing us all to have
his love, and ye we all should knowledge all our salvation to come of his love,
the which he declares so plenteously unto us. Therefore says Paul: The LORD
has chosen us by him ^yhe. 1
(that is CHRIST) or ever the foundacyon of the world was laid, that we should
be holy and without blame before him in love: and ordained us before to receive
us as ehyldre^ through JESUS CHRIST, according to ye pleasure of his will unto
the praise of the glory of his grace, whereby he has made us accepted in the
beloved: in whom we have redempcyon through his blood (namely) the forgiveness
of sins, according to ye riches of his grace, which he has shed upon us
abundauntly in all wisdom and prudence. The fatherly heart was so moved with
love to us ward, that all his thoughts were employed how he might show mercy
unto his poor sheep. Though ye righteousness of God might tustly have
condemned us: for Ada^ and we have both transgressed his commandment in one
flesh. And though the LORD might have kept us still in deaths danger: yet has
his love and pytie so moved him, yt he did join his mercy with justice, and
peace with truth, so that these being assembled, did call upon love desiring
that God would declare his love. This did David knowledge in sprete and said: I
will herke^ Psalm. 84
what the LORD God will say, for he shall speak peace unto his people, and
to his saints, that they turn not them selves unto foolyshnesse. For his
salvation is nigh them that fear him, so that glory shall dwell in our land.
Mercy and truth are met together, righteousness and peace kiss each other.
Truth shall rise out of the earth, and righteousness shall look down from
heaven. And why? the LORD shall show loving kyndnesse, and our land shall
give her increase. Righteousness shall go before him, and prepare the way for
his coming. And again: The Psa. 144.
LORD is gracyous and merciful, long sufferynge and of great goodness. The
LORD is loving unto every man, and his mercy is over al his works. Turn
again then to Psalm. 114.
thy rest (o my soul) for the LORD has given the thy desire. And why? Thou
have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my fete from
falling. Hereby is it evident yt if we desire any inward goodness whereon our
synful soul might test the^ shall we look steadfastly upon this love, and
always consider what CHRIST has given us through his love. wha^ we have ye
knowledge of his love in us, then have we first a cause to rejoice. For only in
his love may we knowledge our salvation. Therefore says Paul: We have not
received Romans 1.
y^ sprete of bondage to fear any more, but we have received y^ sprete of
adopcyo^, whereby we cry, Abba, dear father The same spret certifieth our
sprete, yt we are y^ children of God. Peter also confirms this, saying: 2.
Pet. ^
For so much as his Godly power has given us al things yt pertain unto life
and Godlynes, through the knwlege of him yt has called us by his own glory
and power, whereby the excellent and most great promyses are given unto us:
namely, yt ye by ye same should be partakers of ye godly nature, if ye fly ye
corrupt lust of the world. He now that does rejoice in this love, and can
perceive what is given him by the same, he (I say) could lightely withdraw
himself from all, that is no true love, and suffer not him self to be
deceived with false love. For God has made us so like unto his godly nature
through love, he has yielded himself so louyngly unto ye nature of man: he
has drawn it so friendly to him ward, making of it a chose^ temple cleansed by
his blood, that his sprete might rest in it with al his goodness: and that man
might use God as a friend.

Now when we perceive ye love of God only to be perfect, holy and good, whereby
redempcyon and salvation is given us: then of duty ought such love only to be
our joy, glory and comfort. For God which Ephe. 2
is rich in mercy, through his great love, wherewith he loved us, even when we
were dead in sins, has quyckned us with CHRIST. And for cause of this,
another law nor sin live in us, but CHRIST, which has powered him self in us
through his word: so that God is in us, and we in God. The law does not now
compel us any more, but it is God that has so moved our hearts through his
love, that we by the help and assistaunce of his sprete shall do all yt is
acceptable unto him. This inward mocyon of our heart comes by faith: For
when we know verily that God loves us, then does i^ work in us, causyng us to
fix our mind on nothing, save how we may rejoice in him that does love us.
It is sure a great grace given us of God, yt we knowledge his love toward us,
feeling in our entrayles by faith peace, glory, rest, and joy: whereby only
we perceive that through his love all mercy and for geuenesse is happened unto
us.

This witnesses Paull saying. But after that the kindness, and love of Titum
3.
God our saueoure toward man appeared, not for the deeds of righteousness
which we wroughte, but after his mercy he saved us by the fountain of the
new birth, and renewynge of the holy ghost, which he shed on us abundauntly,
through JESUS CHRIST our saueoure, that we being made ryghteous by his grace,
should be heirs of eternal life, according to hope. Therefore has god
declared his love unto us, that he only should have the glory of our
salvation by faith, whereby we are assured, yt of our selves we have naught:
but ye al is given us freely of his fatherly love and goodness. By says only
are we assured of gods love, and ye we may walk confidently in this love.
Therefore said CHRIST: God so loved ye world, that he gave Ioh. 3.
his only son, that whosoever believes in him, should not peryshe, but have
everlasting life.

The joy and comfort of our conscience shall endure so long, as his love is
had in price and worthynesse of us: but if it begin once to fayde and wax
could, so yt we can another feel rest, nor joy in his love, tha^ do we dread
god as a tyrau^t or a straight judge, not trustyng to optayn mercy of his love
and goodness, nor ye we be made worthy of his love, and goodness by his
bitter passion and death. This is ye most blashhemie and wrong ye can be done
unto God. Where such knowledge of god is, there do men begin to seek health
and comfort in creatures, in ma^s inue^cio^s, in strau^g holiness and in ye
workma^ship of ye craftisman. Thus waxes man could and strau^g from god,
having another faith of god, nor sauoure of godliness, the which not
withsto^ding did love us for his own sake. Eue^ as our opinion is of him, so
shall he please us, as CHRIST says: This is ye life everlasting, that they
Ioh. 17
know ye (ye thou art only ye true God) and who^ thou have sent JESUS CHRIST.
This love does ye book of wysdo^ commend unto us, estyminge it to be a
precious treasure ye we be come to ye knowledge of ye same, saie^g: But thou
Sap^. 15.
(o our god) art sweet, long suffering and true, and in mercy ordreste thou all
things. Though we syn, yet are we thine, for we know thy strength. If we sin
not, shan are we sure that thou regardest us. For to know the, is perfect
righteousness: Ye to know thy righteousness, and power, is the rote of
immortalyte. By this knowledge is God hyhglye praised and thanked of his love.
Ye he has caused to give testimony of his love through out all scriptures, y^
we should be certifyed of it, and to run confidentlye to him through the
same. By Ieremye the prophet Iere. 31,
he says: I love the with an everlasting love, therefore do I sprede my mercy
before the. I will repair the again, that thou may be fast and sure. Now
when man does perceive (by reason of many places of scripture) ye Nota.
God does love us, tha^ ought he to lift up his eyes toward heaven unto him,
that only can lyghten our eyes, and that can give understanding of all that,
which he teaches by his word. Would God we did receive his word by faith
in the spirit, that we might feel, and believe his love therein, and how we
may obtain mercy, grace, and salvation by the same: than should our sinful
soul be comforted in all the goodness, the which the LORD has promised and
declared unto us so louyngly by his word. O LORD I can perceive another the,
nor thy goodness, save only by thy word, wherebye thou saydest that thou
love me. Pour therefore a clean heart within me, and I shall be conforted in
all things, whereby thou declareste thy love. My soul is restless, until I
can rest in the. Increase my faith (for it is thy gift) and I shall have
perceueraunce of the. My soul shall be comforted in thy love, for thou art my
saueoure, my glory, my reioycynge and joy.

When the LORD does hear the hongrie soul syghing after this manner, lo^ging
and hoping for him, than does he turn himself spedely and meteth man,
comforting him with himself saying: Come to y^ waters all ye that be thyrstye,
and ye yt have Esaye. 55.
no monye, come, bye, yt ye may have to eat. Come bye wine and milk, without
any money or money worth. Come to me all ye that labor, and Math. 11.
are laden, and I will ease you, and learn of me: For I am meke and lowlye of
heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls. It is al touching mercy and
forgenesse where with god does call his sheep.

Hereby is it evident unto man, ye gods love is unto him a sure fundament a
strong hold, a rock and an hard ground, whereupon he may buylderightwel.
Wherefore he brings his ship to his haven, he casts out his anchor upon this
sure ground, tyeng al his diseases and grifes at this stony rock, he escapes
through god only all the wawes and peryls of the sea, even as God did promise
by Esaye the prophet, saying: When thou Esaye. 45.
wentest in the water, I was with the that the strong floudes should not
pluck the away. When thou walk in the fire, it shall not burn the, and the
flamme shall not kyndle upon the: for I am the LORD thy God, y^ holyone of
Israel, thy saueour. And Solomon also says: The name of Pro. 1^.
the LORD is a strong castle, the righteous flies unto it, and shall be
saved. He that looks steadfastly upon the LORD, shall not be brought to
co^fusyon: for the love that he knowlegeth in God shall cause him to walk
confidently and assuredly. And with such a faithfully heart is God well apayed,
ye hongereth always to come unto farther knowledge of his will. Such hearts shall
yt LORD call unto him, showing them his love, saying: Son be of good cheer
and comfort, all that is in my is for the. If thou have sinned, if thou have
offended me, remember ye I love ye, trust unto my love, I have paid thy det,
I have given myself over unto death for thy sake, ye thou should knowledge thy
salvation to be of my love.

When man does begin to perceive this, tha^ fideth he comfort and rest, and
does understood how strong ye love was, the which did subdue death. This love
has God to our behofe, that in our need we may run to his love, and
admonysh him of y^ same. And seeing God is love, therefore ca^he not forsake
himself: but will give after the power of his love, and all that of his love he
has promised by his godly word.

This teaches us to know CHRIST'S death in his power, glory, and victory, in
whose love we may se so clearly our redemption, and rejoice therein. O
wonderful gifts, O inco^prehensible treasure. How happy is ye man, to who^ it
is given to have a perceuerau^ce of this? Who came ever to higher salvation?
Who rejoiced ever more, tha^ he ye fa^d god (which loves us) even a father?
Fulfeatlye does Solomon say: Set me as a (...). 8.
seal upon thine heart, and as a seal upon thyn arm: for love is as mighty
as the death, and gelousy as the hell. Her coals are of fire, and a very fla^me
of the LORD: so that many waters are not able to quench love, another may the
streams drown it. Ye if a man would give all the goods of his house for
love, he should count it nothing. He that confesses that JESUS is the son
of God, in him 1. Ioh. 14.
dwells God, and he in God: and we have known and believed the love that God
has to us. God is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in god, and god
in him. Herin is the love perfect with us, that we should have a fre boldness
in the day of judgment. Herby is the synful conscience comforted, namely if
we can perceive by faith, that the LORD will receive the sinner to grace through
his love. And again, if we have made us unworthy of his love, then let us
humble ourselves before ye LORD, syghynge for our mysoedes, and his love shall
conforte us again. Unto him that loved us, and cleansed us from sin by his
blood, and has made us kings and prestes, namely, unto God and his son, be
glory and praise for all his goodness. Amen. Hitherto have we said how well
God loves us, and how -- we may trust in his love: Now shall we show, that
as God has wrought and done great mercy unto us, eue^ so must ye same love
work in us also toward God, and our neighbor, whereby love is uttered what she
is. This namely is, when we render praise, honor and than kes unto ye LORD
God which has made our heart willing in his love through the word, so that we
believe to receive him, and to knowledge his love therein. The love of God does
work so much in us to our salvation, as we can believe and be persuaded, that
God loves us, and that we can rejoice in his love only, being assured, that
we can obtain another mercy nor fauout, save only through his love: yt which he
declared so louyngly toward us in suffering death Whereby we may be assured, that
he does love us without gaynsaynge: and yt he will give us so much goodness,
as he has promised by his word. As we knowledge our salvation and rede^pcion
by his love, so shall we yield him only ye glory of our salvation. Seeing he
only is a geuer of al goodness through his love, therefore ought we to glory and
rejoice in him only. He yt could understand this duly in sprete by faith, ye
same should rest upon CHRIST in all peaceablenes, knowleging his saluacyo^ to
come by him only, and require mercy and grace of him only. For this cause will
God thus declare his love to us, yt we should know, how to rejoice namely, yt
god loves us, and that we know our rede^pcio^ to be by his love

Would God every man knew ye power of ye love yt god has toward us Not^,
for then should we be ever prayeng, and ever readyng scripture, that we might
learn how to know God in his love by his word, and to rejoice in him. For
another of God, nor his love are we assured inwardly, save only by the word,
where unto we give faith and credence. And as the love of God is in our heart,
and as we knowledge his love perfectly: so is our heart again steared with
love toward God, being ready and willing to do all that is acceptable unto
him: that all love and thankfulness might be recompensed him again, which
has heaued and exalted us so hyghly by him through great love: hereby do we
know that God has wrought a wonderful glorious work in us. Seeing the there is
no goodness in man, therefore must all his deeds be assured and sealed with
faith, if they shall be acceptable unto god. And in this faith we shall believe yt
God does work in us both to will and to fulfill. It is God yt has
accomplyshed the work of salvation in us. What work of salvation that ever we
can deuyse or require, that has CHRIST acco^plysshed in us. If we believe this,
and through love utter it, then are we justified and saved, not for the deed or
workynge, but because we are ryghteous through faith, thefore be the deeds of
love or charity ryghteous also. For a faithful man does always behold his own
righteousness in god, ascrybyng to his goodness only all honor: and unto him
self nothing but sin and confusyon that God only may have the glory.
Paul does demand and say: What 1. Cor. 4.
have thou that thou have not received? if thou haste received it, why make
thou the^ thy boast, as though thou had not received it? Again says
Paul: Such trust have we through CHRIST to God 2. Cor. 3
ward, not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing, as of
our selves, but our ableness comes of God. The LORD also exhorts us by
Jeremy saying: Let not y^ wyseman rejoice in his wisdom, Ieremi. 9.
nor the strong man in his strength nor the rych man in his riches: But who so
ever will rejoice, let him rejoice in this: that he understands and knows
me: for I am the LORD which do mercy, equity and righteousness upon earth.
All these places testify that we must look upon CHRIST beleuynge that we be
saved only by his love, if we covet to seek rest and peace in our conscience.
Therefore does Jeremy again speak confortably saying: The mercyes of ye LORD
are not clean gone, and his louinge (...). 3
kyndnesse ceasseth not. His faythfulnesse is great, and renews it self as
the morning. The LORD is my porcyon (says my soul,) therefore will I hope
in him. O how good is the LORD unto the^, that put their trust in him, and to
the soul yt seeks after him. Seeing now that God is always workynge with his
love, therefore must we confess and knowledge all our salvation to be only by
the workynge of his love: and so doing we give him only the glory of all the
goodness that is in us.

This love shall stear our hearts to fulfill the LORDS will, and cause man not
to remain idle in yt love, where unto ye word of ye LORD does exhort him so
louyngly. Love coueteth to come to perfectnes, desyryng always to be so minded
i^ love to god ward, as god by his love is minded to us, ho^geryng always to be
equal with God in love. The spret exhorts us to end euoure us through love to
please God, even as he through his love has done well by us. A o^e is merry,
and comes from a ioiful heart. For love causes a man to have a good opinion
of God, namely, yt god of his bou^teous goodness has given hi rest and hearts
ease, so ye he must rejoice eue^ from his whole heart. How ca^ he be sorry, if
when he looks upon God. he is fully persuaded yt God loves him? And this is
the taken whereby he knows it: yt is, wha^ he feleth his heart to be drawn in
love toward God. For he is sure of a great and in estimable treasur, that he
can rest in the love of God, beleuynge God to be a merciful father unto him by
reason of his tender love. And sure he is, that God shall give him so pleteous
goodness, as he has promised him by his loving word. If God find love in
man (seeing he himself is love) then fyndeth he godliness in him, wherefore he
loves himself in man: and as long as a man continues in this love so long
can not God hate him, nor separate himself from man. For God is knytte and
joined with man by himself, and can not forsake himself so long as he
perceaueth himself in man.

Now, seeing man is become godly through love, if God the father would of his
righteousness co^dene him, then must the godliness be condemned also.
Wherefore, because God is the glory, therefore of necessite must this damned man
live with God in glory through his love. By love have we fellowship with god
and all that is in him: likewise also has he fellowship with us, hydynge our
sins with him self, not sufferynge that such a vessel (wherein he rests
him self through love) be brought to confusyon.

By love use we God to our pleasure, with all his gifts, and all that is in
God: for love wylleth none otherwise then God will. Man has it not of him
self, if he do any good according to the will of God: but seeing he has the
love of God, the same is constrained by the sprete of God to do nothing save it
that pleases God, whom he endeavors ever to please through love. And as God
always delyteth in him self, and in all that he does: even so will he also
have a pleasure in all that, which is done in man through love. God of his love
has made all things good: wherefore all must be good yt man does of love.
Love is pure and clean, and can seek none other rest or peace, save only in
him which himself is rest and peace, which has filled his heart with joy so
louyngly. Love is satisfied with God only, seeking nothing but God. For he
has sought God only through love, that he might enjoy him in truth.

No man can use due love in God, without he be sure first by faith inwardly how
well God does love us, reioycyng in the same love, and put tynge all his
saluacyo^ therein. Thus doing he shall pass by all creatures, estymynge them
as donge, cou^tynge CHRIST only his joy, glory, and hearts desire. He now
that utters ye love, (for true love cannot be idle) he utters it, yt which
God the lover of love will have ye loving man to do. Paul says: Owe nothing
Romans 13.
to any man, but to love one another for he ye loves another, has fulfilled
the law. And again. The chief 1. Tim. 1
su^me of ye commandments is love of a pure heart, and of a good conscience,
and of faith unfeigned. That is: If we desire any goodness inwardly, we shall
pray humbly, that we may have love: for only love is a witness that we have
faith in CHRIST. Love is a power whereby all our works are acceptable unto
God, and sufficiently tried. Wherefore says Paul: In CHRISTIESV Galat. 5.
another is circumcision any thing worth, nor vncircumcysion, but faith: which
by love is mighty in operacyon.

And yt we should know ye better ye power of love, and so yield our selves to
ye same, therefore does Paul show full featly, what worthy deed of love CHRIST
has wrought in us, (yt we should the better knowledge our salvation to be
optayned by love, and so following and conterfaytynge CHRIST'S love) saying:
Therefore does God set forth his love toward Romans 5.
us, in that CHRIST dyed for us wha^ we were yet sinners: much more then shall
we be saved from wrath by him, seeing we are now made ryghteous through his
blood If we now desire to follow CHRIST and to fulfill his law, commandments
and gospel: the^ is there no nearer way the^ to follow him in love. Paul does
exhort us to ye same very heartily, saying: Be ye folowers therefore of God as
dear children, and walk in Ephe. 5.
love, eue^ as CHRIST loved us, and gave himself for us an offering and
sacrifice of sweet savor unto God. The cause now why man is so cold in love
toward God, and so sore divided from the same, so that he has another pleasure
nor savor in God is, because he has not fully yielded his heart to God, to be
taught of him, ye so he might know how well God does love him. Of this makes
god none preuy save only such as seek him with all their heart, and be always
hongerynge to know God in his goodness.

The vnfayth fullness and little perceueraunce Nota.
that men have of God, does cause the^ to abide in synfulnes and to hang upon
creatures. They can not rest duly upon God, nor his benefits, by reason of
their small understanding in godly matters: for ye benefytes of God do not
synke in their entrayles. If man could enter even to the ground of the
benefits of God, and behold the wonderful and glorious works of God, then
should he no doubt give sentence and verdite, that unto such a god, and such a
LORD only is due all praise, honor, and glory.

Therefore ought man to yield al his wit, will and wisdom to Gods majesty,
estemyng in himself nothing save sin and folly, with out God did steare our
hearts inwardlye with his love: so that we should perceive nor desire naught
with all our heart and mind, save only CHRIST our lover. With out this
wisdom is it al folyshnes that is in man. For without God there is nothing to
seek nor to find wherein man may rejoice by any mean. It is God only that
can satisfye man's heart, and bring him to love. Paul was joyful in God a
right, what time he was come to this knowledge, saying: For I showed 1. Corin
2.
not forth my self among you that I knew any thing, save only JESUS CHRIST,
even ye same yt was crucyfyed. Oh let us humbly beseke the LORD, that we may
know him by his love, and rejoice over all the good ye he has wetesafe so
louynglye to declare unto us by his word. For as we know God by his word in
his love, so shall our heart again be kyndled in love toward God, and shall
not pass this band. For faith consysteth in this, namely, that we can believe
all mercy, salvation, and health to come freely by only love: and yt we again
utter the same faith through love in the sight of all men. To this exhorts us
CHRIST, saying: Let your light so shine before men, Math. 5
that they may se your good works, and gloryfy your father which is in
heaven. s. Peter also exorteth us 1. Pe^t i. ^.
to lead an holy life among ye heythe^.

Love does declare herself by faith, workyng wonderously, to the
righteousness and salvation of all such men, as knowledge God in his love,
ready always to render him love and thanks again. Paul what time he had a
tayste of this love, and felt the power of the same, he gave unto this holy
love the glory of all the good that is acceptable before God in man, saying:
Though I spoke with tunges of 1. Cor. 13.
men and angels, and yet had not love, I were even as soundyngebrasse, or as a
tynklyng cimbal. And though I bestowed al my goods tofede the poor, and
though I gave my body eue^ that I burned, and yet have not love, it profyteth
me nothing. Love is pacyent and courteous, love enuyeth not, love does not
frowardly, is not pufte up, deals not dishonestly, seeks not her own, is not
provoked unto anger, thinks not evil, rejoices not over iniquite, but
rejoices over the truth, bears al things, believes all things, hops all
things, suffers all things. Thus much suffyseth to be spoken of the love
that God has toward us, and how man is joined unto God by love. For true love
must work by faith in such as god has elect and chose thereto, and it causes
man to obtain al things lawful, wherefore we shall treat farther wherein we
ought to declare, and utter our love again.

Seeing that we have here sufficientlye showed that god loves us, and that the
same love works always; therefore shall man examyne himself, and search his
entrayles whether he be come to a true love by faith. Faith must declare it
self through love and mortyfycacyon of the flesh. S. Ihon exhorts us
earnestlye to a renewynge of our sin full life, after that we have received the
word of the LORD with joy, being assured by faith that we may obtain
mercy through IESV CHRIST, saying: God is light, and in him is no darkness
at all. If 1. Johan. 1.
we say that we have felowshyppe with him, and yet walk in darkness, we lie,
and do not the treuthe. But if we walk in light, even as he is light, than
have we felowshyppe together, and the blood of JESUS CHRIST his son cleanses
us from all sin. CHRIST also says: I am the light of the Johan. 8.
world, he that follows me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the
light of life. And again: The Johan. 12.
light is a little while with you, walk while ye have the light, that the
darkness fall not upon you. He that walks I darkness woteth not whether he
goes, Believe ye on the light while ye have it, that ye may be the chylderen
of light. It follows: I am come a light in to the world, ye whosoever
believes on me should not abide in darkness. By all these aforesaid sayenges
are we taught, that God has given himself alyghte in our hearts, if we have
learned to know him in his love by his word. The word is y^ light and food
of the soul, whereby the love of God is clearlye set forth unto us. That we
therefore be found, trutefull and thankful before the LORD, it is his will
to lead, ye to drive us with his light to lyghten us, and to teach us all that, whereby our sinful soul may be conforted, and rejoice in God our
lover. When David knew this light, he was glad thereof, and sange: How
precious is thy mercy (O God) that the chylderen of men Psalm. 35.
may put their trust under the shadow of thy wings? They shall be satysfyed
with the plenteousnesse of thy house, and thou shalt give them drink of the
river of thy pleasures. For by the is the well of life, and in thy light shall
we selygthe.

When we have now received CHRIST so rychelye, and joyfully by his word,
than shall also the Godly word only be our light, guide, and master, so that
we shall harken diligently what God has commanded, admonyshed, and taught
us in his word. Noman feleth inward joy, or comfort of the Gospel, without
he be sure that it has wroughte euidentlye in him the mortyfycacyon, and
subduynge of his own sinfulness, and ye love toward his neighbor. When it
has wroughte thus in man, than perceaueth he first the incomparable love and
favor the which god does declare by his word. Moreover, when he has tried
the same with the renewynge of his life, than is he sure that God has wroughte a
passing great work of mercy in him. This knew David when he said: I will
harken what the LORD Psalm. 14.
God will say, for he shall speak peace unto his people.

Now is it euidente, and plain that God does send his word, and light in
our hearts, that we through the light in his word should knowledge all our
salvation, and redempcyon, reioycynge in him only. If man do not yet fyxe his
syghte only upon God, and his love, but seeks comfort either of men's
inuencyons, or any creatures, not reioycynge in God only: than is it to be
doubted, lest such one be not founded a right on God only. Paull says: But
we wait in the spirit of E^l^. 5.
hope to be made righteous by faith. The faithful lives always in joy.
Aba^^^. 2.
for the just lives by faith. Scripture Roma ^. Heb. 10.
witnesses every where, yt God does call us, and says: I am, I only am he
that put away sin, without Esaye. 43
me there is no saueoure. In y^ time of trouble, and in the strayghtnesse of
sinfulness, than does god be hold us most of all, if so be we seek him with
our whole hearts. The soul can rejoice in nothing yt is without God.
Therefore seeing God loves us, he exhorts us to put our confidence in him
only, saying. If ye fyxe your sight upon an other, than shall ye remain
confortlesse, and ye shall serve strange gods day, and night, that will
show you little favor. But my Esaye. 32.
people shall dwell in the ynnes of peace, and in my tabernacle, and pleasure,
where there is enough in them all. For this cause shall man try himself
whether he be mortifyed in his own sinfulness, and carnal desires. For Paull
says. They that are CHRIST'S, have crucified their Gala. 5.
flesh with the lusts and desires. He shall also search how he ought to
behave himself in love toward god, doing it that he is sure to be acceptable
unto God, that the father may be glorified thereby: the which will work
wonderously through his love in all them, in whom he has powered his word so
louynglye. Of this may the ancient father Symeon be an ensample, the which
seeing Luce. 2.
the little babe reioiced in sprete. The two disciples also herd CHRIST, and
they learned to know him with Luce. 24.
joyful and merry hearts.

Now shall we proceed and show that al our thoughts, wit, and will shall be
enployed, how we may again tender ye LORD al service, love and
thankfulness, after that we know what vnoutspeakeable love, and mercy is
showed us by him. It were undoubtedly a great loss if god should love us for
naught: if his love should not work in us, nor bring forth the fruits of y^
same: or if it should have wrought no salvation in us, whereto god has always
given it: For than should god be idle in us with his love, with his holy word, with
his goodness, ye with al his precious gifts: Tha^ (I say) should not god have
any glory, nor praise in us for all ye benefits, which we do possess by his
bou^teous goodness. By ye fruits may it be evident what a great act god has
wrought in a faithful heart. Therefore said CHRIST: I am come to kindle a fire
upon earth, and what would I rather tha^ Luce. 12.
that it were kyndled already? Is Iete. 23.
not my word fire (says the LORD,) and like an hammer that breaks the
hard stone? It is sure a co^sumynge fire bryngyng to naught the iustes of ye
flesh, and kyndlynge man to charitable deeds. Thus must it be workynge, and
may not come again void, as says Esaias.

As for the fruits of the spirit, yt Esaye. 55.
be wroughte by faith in love, those may we feel in our selves. First, If we
do rest upon CHRIST IESV only, reioycynge in him only, trustyng to his
goodness only, the which he has promised by his word Secondarly may we know
the^ by ye mortifycacion of the flesh with his desires, namely. If we have
conquered our selves by the love of God, and live now in all meekness, and
clenlynesse of heart. Thyrdlye, if we be kyndled by the aforesaid love with
mercy, and kyndnesse to ward our nedy neghbour. To the which Pau does
exhort us, saying: Now therefore as the elect of God, holy, and ^ollos. 3.
Ephe 4.
beloved, put on tender mercy, kyndnesse, humbleness of mind, meekness,
long sufferynge, forbearinge one another, and forgeuynge oue another, if any
man have a quarrel against another. Like as CHRIST has forgiven you, even so
do ye also. But above all things put on love which is the bond of
perfectness. And the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which ye are
called in one body: and se yt ye be tha^kful. Love 1 Petri. 4.
covers the multitude of sins.

Hereby have we perceived love, yt he gave his life for us: and therefore
Johan. 3.
ought we also to give our lives for the brethren. But he that has this
worlds good, and seeing his brother have need shuts up his heart from him,
how dwells the love of God in him? My little chylderen, let us not love with
word, another with tunge: but with the deed, and with the treuthe. And again:
Dearlye beloved, let us love one another, 1. Ioha^. 4.
for love comes of God: and every one that loves is born of god and knows
God. He that loves not, knows not God: for God is love. We know that we are
translated 1. Ioha^. 3.
from death unto life, because we love the brethren. He that loves not his
brother, abides in death. Whosoever hates his brother is a manslayer. And ye
know that a man slayer has not eternal life abiding in him. James says that
there shall Iacobi. 2.
be judgment mercylesse to him, that shows no mercy. CHRIST Math. 25.
in the day of judgment shall very rouglye require of us y^ deeds of
charity. Wherefore like a true watch man, he does admonyshe us of his love, that
he might draw us to the same, saying: Be ye therefore merciful, Luce. 16.
as your father also is merciful. And again: A new commandment give I
you, that ye love together Johan. 13.
as I have loved you, even so love ye one another. By this shall every man
know that ye are my dyscyples, if ye have love one to another.

By all these before said places of scripture does the LORD, admonyshe us,
how we ought so be like him in love. For faith does declare herself openly
by love. As God is the love himself, even so is man like unto God, if he be
loving. And as God of his love has redymed us without our helping hands,
even so must we utter the same love to our neghboures behofe. He therefore that
has no love to ward his neghbour, how ca^ he have any goodness in him,
whereby he might be acceptable unto god, or wherein he may be equal with god by
love? He yt fulfylleth not it yt god has commanded how shall he obtain it
of god, that which god has promised? It is love ye causes man, and al yt he
does to to be acceptable unto God. Therefore speaks James so much of works.

Faith must declare it self by deeds of charity, not that the works are an
occasyon of our righteousness: for than should God be depryued of his glory,
the which makes us ryghteous in the faith through CHRIST, lest we should
boaste our selves, but rather make our boaste of CHRIST IESV, which makes
ye sinner ryghteous by faith workinge love in man. Of this treats Paull very
much. When works come from a beleuynge heart, than are they acceptable unto
God through faith: the which a man does utter by the works of love. God looked
Gene. 4.
first upon Abel, and than upon his gifts. For this cause says James: What
avails it my brethren, Jacob. 2.
though a man say he has faith, when he has no deeds? For says if it have
no deeds, is dead in it self, Abraham is made ryghteous through works (that
is) the works were counted ryghteous by faith, and gave testymonye that he
had faith, what time he would have offered his son Isaac. Therefore says
scripture. Abraham believed God, Gene. 15. Roma. 4. Galat. 3. Iacobi. 2.
and it was counted him for righteousness. For this cause shall man search,
and examine himself, whether he has declared his faith by deeds Nota.
of charity, or not: lest he deceive himself, thynkyng to have faith and love
when he can talk and utter many words of the same. Who so therefore fyndeth
himself without love, being yet fleshlye minded, granting the flesh his
request, he (I say) is not yet come to ye true faith. If we now be come to
the true love, than are we carried by death unto life, and can rejoice duly in
him 2 Tessa. 1.
that loves us. For this cause said Paul: We pray always for you, that
our God make you worthy of the calling, and fulfill all delectacyon of
goodness, and the work of faith in power, that the name of our LORD JESUS
CHRIST may be praised in you, and ye in him, according to the grace of our
God, and of the LORD JESUS CHRIST

I beseke the LORD entierlye (which is only the geuer of al goodness), that
he will so lyghten and steare our hearts inwardly, that we may rejoice a
right in his love, and render him again thanks and praise with a fervent
love: though our sinful souls be not worthy of such love. But this again
is our comfort, namelye, that the father has given us CHRIST, the which
has given himself over unto the bitter death to declare his excellent love
unto us, that we might knowledge our salvation in his love by faith
accomplyshynge his will, and pleasure. Unto him that of his love has called us
so gentelye by his word unto all mercy, unto him (I say) be thanks, praise,
honor, and glory, both by us, and by all other creatures now and for ever.

Amen.
Hereafter shall we treat how hurtefull the love of the world is, and how
we may despise it.
Seeing that we have spoken so largely of the love ye God has toward us, and
how stronglye the same love works in us, we shall therefore now treat how
dangerous worldly love is: that is, that either the world loves us, or that
we love it.

When man does consydre the world, and all that is therein, than finds he
naught for his soul to comfort, to rest, or to satisfye herself in. He that
does behold the world duly, may se that it is hurtefull, and faydyng, with
all that belongs thereto: Ye al such as will either seek, follow, love, serve
or please ye world must stayne and join the^ selves with the same. It is al
vanyte and vexacion of mind Eccls. 1.
that is under the sky. What joy or glory should man feel inwardlye, when he
consydereth that he serves such a lord as brings naught save damnacion, hell
and sin with him. As the soul is noble, and heavenly, even so can she find
nothing among these earthlye creatures wherein she might use true glory,
and joy. And seeing the soul ca^ refresh herself in nothing that is
transytory, therefore must she forsake al creatures, and knowledge God to be
glotious in all that he has declared, and wroughte in his creatures: for he is
wonderful in his power, wisdom, and goodness: wherebye al creatures have
received their bewty, growing, fashyon and life. The creatures call to us
saye^g: We give nothing that may satisfye you, save only the eye syghte: By
us may ye perceive God to be wonderful, and glorious in all his works. If ye
re main, and abide with us, and go not unto God by us: (For he will be known in
his love by us) than shall ye be restless surely, seeing we give naught whereon
your souls may rest. If man could consider this dewly, then should he se
evidently, yt he was never aryght conforted, that sought to fulfill his lust
and pleasure in any creature. The world smyleth and promyseth a man much: but
seeing there is nothing stable in it, therefore can not it also give any thing
to rest upon. Though all the world did love us, yet should it not be
profitable and auaylynge to our salvation: but rather a stop or let of the
same, making man unworthy of the love of God. For God does not pour his love
in that Sap. 1.
heart, wherein the world with his love is abiding. This witnesses saint
Ihon, warnyng us, lest we suffer us to be begyled of the world, saying: Se
that ye love not y^ world 1. Ioh. 1.
another the things that are in the world. If any man love the world the love
of the father is not in him: for all that is in ye world (namely ye lust of
the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life) is not of the father,
but of the world. And the world passes away, and the lust thereof: but he
that fulfylleth the will of God abides for ever. James confirms this
saying: Who so ever will be Iaco. 4.
a friend of the world, is made the enemy of God. This is the profit that we
have by ye love of the world, namely, that for the love of the same we do
become enemies to God. For this cause said Paul: If I should ^ala. 1.
yet please men, I were not the servant of CHRIST. The apostles also what
time they were chosen and sundered, they were hated of the world. For it
could not agree to be atone with God, and to have frendshippe with the world.
If there shall be an atonement with ye world, then must there be also a consent
to his synfulnes. And because that another CHRIST nor his disciples were of the
world, nor consented to the lust of the same, therefore does he admonish and
conforte his disciples at his departing, saying: If the Johan. 15.
world hate you, the^ know ye it has hated me before you. If ye were of the
world, the world would love his own. Howbeit because ye are not of the
world, but I have chosen you from the world, therefore the world hates you.
And the prophets all though they were hated of ye world, yet were not they
sorry for it. For if they would have procured the love of the world, then
should not they have rebuked the sins of ye world but lived in sinfulness
with them, and forsaken God, another should they have rejoiced in his spret. The
love of God no doubt overcame the love of the world. This is evident in many
patriarchs, prophets and holy men and women, ye which were al slain for
rebukyng of the world, and because they followed not the lusts of it: as namely
Abell, Esaias, Jeremy, Helyas, Micheas, Susanna, Daniel with diverse other that
have been slain and persecuted of the world.

The world therefore is a wicked thing, for it gives naught wherein man might
rejoice by any means, but his rewards be, sin, hell, and damnacyon: and
itself is altogether set on wyckednes. The nature 1. Ioh. 5
of man is co^munely such, that it is changed in to it, where his love is
most set on. But what joy can a man use in that thing that is wicked of
itself? The worldly wysedom could not brouke CHRIST, another could the worldly
holiness render all glory unto CHRIST only: Ye because CHRIST did rebuke
wickedness, and feigned holiness, therefore rose y^ worldly men against CHRIST
and have determined to slaye him. This one thing might of right open the eyes
of many men. Seeing the love of ye world was never good nor profitable, how
might we then get any goodness by fulfyllyng his lusts? as Paul says: What
fruit Rom 6.
had ye at that time in those things whereof ye are now ashamed? for the end
of such things is death. O death, how bitter is the remembrance Eccl^ 4,
of the to a man, that seeks rest and comfort in his substance and riches:
for death is the reward of syn. When lust has conceived, she brings Romans 6.
Iacobi. 1.
forth sin: and sin when it is fynyshed, brings forth death.

When a man now has well co^sydered the world, and begins to perceive that
it is nothing but vanite and hearts grefe, then begins he to withdraw his
heart from it. Wherefore if he can then pray to God entierly and heartily, he
shall se how glorious and nobell he is esty med in the syghte of God, namely,
that he is a vessel of sin, where as God notwithstanding has created him to
be a tabernacle or a temple, wherein he will dwell with his spret, and all his
gifts. If he can believe this with a steadfast faith, than shall his heart
reoyce in God, trusting to use such gifts more freely with him. By faith does
man se where to he is created and called, and what is promised and given him.
And seeing that by faith he does look for a better world, then this wretched
world and vale of mysery is, therefore is not he co^tente with it: for ye world
gives his heart nothing to rejoice in. When man has don't long and true
service unto the world, he fyndeth none other reward, save great grefe and
heaviness of heart. For man is made a stranger from God, and cold in love,
wha^ he goes about to serve ^ please the world. Now when h^ has once a tayst
of this, and is sure that it is so, then does he wend his heart from the
world, saying: Fare well all transytory creatures, fare it well all that ever
deceived me, fare well with all thy lusts. I went astraye when I sought the,
I was begyled when I tande the, I was blind when I set my love upon the, I was
amassed when I pleased the, I was co^fortlesse when I occupied the, I was parted
from God when I served the, I was in ^eath wha^ I lived with the, I was
^estelesse when I beheld the, I was sorye when thou gave me ^oughte, I was
not suffised when ^hou gave me much, I was mysaryed when thou made my
glad. Oh thy wisdom is folyshnesse be^re God, thy glyrye is heye, thy ^ylynge
is deceate, thy bewtye is ^lthynesse, thy riches are vnsta^e, thy presence is
without rest, ^y reward is but death, thy joy ends with sorrow. He that
fyndeth the leseth himself, and comes in deaths danger. He that loved the
was never dealt faithfully withal. He was not conforted aryghte that sought
thy frendshippe. He that busyed him to please yt was never joyful. He never
rejoiced aryght that rejoiced in the. He never happened well that was seruiable
unto the. He that followed the did never happen well. He that knew the aryght
did never pass greatly upon thine amyte or fre^dshippe. Thou deceauest al thy
lovers. Thy love is untrusty Thy dealyng is craftynesse. O how happy is he that
never sought for the: but happy is he whose hope is in the LORD his God. He
that seeks God, comes from death unto life: But he that loves the world,
falls from life unto death. CHRIST therefore not willing us to be damned
through the world, has warned us of the dangers of it, saying What helps
it a man though he Math. 1^.
wanne the whole world, and yet suffered harm in his soul? When CHRIST did
call any body, the^ did he draw him from the snares and peryls of the world, as
namely, Matthew, Zache, Mary the open sinner. CHRIST said unto the yongeman:
Math. ^ Luce. 9
Let the dead bury their dead. But go thou thy way and preach the kingdom of
God. And to another that would have followed him he said: Who so purteth his
hand to the plowe, and looks back is not mete for the kingdom of God. And
again when another that deman^ded of him, what he should do to come in to the
kingdom of heaven, he said: If thou wylt be perfect, go thy way and sell that
thou have, and Math. 19. Matti. 10 Luce. 12.
give it unto the poor, and thou shalt have a treasure in heaven, and come
and follow me. Wha^ the yongema^ herd that word, he went away sorry, for he
had great possessions. JESUS said unto his discyples: Uerely I say unto you,
It shall be hard for a rich man to enter in to ye kingdom of heaven. Hereby
may it be euidente that riches draw a man sometime to synnynge, wherefore he
can not follow his LORD his God, to serve him humbly. For riches and worldly
love cause man sometime to fall to pride and obstinacy. If the Nota.
rich man could use his riches well (that is) to dispend them charitably to
the behofe of his neighbor, and in the mean season prouydyng for h^s own
necessite, releuinge ye nedy with the rest: then should not his riches be
hurtefull unto him. Abraham, Isaac. Jacob, Job, David, and many other holy men
and women have had great riches. But seeing they have worshipped and served God
and showed kyndnes unto their neghbures with their substance: therefore were
their riches a furtherauce rather the^ a let unto their saluacyo^, according to
ye mind of Tobias ye elder. Nabal though he was rych, and 1. Reg. 25.
David having need, requyrynge only what it pleased him to give, would depart
from nothing. The rych glutton also would show no mercy Luce. 16
unto Lazarus. Because of such abuse were their riches hurteful unto the^.
Therefore said Paul: They yt 1. Tim. 6
will be rych fall in to ye re^ptacion and snare, and into many folysh and
noisome lusts, which drown me^ in destruccyo^ and da^nacyon. For covetousness
is the rote of al euel. Jesus Sirak cou^feleth every man also, saying: My
Eccler. 11.
son, meddle not with many matters: If thou wylt be rych thou shalt not be
without wyckednes. For this cause said Paul: Charge them which are rych in this
world, that they be not 1. Tim. 6
proud, nor trust in ye uncertain riches, but in ye living God (which
gives us abundauntly all rhynges to enjoy them:) that they do good, y^ they
be rych in good works that they give and destribute with a good yt will,
gathering up treasure for the^ selves, a good fundacyon, against the time to
come, that they may lay hand on eternal life. The cause why saint Paul does
thus exhort us, is: For we brought nothing in 1. (...). 6
to the world, therefore is it a plain case, that we can carry nothing out.
When we have food and raiment let us therewith be content. CHRIST likewise
exhorts us not to be so careful for this short season, another to set an
outrageous love upon any creatures, saying: Se that ye gather you not treasure
upon earth, Math. 6
where ruste and mothes corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal:
but gather you treasure together in heaven, where another ruste nor mothes
corrupt, and where thieves another break up, nor yet steal.

That man might withdraw his heart the better from these creatures, he should
call oftymes to remembrance how tra^sitory and faydyng all it is, that is
without God. All yt he beholds with his bodyly eyes, gives his heart another
rest, peace, nor ease, ye it gives nothing save hearts grefe. Man ought also
to remember that we have here no abiding Hebre. 10
city, but we hope and look for another, the which is better by a thousand
parts then all that is in this world. When diverse saints did consider this,
they have set the world at naught, sekinge their glory in CHRIST only: which
can satisfye his friends with the truth, and make them rich with him self:
so that when his friends shall have plenty, his enmyes shall suffer great
scarceness. For ye world gives nothing wherein ye lover of ye same ca^ rest
and satle his mind. They y^ have oppressed the simple, they that have used
policyes and crafts to auaunce them selves in worldly dignities: those shall
be brought to confusion at the day of dome, and shall se that they have
procured nothing save hell and sin. For they would give no ear unto the
truth of Gods words. At that time shall they say: Tedious ways have we
gone, but as for the way of the LORD, we have not known it. What good has
our pride done unto us? Or what profit has the pomp of riches brought us?

All those things are passed a way like a shadow, and as a messau^ger
ru^nynge before. etc. Every man ought well to considre this, for the worldly
service comes to a bitter end. Harken what scripture says: If a man live
many years and be glad in Eccles 11.
them all, let him remember yt days of darcknesse, which shall be many: and
when they come, all things shall be but vanite. Be glad then (O thou young man)
in thy youth, and let thyn heart be merry in thy yo^ge days follow ye ways of
thine own heart and ye lust of thine eyes. but be thou lure, that God shall
bring the in to judgment for all these things.

This is meant of the lovers of this world. For though it seem to be so^what,
truly it is nothing (ye though man lived a thousand years) in comparison to
it that is everlasting. When we think in our selves: where are the mighty?
where are the great me^? where are y^ wise men? whose name and fame has all
the world maruayled at. At ^ end have they concluded all with death. Salomo^
perceived ryghtwell, that for all his wisdom and riches, he was equal in
dyenge unto all other men: Therefore has he counted it al foolyshnesse yt is
under the sky Esaias also says: O my people, they Esaias. 3.
that call the happy, do deceive the. As though he would say: They that praise
you here of ought that is in you, they deceive you. For there is naught in man
that is worth praise, or glory. Be not proud of thy raymente, and exalte not
thy self in the day of thine honor: for the works Ecc^^. 11.
of the Hygheste only are wonderful: ye glorious, secret, and unknown are
his works. Many tyrauntes have been fayn to sit down upon the earth, and the
vnlykelye has worn the crown. Many mighty men have been brought low, and the
honorable have been delivered in other men's hands. They that be now exalted,
shall be brought low tomorow. And they that be now brought low, shall be
exalted tomorowe. It is great folly that man has confydence in that thing
that is unstable and gives no goodness from it self. Such one buyldeth upon
a sandy ground, whereby his house must suddenly fall, and perish. Such a
foolyshe body says: Now Ec^^^ ^. ^.
have I gotten rest, and now will I eat and drink of my goods myself alone.
And yet he co^sydereth not, that the time draws nigh that he must leave all
these things unto other men, and dye himself. CHRIST said: There was a rych
man Luce. 12.
whose feldes had brought forth trutes plenteouslye, and he thought in
himself: What shall I do? I have nothing wherein to gather my fruits. And he
said: this will I do: I will break down my barnes, and build greater, and
therein will I gather all mine increase and my goods, and will say unto my
soul: Soul, thou have much goods laid up in stoare, for many years, take
now thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry. But God said unto him: Thou ^oole,
this night shall they require thy soul from the, and whose shall it be that
thou haste prepared?

Seeing that the end of the service of this world is so bitter, and that it
rewards his servants with remorse of conscience, therefore does God show
us so great mercy in drawing us so louynglye from the love of the world:
and that does he, because we should rejoice with him in the treuth. It is a
joyful thing to follow CHRIST: for he makes his servants glad with himself.
But he that follows the world, fulfylling the synful desires of the same:
becomes a servant of sin. And Johan. 9.
Paul says: that the reward of syn Roma. 6.
is death. Fashion not your selves (then) like unto this world, but be Roma.
1^.
changed through the renewynge of your mind, that ye may prove what thing that
good, that acceptable, and perfect will of God is. And this is the will of God,
even your sanctifienge, 1. Tessa. 4
that ye should abstain from whoredom, that every one of you should know how
to possess his vessel in holiness and honor, and not in the lust of
concupiscence. And that no man go to far, nor defraude his brother in
bargenyng. For the LORD is the auenger of all such things, as we have said
and testified before time. Now as the world and the wisdom thereof have
always persued CHRIST and his, separatyng themselves from god, and falling to
synnynge, from the least unto the most: therefore may we think right well
that we also shall obtain but little goodness of it. For this cause does
Syrack warn us saying: My son, if thou haste sinned, Ecc^^. 21
do it no more: but pray for thy foresynnes, that they may be forgeuen the.
Fly from sin, even as from a serpente. For if thou co^mest* to nigh he she
will byte the. The teth thereof, are as the teth of a lion, to slaye the souls
of men. The wickedness of man is as a sharp twoegged swearde, which makes
such wounds, that they can not be healed. Job also speaking very largly of
the welthe of the wicked, says: They spend their days in welthynesse, but
suddenly they godowne to Job. 21.
hell. They say unto God: go from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways.
etc. Dse likewise says: They are gone to Baal Peor, and (...). 9.
run away fro my to the shameful Idol, and are become as abominable as
their lovers. For the ungraciousness of their own inuencions will I drive
them out of my house. If we were now enfourmed of ye wickedness of the world,
and knew it well, than should we lyghtelye forsake it and seek CHRIST, whose
love calls us to the life eternal: and tha^ should it be to us that Paul
says: If ye be now risen with CHRIST, Co^^^. ^
than seek those things which are above, where CHRIST is sittynge on the
righthande of God. Set your mind on the things which are above, not on the^
things that are upon earth. For ye are dead, and your life is hydd with
CHRIST in God. But when CHRIST our life shall appear, than shall ye also
appear with him in glory.

Thus have we now showed unto you how God loves us, with what strength and
power his love works in us, how we again should utter love to our neighbor,
and finally how hurtefull the love of this world is. I pray God now, that we
may so follow him in love, that our good conuersacyon and life praise the
heavenly father, that has declared his bou^teous love so wyllyngly, in sedyng
unto JESUS US CHRIST his son.

AMEN.
Here end the two fruitful treatyses, namely, of faith and hope, and of love,
and charity.
Imprynted in South warke for James Nicolson, Anno, M. D. xxxvii.


