News concerning the general counsel / holden at Trydent by the Emperor
and the Germaynes with all the nobles of Hungarye / Constantenople and Rome
Translated out of Germayne into Englysh By Ihon Holibush.

Anno. 1548,

Cum Priuilegio ad Imprimendum Solum.

After dew salutacio^ I co^me^d me to you trusty fre^d, letti^g you were, yt
where in my last wrytinge to you I wrote, that (by the leave of the bountefull
grace and license of the Imperial majesty) I would shortelye be with you,
wherefore at ye time I wrote no neweltyes to you concerning this Imperial
parliament. But for as much as this purpose of mine is hyndred, and I am
constrained to tarry here until the return of ye worshypful in god father the
Cardinal and bishop of Tride^t which is sent to Rome with a spedy message, I
would not leave to certify you of some news, so far as I may do and
becomes me.

First as concerning the articles proposed of the Imperial majesty to the
estates of the Empire, I trust year fully certifyed And though the answer upon
the^ has be^ deferred, and specially that concerning the Religion, yet at the
length, by the grace of god, have the States with one consent agreed and
required, that the ordinance concerning the Religion that is in controuersye
vndeterminated, may be determined in the general, fre and christen concell
that already is poynted, bego^ne and continues at Tride^t. The which request ye
Imperours majesty has also thought yt most convenient, christen and sure way
to alaye all debate and controuersye: specially for as much as the sytuacyon
of Germanye is not greatly onmete for the purpose, nether can other nations
greatly grudge at the way and distance from Trident, whereby they might
pretend incommodite where upon the Imperial majesty trusts that every and
syngular estate of the Empire will agree to such a general council, submytting
the^ humbly to it, acceptyng and redressyng the^ after the ordinance of the
same: In doing of which, they shall follow the footesteppes of the ancient
fathers, which have always in doubts of religion or faith, had their
recourse to the council as unto a sentuary, and redressed them wyllingly after
the ordinance of the same.

And that such a fre general counsel have the better progress and
continuance, and that noman needs to fear interruption of it or hynderaunce:
the Emperors majesty as a maynteiner of the church, and defendour of the
counsel will godly help and busyly provide, that such a counsel begone at
Trident have his quick course and continuau^ce. He wylleth also that it be
visited augme^ted and confirmed by ye presence of other christian princes and
nations, specially Archbysshops. Bishops and other Prelates of Germany (as the^
yt are and have been chief aucthors or makers of this debate,) or in their
lawful absence, by their wise, learned and fully aucthorised deputyes.

It shall be lawful also for ye States of the Ausborowesh confession safe
co^duted to come to remain and return again from this counsel, and there
shall be granted to the^ dew audience. By these means shall ye beginning ye
whole treating of this general co^cel and co^clusio^ be godly and Christenly
(all affections and parcialite set a part) according to the doctrine of holy
scripture and holy fathers, whereof may follow a christen reformation, by the
which perverse doctrine and abuses may be rooted out.

As for the pleatynges of the Imperial chamber or hall, will the Imperial
majesty continentlye reform, and that with convenient Judges, Presydentes and
Extraordinare persons, that justice may be comely executed, and there to be no
more lackes.

There are also other causes handeled in this parliament Imperial, as are of
peace, of the Coin and such like, which are come to such a point, as is to
be hoped no man can have a just cause to compain.

We do hope also that this Imperial parlamente shall be shortelye ended, which
might be when the worshypfull Cardynall and Bishop of Trident shall be
returned, who departed hence out of Ausborowe the syxte day of November
being sent to Rome unto the Bishop of Rome, for the continuance of the
Counsel of Trident, and to approve or allow the reformation, how every man
shall be have himself, during the time of the general counsel. The which came
to Rome the eyghtenth day of November, from whence he has written: he wylbe
shortelye with us again, and bring with him al things that have been the
requests of ye Imperial majesty, and the States.

Another can I wytholde to certyfye you / that the majesty of the king of rome
Ferdina^dus sent ye last year an ambassador / named Lord Gerarde Veltwick to
Constantinople to the great Turk / for to demand truce for.v. year the
which request the Turk did easily grant / partly for dread of the Imperial
majesty / whom he names a vanquysher / and Lord of Europa / partly because
of the Assaults of ye Soldane or king of Perses / which combreth him with
wars: but upon that condition: if the Imperial majesty will hold / consent
and agree to the same truce. The Roman kings Ambassador lord Veltwick has
agreed to that condityon / and promised to busye himself to cause the
Imperial majesty consent to this truce: doutynge not / but trusting, ye
emperial majesty would not refuse it for the tender love he owes to his
brother. And upon yt is ye forsayde lord Veltwick come hither with the Turks
messangers, desyringe to know, whether the Imperial majesty will agree to this
truce of five years, or not: that these forsayde messangers of the Turk, may
bring their lord an answer. Upon yt which has the Imperial majesty answered
on this wise: Though it becomes not our majesty, to make any appoyntme^t
with the enemy of our religion, another has ye Godly majesty ever left us
aydelesse hitherto but always prospers and helps us to vanquysh our enemies:
so that noman there is, which can auaunce and say: I have overcome Charles in
battayll. For so much also as almyghtye God has endued us with so great
puyssance riches, men of war and captains so that we need not to be afraid
of any man in the world: yet for the tender love that we owe to our brother the
king of the romans, Ho^gary and Bemes we co^desce^de, allow and ratifye the
truce of five years but upon that condition, yt the Turkysh Emperor do send
us his letters and specificayo^ concerning this peace. Wha^ the Turkyshe
messaungers had received this coragious answer of the Imperial majesty, they
are returned to their Lord, which continently sent over the foresaid
letters, in the which he calls the Emperors majesty a Lord of the christen
world. These letters came here to Ausborowe the.xxi. day of November, which I
have both handeled and seen. These be written with great and unseemly letters,
and on the top sygned with the great Turks arms of gold. I doubt whether I
ever have seen any such like, they be another Chalde nor Hebrew letters, the
Lord Gerard veltwick says they be Arabyck letters.

There is also tidings come out of Hungary that a Lord of the Kings
counsel, called loce^tz which favored more the Turkyshe party than his own
lyege Lords, nether heard gladly the truce made: for his enterpryses in many
points were hyndered.

This same as he sat upon a time at his table, and his servants about him,
one of them began suddenly to cry: Come death and have me away. And suddenly
he cast an horrible sight with turnynge of his eyes, raygynge and crying hugly
with a loud voice: The devil is in me, and has possessed me, another will he
leave with me, but more of you must dance this dance. The other servants
would have bound him, but he spewed from him, and behaved him so woodlye:
afterward cast he out at his mouth the stomach, bowele, liver, heart, and all
his entrayles by pieces. After that began an other of the servants to rage and
wax wood, cryenge and howlynge piteously and hugly: I am possessed of ye
devil. The same did they bind, and Lozentz sent co^tine^tly for his parson to
conjure the evil spryt. But before the priest came, ye third servant began to
rage also, which was bound as the other. With yt began Lozentz to be greatly a
frayed: and though the priest prayed much over him, yet began he to rage like
the other and cry, so yt he also was constrained to be bound. And lay of this
wise in his house with his two servants (for the first dyed) xiiii. days
before. In the mean while swaged the woodnest, and he was lowsed of his
ba^des: but his cou^tenau^te is yet so horrible and dredeful, yt noma^ dare
approach him.

Wha^ the foresaid truces were in hand / a ship was spoiled upon our borders
and soncked which passed in valor.xx.M. gold gylde^ / and al they that were in
her were drowned: but the deed doers are yet unknown whether they be christian
or Turks that join upon the borders. Cattia^s brother in law has slain two
hundredth Turks that passed the borders, and invaded our men, wherwyth he has
apeaced and stylled the other. These tidings came here to Ausborowe the.xix.
day of November, but there was no credence given to them, until there came more
surer certificatio^ from the Kings Majesty and other Lords.

The.xxvi. day of November last past came hither three wedowes, namelye my lady
Mary queen of Hungary and Regente, the Duchess of Loren, and the lady
Princess of Orange of Brabant: whom met the Kings grace of Rome, the
Archduke of Austriche his son, and the electours, namelye of Colens Saxonye
and Braundeborowe, be side a great nombre of Bishops, Dukes, and Lords, so
that they entered at Ausborow six hundredth on horsebak

They of Ausborow also have made peace with their Lord the Bishop, whereof the
conditions be, that for the force, spoiling and injuries they have done him,
shall in recompense thereof give him five and nyntye thousand gold gyldens and
for the spiritual rentes that they have received thyrtye thousand gold
gyldens.

There is here such a nombre of Lords and Princes / as never has been seen in
any parlamente imperial.

The most worshypfull in god father and Lord Adolyshe archebyshoppe of Colen
and has yesterdaye which was Saint Nicolas even received of the Imperial
majesty his dignitye.

Much were to be written of the taking of the Duke of Saxony elector was, and
the Landtgraue, but the shortenesse of this letter, and also the time will not
admytte it. Yet can not I wytholde you that Landtgraues wife with her children,
have delivered a'great byll or supplication to the States of the Empire,
wherein they sygnified, that those articles which were delivered at the yeldyng
of the Landtgraue, were fulfilled, expyred and accomplyshed: required all the
States of the Empire to make suit for the Landtgraue to the Emperyall majesty
yt he might be delivered. Some of the Princes gave consent thereto, but some
took deliberation upon it. In the mean while as this was in hand: was the
Imperial Majesty aduertysed of this. And when the Princes were now
consultynge and taking their advise, did the Imperial majesty send them a
far other certyfycation of the matter, than that of the La^dtgraue specyfye^g
the causes why it were not expediente, nether for the commune peace, nor the
contry, that he should be released and set at liberte.

It declared also plainly, that the articles of the Landtgraue submission or
yeldyng, were not proposed aryghte nor lawfullye: yea were not executed another
of the Landtgraue. The Emperoures majesty also answered so evidently, and with
so manifest demonstratyons to these things that were proposed the Princes by
the Landtgraue, that they all ceased of making suit for him, but were of a
contrary mind. Wherefore he was removed from donwerte, to Norlinges, with
duble ward which thing does greatly grieve and displease him, complaynyng
bewayling and lame^tyng to be so removed from place to place.

Duke noritz of Saxony elector is departed from hence now of late, of whom
the fame goes, that he is gone to take up men of war in the name of the
Emperors majesty, the truth whereof, I cannot write for a certaynte.

This is of a truth, that here are many doughty captains, and that much
artillery is sent toward ye costs to Switcherland. They of Berne are afraid,
and have often sent to the Duke of Sauoye, requyrynge to have peace with him
What end these matters shall have, can I not show at this time.

I trust your gentlynesse will take this writing in worth, as I shall come by
you, (the which I trust shall be shortly) I shall show you more news by mouth
Fare well

Written from August the syxt day of December. The year of our Lord.
M.D.Xlviii
Imprinted at London in saint Andrews paryshe in the ware dropped, by Thomas
Raynalde.


