THE TREASVRE OF the Soul.

Wherein we are taught how in dying to Sin, we may attain to the perfect love
of God, and our neighbor, and consequently unto true blessedness and Salvation.

Many years since written in the Spanish tongue, and and now newly translated
into English: By A. P.

1. Tim 1. The end of the commandementes is love: springing from a clean heart,
a good conscience, and an unfeigned faith.

Gal. 5. Those that appertain to Christ, have crucified their flesh, with all
the evil desires and concupiscences thereof.

LONDON Printed by John Wolf. 1596.

To the worshipful his good Uncle, Master Richard Saltonstall, Alderman of
the City of London, and his wife Mistres Susan Saltonstall, his loving Aunt.
Adrian Poyntz wishes health and prosperity in the Lord.
WHen I had finished the translation of this Book (loving Uncle and Aunt) I
remembered the common order and custom ever used, in so much that few commit
their labors to the view of the world, unless they first procure some Patron
for their defense. I therefore, unwilling to send my translation to the press,
before I had committed it to the patronage of some And standing in doubt to
whom I might offer my labor in this kind, trusting upon your courtesies, did
embolden my self to commend this Treatise to your protections. The book was
written above an hundredth and threescore years since in the Spanish tongue,
the Author thereof being unknown. As for his style and method of writing I
mean not to commend it, leaving the judgment thereof to those, unto whom such
censures are belonging. I for my part as I have faithfully englished his
words, and delivered his meaning in such manner that Englismen may both read
his treatise and understand it, so I do not doubt, but that it will be as
profitable unto them that read it, for their instruction, as it has been to
other nations who have greedily desired the translation hereof. And thus
beseeching you to take my good will and meaning in good part, I commit you to
the tuition of the Almighty.

Your worships to command. Adrian Pointz.

THE PREFACE of the Author to the Reader.
THE more graces a man has received of God, and the more he is endued with
knowledge of understanding: the greater punishment he deserves, if therefore
he be unthankful. And again, whosoever acknowledges the benefits of God,
he also by all natural reason is bound the more to love him. Now all books
are replenished with knowledge and learning, now is the holy Gospel sealed
and confirmed with the precious blood of the immaculate Lamb of God, to the
end we may have a greater assurance of the unspeakable love toward us. All
books, I say, are full, the earth does abound with Preachers, sounding forth
as Trumpettes the great power and excellency of the Almighty, for to draw and
stir us up to land, praise and give thanks to our Creator, and most loving
Father. But we are all so prone to unthankfulness, and so ready to forget his
benefits, so largely bestowed upon mankind, that there is none almost to be
found, who unfeignedly do seek him? But all run and fly headlong into dark
and obscure places of sin and wickedness. Moved therefore by the premises, I
have finished this book, to the glory of God, and (as I hope) to the
furtherance of the godly. And because that now a days our slothfulness is so
great, and our desire and stomach to the glory of God so faint, weak and
slender: I have used here in this my book sundry similitudes and parables, by
these means to entice the minds of men the more to the deep consideration of
the contents of this volume.

THE TREASVRE of the Soul
IN times past there dwelte in a huge and great forest, a wise and godly man:
daily watching, fasting, and praying devoutly, serving the Lord. Who being
desirous to attain, as much as lay in man, to the true and perfect knowledge of
understanding, and the love of God, leaving his cottage, determined with
himself to travail through all the world, for to see if he could find any
that would vouchsafe to teach him the same. And after great and wearisome
iournyes, met in the end with a shepherd, feeding his flock in a green
pasture. He being very glad of this, having as yet in none of all his iourneyes
found or scene any man: came to him and said: Brother I thank God that I do
see thee, whereupon the shepherd bidding him welcome, asked him what he looked
for in this desert. I look, said he, for a knight, who but now is gone by
this way.

The second Chapter does instruct the Pastors and Teachers of the people.
DEsire, for it was that holy man's name, meruaylinge greatly at the provision,
diligence and care which the shephearde took in his trade: for that he had a
crook in his hand, a bag hanging at his right side, woodeen cloge at his
feet, and a long coat upon his back: besides at his left side two horns
hanging at his girdle, the one somewhat bigger th^^ the other, and two great
dogs lying before at his feet, and not far from thence his cottage
environed with a hedge of thorns round about it. The shepherd perceuing
Desire to behold and to view him so diligent and narrowly, asked him the cause
of his wondering, and that if never before he had seen any shepherd. Whervppon
Desire answered him, how he had seen diverse of them, but none so well
provided and furnished of all necessaries as he was, desyring him most friendly,
that it would please him to show and declare unto him those things which he
should in courtesy demand and ask him. The shephearde having granted to
satisfy him in all his questions, so far as he was able or his knowledge
should reach unto. Desire began and said, tell me I pray thee, wherefore
carryest thou this crook? Why demandest thou me this question (quoth the
shephearde) and thou a country swain, and a heard-man, and do thou not
know this? I do carry it said he, that I might lean upon it, and keep me from
falling when I lead my sheep about the pastures. To rule likewise my sheep
with it, and to drive the^ into ye right way, and to keep the^ together that
they run not astray, and s^eke sundry ways according to their own pleasure.
For when one runs before and the other behind, then do I drive the hindmost
forward. And what have thou in this bag (quoth Desire.) Diverse and sundry
things answered the shephearde: First of all I have a tinder boxt, for to
strike and make fire in cold weather, and to dress my meat for me and my
household. Besides I have in it, bread, ointmentes, a small bottel with oil,
and salt, giving these to my sheep oftentimes, but chiefly the salt. Wherefore
do thou wear these woodde^ clogges demanded Desire? for to keep my feet
warm when it is ^r^g^^, or the dry in raying weather, answered the shepherd:
for if I should wear fine and proper shoes, they would be quickly worn and
spoiled in the wet and snow. What do thou with this long coat said Desire:
It serves to cloth me (quoth the shepherd) for if I did not wear this coat,
I should not seem to be a heardeman. But of what stuff is it made (demanded
Desire?) It is made of sheep skins (answered the shephearde) for if my frocke
were made of Wolf skins, or of any other kind of beast, the sheep would
smell it quickly, and would fly and run away from me, but now that I am
clothed with their wool, they love me, know me, and follow me. Tell me
(quoth Desire) what have thou in this small horn hanging at thy girdle.
Ointmentes (said the shephearde) to ointe my sheep withal, when they be
scabbed. And what have thou in the other horn somewhat bigger then the first
(demanded Desire.) Tincture and color (answered ye shepherd) to mark my
sheep withal, for to know them again when they are stragled by chance among
other strange sheep. What do thou with these dogs. These dogs bark in ye
night, turn and chase away the Wolves, for the better safety of my sheep, and
because I should the more quietly take my rest without ^eare. Wherefore ^oest
thou al things so advisedly (quoth Desire?) because I have a good bountiful
Lord (answered the shepherd) who has promised me great recompense for my
pains, al^hough I rather do this more through the love which I bear him then
for the recompense I do look to receive at his hands.

The third Chapter entreats yet of the same matter.
DEsire did marnayle greatly at all these things, being wonderfully well
pleased, that he did all this through mere love. And told him, brother
seeing thou spendest the most part of the day in the fields, I pray thee
can thou not show me which way a certain knight is gone, trauayling up
and down without company, because they have thrust him out of his house, and
his own subjects will not know nor receive him, therefore does he seek on
with who^ he might dwell and remain for ever. What is this man quoth the
shepherd? He is called the Love of God, answered Desire, I know where he
commonly keeps, said the shephearde, and if I had one to look to my sheep,
then would I bring thee my self wherher dwells, to ease thee somewhat of thy
journey, for thou must know, that he loves shepherds, and is glad of their
companies, and although he be a knight, is notwithstanding a shepherds son.
But because I have no body to keep my sheep, I will show thee the way as
near as I can. Therefore brother go through this desert and great forest, at
the end whereof thou shall find a costly Palace, where none but women must
dwell, who will show thee where thou may find thie knight. For he is of
such friendly and virtuous nature and conversation, yt he despises no man's
company nor fellowshippe. These words did very much please and rejoice
Desire, and chiefly because they put him in hope that he should find out
the Love of God, saying brother, I pray thee show me the direct way, that I may
not miss my way: I may not leave my sheep alone, quoth the shephearde, but
yet I will appoint and get thee good company, that will lead thee God willing
in the readiest and best way: take therefore this Dog for this purpose. But
what is his name quoth Desire: He is called Good-wil, said the shephearde. I
thank thee quoth Desire, and God have thee in his keeping. The Lord be with
thee and thy guide, answered the Shephearde, and had him farewell.

Of the Palace of Humility.
WHen Desire was parted from the shepherd, who had committed him to yt way
with his new companion, being a great comfort unto him in his journey, after
many nights and days traveling, came at the end upon a Sunday, in a green
and large field, very pleasante, the ground nevertheless being nothing but
grauel and very dry: whereat DESIRE maruelling greatly, how it should be
possible, that so fair and flourishing herbs could grow in so rocky a
place, sit rather for thorns and thistles, then for any thing else. Espied in
the midst of the field, a sumptuous and costly Palace, whereof he rejoiced:
and in all paste going to the house, ounde the gates thereof shut, and a
fair Damzell standing without, by her favor and outward apparel, seeming
very honest and virtuous. Who seeing his dog was affraide of him, and began
to shake. But Desire willed her not to fear him, because he was not wont to
do harm to any man. Desire maruelling at this Damzell, watching at the gates
of the palace, said: Tell me I pray thee sister, what look thou here for
alone: I tarry answered she, til they open the gates that I might enter in:
how art thou called then quoth Desire, my name is said she, Vainglory.
Desire having tarried long at the gates, and seeing that he thus watched in
vain, began to knock (for at the door did hang an won hammer called
Patience) to see if any man woul^e come to open the gates. And presently there
came an aunciente and reverend father, being Porter and keeper of all the
house, to open the doors, and his name was the Fear of God. Desire seeing
this old and worshipful father, after due reverence done unto him, said: I
am come hither sir, to look for a certain knight called the Love of God, and
the^ have told me how he should be past through thie forest, and come
into this house, therefore full ^am would I know whether he be here or not The
Porter was glad of these words, for he loved entirely the Love of God, being
his brother, and said unto him. Son wherefore do thou look for this
knight, what business have thou with him? Most reverend father, answered Desire,
I do ask for him because I do rejoice in him, and stand in great need of
him. How so quoth The fear of God? because said Desire, I would willingly
dwell with him and be his servant, for in all this country there is none who
likes me better, although I might have had many others that most gladly
would have entertained me. But I have been certified of him by others, how he
is a noble, courteous, and bountiful Lord to his servants. It is most true
answered the Porter, that thou say, and not long agone he came by this way,
with small company, yet notwithstanding, at this present he is not within, but
tarry here a while, till I go call a Damsel, who will show thee directly,
where thou may find him.

The seventh Chapter how Vainglory keeps the watch at the gates of the
Palace of Humility.
DEsire tarried merrily til ye Damsel should come we the Porter, and not long
after, there came forth a very humble and virtuous Lady greeting him very
friendly, and he likewise her, saying, I pray thee Lady tell me thy name is
said we: Esteem me nothing, and how is this house called, quoth he. The
Palace of Humility answered she, because there are many Ladies dwelling in it
under one sovereign called Humility. And what gentle woman is she, said he,
that watched without at the gates? She is called Vain-Glorie answered she,
watching continually at the gates till they are opened: and whenever the
Porter looks not narrowly to her, or takes small heed to his charge, then
she presumes oftentimes to come in. Wherefore will thou not suffer her to
come in said Desire, seeing her words, her apparel and favor seems to be
honest and virtuous. Ah brother answered she, thou do not yet know her,
for she is a most pestilent and wicked creature, and although she seems
honest by her outward behavior, she is therefore not any thing the better,
but rather the worse. what injury does she the^ unto thee said Desire? As much
as she is able to do, answered the Lady, for she is daughter to a wicked
father called Self-loue, and to a worser mother, called Self-conceit. These
three being our greatest foes in the world, are yet greater enemies to the
Lord, and chief of the house, called The love of God.

Will thou know what injury she does unto us, whenever she enters by one
way or another into the house, she is very greedy and hungry, and runs
presently to a garden, and eats all the fruits of the best tree which we
have, by the which we do live only and are all maintained: and have but one of
these trees, which is not yet very fruitful, when she has thereof stolen the
fruits away, we remain very poor and are scarce able to live. Besides,
which is far worse, she is a great flatterer, and has so smooth a tongue,
that whenever she is come within, there is none that is able to thrust her
out again, but only our sovereign Humility, whom when she sees, presently
shows her heels, and runs away as fast as she can. Therefore it is best
not to let her come in: and to this intent have we made this old man our
Porter, because he is something hard and froward, and speedily clappeth the
door to her face, and takes great heed that she enter not by stealth, or on a
sudden. Moreover we have desired him, that he should look well to his
charge, in opening and shutting the gates. Desire wondering at this Ladies
words, said: thou have reason not to suffer her to come in, seeing what great
harm ye all receive by her.

The sixth Chapter concerning the way to Humility.
TEll me said Desire, who brought thee in this fair and costly Palace, two
Ladies answered she, the one called Contempt of the world, and the other,
Contempt of her self: whereof the last is more holy then the first. These two
Damselles did guide and conduct me hither, and desired our sovereign, that it
would please her to entertain me, but she would never have done it, unless
it had been for a certain Knights sake who met us in the way and brought us
hither, and for the love of him gave me this garment, and received me into her
service. But if God had not granted us this grace, that we had found this
Knight in our way, we should have taken all this pains in vain, for she
would never have entertained me. How do they call this knight, quoth Desire:
The Love of God answered she, all which did make Desire glad, and did increase
his desire more to serve him, because he perceived that ye Love of God was so
much esteemed of in this place. Sister, said Desire of what kindred were these
two Ladies who brought thee hither. For it profits greatly to vertuousnes, to
be the child of honest and godly parents, because for the most part, the tree
takes her force from the root. I know their kindred very well answered the
Lady, for they be of a great stock, and their father is (for they are
sisters) one of the chiefest in the Kings Court, and is called Knowledge.
Besides I do know their Grandfather, called Observing: a very wise and sensible
man, doing all his things with counsel and advice, who took a wife called
Wisdom. Then said Desire, The knight who met thee upon the way, was he
alone, no quoth she, for he had a page with him, whom he loved sincerely, and
was called Neighbourly Love. Can thou not show me said Desire, whether this
knight is gone? I said she but first we will go within, and I will bring thee
by some that will give thee better direction. But good Lord, quoth she, what
do thou with this great Mastine: He is given me said he, for at ye first I
had but a small one, yt was brought up in my chamber, til I met a shepherd who
has bestowed this Dog upon me to bring me in safety through this great
Forest: How do thou call him said she, Good Will said he, it is a very
good Dog quoth she, and if thou can keep him well, thou shall be sure, as
long as he shall remain with thee, that he will not suffer any harm to fall
upon thee and thou need not to fear that thou shall go astray out of ye
right way: Tell me said Desire, who shall show me this knight? Brother
answered she, he dwells far from this place, and thou must go seven days
journey at the least through this desarte, before thou can come to him where
he dwells: There be seven houses in this desert, and there is no other hie
way but one. But for the Love of God, I will show thee a short foot path, which
will shorten thy way, that thou may come the sooner to thy iourneyes end:
but thou must follow my counsel. Desire was glad to hear these words, and
chiefly because she did it only for love, and said, whatsoever thou
commaundest me to do, that will I do most willingly, for hereby to find out
the Love of God.

In this desert said she stand eight houses or palaces, the first is, the
Palace of Humility: the second of Justice: the third of Wisdom: the fourth of
Fortitude: the fifth of Tempera^ce: ye sixth of Faith: ye seventh of Hope: the
eight of Charity: and in the last of all dwellet, the Love of God, and is
sovereign of the house and all this way must thou go, so thou will not go
out of thy way. But as I have told thee before, so according to my promise
will I show thee a foot path to shorten thy way. But first of all must thou
dwell for a time here in this house, for to learn mark and remember all our
manners, and become acquainted with our Sovereign and her watching maids, and
never to forget their names nor their countenances. And when thou shall have
had a trial of all belonging to this house, and shall bring certain tokens
from us to ye Love of God, then soon will he entertain thee, for the great
affection he bears to our house above any of the rest, and chiefly when he
shall see a letter from our Sovereign. Wherefore (demanded Desire) does this
knight love this house more then any other? for in my judgment it is the
poorest, and barest of them all. Thou must know, yt this house was the first
builded in this desarte, and all the rest are subject under it. And our
commander and chief gouenour the first founder of it, did dwell here, and
although he went in progress oftentimes for to see the other his friends and
subjects so to keep the^ in good order, yet notwtstanding all this, would not
be called but a so^ of this house. Desire having given a diligent ear to her
words found his heart to be more inflaimed with Love, for he did conceive her
meaning very well, and said: that he would willingly remain there for a time,
till her had learned all their customs. Let us go within then, said she, and
took him by the hand and went to show him all the house.

The seventh Chapter concerning the talk which Humility had with Desire.
AFter yt the lady had showed him all the house, he greatly marvelled at the
fairenes and beauty thereof, and the more because it seemed outwardely but
very simple and homely and of no great shoe, but was within very profitable
and necessary, the foundation whereof was not set upon gravel or sand, but
upon a fair and precious stone. And after he had said his prayers in the
Chapel standing in the house, the Lady did lead him into the chamber of her
Sovereign, who received him most courteously, and because she found him so
advised and circumspect in all his words, bad him to sit down next to her side
and said: My son, wherefore art thou come to us, seeing that we are so simple,
poor and despised? Ah most reverent Lady, answered Desire, I seek for a
Knight calls the Love of God, and I am told that I shall not find him,
unless I remain for a certain time with your Ladishippe, and if it would
please you, I would most gladly tarry here at your obedience and commandment.
Thy good will, said the Lady, pleases me well, but first of all remember thy
self, and have care what thou have to do, for not to repent hereafter. God
grant me grace quoth he, to remain constant in all virtues, and steadfast in
all godliness. Amen said the Lady. And that it may please him who has begun in
thee a good work to bring it to perfection, for it is necessary that thou
should putthy helping hand to it, as much as lies in thee, and that God do
accomplish it. What must I do then, said he: I will tell thee, answered the
Lady, if thou art minded to remain here with us, then thou must seek to keep
my daughters favor, who brought thee in, and take her as thy gouernes, for she
is called Esteem nothing. And we have put her in this office to entertain
strangers. because she should instruct them, and those that will not be under
her commandment, can never remain constant or steadfast. I am ready, quoth
Desire, to take her for my gouernes and guider in all my actions. But may it
please your Ladyship to let me know your name, your kindred, your estate, and
by what means you are become a Sovereign to all these damsels and Ladies, for
I was told before I came in, that it was necessary for me to know all this, yt
by these means I might love your Ladyship, and all your household the better
and likewise when I should go from hence, yt I might give those that should
ask me good directious and certain tokens of my former abiding here.

My name, said she, is Humility, my father was called Contempt of himself,
and my grandfather Knowledge of himself, and my grandmother Knowledge of God,
and my grandfather was borne in a City called Remember what thou art, what
thou have been, and what thou shall be. And my grandmother was borne in a
City called Remembrance of the love God. And to come to the City where they
were borne, there are but two ways and two gates to come in. The one is
himself, and the other the Creatures. Besides they say, that none can come
into the foresaid gates but flying, And how the Lord himself has builded
the City with his own hands, for there is no man able to build so great, fair
and strong a City, then he only. How said Desire, the Lord who is so
excellent, will be busy himself to make such walls of earth, I, answered
she, for he is a cunning Mason and delights greatly to make walls, and
monuments of earth. Wherefore does he this, seeing he needs nor wants
nothing, quoth Desire. Therefore answered she, because he is so bountiful
that he will never be idle in doing good to others. And of all that he does,
seeks but every man's health, rest and salvation, although the honor hereof
apertaine to him only. And therefore he makes his works of such slight and
vile stuff, as earth, to be the more praised of all. I marvel said Desire,
that such a noble and high Lord will be praised, and fears not to fall into
vain glory. Not so, said Humility, for he is so perfect in all goodness,
that no imperfection can any way touch him. And the glory which we do give
him is not vain, but is his due as belonging unto him. And although we
should give him as much honor as ever we could, yet in no wise should we pay
that which we do owe, and much less attain to that he is worthy of. And
therefore he will be praised and honored, not because he is ambitious, but
because he is the most perfect in all justice and perfection, and will that
every one should receive that which is their own, and due unto them: and
because we do owe unto him which is good alone, al h^^^or, praise and thanks
he will therefore in justice, that we do give it unto him. And whenever any
other does desire or look ^or it, as if it were h^s own: then may he well be
called vainglorious, stealing it from him to whom it only belongs, and is
worthy of no better title then of a thief, that will seem to usurp Gods
right, which is due only unto his divine Majesty.

The eight Chapter, wherein Humility proceeds in her words.
DEsire said, I pray your Ladishippe (seeing you have satisfied me in the
rest) to tell me by what means you are become a Soueraign to this house, for
in my judgment, it is a great honor and credit. And perchance it might be
my luck to be once a commander of such a like place, for there is great
difference to command, and to be commanded. The Lady Humility, hearing
these words began to bitterly. Wherefore Desire demanded her the occasion of
her sorrow and weeping. Then answered she, I weep because I see thee outwardly
and not inwardly clad with Humility, and carriest only the bare name of an
advised man, thy heart and mind being notwithstanding far from it. In vain
have thou spoken yet to me, and til now have thou dissembled with us all,
because such thoughts and desires do utterly displease my God and Father, who
being man in this world, and having taken upon him our shape and nature,
sought not with words or deeds to command, but rather to be commanded of the
simplest. And whosoever keeps not this way, takes the high way to
condemnation, missing the right path leading to eternal life. Ah poor and
miserable wretches that seek to command and direct others, having more then
enough to command and govern themselves. whoso^uer hunteth after this honor,
seeks care, grief, travail, pain, distress and danger. O heavy burden
that brings to a man but pain and grief, and the il will, gainesay, and
murmuring of those that were bound in duty to recompense labor with thanks
and thankfulness: which tho^ shall find to be most true if thou remaynest
but a while with us. And because I should satisfy thee upon thy demand, I
will not hide from thee this secret, but for the love of God open and disclose
to thee my heart. When I came first to this house I humbled my self as a slave
and servant to all the rest of the damsels, which lowlines I have continually
so loved, and embraced, that the mercy of God did marrye me to this mind as
to a husband, by whose means I have gotten this office, although I did utterly
detest it and refuse it. When Desire did hear this, be honoied this Lady
greatly in his heart, and esteemed her to be very vetuous ye would for ye Love
of God become so humble and lowly: and said, now do I see whosoever will
become a governor and commander of others, must first of all follow your
Ladyships steps, and learn to be humble and cammanded. It is so my son
answered she, and if thou did understand ^ne right, then thou should
perceive that they are not my words but the everlasting truths. How should I
understand the^ quoth Desire? Thou must know said she, that he who humbles
himself, shall be exalted, although he does not humble himself to that intent
to be exalted, for by these means he should fall into pride, and humility
and pride are contraries one to other: For if one humbles himself in any work
which he takes in hand, in on wise may he become proud of it, although in his
work consists humility, yet in himself (humbling himself to such an end
as I have spoken of) should consist pride and ambition. And because the work
takes his name and title from the intent of a man's mind: it happens that
such humility is properly termed with the name of pride and arrogance. And to
speak more plainly of this, humility is not altogether contrary to pride,
seeing they do remain at one time in one body together (which is contrary to
ye nature of contraries) but the spirit of the one is quite repugnant to the
other, so that they can not abide one another sight, for humility is only
the work, but the spirit of humility makes a happy end of the same,
together with the good intent for to humble himself.

The ninth chapter does prosecute the former words, and of the battle between
the flesh and the spirit.
THis my low mind said Humility, is my faithful helper, and defender, in a
battle which I daily sustain against a mighty Princess of an other palace,
who has a great sort of Ladies under her jurisdiction: and her court is
called, the Palace of Pride, and the sovereign thereof, the Pride of life.
Every day she comes or to contend and quarrel with me covering only to
search out mine eyes. And brings with her the lifetenaunce of her house,
commonly called the concupiscence of the flesh, with her steward, the
concupiscence of the eyes, these three are accompanied with an other wicked
woman their mother, who has nourished them all, called Oblivion. But because
she is oftentimes of no force, and very weak, therefore she brings we her a
foolish idiot, and unbridled watching maid called Maliciousnes, besides 3.
other more, ye one called Wrath, the other Slothfulnes, and the third Envy. And
with these two last, there comes two other named il Suspicion, and false
Judgment, these are altogether my mortal enemies, against who^ I am forced to
sight and to strive: and whenever they have made an entrance here in our
house, then by the lowness of my mind I drive them out again, and do give
them the foil. But when I and my company have done this, then must we be
careful only but for one thing, which is diligently to look that this
damsel called Vaineglory (continually keeping sentinel at our door) do not
enter, for when soever she comes within, then she does rob us of all the
profit, delight and pleasure, which we take in over coming in others, so that
we can no wise enjoy the fruits of our pain and travail: and when these other
Ladies, said Desire, make an entrance here within, for to endamage you,
wherefore does not she that stands without at the gates come in with them.
Because answered Humility, that the other Ladies have wings and never enter
through ye door, but fly always over the walls of the house, and oftentimes
do hyde themselves in some corner of the house, and lie in ambush, for to
assault us when we think least upon them. Therefore it is most necessary that
we should watch and ward continually, that we be not assaulted being
altogether unprovided for to fight. Let us speak some thing more plainer of
this point quoth Desire. Wherefore do you contend and strive with them,
seeing it is not well done to give an evil example to others, which happens,
when men see such iars, strifes and contentions, between wise and godly
people, who should be merciful, meek and bountiful for the Love of God toward
every body. We battle and contend with them, said Humility, and seek to
drive them out of our house, because they are mortal enemies to the Love of
God, who is our only Landelorde, and in matters which are contrary unto him,
we should nor will not contract, or enter in league with any body.

The tenth Chapter does entreat of the concupisce^ce of the flesh and how to
overcome it.
THe good will and loyalty which Lady Humility did bear to the Love of God,
did wonderfully delight Desire, and said, Madame I would be glad that it
would please your Ladishippe, to show and teach me the means whereby, you
do use to overcome these wicked Ladies, your enemies, and drive them out of
your house. I would to God, answered she, that thou were herein satisfied, but
because I do not yet know thy nature, will, and mind, but only by certain
external signs, whereby one may be deceived, it causes me somewhat to doubt of
your honesty: for honny is not sweet to every body: for the diversity of sundry
natures and complexions: My Sovereign, quoth Desire, even as I am here, and as
your Ladishippe does see me, so I yield my self into your power, my reason and
will wholly submitting to yours, that I might receive instructions by these
means for to find out ye Love of God. Most willingly will I the^ satisfy thy
mind answered Humility, and disclose all my secrets, and communicate unto
there my daily exercises.

First, my godly pretense and purpose being my husband (whereof I have spoken
unto thee before) made me by the means of Contempt, to ouercom the world,
and by chasting and fasting to rule my one flesh, and to vanquish Satan by
humility, and make me Sovereign of this house, but chiefly of my self,
which is the most of all. For when my flesh feels that I travel and endeavor
to please ye Love of God, then it does resist me with all his crew, and is
continually disquieted with my doings, but nevertheless my soul does then
remain in peace, contentment, and quietness.

Desire did marvel greatly at the words of Lady Humility, and said, I pray
your Ladishippe, that it may please you to instruct me by some similitude in
these things, for I am somewhat dull of understanding, so that I shall better
conceive your meaning by an example or comparison. This motion did greatly
please Humility, and chiefly, because she saw how he did begin to wax humble,
in confessing the dullness and grossenes of his wit and understanding, and
said: My child, whenever any of yt foresaid women do enter in, then I
behave my self in this sort, as for example: when Concupiscence of the flesh
begins to siruit with me, before she is able to come to me, I know her,
and her conditions very well, for she is very gluttenous, and gathers
forces by eating and drinking, therefore I withdraw from her all dainty kinds
of meat, and will not give her so much of ordinary diet as she does desire to
have. And because my forces are not able to withstand or to va^quish her, (for
mine own household comes to aid and to assist her) I crave and call for
help at the hands of God, who stands always at my side, to strengthen me
against these wicked women. Moreover, I do esteem my self to be as a beast
who does eat no more then his master does give and allow him. But when his
master sees that he is greedy at his meat, he does restrain his mouth
with a mufle, because he should not eat but at such times, and such as it
does please him to give unto him. Wherefore the Love of God, my only master
has put about my mouth a mussell called Sobriety, that I should eat no more
then will suffice nature, and has told me that I should of that, yet something
wtdrawe, if I would please hun. In this forte is this wicked Lady vanquished
and overcome, as much as it does concern my own self, But because she does
not only assault me with mine own flesh, but by others, does provoke and draw
me to sensuality and uncleanness: therefore I avoid her as much as I am
able, eschewing all things whereby she seeks to entice me to her love and
liking, esteeming this to be the best and only cemedy to escape her snares and
deceytes. Furthermore. she assaulteth not* only my body, but also my mind
with diverse and strange imaginations and thoughts: for ye which to avoid
likewise, I judge it the best remedy, to cast my mind upon my Savior Christ,
and continually to behold his death, passion and martyrdom, as also to
reme^der the pames of hell, the straitnes of the last judgment, and my small
en^e, and that I must appear before the tribunal seat of God, to give an
account of al my words, thoughts and deeds: And by these means is overcome,
vanquished and quite overthrown this wicked woman, being Lieuetenant to the
Palace of Pride.

The xi. Chapter, Lady Humility speaks against the Concupiscence of the
eyes, and the pride of life.
IT auailed not to have overthrown ye one unless I should endeavor my self also
to vanquish the other her fellow and companion, who is Steward of this ungodly
Palace, and is called Concupiscence of the eyes. And oftentimes she offered
first the combat, but I overcome her by my godly intent and purpose, saying:
whenever that she is ready to come. In vain do thou seek to assault me,
for I am not unlike to a beast, that does care for no thing but what is before
him, and esteemed of no other superfluity, but what he needs, and
therewithal is contented, being nothing curious in yt which he lacks, nor
careful whether the Saddle and the Trappi^rs are clean, neat or old, or
whether the stable or maunger be altogether fit for him or not, but is
sufficiently satisfied when he may stand or lie, for to take his natural rest.
And because I esteem my self to be such an other, for the Love of God. I
will use my body according as they are used: for when the master does mark
that they wax wild and stubborn, he puts a bit and bridle in their mouth
to rule them after his own will. Likewise bath the Love of God brideled me
with a bitte called Sham^f^stnes, that I should not curiously behold and love
vanity, for it is dangerous to behold that which is forbidden to be desired
or coueted. wherefore the Love of God has given me warning, when ^^euer I
should come to ^^euer I should come to see a thing which is beautiful,
comely and delightsome to the eyes, that I should not set my mind oppon it,
but should di^daine it as a trifle of nothing, and should continually love
and behold y^ cheifest felicity, being a a treasure not subject to mutability,
or vnconsta^cie which is my only Savior Jesus Christ, who does seek and
demand my heart and love, and will most bountifully reward me for the same.
And by these contemplations I overcome the other Damsel. Now when these two
are driven away, there rests yet the last, who is there Sovereign to be
vanquished, who has more deceit and subtlety then all the rest, and watches
continually over the good works of a man, and is called the Pide of life. And
whenever the comes, she is always accompanied with one page or an other,
the one called good, and the other evil intent. But so soon as I do spy
her, then I use her in this sort: and tell her, Avoid thou wicked and
deceitful Siren, for if I sholdgiue ear to thy sweet poisoned words, I should
draw upon me a sea of calamities and miseries. And although thou clounsellest
me that I should grudge at the chastenings and commandment of others, yet I
will not hearken to thy words, for I tell thee plain, I think that he
loves me, who does chasten and rebuke me, for not to come to shame, and
utterly to be cast away. Sometimes she does present her self under the color
of Envy and tells me. This body is in such authority, and this has such a
commandemente, but no body esteems of thee. The one is Sovereign, the other
Lieuetenant, the other Steward, and ouerseer the other: but thou art accounted
but as a kitchen drudge, being notwithstanding us old and as good as any of
them al. Thou art without office or commandment, and esteemed amongst them
as a slave of all slaves, because they never commit any charge to thy hands,
therefore thou may well see, that he who does most is least considered of,
hereafter then use thy self otherwise, for whosoever makes of himself a
sheep, the woolfe will quickly eat and devour him. These and such like things
does she cast before me, and comes dissembling wise to me, although I knew
her not, nor could perceive from whence these lamentable words did spring and
grow. Whereupon I answer her in this sort. Content thou thy self, I have not
forsaken the world, and mine own self, to rule and command others, but to be
governed and commanded my self: Long agone have I purposed to be oobedient,
and therefore I will do that whereunto I am called. For God will never ask an
account of ye commandment which I had here in this world, and how highly I
have been advanced in Office and authority, but how I have behaved my self
in mine estate, how I have executed those things which were commanded me:
how I have humbled my heart toward him. Therefore I will diligently execute
the vocation whereunto God has called me, and meddle not with other men's
offices and authorities. For I am assured of one thing, yt it is a step and
degree to salvation, to be obedient, dutiful and humble, from which no man
can fall but by an aspiring mind. And therefore I have no occasion to complain
for this my baseness sake, but rather the more to thank and praise the Lord,
and greatly to rejoice, that he has taken away from me all occasions of fear
and peril, whereunto honor and authority do oftentimes lead and bring a
man. And herein let Saint Augustine satisfy thee, who says: In nothing have I
felt more Gods wrath, then when he appointed me to rule and govern others. And
therefore my son marvel not of this, for even as this wicked Damsel, who is
Sovereign of the palace of Pride, is more addicted and given to all manner of
iniquity and wickedness, so we of our side do need to be the more
circumspect, strong and diligent for to avoid her snares and subtilties. And
to be short, I will show thee here a thing of no small importance, being a
remedy whereby thou may vanquish, and overcome all these wicked crew
together at once, or else every one apart. For when one of them comes,
whosoever she be in complaining wise, do the^ as I do: Namely, when the
Concupiscence of the flesh comes, complaining, that they give her too little
and too cold cheer, or that her drink is too small or too sour: then I answer
her: It is most certain that he who has more then he deserves, has no
reason or occasion to complain: and thou do not deserve a crust of bread,
nor a cup of cold water, as the best Saints have confessed in truth of
themselves, and therefore thou do deserve a great deal less, who art not
to be compared unto them in holiness of life, being so unsteadfast in Gods
service, and so unthankful for his benefits. What occasion have thou then to
complain, seeing thou have more then thou art worthy of. And the same I tell
her likewise, when she misliketh her apparel. The like answer I give unto the
other, called, Concupiscence of the eyes, when she stirs and prouokes me with
the desire of coveting this or that: saying to my self: O thou vile and poor
wretch, that which thou desire under the color of need, is superflui^y and
contrary to the poverty of the spirit. And although she is not by this
altogether overthrown, yet notwithstanding it does diminish at the least our
self-loue and pride in our virtues. And we Christians (who profess the name of
Christ) should be ashamed to be endued with less virtues, then the Heathens
and Idolaters were, amongst whom Seneca was the only mirror and pattern of
virtuous poverty, as it is yet manifestly to be seen in his works and
writings. The like answer I make to the third Damsel being called the
Pride of life, whenever she goes about to tickle me with a desire to be
honored, esteemed of, exalted, and to command, thinking within my self: O
thou miserable creature, thou do enjoy more honor then thou art worthy of,
if thou could only conceive it. For have thou not deserved to burn in hell
fire with the damned souls? And behold what honor the Lord does show
thee, to suffer thee to dwell in peace and quietness amongst his creatures, I
and which is more, has received thee in to his service, and has made thee one
of his domesticals and household. And although you art altogether unworthy to be
ye least of his servants, yet has he chose^ thee to be one of his minions, and
will not let thee part from him night nor day, but requires that thou should
speak with him continually, and praise and thank him for his goodness.
Moreover he does feed thee in this transitory and mortal life, even with
ye bread of Angels, and sets thee at his own table for to banquet with him.
Thou proud wretch what can thou crave more* where would thou clime?
would thou fall down again from whence thou art come, for to lie as deep in
ye bottomless pit of hell, as thy father Lucifer does? what would thou have
more? do thou desire to be God himself. Thou lackest nor need nothing,
O unhappy creature as thou art, open but only thy blinded eyes, and confess
that thou have more then thou deseruest, or art worthy of. Be contented with
that, that God sends thee, and with thine own estate, and persuade thy self
that all things which do happen, do come to pass by Gods ordinance and
appointment.

The twelfth Chapter does entreat of the ways and means to vanquish the other
wicked Damsels.
WHen these three are overcome, the^ easily may thou overthrow her, who is
their nurse and mother, called Oblivion, who comes creeping into the house
through a thousand holes, sometimes she finds her self in the morninge,
sometimes in the eueninge Prayers, and sometimes at our work and labor. And
always I rebuke her in this sort: I tell thee woman, there is no man that
keeps a beast in his stable to be idle always, and to take his pleasure
only in eating, drinking, and sleeping, but that he might work daily with
some courage. For whenever a beast is not tamed with working, fasting and
watching, he grows quickly stubborn and stiff necked against his master.
But when the master sees yt he is slow and nothing quick, then he uses a
goade or spur to drive and prick him forward: even so has the Love of God
procured for ^^^e a rodbe called Fear, whereby he drives me forward. And I
that am servant and the poorest of all the house, know very well that a slave
is not kept but for to work and travail, and no body should make great
account of him or ease his task or feed him daintily, because he should not
wax too bold or too stubborn: for there is no worse man then a wicked
prisoner. Further I ask her, whether the kingdom of heaven is to be gotten with
eating, drinking, sleeping, and securenesse of life? Not so truly, for our
savior Christ did not enter into it in this sort: and seeing yt he who is our
only guide, did not take this way to come thither, but by pains and
sufferings entered into everlasting blessedness: therefore if we will obtain the
same joy, then are we forced to walk in the way of sufferinges and poverty,
for when the head will go this way and the feet another, the body shall never
be joined and come together. And if we do not keep the high way of suffering,
travail, pain, and contempt, then we can in no wise be incorporated, but
shall be cut off as unprofitable members and branches, and be cast into Hell
fire. And if we refuse to be partakers of his cross and passion, then we shall
not participate of his joys and resurrection. And if we do not find Christ,
in punishing our flesh, as he was whipped, spitted at, despised, wearied, poor,
hungry, thirsty, and suffering death between two theeus as an il doer, being
nevertheless bout stain or spot, and altogether innocent, then we are sure
never to taste of his joys, and enjoy his lovely and sweet countenance, being
now made king of all kings, and Lord of Lords: sometimes this wicked woman
comes to assault me, when I am in my chamber at my prayers, although she were
wearied and troubled with too much heat or frost. Then I tell her, woman a
devout damsel feels no tediousnes of a good thing. Besides, what shall I pay
to the Lord again, for all that he has given me? What can I suffer to
requite my dear and welbe-loued Savior Christ? Who through mere love, has
lost his life upon the cross, not lying there at his own pleasure, as I do
here, but was thrown most cruelly upon it, and there stretched out as with a
rack, not clothed, but naked, not under a cover, but under the bare sky: not
with warm shoes at his feet, but pierced with great and cold iron nails, and
all this for my sake. Wherefore then should I grudge to suffer a thing of
nothing for the love of him? All which is yet small in comparison of the rest,
for he has not only, most gladly and willingly, for my sake suffered the
miseries and calamities of this life, not for an hour, a day, or a month, but
for three and thirty years together, and besides remained three hours alive
upon the cross, in such pain, grie^e, and martyrdom, that no tongue is able
to speak it, or any understand it to conceive or comprehend it, all which
seemed little unto him for the great love and affection he bore to all mankind,
and particularly to every one of us, and would have suffered much more if it
had been needful: he notwithstanding being a king, and I worse then a slave,
he God, and I more vilder then the earth, dust, or ashes: he most holy and
innocent, and I a great and grievous sinner, worthy of severe punishment. And
seeing he has done all this for my sake, should I think it too much to do any
thing for the love of him? And is the servant better then the master?
Therefore Obliuio^ avoid, for it is no pain for me to be here, seeing I do
not suffer any grief or adversity: and unless I should do this with a good
will or spiritual pleasure, ye hand of God might fall upon me: for it is
written, Cursed is he who does the work of the Lord negligenly and
carelessly. For he cannot abide that one should serve or offer the sacrifice
of praise and prayers unwillingly, but is pleased when they spring and come out
of a joyful and unfeigned mind. When now this old and accursed wretch is
overcome, then must we endeavor ourselves to vanquish the other foolish
watching maids, whom the worser they are, of the greater and of more force
are their temptations, and assailings: and the less they are mortified, the
vncasier are they to be rebuked and overthrown. Now when the first whereof I
have spoken called Maliciousnes, accompanied with her daughter Wrath, do both
assail me, then I give them this answer. Charity is bou^tifull and patient,
and thus with my good intent and meaning my husband, I quite overthrow them.
Further, I tell them, although yt mine acquaintance, who profess great love
and frendshippe toward me, do offer me some secret wrong and injury, seeing
that I deserve and am worthy of more, I am willing to bear it patiently for ye
Love of God, and persuade my self that they greatly favor me, that they
offer me not so much as I, (if all things were rightly considered off) have
deserved. And this the Lord suffers for my sins sake, for to make me ready
in this world, that I might learn to suffer some thing in the mean season for
his cause. Those whom thou say that wish me ill, and do speak ill behind
my back, and cannot abide my sight, they hate not my soul, but my sins
only, my faults and wickedness, therefore I am bound to love them, for
their purpose and intent is good and goodly. And if I am Gods servant, I shall
soon spy and hate mine own faults. Wherefore then should I curse or wish any
harm to the^, who do that which I would endeavor to do my self? I will
therefore conclude, and therewithal drive thee away from me. Those that do
report ill of me, and seek to hinder me, are they not my brothers and
sisters, and seeing that they be such, am I not commanded to love, and in no
wise to hate them, by force and virtue of the commandment, Love thy neighbor
as thy self? And whenever she does assault me with another of her
servants called Envy, who brings with her a two edged sword, commonly
termed, Spite at another man's corporal and spiritual virtues. Then I answer
her as follows. But first of all you must know that she is a venomous and
spightful Damsel, for she withers, consumes, and kills her self at the
prosperity and good success of her neighbor, and reuiueth again, and
rejoices at their misery and adversity. But now to my answer. Thou say
that others are endued with greater wealth, beauty, and better gifts of nature
them I, wherein I do rejoice and account me the happier, for in this and in
the life to come, I desire nor wish for nothing but for Jesus Christ, who is
the Angels and my only treasure, mine and all creatures beauty, my gain, and
the fountain of al goodness. Therefore let those love the other things that
will, as for me I do thirst after nothing but after Christ and his love. Fe,
there is no exception of ye rich or poor, of the foul and fair with him, but
he regards only the humblenes and lowlines of the spirit. And thou say
that others do possess such and such wealth, and that they receive great
gifts, and I none at all: and I do say, although they enjoy all this, that I
possess, yet much more the^ they, for I bear so great and noble a mind,
that I esteem it a great baseness to settle my heart upon such mean, vile,
and transitory things, as all earthly things are. But now I will overthrow thee
with humility, whereof I bear the name and tell thee that the children of God do
freely possess all these gifts, and many more, and not I that am but a slave,
and not worthy of the least of these things. Then she turns her back
quickly, and presently assaulteth me with a spiritual envy of another man's
goodness and holiness of life, saying, this man is more advised, more seruent in
prayers, quieter, more mortified and soberer then thou art? Whereupon I do
answer her and I say: Let us now speak with reason. Wherefore should I spite
at this, seeing they prick me forward to godliness, and give me an occasion
to rejoice; when I see that my good Lord and master has such servants, who
are lo fervent and holy, and do love him so much with out dissimulation.
Therefore the more I am bound to pray, yt it would please his divine maiestic
to bestow more gifts and graces upon them, to the end he might be praised and
honored the more by the^. For if one did love his master, would he not be
glad that he were known, loved and honored of all the world, and that he
likewise should enrich them with a temporal and spiritual riches and
blessedness. Avoid therefore thou aceursed and wicked creature, for thou
know not what charity means, seeing thou art the brood of so wicked a
damme. Therefore I tell thee farther, I would be glad (so that it might be
without the damage of my salvation) that my Lord and God should deprive me
of all these bodily and spiritual gifts, wherewithal I am endued, and bestow
them upon others, who should use them better to his glory then I who am
unworthy of the ground whereon I tread, and most unthankfully have entertained
his graces and favors so abundantly bestowed upon me. For I desire nothing
else then the glory and praise of my Lord and master, and if it were
possible, upon mine own charges, although my self should receive no benefit
by it at all. Do thou not know that our Gob does all things in great
wisdom? he knows the vessels before, whereinto he pours his graces, and
because he knew me to be unfit for such favors, for my uncleanness and prides
sake, that would be puffed up with a vain presumption of my self, mine own
works and virtues, therefore has his wisdom not beautified me with them, and
yet I am well contented, and will desire no more then I am able to use, both to
his glory and mine own salvation.

The thirteenth Chapter shows most manifestly the ways and means to
overcome all manner of wickedness.
MAliciousnes third daughter, is Slothfulnes, who is of a wonderful wicked
nature, because she is in all spiritual actions which concern Gob, in whom
consists all our salvation, very cold, negligent and slothful. And when she
begins to assault me, then I do withstand her with these armours: In dayrie
do thou seek thou accursed wretch, to draw me from my prayers and
spiritual exercises, and therefore to overcome thee I will be more diligente,
and zealous in praying, watching and fasting, to pass my time in godly
conte^plations: And when she sees that I thus prepare my self to the co^bate,
she takes another course with me and says: Do thou not see and perceive
that thou art altogether without feruency, and that thou shall pray aaginst
thy stomach, whereby Gob is rather provoked unto anger, the^ thereby pleased, and
rather tempted, then honored, who both desire to be served with a burning
zeal and joyful mind, and not with an unwilling and browsie heart. Whereupon
I do answer as follows, avoid hence thou brood of Satan, too well do I
understand thy meanning: for thou must know that at such times I do please God
much more, when I serve him at mine own charges, then when he bestows a
great abundance of grace upon me, for it is an easy thing for him to swim
that is holden up by the chinne. Do thou not know that he withdraws
sometimes his graces from us: for to try what we will or are able to do our
selves. And when he sees that we do offer and present unto him all our
ability, and do all that lies in us, he does then at convenient time through
his mercy increase our comfort again: and although we be deprived of that
zeal which we should have, yet notwithstanding we feel always in us a
good will and desire to perform it, and a misliking of that which we dot: and
do thou ask then, wherefore I do embolden my self to pray, being
altogether faint, slow and of no zeal, and moreover art not ashamed to say: yt
so doing is to tempt God: I tell thee, if I had yet less feruencie then I
have: yet I would not be afraid to do this, and would present my self before
my Lord and say nothing unto him, nor crave any thing at his hand, but only
stand before him. showing him honor and reverence, hoping that he is present,
and does vouchsate to behold and regard me, and yt he which is the fire of
love, will kindle my heart whensoever it shall please him. For I will yield my
self altogether into his hands and submit my will and my self wholly unto
him: and further know, the colder and famier I am, the more need I have to
approach near to the fire. For if I should go away from it, I should be
worser and wax colder. Avoid thou hence therefore for I do not set my self to
pray, or to spiritual contemplations, and other godly exercises, for to
receive thereby comfort only, or because I find in it a sweet and pleasant
taste, but to serve my Lord and God, and besides I knowing his will for to do it,
exercising my self to the glory of his name in all virtue and holiness. Now
when this wicked Damsel does perceive that she is not able to draw me from
the love of my God by these means, she turns her aside, and endeavors to
allienate me from yt love of my neighbor, by the help of these two other
foresaid damsels, called Ill Suspicion, and false or light Judgment, for to
despise them in my heart and judge them to be wicked, and malicious, laying
before my eyes all that which might breed in me some ill suspicion of them,
for by these means to entice me to give a false and rash judgment of their
doings. And to bring their purpose to better effect, they come accompanied with
Murmuring, Despising, and Backebiting. But presently I answer th^^n as it
follows: it does not become a slave suspect ill of his betters, sinners
should not touch sacred things, I must esteem every body to be good and
holy, and account my self to be wicked and a sinner, not knowing what every man
may be in the sight of God, or else what his latter end will be. But as
concerning my self, I know whom and what I am, and to what end the feelt of my
desires Wickedness and Ungodliness would bring and carry me, namely into
hell, it yt mercy of God came not to aid or assist me. Therefore I have enough
to do with my self, and to see whether my thoughts, doodes, and conscience
be good, for I know my self and not other men. As concerning others, I will
take and choose the surest, which is to think well of them all, wherewith I
shall loose nothing, but may profit and advance much. For it is dangerous to
refuse the certainty for the uncertainty: and charity thinks no harm.
Moreover, who has ordained me a Judge between God and my neighbor? between
him and his conscience? truly no body. Therefore avoid, the judgment hereof
belongs to God only, for it is he that sees the inward? thoughts, and
tries every man's reins and secrets. Moreover Ill Suspicion, proceeds from
yt Devil, and is quite contrary to brotherly unity, and causes great strife
amongst friends, which a man may find to be true by daily experience: for
if a husband takes an evil suspicion against his wife, and she does perceive
it, although she had been before the honestest of all her goodly neighbors,
she will quickly turn her chastity into all manner of wickedness and
disloyalty. For it is most true that Seneca says: Ill suspicion has caused
many men to sin. What although they have erred, perhaps they are fallen
through weakness, or else through great temptations, but notwithstanding all
this, I should not therefore hate them, or else give a light judgment of their
doings, but for the Love of God should turn all things to the best, should
suffer, pity, and have compassion on them. And if thou will not yet grant
me this, then I tell thee that it is Gods justice and judgment, whose
providence does bring all things to pass, which in no wise we are able to
comprehend: and in such sort, that eue^ as he never cease to do good unto
us, so he permits these faults, and turns them (although they are evil)
to the advantage and profit of those that are fallen, or else of theirs that do
behold them. Therefore trouble me no more, for he that takes upon him to
judge other men, presumes upon the title of God, and remember what happened
to thy father, when he would have been like unto God, and therefore I have
reason to take warning by his and others mishap, and misfortune, and to have a
special eye to mine own actions and doings.

the xiiij. Chapter ends the exercises of Lady Humility.
DEsire being stricken in a maze at Lady Humilities words said: Now first I do
understand that, which long agone I have heard my ancestors tell, but yet
never had any trial of it, namely that Humility conteyneth and co^prehendeth
all manner of virtues, Justice Peace, Joy* spiritual and temporal comfort.
Therefore I pray your Ladyship to resolve me of one doubt which troubles me
not a little, as touching this matter. Whether you do know always these
wicked Damsels, when they come in disguised apparel or under the color of
godliness, for we do read, that they are able to transform themselves into
Angels of light, whereby easily they may deceive the simple, and such idiots as
I am. Ah my well-beloved son, quoth Humility, this is a great point. Therefore
to resolve thee herein, thou must know ye God has put a Lamp in the midst of
our Chamber, called Good conscience, which burns day and night with the oil
of his mercy: and is kindled with a wike of the holy Scriptures, and hangs
to it a string called Care of the mind, being fastened at a nail called Care of
inclination. And as long as this Lamp does burn and is kindled, then we
need not to fear them, for we can spy them quickly. And although they come
as disguised as they may, yet we know them by their going, for they are crooked
misshapen, and are lame, and do halt, so that they cannot for their lives go
straight and upright. But my son, when this Lamp is put our, by our own
negligence: or yt the nail falls out by our idleness, or else that the string
breaks, or that God wtdraweth his Oil (which he never does before we do
first spill it willingly) then we remain in darkness, and nothing does
prosper with us. And therefore we pray to God always, that it would please
hun to lighten our Lamp, and do say with the Prophet David, O Lord thou art
my guide, lighten me therefore in darkness. The Lord grant you his grace
and mercy, quoth Desire, for you have comforted my troubled mind. Take the^
said Humility, these Ladies whom I shall aopoint, in thy company, until thou
be sufficiently armed with a True fear, for the foresaid wicked Damsels will
endeavor themselves to draw thee perforce again out of our hands, Here is
Fortitude, against the first called Concupiscence of the flesh. Earnestness
against Concupiscece of the eyes. The second, Humility, against Price of life.
The third, Watchfulnes, against, Slothfulnes. The fourth Bountifulness,
against Maliciousnes. And so the Lord have thee in his keeping.

The fifteenth Chapter entreats of the Ver^ues of Lady Humilities d^ughters.
By these means said Humility, with the help and grace of God, and mine own
endenour, I vanquish and overthrow all my enemies. Desire did receive a great
comfort by his soueraigns words, and said, I pray your Ladishippe give me
leave to go visit these Damselles, for to come acquainted with them. Go in the
name of God answered she this leave I give thee most willingly. And thou my
Steward, go thou with him, and bring him acquainted with all the household. And
herewithall Desire departed most joyfully out of his Sovereigns chamber,
accompanied with ye foresaid Lady, who was Steward of the house, called
Esteem nothing. Who brought him presently into ye chamber of Humilities eldest
daughter, called Confession of sins, who did entertain him most friendly, and
being bidden to sit by her, began to speak. I pray you Lady yt it may please
you to tell me your estate, conditions, and manners. I answered she, am
Humilities eldest daughter, and a scholar to this damsel our Steward and do
greatly delight in her company, acknowledging and confessinge always whom I
am, and such as I esteem my self to be. Desire presently did mark, that this
Lady was of a great contenance and very bountiful, because she showed her self
to be an enemy to all vain glory, and idleness, and herewithall, did take his
leave of her. And being departed from thence, his guide brought him to the
Chamber of Lady Humilities second daughter, called Desire to be despised, who
did receive him likewise most cu^teously, and sitting down by her, said: I
pray you Lady to tell me your name, and condition. I am called, said she, Desire
to be despised, contemned, and nothing esteemed of? This did greatly amaze
Desire, hearing that she was so desirous to be despised and contemned, seeing
that it was quite contrary to every man's nature and condition: yet
notwithstanding, did account and esteem her a very virtuous and godly Damsel,
because she did it for the Love of God. And herewithall did take his leave of
her also, and went with the Steward his guide to Humilities third daughters
Chamber, who was called Glad to be despised, who entertained him likewise with
a cheerful countenance, and as he sat down, said unto her. I pray you Lady
to tell me your name and conditions: I answered she, do rejoice to be
despised, contemned, injured, and mocked at, and this for ye Love of God.
Desire did marvel at her virtuous disposition, and said: I pray you to teach
me the means whereby I might attain to your virtues, for I find this, which
you have to be quite repugnaunt to mine own nature: for when I am injured,
contemned, dishonored, and nothing esteemed of, then I grudge and wax angry
at it. This does happen said she, because thou have notyet embraced Humility,
who does comprehend to esteem nothing of her self, and for the Love of God
to despise her self: but it is a sure and certain token that thou art full of
Selfeloue, Pride, and Ambition. Yet because God has brought thee here in the
house, we will teach and instruct thee in all kind of virtues, and pull from
thee this thick and filthy skin, and transform thee unto a new shape, and
prepare thee, that thou may come to the speech of the Love of God. Therefore
if thou will attain to my virtues, first of all thou must embrace my second
^ister, called Desire to be despised, oftentimes remembering and speaking to thy
self. Hereafter I will be despised and contemned, and not grudge, when I am
mocked at, injured and belied. And when thou have attained unto this, then
shall thou be fervent in prayer, and with great labor, not at the first, but
by little and little obtain this virtue, whereof I do bear the name. And
although this will fall something hard unto thee at the first, because thou
shall be forced to strive against thine own nature, yet shall thou with
constancy overcome all difficulty, insomuch that thou shall at the last
rejoice, when they shall either in words or deeds, offer thee, any wrong or
injury. Therefore force thy self to bear patiently all shame, contempt and
despising, for thou must know yt none is just unless he be humble, and grudgeth
not to be despised, injured, and mocked at. whereupon Desire did answer, and
said, I do marvel that he should be unjust, who does mislike and grudgeth at
these things? for there are few to be found y^ then are just, therefore I
think y^ you do mistake your self in this point. Not so said she, and
therefore I will instruct thee in this doctrine. First thou can not deny,
that he is just, who does desire to give and to receive of every man his
right. And thou know that unto man appertains nothing but contempt and
mockery, because he is more vilder then any other creature, for his great and
abominable sins: and therefore I conclude, that he who grudgeth to receive
his due is unjust.

Furthermore thou can not deny, that all good things should be beloved,
sought for, and esteemed of, and so much the more, the more that they exceed
in goodness. And contrariwise, that every evil thing should be hated,
despised, and suppressed. And it is most certain, that every man is naught and
wicked, because God only is good, and therefore it follows, that he with
reason should be despised, scorned, and hated, because it is his due and right.

The sixteenth Chapter shows, that all things which God has created are
good, and how this title Good, belongs only unto him.
BEhold said Desire, I am not yet sufficiently satisfied with these your
arguments, where with you do seek to prone, yt God only is good, and all
that, that is not God should be naught. For your conclusions do disagree with
the holy scripture, where she witnesses, that when God did behold all that
he had made and created, found it not only to be good, but perfect and
without fault. Further, seeing that God is good (being our cheifest felicitte,
and of all that there was created, the efficient and only cause) consequently
it must follow, that all which he has created should be exceeding good,
because the work should be answerable to the excellency of yt workman, for
not to stain his skill and cunning And seeing that man is ye most noblest and
excellentest creature of all visible things, therefore he is not good only,
but exceeds in goodness, and by consequent, according to your own argument,
to him belongs all honor, love, and obedience. I will not answered the
damsel, dispute with thee any longer, but I will more at large, declare and
expound unto thee these things, to the end thou may the better understand
them. Thou must know yt God only is good, (as yt Gospel being the only truth
does witness) which is thus to be understood. That God in his essence and
nature is good only, and that it is proper to him to be good, and all that God
has created is good, but by participation of his goodness. Therefore when the
creature does consider the unspeakable goodness of God, and wayeth his
benefits and graces, bestowed upon her, she will yield all honor and
obedience that is due to his Majesty. And this turns to Godwarde, and not
the creatures. And in this sort ought we to love our selves and all creatures,
because we were all good in our first creation: and therefore man shall not
seek to be honored and reverenced for his own sake, but for the goodness
of God participated unto him: and because he is the handie^wo^ke and creature
of God, shall attribute only unto him all his goodness, and not to himself or
to his own industry. For th^re is great difference in that he has received
of God, and in that he has of his own: from God he has that which is good
in nature, but from himself that which is evil: for by him he does carry his
image and likeness always in him: but by himself, through his wicked and
ungodly life, does deface it, and becomes altogether unlike him, delighting
in nothing by nature, but in that which is contrary to God, and his first
creation. And hereout may we perceive that we should honor and love that
which man has in him of God, namely, his good nature, condition, and all kind
of virtue. But should hate and detest in him all that he has of his own,
namely his wickedness, filthiness and sin, in such sort that we shall in
sundry meanings, and to sundry ends, honor or despise, love or hate a man.
And how holy or virtuous so ever a man is, yet must he know and confess that
he has nothing of himself, but all manner of wickedness, and shall
therefore desire, that the honor and praise of goodness shall only redound
to God, from who^ all goodness flows. But as much as concerns his
wickedness being his own, shall wish only to be despised, contemned,
discredited, and dishonored for it. And whenever he shall do this, then
shall he be just. And if a holy, good, and virtuous man does not grudge,
and is desirous to be despised, why should a sinner then account it injustice
and indecent to have such a desire, but contrariwise would be honored and
esteemed of although they had deserved it. Therefore no sinner shall persuade
himself that he does much when he desires to be thus despised and
disdained, seeing a holy, virtuous, and just man, is bound in duty and
conscience to desire it.

The seventeenth chapter entreats of the same words.
THe words of the Damsel did greatly please Desire and said, I pray you
that it may please you to tell the means, whereby I might further and obtain
this holy desire. Two means there are, answered the Lady, the first is the
Love of God, the second a godly mind, and whensoever thou will take my counsel
it will greatly further thee to the attayning of this my virtue. Most
willingly, answered Desire, I will take it: make account then, and fully
per^wade thy self said the Damsel, that the Love of God, whom thou desire
and love so much, has no greater enemy, nor one who offers hun more wrong
and injury, and more resists him then thine own flesh. Therefore take this
for an use and custom, to speak every morning to thy soul as follows.

Let me see, O my soul, how thou will hate this day thy rebellious flesh,
mortal enemy to thy creator, Lord, and loving spouse Jesus Christ, and what
means thou will use to despise and vex it: And again in the evening shall
thou say this unto her. Let us examine now my foul, how thou have hated this
day thy vile body enemy to thy only Lord and Savior, and have sought by
all means to dishonor it, chasten it, and vex it, and how diligent thou have
been to hinder it of his own will, and in all things to persecute it. And
brother, whenever thou will go about to do this, and with a steadfast desire
to hate thy Lords and thine own souls enemic, then will this exercise bring
and adnaunce thee to a high degree of humility, and by little and little work
in thee a perfection of all virtues: so that shortly after thou shall detest
thy selte, hate and vanquish thy own rebellious will and flesh. And
whenever any body does use thee so, then take hold of me, and of my
virtues, and herem greatly also rejoicing, say: Praised and blessed: be the
Lord my God, who gives me now means to be revenged upon mine enemies.
Desire received great comfort by this damsels words, and with great and humble
thanks, having taken leave of her, was brought by his guide into another of
Lady Humilities daughters chambers, called Sincerity or Simplicity, who
likewise received and entertamed him most trendly, and courteously placing him,
next to her side, began to speak of God, and of heavenly and spiritual
matters. Whereupon Desire did pray the Damsel, that it would please her to
tell him her name. My name is Simplicity, answered she, and with every man I
deal plainly and without deceit, using no dissimulation in any of my actions
or doings, and all that I hear or see, do always conster it to the best:
for I think every man to be as I am: at the least as much as concerns his
mind, I think no harm of any man, but only of my self, for I have alwates an
evil suspicion of my self, having an eye continually upon all my thoughts
and desires being very circumspect and careful to eschew yt traps and snares
of the wicked, that by these means I might wax strong and increase in my
mother Humilities virtues. How, answered Desire, can you not be virtuous
unless you be thus careful? No said she, for Simplicity without Wisdom is
worth little or nothing, and hinders more then it profits: for the Love of
God loves none but those which walk wisely and circumspectly in all his ways.

The eight Chapter entreats of Sincerities manners and conditions.
I pray you good Lary (quoth Desire) to tell me ho^^ you deal upright and
s^^cecely with every (...). In three things answered she, in thoughts, words,
and d^edes. First of al I will not cast my thought upon matters which do pass
my understanding or capacity, nor seek to purchase honor, dignity or
prouiotions of this world, which are but vain and transitory, always
thinking my self to be the worst amongst al reasonable creatures, and the
unworthiest of all Gods servants, esteeming all others to be holy, good, and
replenished with heavenly graces and virtues. Secondly, I will not use any
flattering or deceitful words, to intrappe therewith my brother, but only I,
no, for all things else are wicked, and spring out of the root of vanity and
^dlenes. Thirdely, I refrain my self from vain, fleshly, and worldly actions,
and endeavor to do that only which is simple, plain and prosiable, thereby
to eschew Vanity, and Partiality, which ^ight cause and work my cuine and
overthrow: for to go always roundly and plainly to work, it maintained the
mind in humility, whereof the contrary is full of fear and danger. wherefore
is the contrary thus perilous? quoth Desire, thou must know that my mother has
given me two jewels or precious stones to keep, which I have here in my
Closet, the one called Chastity, and the other Innocence, which are of such
valor, price and estimation, that none is able to give the worth for them. For
we do direct all our actions by these two iewelles, even as the Mariner does
his ship by the compass, endeavoring every day to get the^, and having
gotten the^ surely to keep them. And whenever Curiosity, Vanity, or
Partialite, are suffered to enter through the door of our heart, mouth, eyes
or ears: they they serve by all means to steal the^ away and deprive us of
these iewelles. And therefore whosoever does not direct all his thoughts,
words, and deeds, to ge^ and keep^ them, deserves to be esteemed worse then a
fool. What will you ^o said Desire, with these iewelles, for it is a token of
covetousness, to possess such needless and superfluous riches, as iewelles and
precious stones be, where you see so many poor almost ready to starve for
want of food and maintaynance. Not so quoth she, for thou do mistake my
words. And although that in the love and desire of possessing wealth, riches,
and worldly goods, after the intent and meaning of the possessor or owner
thereof, man consist covetousness, fraud and guile: yet notwithstanding there
can be no deceit or auarisiousnesse in possessinge of these iewelles, whereof
I have spoken, because we do desire and keep them to serve and please
therewith the Love of God, and to honor him herewith, when he vouchsafes to
visit us. Other riches either perish by worms, or consume with rust, or wear
with time, because they are earthly, and common to every man. But those that
are hidden in ye heart, no mustines, rust, worm, or tune can consume them,
because they are common to none but to such as do possess the^. Dow, quoth
Desire, if he who does possess them, did discourse and make a show of them,
would they not consume then, as other riches do? No said she, for when he
does discover them to be seen, then he does not possess them any longer,
for whosoever does enjoy them, does not think that he does possess them,
but does always endeavor himself and trauaileth to get and to attain unto
them. For our God does oftentimes bestow these iewelles upon him that does
not know them, and is ignorant of the possession thereof, because that our
Presumption and Self love which lies hidden in our hearts, should not steal
them away. Therefore he that does possess them, keeps them as secret as may
the possible.

The nineteenth Chapter shows, what things that mayntaine sincerity or
Simplicity.
THe words of this Damsel did please Desire, and said, by what means might
one best keep then these iewelles? one thing answered she is most requisite
and necessary to those that are new begin^ers, and not altogether unprofitable
to the long continuers, which is to fly and to shut doors and windows, for
to haunt and frequen many men's companies, and to hear and see much, are ready
ways to lose and to be deprived of them, because our soul is as a looking
glass, which easily receuieth all figures and likenesses which are brought
before it: and is like unto wax which retayneth the print and mark of any
thing put upon it. How is it possible, quoth Desire, to fly and to shut all
the gates and windows for hun that dwells in a congregation or company of
many? for he is constrained to go oftentimes hither and thither for to dispatch
his business, besides it is both decent and godly to be affable and courteous to
every man, for not to fall in the vice of self-love or Partiality, which is
to be abhorred and to be detested, although it seems to carry a fair shine
or color of virtue and godliness. It is true answered she, but nevertheless
the Love of God commands us that we should be circumspect in all our actions,
and do nothing but by necessity according to the greatness of our affairs,
and to be careful always for these jewels, which we have in our custody,
that we do not lose them. How must we then behave our selves, quoth Desire, for
to do as much as lies in us? It is needful answered she, that he who is not
able for his business sake to keep him from company, indangering hereby greatly
the looimg of these two jewels Chastity and Innocence should always take me
at his side, and whenever he shall be in my company, then he needs not to
fear, that he shall loose them, although he should travel through al ye
world. I pray you, quoth Desire, that it may please you to instruct me by some
comparison, that I might the better conceive it, and the simple and idiot
people ye better understand it, for to carry it away in their memories the
more easier. Know then, answered Sincerity, whosoever is desirous to keep
Chastity and Innocence (being two of the best means to virtue, and ye
readiest ways to come to the last, ye Love of God, who comprehends all
perfection of Charity) must fly and shut doors and windows. And if it be
not possible for him to do it, let him use me then, in all his actions and put
me in his right eye, that whenever his left eye of Concupiscence, of rash or
foolish judgment, will desire to see or judge any thing, let him direct her to
his right eye of sincerity, considering with himself earnestly, that every
man or woman are Angels, and children of the Lord, who continually without
ceasing do laud and praise their Creator, Likewise whatsoever he shall hear
or see of his neighbor, his right eye shall excuse it, and amend it. And
whenever his left eye of Concupiscence, shall seek to draw him to the love
and desire of any Creature, let him presently behold his right eye, which will
send him to the remembering and consideration of the beauty, goodness, and
other perfections of his Creator, which will cause him to love the creature,
for no other cause but that she does love, laud, and praise with him her God
and Creator. And therefore it were most requisite, that he should use me
likewise in all his words and communications. When quoth Desire, does a man
all things with Sincerity? when his mind, answered she, is simple, upright,
and sincere, so that his words and deeds be always correspondent, and all
his actions reasonable and without dissimulation. Having always a special
regard that all his doings may redound to the glory and praise of God, his
souls health and salvation, and to the profit of his neighbor: and this
doing is in all things to walk with Sincerity, and he goes sure and without
danger, whosoever takes her always in his company.

The twentieth Chapter entreats of Poverty, one of Lady Humilities daughters.
DEsire having received great comfort out of Sincerities words, took his
leave of her, and his guide brought him to another of Lady Humilities
daughters, called Poverty. who bidding him welcome, did pray him to sit down
by her side. Desire seeing the great courtesy of the Lady, said, that he was
very glad of her company, because he did perceive that she esteemed much of
the Love of God, and therefore did ask her name, and prayed her to tell him
her manners and conditions. My name, quoth she is Pouertio. And for the Love of
God, I do not possess nor care for any worldly things. wherein, quoth
Desire, take you then your joy and all your comfort? My chiefest treasure,
answered she, wealth, and riches, joy and comfort consists, to forbear all
things for ye Love of God. I do greatly marvel of this, quoth Desire, for I
was told, that this palace was builded, by the most noblest, richest, and
most bountifullest knight of the earth, wherefore does he suffer then so poor
and needy people to dwell in it? For I cannot conceive what profit or gain he
receives by your poverty, need, and necessity. I will tell it thee, answered
she. The Landlord and the founder of this house, is Lord and King of all ye
earth, having al her riches and wealth in his hand and power, and yet it is his
will and pleasure, that we should be poor, because we should not settle our
heart upon any thing, but upon him only, for he is able enough to give us all
things abundantly. But these whom he loves, he does give them none of this
earthly felicity, because they should only desire and love him, and hate
this transitory and deceitful world. The greatest token and witness which we
can have of his love toward us, is when he does not comfort us in this
wretched world, or bestows on us all, that our flesh and lust does crave and
desire. Moreover he does send us poverty, because we should not be too
pensive and careful for the goods and riches of this world, but that we
should serve him with an unfeigned mind and a joyful spirit, and not lightly
for any worldly things, gain or loss, prosperity or adversity, receive a
vain joy, or discomforte, but that our hearts should always in rest and
quiet, without perturbations or discord, be united with God our creator and
Savior. For the Love of God is of such tender and gentle nature, that he can
not dwell but in a quiet, cleave, and peaceable place. which is your cheifest
virtue, quoth Desire, my cheifest virtue is, answered Poverty, to frame and
conform my self to the godly and virtuous conversation of the children of
God, whose company I gladly do frequent. And although my desire is, for to have
nothing yet for to shut out a wild bore who does destroy all our garden,
called Partiality or Exceptions of persons, my mother has ordained that I
should live as the other of my sisters do. But because I should not lose the
reward of my virtue, she has married me to a holy mind, called to desire
nothing: this quoth Desire, in my judgment, is to desire more then to be good,
or more then we do owe or are bound unto, for I do persuade my self that
your Landlorde does counsel you rather to the poverty of the spirit, the^
to that of the boly, and ye prophet says, if thy goods and wealth does
increase set not thy heart upon it: Therefore I esteem that ye virtue of
poverty does not consist in possessing little or much, but in the heart and
mind of the possessor. It is true, quoth she, that the virtue of poverty
consists in the spiritie, yet for ye Love of God to forbear these things it
is a precious virtue, and worthy of great praise and commendation. For our love
and desire is so much inclined to the beauty and comelines of these earthly
things, that hardely we can possess them, without fixing our whole mind upon
them. And because they should not draw us away from the love which we bear to
God, which commonly is very small, it is good and wisely done to take the flax
from the fire, and to remove and prevent all occasions of mischief, as much as
lies in us. For the love of God will have all the heart and can abide no
partner: and take of this an example of our Savior himself, who could have
possessed all ye wealth of this world, and that without to set his mind upon
it. But behold I pray thee how poor he and all his Apostles were. What does
this else signify, but that we should abstain from these things which are so
dangerous and draw many yt do possess the^ into everlasting pain and
damnation.

The twenty one Chapter entreats of Obedience.
DEsire was likewise comforted by this Damsel, and took his leave of her. And
his guide brought him to an other of Lady Humilities daughters, called
Obedience, whom he greatly did reverence, for her countenance and outward
apparaunce did show, that she was of great dignity and more esteemed of, by
the Love of God, then any of her sisters were. And when he did offer to kiss
her hands, she would not suffer it, for she was one of Lady Humilityes
daughters, and sought not after Honor and Promotion. But she bad him to sit
down by her whereupon Desire did inquire her name and conditions. My name,
quoth the Lady, is Obedience, and I am married to a husband called to leave
nothing undone, who is a very valiant, and renowned Knight, and he only is
able to overthrow this fearful and terrible beast, ranging thus in ye world.
called self-will. Which beast does devour all those that follow and love him,
and causes through his sweet whistling, all the ungodly to follow him, and few
do leave him before he has brought them to eternal destruction. But every
body flies away from me, although it be most true, that without me, none can
get and obtain the Love of God. And seeing that God has given me so good a
husband, therefore I do nothing but that he commands me: Likewise I crave
nothing at his hands but necessaries: and I never do go about any thing alone
for fear of theefes, for here are many, and hide themselves, so that I cannot
see them. Who goes then with you, quoth Desire, first answered she a trusty
dog, called Good will, and my sister Sincerity, and my daughters, Foresight,
Mirth, Diligence, and Chastity, and before all things my mother Humility will
always accompany me: all these must I needs take with me for to go sure,
and without danger, and for to do those things which are commanded me. I
pray you quoth Desire, to tell me in what sort your mother Humility is
always with you in all things which you take in hand: for I cannot well
understand it. Of all things which I do, answered she, although they were
the greatest of the world, I think not once that I have done any goodness,
nor set my trust or confidence upon them, nor do exalt my self for them, nor
persuade my self that others are not able to do the like or better, nor do
desire that any man should praise me, although I should seem to have done great
wonders: but humbly I do thank the Lord, that it has pleased his goodness to
give and bestow upon me this knowledge, wisdom, and grace, to do this for
the love of him: and think, because God has granted me the grace for to do
this therein has made me more beholden unto him, and therefore am altogether
unwilling that any should do otherwise but laud and praise God for it. And
as concerning my self, I desire nothing but pain and travail till my last end,
and that my Lord God may receive thereof, the praise and thanks, and my
neighbor the gain and profit: And therefore I desire nothing for all my
doings, because I know that I merit nor deserve nothing. Praying God only
that it may please him to grant me his love, that thereby I might be the more
virtuous in all my actions, for never to offend him, and that it may please him
to be unto me a favorable and merciful God in ye hour of death: as I hope
and faithfully put my trust in him.

The two and twentieth Chapter entreats of Chastity.
DEsire taking leave of Lady Obedyence, went his ways, being greatly comforted
by her: and his guide brought him to another of Lady Humilities daughters
chamber, called Chastity, who likewise entertained him most friendly, and bad
him to sit down. Whereupon Desire did ask her name, and of what nature and
conditions she was. I am quoth she, one of Humilities daughters, and I have
two maide^^ attendant upon me, the first called Continency, the second
Shametastnes, and my name is called the Suruiour of the heart. Who has likewise
a daughter surnamed the keeper of the senses. I pray you quoth Desire to show
me this maiden, willingly quoth she, her own name is Virginity. Desire did
greatly marvel at the costly and strange apparel of the maid. For first of
all she held a bridle in her hand, a stone and a white lawne with a chain
and a padlocke thereunto. And Desire said, I pray you sister to let me
understand what all these things do mean. This bridle, quoth she serves
for to came a wild beast, and although it is very small, yet troubles us not a
little: For if it slips once away, it throws every one of us down, and there
is none then that can rule it, but our Porter called The fear of God. Now do
you call this wild beast, said Desire. It is called answered she, the tongue.
And what do you with this stone demanded Desire: This stone serves quoth
she, to stop up a gappe which is in our house, called the ears, for to
keep out thieves, that they enter not through it as they do many times. Some
times I do put it in my mouth, because I should not speak, for it greatly
pleased the Love of God, sometimes to refrain his speech. What service quoth
Desire, does the Love of God receive of you by thus doing? Great service
answered she, for by this door one loses these two precious stones whereof
Lady Sincerity has spoken of before: And whereto serves this white lawne,
quoth Desire. To stop up the left eye, said she, and it is called Hate of
Uncleanness. And do you not cover your right eye, demanded Desire, no said she,
for it belongs to Sincerity, who does beautify it with all manner of
goodness and vertuousnesse. But this left eye which serves Sensuality, has
a very sharp sight, and spieth any thing sooner then the right eye, and does
us much hurt, for it causes death: and therefore it is necessary that it
should be covered with this lawne, to the end we might behold, and see in all
things with ye pureness of mind, for to become edified thereby, to the honor
and praise of God, and to the edifying of our brother. But to what use serves
this chain with a padlocke hanging at it. This chain is called, quoth she,
Mediocrity, and serves to chain up our doors, for to keep out thieves, and
likewise to keep all in good order in the house, if it were not for this lock
and chain, we should have no order in any thing, but a confusion which should
cause and procure our destruction and overthrow.

The three and twentieth chapter is a conclusion of the first book.
WHen Desire had been a while in Chastityes company, at the last taking his
leave of her, departed with humble thanks, being likewise greatly comforted by
her words. And his guide leading hun out of yt house, said unto him, now thou
have seen all yt house, and the Ladies therein dwelling, and whenever thou
do remember all that thou have seen and heard here amongst us, and put it
diligently in execution and practice, the^ thou have enough to find out ye
Love of God. But yet I will show th^^ a tree which stands in our Barden.
Desire being come into ye Garden and having seen the tree, did marvel greatly
at the beauty thereof, and chiefly because he carried two sundry sorts of
fruits, inquiring what they were for fruits: the fruits which grow upon the
lowest boughs quoth she, which are thus pale and without color, as thou see,
are called Discoufidence in himself, and those that grow upon the highest
branches, which have a golden and vermilio^ hue, are called Confidence in God,
and this is the chiefest fruit that those must feed upon, who do resort
hither. And if they eat not hereof, all their labor is lost, and in vain is
their coming into this place. will you not give me some of these fruits
toward my journey, quoth Desire, most willingly quoth she, but first fill thy
belly with the fruits of the lowest boughs, and then thy pockette and
sleeves with those that grow upon the highest brannches, to eat them by the
way, til thou co^mest into the Palace of the Love of God. Desire was glad that
he had eaten with so good a stomach of the lower fruits, and had filled his
belly with them, and afterward did fill his sleeves, bosom and pockette with
the highest fruits, and said unto the Dainsel: I pray you show me the nearest
and readiest way, which I must keep for to find out the Love of God. I am
glad quoth yt Damsel, that I see thee thus well furnished, and provided for
thy journey, going to seek out the Love of God, yet I fear me, if thou
should go alone, that thou should not find the right way, therefore I
will appoint thee some good company that shall conducte and bring thee in
safety to thy iournies end. Now, quoth Desire, have I not company
sufficient enough of my dog? called Good Will, No, said she, he would not
suffice although he were twice better then he is. For in the way there are not
only a great company of thieves, murderers, and robbers, who sease upon men
and rob them, but also many wild beasts, who do altogether denour them, if
they do catch them: therefore it is good not to trust too much upon thy dog
Seeing it is so, quoth he, as you say: show me so much favor as to appoint
me such company as you think to be needeful and meet for me. Lake therefore
said^ she, the Porter with thee called the Fear of God, for he is a strong and
valiant man. And if thou will yt he forsakes thee not, make much of his
daughter called Shamefastnes. And likewise if thou will not loose her, keep
this sweet powder always about thee, called Look down ward, for she
delights greatly in the smell thereof. And the other whom I do appoint thee,
is sincerity. And so the Lord be with thee, and have thee in his keeping.
But before thou go, I must admonish and instruct thee of one thing, which
is, if peradventure thou should com to leese the Fear of God and sincerity,
at the least look well to thy Dog, for he shall find them out again, and
look that thou feed hun well with those fruits which thou have in thy pocket
and about thee. And when thou go hence take the way which lies on the left
hand, and there shall thou find a foot path which is a great deal noerer then
the high way, and will directly bring thee to ye Palace of Love, where the
Love of God dwells. How is this footpath called quoth Desire, that I might
inquire of it, If I happened to miss the way, and come in ye right path again.
It is called said she, Patience, which is the nearest way to the Palace of
Humility, and likewise to that of the Love of God.

The second part of the Treasure of the Soul.
The first Chapter entreats of Patience.
DEsire parted merely from the palace of Humility, having filled his belly
with the sru^tes of the Garden thereof, and was well provided with good
company, namely, with his Dog Good-wil. And (...) his one side with the
Fear of God, and at the other, with sincetitie, and his pockets full besides,
with the fruits of To trust in God. And although they had told him that it
was shorter and a great deal nearer then any other way, yet notwithstanding,
did find it to be very hard and tedious, full of stones, hedges and thorns.
Where upon he said to sincerity, O good God how coms this way so hard,
uneasy and todious, I never would have thought it, that it could have been
so. Marua^le not, quoth sincerity, for therefore it is called the way of
Patience: and if it were not so full of stones, prickles and thorns, and not so
troublesome to walk in it, it should not bear the name, which it does, and
the house where it brings a man unto, not of such a great estimation, if the
way were even and pleasant, and every one could walk in it according to his
own will and liking. But now none come thither before they be first well
exercised in virtue. For do thou not remember the common proverb. There is
no gain without pain, No joy without annoy. And seeing thou art now entered
into it, be of good cheer, for it will not last long: for thou know that
be who desires to fish, must not fear the water: and do thou think then
to find so costly and precious a treasure as is the Love of God, without
pain? Remember I pray thee, what Seneca says, A rare and precious thing is
not to be bought with small money: Besided, the end of toil and labor, is
rest and quiet. Therefore it were a foolish thing but once to imagine that such
a costly jewel could be gotten so easily at every man's pleasure. For if one
could find the Love of God so lightly, he would be nothing esteemed of, because
lightly gotten lightly forgotten. Therefore do thy best, and let a small pain
not annoy thee, then afterward thou shall rest with the Love of God, rejoice,
and daily banquet with him: and the greater pain thou take now to find him,
the more will thou esteem of him, and with greater diligence will thou endeavor
thy self to keep his favor. And likewise how thy pain and travel which
thou have taken for him, has been more tedious, so much the greater shall be
thy joy, comfort and pleasure. Again if thou feel thy self weak and
almost ready to sound, take a little of the fruit, To trust in God, which thou
have about thee, and it will reniue thee again. And if thou will not feel the
tediousnes of the way, do as commonly all travelers do, who with a song do
lighten the tediousnes of their journey. Sincerities words did please Desire,
and said: how is it possible that one should sing in this old man's company,
for commonly age is always repugnant to youthful actions. It is his custom
quoth she to bear such grave and severe a countenance, but otherwise he is
very pleasant, friendly, and merry, for he is the Love of Gods only brother,
and delights in mirth, but chiefly when we sing no vain, light, or worldly
songs. How shall I begin to sing, quoth Desire, seeing I have no voice at
all? It cannot be, answered Sincerity, that thou should not have any voice,
seeing that thou thy self art a voice. Desire did marvel, because she said,
that he was a voice himself, and asked how it was possible that it should be
so. Thou and all creatures, quoth she, art created by the word of God, and it
is most manifest, that soon after the word uttered ye voice followed. And
seeing that as soon as the Lord had spoken the word, all creatures were made
and created: it follows therefore that all creatures are voices. I pray you
quoth Desire, to tell me this something more plainer that I might conceive it.
Willingly answered Sincerity. The speech and the word is all one thing, for the
speech is not that, which is uttered by the mouth, but it is the conceit of
the mind, and that which man speaks with the mouth is the voice, which
utters and gives to understand the speech, the word, and the inward
conceit of the mind. As for example: When I do think with my self, that
thou art a man, this is a word or speech, although it lies hidden wtin me. Now
let us hear, quoth Desire seeing that I am a voice, what kind of voice am I?
Thou art, answered Sincerity, a voice of the Lord, who has created thee to
honor, laud and praise him. But what do I say of my self (as I am a voice)
quoth Desire, through the good which thou have received from God, sa^de she, thou
criest that God is good and bountiful, and by the comelines wherewith he has
endued thee, thou say that God is beautiful: and so consequently all ye
wherewith God has endued thee, is but a voice of him, declaring his bounty and
goodness. What reason have you quoth Desire, to say that all wherewith God has
adorned me, is but a voice of him, and say not generally, that all which I
have in me is his voice? Because answered she, ye sin and wickedness, which do
remain in thee, are not created of God, and therefore they cannot he voices of
the Lord, but well thine own, declaring that thou art vile, wicked, defiled
and unclean, for as man may come by the creatures, to the knowledge of God, so
likewise may he attain through the works, proceeding from himself to his own
knowledge.

The second Chapter declares the knowledge of God through his c^^atures.
DEsire maruailed as the Ladies grave countenance. I although the seemed to be
but plain, was notwithstanding very skillful and learned in all heavenly
knowledge, and said unto her, wherefore would you have us to sing? Therefore
quoth she, because we might hereby somewhat forget the tediousnes and pain
of this vale of miserye: whereunto the remembrance and contemplatio^ of Gods
creatures, is likewise a great aid and furtherance, and therefore have I
placed them in the way of Patience, for the sooner shall thou come to the Love
of God, if thou do exercise thy heart oftentimes in the book of the
creation: for through Patience and the holy scriptures, (whereof all the world
is but a book) we attain to the knowledge of God, and are greatly comforted
in a distressed hope. And if thou will learn to tune thy voice, learn it of
the creatures, for some of them declare his goodness, some show his might, some
his wisdom, some his excellency, some his beauty, some his mercy, some his
bounty, and generally all more or less sound forth his omnipotency, that all
in consideration hereof should spread abroad his praise and glory. Therefore
endeavor thy self to learn to sing here by ye way, for where thou go, namely
in the palace of the Love of God, they do nothing but singe forth his praise.
Teach me I pray you, quoth Desire, to sing by his creatures, for I cannot
learn it of my self, willingly, answered sincerity. In the mean while Desire
traveled far and wide in this desert, where he saw many great wonders of the
Lord, and began to learn and to perceive his mercy and goodness, and most
part through Sincerities help, doctrine and teaching: yet he was forced to
endure and sustain many dangers, perilles and pain, for he did stumble
oftentimes, but Sincerity kept him from falling, and yet notwithstanding
sometimes fell, but sincerity did reach him the hand, and help him up again,
and sometimes caught such falls, that if the Fear of God had not aided him,
he never would or could have risen again, sometimes when he should go forwards,
went backwards, and when he should have amended himself by the creatures,
oftentimes did greatly hinder himself thereby. For he did not endeavor to
learn their secret voices, but became hoarse through negligence and
slothfulnes, until the fear of God gave hun a good push, and drive him
forwards. Oftentimes he did tread on a thorn, but sincerity incc^uted his
feet and drew him out of it again. Oftentimes fell a sleep, but the ^eare of
God did awake him: sometimes being weary, sat down and rested himself, but
his dog Good Will did not hold off from barking, until he did rise again.
Sometimes the way was so tedious unto him, that his heart began to faint ^un,
and desired to turn back again, but as soon as he did eat of the fruits
to trust in God, which he had in his pocket, and in every place about him,
came to himself and waxed strong again. And sometimes going by night, lost the
fear of God and sincerity, so that he mist his way, but as soon as the day
appeared, and the Sun began to shine, found quickly the way again by means of
his dog. And when they had thus travailed certain days, came at the last
into a fair large and pleasant field, in the midst whereof stood a princely
and coastly palace, called Love, where the Love of God was porter.

THE THIRD part of the Treasure of the Soul.
Of Love and Charity.
The first Chapter does entreat how the Love of God does exercise and try us.
DEsire was glad when he saw so fair and princely a palace, and found by
experience that this wearisome, tedious, and troublesome way had so good and
pleasant an issue. Came therefore presently at the gates of the palace, but
finding them shut close, begun to call and knock, yet notwithstanding after
long crying and knocking, none came to answer. Call and cry aloude, quoth
sincerity, for in so doing, although they were all a sleep, or half deaf, it
cannot be but they shall hear thee. Knock hard with the hammers which do hang
at ye gates, and then soon they will open the doors unto thee (for there hung
two hammers at the gate called to sigh and weep. Knock, hard and boldly,
quoth she, for if they were not wont to open the gate to none, these two
hammers should not hang at the door, for I think they are made for that
purpose, to let all those in yt knock with them. Desire having knocked and
called very long before the Love of God would open the gates was yet at y^ last
comforted by his coming, who having opened the door, Desire knew him not.
Brother, quoth the Love of God, what do thou lack or desire? For whom do
thou look here? Thou art weary perhaps to have watched so long at the gate,
and to have knocked so oftentimes. But here we fame us all to be half deaf,
to try you constancy and patience of travelers who come hither. And when we
find some that are weary, and persuade themselves that there is nothing else
belonging unto it, but as soon as they are come, then presently to open the
gates for them, and let them come in: then we let those without opening unto
them, return back again, because we open not the door to any who thinks
that he has deserved it, and persuades himself that he is worthy of it, and
that it is our duty, and are bound to do it. And art thou none of those
fellows? No, my good Lord, quoth Desire. For although I have suffered and
sustained much sorrow and pain both of body and soul, yet I know for
certain, that I have not deserved, and am altogether unworthy to enter into
the house, unless it would please your Lord ship through your great mercy
and goodness, to lead and bring me within. wherefore would thou come in
quoth yt Love of God, or whom do thou seek here in this house? My Lord
answered Desire, I am come from the Palace of Humility, accompanied with these
worthy personages. and have taken my tourney through the nearest way being
Patience, to seek out the Love of God, who as I am informed, keeps here his
residence. Do thou not bring any token, quoth the Love of God, whereby a man
may know thou come from thence? Yea my Lord, said Desire, I have brought true
tokens with me, whereof the one was given me in the house of Humility, and is
called Knowledge of him self, and the other have I learned by the way, and is
called Knowledge of God. I am glad, quoth the Love God, to see thee so well
provided, but do thou think that for this knowledge sake we are bound to let
thee enter here? No my Lord, answered Desire, but only as I have said
before, for thy grace and mercies sake, because I cannot tell whether these two
sundry knowledges are perfect or not, and therefore I doubt of their
sufficiency, I know that I have dwelt in the Palace of Humility for a time,
and that they have showed me there all the house, the Damsels, their nature and
condition, but I cannot tell whether I have well digested in my stomach the
fruits which I have eaten there, although they were unto me very toothsome
and pleasa^^ Be^^des, I do not know^^ wherther I have ^^of^^ ^ne^ not by yt
may, (...) ^^^me^ ye pri^kelle^ and ^^ornes have gri^^ ^t^^y hurt me, and my
com^ ^^ue has brought me hither almost perforce. Therefore my good Lord, I can
assure thee of nothing that I bring with me, but only of my wickedness,
unbelief, and imperfection. And the chiefest occasion that moved me to seek
ye Love of God was this, that I heard yt he was a good Physician and
Surgeon, and would let me blonde and purge me from all corruptions and
uncleanness: And I am told, as soon as he does see one, knows presently
his disease, although it lies hidden secreat win the heart. And wheresoever
he puts his hand upon, there he purges and cleanses all things.
Wherefore said the Love of God, do thou desire to be thus clean, sound, and
unspotted? Because answered Desire, that I was also told, that none who were
unclean and undefiled, should or could enter or come into this place. Seeing
it is so, as thou say quoth the Love of God, and that thou put all thy
confidence into our hands, tarry here a while, for thou can not become
familiar with the love of God, ere thou become acquainted first with his page,
therefore I will go call him, and he will instruct thee of all what thou have
to do, and speak unto his Lord and master.

The second Chapter entreats of the love of his neighbor.
DEsire tarried with great expectation for ye forth coming of this Page, yt he
might bring him to the speech of his Lord and master, And not long after saw
him come, and was called Neighbourly love, which sight did greatly rejoice him,
that even for the love which he bare to she Love of God, could not abstain
from weeping. Wherefore do thou weep quoth Neighbourly love, for they are all
merry in this house, and from hence is banished all sorrow and ladnesse. I do
not weep for any grief, said Desire, but for joy. For whom do thou seek
here, quoth Neighbourly love. My son, answered he, I look for the Love of God.
I am his servant and page, quoth he, and if thou do seek my Lord, first of
all thou must speak and come acquainted with me, for my Lord loves me
dearly, and therefore those that love not me, he will not know them, nor once
speak unto them. Feign would I know thy nature and conditions, quoth Desire,
and for thy Lord and masters sake become acquainted with thee? If thou do
desire my acquaintance and frendshippe, quoth Neighbourly love, thou must
provide and give me every morninge an herb for my breakfast, called to think
humbly, and for my dinner another, called to speak humbly, and for my supper
another not unlike the first, called to work and do humbly. But where shall
I get these herbs, quoth Desire, the first called to think humbly, answered
the Page, grows in Humilities garden, where she esteemed her self a slave of
all slaves, and worse then a beast. But to come easily to this herb, because
it is a great way to ye palace of Humility, and thou shall take a horse to
ride on, called to think well of every man, and by these means may thou
come by this herb every morning. The second herb is made of three sundry
herbs, of the first think humbly, of meekenes and affability in speech,
and upon the last is cast a small ponder called Slow and little. The third
herb called to work humbly, is made of diverse herbs, whereof Mirth, love,
and quietness or diligence are the chiefest. And whenever thou do feed
me with these herbs, then our acquaintance and friend ship will continue and
abide for ever, and I will soons bring thee to yt speech of my master. The
counsel and doctrine of ye Page did delight Desire, and said: Seeing thou have
made me acquainted with thy nature and desire, I will diligently endeavor my
self to procure and get these herbs, for to give them unto thee. After this
they both continued in samiliaritie one with another a long time. And Desire
having convenient time and opportunity, said unto him, I beseech thee show me
so much favor, as to bring me to thy Lord. Willingly, quoth Neighbourly
love, for thou have done thine endeavor since thou have been with me. But
tarry here a while, I will go call my Lord, and see whether he will come
forth to speak with thee.

The third Chapter entreats of the love of God and his neighbor, and of the
second degree to love, and of his office, and daily exercise.
DEsire doubting whether the Love of God would come forth to speak with him,
because he saw his own vileness, poverty, and misery, and how unworthy he
was to speak with such a Lord, espied one to come toward him: who said,
Brother, what do thou look for, or what is thy desire? Sir quoth Desire, I
look for yt Love of God. I am be, answered the Love of God. And as soon as
Desire did hear this, fell in a sound, but ye Love of God took him by the
hand, and lifting him up, revived him again. And when he saw the love of God
make so much of him, he began most bitterly to weep, insomuch that he could
not speak any word at all. Which the love of God seeing, being of a gentle and
tender heart, was moved with compassion, and meruailed greatly of the extreme
love, desire and affection which Desire did bear unto him, because he saw him
weep for very joy: and said, I pray thee weep no more, and do not make me
sad, for I cannot abide to see those weep yt love me. Tell me who told thee
I dwelt here? A shepherd, quoth Desire, whom I met by the way, and did direct
me hither. What said he of me unto thee, said the Love of God, that thou love
and desire me so much: do thou love me so dearly, because thou have
been told, that I am bountiful to my friends, and unto those that serve me,
very frank and liberal? No quoth Desire, not therefore, but because you are a
noble and good Lord, and because you bring your friends in a place where they
shall see God, which is the greatest blessedness of at the world. This good
and holy mind of Desire did delight ye Love of God not a little, and was an
occasion that he loved him ye more for it, I meruell my Lord, quoth Desire,
seeing your highness are so noble a Prince* that your Grace puts those that
come to seek you to such pain and travail, and are so hardly so be found out.
Hold thy peace, answered ye Love of God, this mystery is hidden from many. For
some there are, who think they have not found me, nor known me, yet I
nowtsta^ting am always near them, and they are filled and replenished with
me. And some there are likewise who persuade themselves yt they have founds me,
who are yet far from me, and know me not. I pray your highness theefore, quoth
Desire, to let me understand your nature and conditions, that I may know
thereby whether I am near or far from you, for I take you for my Lord and
master. Mine exercise and office is, answered the Love of God, to love God,
and I am a child of the knowledge of God. In what sort do you love God, quoth
Desire, I have answered the Love of God, a desire to wish for him with all my
heart, and with all the strength and force of my soul, and to find him I leave
nothing undone, using all means thereunto possible. And that I might know him
the better, to his praise and glory. I desire that all ye earth would
acknowledge his unspeakable and infinite goodness, and that all creatures
should laud, honor and praise him. with this desire I constrain and force my
self to do nothing wherewith to displease him: and if peradventure I offend
him, then presently I prostrate my self before him, and crave pardon at his
hands for my offense: and then we are as good friends as ever we were before:
and because my Lord and God is so bountiful and ^ood, I am not yet coun^ed to
this first degree, but I endeavor my self also* to my small power a^ d^^^
b^^^e to execute and do that which he or any of (...) least amongst us does
command me* with as great diligence as may be. And hereby only I can perceive
how dearly I do love him, when I do that which he commands me. For
certainly I believe that nothing is more acceptable or pleasant unto him* no
service or reverence more delightful then the obedience unto his will and
commandementes. For he him self does say, how can thy service please me, or
how can thou persuade thy selt that I love thee, when thou do not keep
my commandementes. For know that there is nothing that joined and knitted
faster thy spirit with thine, then willingly to execute my will, and keep my
laws and statutes.

The fourth Chapter does prosecute the office of the love of God in the same
degree.
IN the same degree of Charity, I have purposed to do al things, where unto
by office and calling I am bound unto: and seeing that I have now bound my
self to God, (whereof I repent me not) I am willing to obey his will and
commandment. Daily therefore I consider my office, and all things there unto
belonging, and for the better execution hereof, I diligently follow the
counsel of the godly, and the holy Scriptures, for I know that many herein
offend my Lord, because they are ignorant of those things, which are belonging
to their duty. And if they know it, and do it not, then they are far
worse, because they sin not through ignorance, or weakness, but only
through mere wilfulnes and malice. Besides that, which I have promised and
have sworn, and vowed unto him, (whereunto I am most bound) I endeavor with all
diligence to perform and keep it. Therefore I have vowed unto my Lord to
serve him with three damselles, Obedience, Chastity, and Poverty. Therefore
every morning, I study how I might best serve and please him, speaking unto my
soul as follows. Let us cast about, my soul, how we shall behave our
selves, this day to please and to serve our Lord, and again in the evening, I
say unto her. Let us see O my Soul, how we have served our Lord to day with
the said Damsels, whether we have offended him in any thing or no: and in this
sort I endeavor my self to be a loyal servant to my Lord, with these
Damselles. Wherefore do you this quoth Desire. Therefore answered the Love of
God, because these three Damselles are Chamberlaines to my Lord, and none can
come in his chamber, and speak with him: unless first they do open him the
doors, and prepare him the entry. I pray you, quoth Desire, to tell me what
spiritual exercises you do use, for to be faithful unto these damsels, I
have answered the Love of God, three intents which I do offer both day and
night, that further me to all manner of service. The first intent is called
Wish or advance not. The second, Desire nothing. The first intent serves
Obedience, when I dress it with a certain sause, called to do, and then is
called Advance not to do, And the finer I dress this for her diet, ye more
frendshippe she gets for me, and in greater favor she bringers me with my
Lord, and says much good of me unto him, so that he by her words loves me
dearly, and is a merciful and bountiful Lord unto me. This foresaid dish,
namely Advance not to do, when I dress it with another sause called to have,
then it is called, Wish or advance not to have, and herewithal I feed and
maintain the other Damsel called Poverty. Stay a while quoth Desire. Why
should I not wish or advance my self, to have something when I lack? This is
not thus to be understoode, answered the Love of God, for if thou need some
thing, thou have thy Soueraign, who will by himself, or by his commanders
sufficiently provided for thee, without thy wishinge or asking, which is
altogether unmannerly. For where one is, who has the commandment, and care
over all the household, he will sufficiently provide for them all, after his
power and ability, and as it becomes his duty, place, and authority. To
the end the rest should addict themselves more zelously to ye service of God
and to ye contemplation of heavenly and spiritual things, without every man's
own and particular carefulnes, to crave, ask or advance to have yt which he
needs. And it were a great oversight that a chief commander of any place
should not have the care and forecast to provide for his subjects or housh
oldes necessity, without their asking. But that which I speak of advancing,
demanding or craving, is diversely, but chiefly two ways to be understood.
First when they provide not for thy necessity without thy asking or craving,
which is greatly to be misliked, discommended and dispraised in a congregation
whatsoever. Secondly that which thou need thou do lack it greatly, and
not to be wilful and wanton. Orels in all things which thou can desire,
therein will consist curiosity, superfluity and tempting of God. For believe
me that under the cover and color of necessity, lie oftentimes hidden diverse
and many sins, and chiefly in things belonging to the maintenance and and
sustenance of the body, as meare, drink, apparel and such like things are.
How shall I know quoth Desire, whether it be needful, superfluity or
wantonness only, that which I demand or crave to have. See answered ye love
of God, whether thou can forbear it, and live without it, without the great
hinderaunce, peril and danger of thy soul and body. But if thou did
perceive that it should turn thee to such peril and damage, then to Desire
nothing were a great sin and madness, and contrary to Gods commandments.
But if thou can forbear it and be without it, so it be not as I have said
dangerous, and hurtefull to thy health, although somewhat painful,
troublesome and tedious to thy flesh, then to Desire nothing is a great
virtue, and morthie of praise and commendation. But as the holy Scripture
says: Blessed is the man that suffers something for the Love of GOD.
Therefore if thou can forbear it without the hazarding, and indangering both
of thy soul and body, then to crave, ask, and demand, esteem it
wantonness only, although it covers it self wc the cloak of necessity,
want, need, and holiness. For sins never disclose and show themselves hare,
but present themselves always under the color of good things, and hereby
may thou know whether it be necessary or not when thou crauest some thing,

And that none deceive themselves in their own opinion, they need greatly a
diligent inquisition, and a virtuous exercise, and if they be destitute hereof,
then set them go about their business with counsel of the holy scriptures,
or with the advice of a gooly and wise man, who will instruct them herein,

The fifte Chapter entreats of the two other intentes, namely of Desire
nothing, and remember nothing.
SEeinge I have now disclosed unto thee my first intent, wherewithal I
maintain the two damsels Obedience and Poverty likewise I will discover ye
nature and property of others, namely Desire nothing, and Remember nothing.
Thou must know that the said first intent, To wish for nothing, grows and
comes of nothing, but from a Desire to have or do nothing. And when the
cause which is the Desire, to wish for, is taken away and rooted out, then
his force and effect does cease quickly, which is, To ask for. And hereby is
made yt which is contrary to it, namely To ask nothing, which is my second
intent, wherewithal I maintain dame Poverty. But thou must mark, that this
Desire, is understood only of worldly and earthly matters. But because this
herb has an other root, where out it grows, which is to Remember, (for
nothing there can be wished for, which was not before remembered) therefore make
much of this third intent, which is, to Remember nothing, wherewithal I
mayntain the third Damsel, called Chastity. But you must understand this,
Remembering, when it is substantial, steadfast, wilful, and springing out of a
fleshly lust. For it is not in man's power not to Remember nothing, but well not
to suffer thoughts to remain and cast foundations in him, but to turn them
quickly of, and to think of God. But because that this herb Remembering does
water it self with a water called To see, we must cast upon it a powder called
Diligently to have care to the eyes, which is very profitable so it.

These three intents, do not only cleanse my soul of all worldly things, as
selfe-wil and such like spots, but they breed in me a great pureness and
promptitude, to love my Lord, drawing from me al other loves, and uniting me
altogether with him. In these three intents I have comprehended all the other
godly exercises serving the spirit, as well of Humility, as of any other
virtues, because I know that the perfection of virtue consists herein. Think
not therefore that in vame I serve these three Ladies, for they be very
gracious, and get me much favor. One of the three called Poverty, has given
me a fair jewel. I pray you quoth Desire, to let me see it? I keep it
answered the Love of God, in two places, namely, in my heart and Bedchamber.
This jewel is so costly, and of such price and value, that I was not able to
keep it in my heart, before I had cast out of it all earthly love. And in like
sort, it could have no place in my Bedchamber, before I had cast and thrown
out of it all curious, superfluous, and partial things, reserving only to my
use, but a few books. Now do you call this jewel quoth Desire? It is called,
answered the Love of God. Nothing at all, for this is the greatest treasure
that Poverty can possess, who is the richest Lady of all the earth, because
she has as much treasure hereof as she will her self.

The sixte Chapter does prosecute the office of the Love of God, and besides,
entreats of prayer.
IN this degree of charity whereof I have spoken, which was for to obey his
commandment (as my duty does require) there is yet another circumstance to
be considered, for the Office sake, wherein he has placed me, namely to be
his cha^berlain. Which is, whensoever I come to serve him, or come to crave
something at his hands, or but only to speak with him: I have then a special
care to come before him, with such great humility, lowlines and pureness of
mind as I am able. And the purer and cleaner that my heart is, the more casie I
see, behold and know him. And pray my loving brother, the Fear of God, and
my Aunt Reverence, to keep me company. What do you when Lady Reverence goes
with you said Desire. Then I remember and think what I am, answered the Love of
God, and set before my eyes the majesty and greatness of my Lord, who is to be
served with fear and reverence, as one only worthy of it. Besides, I
remember that all Angels and heavenly principalities do fall down before him,
worship and adore him, being astonished, at such great excellent and
incomprehensible a Majesty. Moreover I conclude, that he knows the secrets
of my bart, and sees my inward thoughts, better then I my self. Likewise
that he can, according unto his godly will and pleasure, do and undo all
things, and that life and death, being and not being, and the salvation and
condemnation of all the world are in his hand and power. Furthermore, I remember
that he is the fountain and welspring of all goodness, the only and
Sovereign good in heaven and earth: and when diligently I put in mind those
things, then I begin to shake and tremble, then my heart and mind begins
to alter, so that oftentimes I fall in a sound: chiefly when I consider that I
being so wicked, vile, unclean, and worser then any dog, presume to undertake
such an high office, and to be so familiar with such a mighty Lord, and yt such a
renowned Majesty will vouchsafe to delight in my vile company, and suffer me
to speak and eat with him, as his familiar and only friend. And oftentimes my
self do tell him of it, saying: wherefore do thou suffer, O my God, these
vile and unclean sinners to stand before thee? How my Lord, is it decent yt
thou should be served of such wretches and wicked offenders as we are? Where
is the honor and reverence due to thy princely Majesty? But what answer
does he give you, quoth Desire. I cannot tell answered the Love of God, but
only that for very joy he makes me to weep, and says: Do not trouble thy
self herewithall, for you have not procured thee the office, and have not
placed thy self in it, but I have called thee unto it, and I know wherefore I
have done it, but be thou careful to look to thy calling: and that which thy
Office does require and demand: endeavor thy self diligently to further and
perform it. What do you say unto him, quoth Desire, when you come before him,
accompanied with Humility, Charity, Fear, and Reverence. First of al, quoth the
Love of God, when I crave something at his hands, and would move him to grant
me my request, then I endeavor with all my force and power to exalte and praise
him: and cease not for to give him thanks for all his benefits which I have
received, for I know yt this is acceptable and pleasant in his sight. And
whenever I go about to praise him, then I rehearse all the wondrous works
which he has done, recreating and delighting my self therein greatly. This
same I do touching his great power, wisdom, and goodness, further I rehearse
his great mercy and benefits, which he has bestowed upon his people and
servants, praising and magnifying him therein. I do not forget also his great
mercy showed unto his enemies, which he does daily yet continue, maruelling
greatly in his omnipotency, excellency, and incomprehensible goodness, in
that he does not punish them according to their deserts, but rather does
make them partakers of his bounty and liberality. I thank him also for the
great mercy which in him is always resident, delighting to recount his
virtues and beauty which flow and run from him, praising and magnilying him
for those, and rejoicing in them, and in his vnspeake able mercy. And this I
do oftentimes, because I know yt this is his will, and does greatly please
him. Besides his will is, that we being familiar with him, should talk of
^ecret and heavenly things, which are hidden from those that do not esteem
to enter in his privy Chamber, although they are of his household and daily
servants. Wherefore, quoth Desire, do you give him all this praise,
thanksgiving and blessing? because answered the Love of God, the more I extol
his goodness, and the more I disable and humble my self before him, the more
I am agreeable, and acceptable unto him. For this is his most blessed and holy
will, that we should have always before our eyes, his unspeakable goodness,
highness, excellency, and omnipotency, and our weakness. And although I give
unto him as much praise and thanks as ever I may, I am certain, that therein I
can be no liar, for he is of greater excellency, power, highness, and
worthiness, then I or any mortal or unmortall tongue can utter, or any
heavenly or earthlye creature conceive or comprehend.

The seventh chapter entreats of the love of God in the second degree, and
does prosecute the manner of prayer.
AFter that I have praised, thanked, and exalted him as much as I am able, then
I do commend unto him my soul, my whole will, and the best intent and mind
which I have: which is, that although I might gain all the world, I would in
no wise anger or offend him, praying him out of ye bottom of my heart, that
it would please him to keep, strengthen and further me in this good and godly
mind, for without him were I not able to keep it long. This done, I pray him
for the forgiveness of all my trespasses, and offenses, wherein I have
transgressed his holy laws, and that he would not let me set my thoghts, love
and mind upon any thing, but upon him only. And because he has vouchsafed
to accept me for his servant and friend, and has honored me with such an
office, that it would likewise please him to give me the spirit of Humility,
who might draw and turn away my mind from pride, and from all that does
displease him: to the end my service be not to his dishonor, but to his
honor and glory, giving me that, which he knows to be most needful unto
me, and that which he is willing I should have to his glory, for to be more
acceptable unto him. And this I do for no other cause, but that I might live
and die with him, and fear not to be cast (although I have deserved it) out of
his sight and favor. Then afterward I pray to him for my friends and
acquaintance, as also for all creatures, that it would please him in his mercy
to give them grace, that they all should praise, honor, love and thank him,
as is their duty: endeavoring my self for to do and speak all this with
all pureness and simplicity of mind. What do you quoth Desire, to come by
such pureness? To my uttermost, answered ye Love of God, I have a special care
to my mind, and keep a straight watch over al my cogitations, and do most
carefully look to my soul. And besides, I survey narrowly all my senses,
setting always before my eie^ Sincerity, who turns all things which she
sees to the best. And when I will assure my self against all the world, and
have no cause to fear any body: then I go and remain with my Lord, for it is
all my comfort, joy, pleasure, and my Souetaigne good, to be in his company
to speak, and ask his advice and counsel: and I am never contented, quiet,
satisfied, or assured, but when I am with him. And therefore I have determined
to leave and forsake all things for to dwell and remain with him, and never to
go from him, but when he does command it me. It is yet quoth Desire,
sometimes needful to read also* It is true, answered the Love of God, that
reading is good, not for to become crafty and subtle thereby, but only for
to learn to know God and his ways, and to love him as we should. And to
this I need not many books, but will deeply fall in love with my Lord, and
set all my desire and whole mind upon him, with all my understanding and
wisdom, for his love does suffice me, and will instruct me in all things,
which are requitte for me to know: and he will by the means of love, disclose
and open unto me, more secreates, then all the books of the world are able to
do. And my soul gathers more pureness, fear, feruency, reverence,
repentance, strength and force to resist my flesh, when I am with him, then
when I do read. Besides, I know that he never will ask an account how much I
have read and studied, but how I have honored and loved him, yet hereby I
will not seem to condemn readinge, chiefly in those who know not the ways of
God, nor the gouernemente of the spirit, nor cannot frame in good order their
thoughts, words and deeds, as they should do, to those I say, it is
necessary yt they should read a long time to become pro^pt and ready in
spiritual and inward exercises. For other wise it would be a great madness,
presumption: nay, a contempt and dispising o^ ye king, yt a clownish fellow
who knows not the use, custom, and language of the court, would come
personally to speak with the king, in ye presence of all his Lords and nobles,
and now being in yt midst of his talk, should cast forth unwise and foolish
words according unto his custom, for this should turn to his great shame and
confusion, for the king would command him to be driven away, so that it should
have been better for him never to have presumed to show himself before his
Majesty. And thus it is with spiritual matters. But those that have gotten ye
knowledge of God, and of heavenly things, either by reading or hearing prayer,
is much more profitable, and a more excellent an exercise then readinge, being
now somewhat acquainted with the manners, use and custom used in the
spiritual and heavenly Court.

And when I am now before my Lord, then I take heed that I turn not my
head, eyes, and body, hither and thither: because it is a sign of contempt of
his word, when one speaks unto him, and then turns his face another way.
Declare this unto me, quoth Desire, somewhat better, for I do not well
understand it. When I, answered the Love of God, speak unto my Lord, and cast
my mind and cogitations upon other matters: then I turn him my back, and not
my face. Therefore I think and persuade my self, that he always sees me,
and never turns his eyes from me, for to mark what I say, what ferue^cy I
have, what reverence I show unto him, likewise in what repentance, love and
unity, I do exercise my self. Then afterward I humbly thank him for all
his benefits bestowed upon me, and generally upon all creatures, having them
oftentimes in my mind, and rehearsing them unto him: because I know that he
cannot abide any unthankfulness, or that in any wise we should forget his
goodness declared unto us all.

The eight Chapter entreats of the third degree of the Love of God.
SEeing I have now spoken unto thee of ye first degree o^ love which I bear
unto my Lord, which is to be careful not to offend him, and likewise of the
second, which is to do all that he commands me, yet I am not contented
with these two, for the great love which I ba^e him, but have toyned unto those
two first, the third degree which is, to do all that I am able to think or
imagine, for to please and to be acceptable unto him, whereby do you know quoth
Desire, yt you do yt which is pleasant in his sight? By two things answered the
Love of God. The one is, to love that which he loves, and ye other, to hate
yt which he hates. As concerning ye first, to love that which he leueth,
thereby I love my Lords only son, who is the fairest, gentlest and most
worthiest, that ever was or shall be, being like unto his father in all things,
and yet the most obedientest that was or ever shall be. This son be loves
as much as hun self, because he is more like unto him, then ever son was unto
his father. And ye unity and love between the father and the son is so
exceeding great, yt they are both one, of one will, force, power, wisdom and
majesty. And although they are distinguished in persons, are notwithstanding
but of one substance and essence. My Lord did make with his own hand for
this his son, a shepheardes garmente wherewithal being clothed, came out of
his Fathers chamber, yet never was from him, but always with him, and is daily
conversant with us in this house, for otherwise we could not see nor know him:
and thus apparelled, his father sent him with a basket at his arms through the
whole world, and likewise through this wilderness to seek out his sheep that
were lost and run astray. And as he was walkinge through the desert, his
father suffered him to be slain by the wolves, and devoured by dogs, and in
no wise would come to aid or assist him, although he was able enough to have
done it, but his will was, yt the wolves should tear him in pieces, and put
him to the most cruellest death that could be invented or imagined, and should
use him the worse because he was a kings son. And this did our Lord for
mere love which he bare us, because that all they which are of his household
might perceive and see how dearly he loved us, in that he has not spared
his own son, but has given him in sacrifice for us, therefore are we bound to
love him also, because he loved, us so much before. when ye Love of God was
telling this, Desire wept bitterly, so yt his heart seemed to break in pieces.
The father loved ye son so much, said ye Love of God, that although he suffered
him to be put to death, yet through his omnipotency did soon raise him up again
from ye dead with more glozie and triumph the^ ever before, carrying with him those
sheep, for whom be was come, having a special care over those whom he had
yet left in the desarte and pastures to wax fat. And thus he returned into his
fathers chamber, where he now sits at his right hand, making daily
intercession for us, and excusing our infirmities for ye unspeakable love which
he bears unto mankind: and I believe that if it were not for his sake, the
Lord would have cast us long agone out of this house, for our great
wickedness sake, because we serve him so negligently, without any zeal or
affection, and so highly do forget him, and put him out of mind for every
trifle and small occasion. The Father loves his son so dearly, that I
believe not yt there is any thing in this world wherewith we can do him better
service, then in loving of his son. Therefore I endeavor my self to love and
please his son. wherein, quoth Desire, do you love and please him? when I,
answered the Love of God, remember his holy life, his exceeding great
travail, his death, and his blessed doctrine, and endeavor to co^form and frame
my actions and manners unto his life, for when my Lord does see one resembling
the life of his son so much the more does he love him: and therefore it was
his will that he should come to visit us, dwell with us, and teach us how we
should live, for we lived before even as beasts, and therefore the Lord did
send him unto us, in steed of a mirror, and looking glass, yt all men who were
desirous to know whether their will, or actions were bad or good, should
behold his sons life, for in ye world there is no surer and better, touchstone
then it. The second whom my Lord loves, is my page, called Neighbourly love
For he loves this lad so tenderly, that all that we do unto him, whether it
be good or evil, he does take it as it were done unto his own person. In what
love you this boy, quoth Desire. First ol al, I esteem him to be better then
my self, and although I do supply a great and high office, yet am obedient
unto him in all lawful and good things. I take heed in no wise to hinder or
endamage him, but I show him all love and friend ship that I am able. I have
no ill su^pition of him, but rather do always defend and excuse him. I
^narie him not i^ words nor dee^es, but I suffer patiently his natural weakness
and infirmity, I ^^^rie him, I do not back ^^^e him, nor will not suffer any
man for to do it. I wish that he should exceed me in love which I bear to
God, and that it would please almighty God to make him better then my self.
I in no wise ennie his temporal or spiritual blessings, or any thing that
belongs unto him, but rejoice in his prosperity and welfare, his loss
aduersitye and sorrow does heartily grieve me. Further, I think him to be an
Angel of the Lord, and that I am unworthy to be his slave and servant, and
this do I because my Lord loves him so deorely. I love also the affairs of ye
common wealth, having a special care over them, because they appertain to
the service of the Lord, to his honor and to the mayntenance of his house.
Therefore I do mine endeavor that nothing be neglected, chiefly which
concerns any godly exercise, as is reading, fasting, chastning of the flesh,
and such like, although some do but little esteem of these things. Further I
remember yt I know him better then any other creature, because I have received
more at his hands then any. And seeing that other servants serve their earthly
masters, with great attendance and diligence, why should I not serve my
Lord, who has chosen ^^^e to be his chamberlain above any domestical
servant? And although all the world should fail, and there should none be
remaining, yet I will never be unfaithful unto him till death.

The ninth Chapter entreats of those things which the love of God has, an^
of the conclusion.
THe other of these two things whereof I have spoken unto thee, and wherewith I
seek to please my Lord, is to hate y^ which he hates. Therefore I set before
me, that my Lord has two enemies, the one, the world, the other my flesh,
therefore I have determined with my self to hate them mortally, and never to
contracte any league with them: and because I might the stedfaster remain in
my determination, I use these means, never to recreate my self with them, to
speak or frequent their companies, vniesse my Lord does command it me, whose
commandment I esreene more then my determination. And therefore I have
desired ye lieuetenant of the house, that be send me not about such business
whereby I might recreatemy self, as in towns, cities, countries, or among
people, for I esteem this a great contempt and dispising, but when I am
commanded, then I obey. And although my Lord for certain affairs commands
me to go into the world, yet his will is, that I in going should not loyter,
and in returning should be found faithful unto him, and in no wise should use
any falsehood practice treason against him, but should withdraw my self as
soon as it were possible, and come again, for I know certainly, that how
narrowly we look to our selves, and as much good as we can do, yet we are
like to get there nothing, but are always in danger to loose much. In this
sort I hate like my sins, iniquities, uncleanness, carnal motions, w^ekes
desires and unnatural passions, and am vetie pensive and sorrowful that they
dwell within me, knowing that they are contrary to my Lords will and do
altogether displease him. Therefore I endeavor my self always to amend
through love. Like wise for the love of him I eschew and fly from all those
yt are in his house, except it be in things of necessity and love,
withdrawing my self altogether from them. Wherefore do you so, quoth Desire.
Because now a days there are no spiritual prayers, love and goodly zeal
practiced and exercised, and those that boast of the knowledge of God, commonly
decay in slothfulnes

Therefore I will accustom my self to be alone, and addict my self to
prayers, that my soul may receine and feel some comfort and joy in the Lord,
and I learn to love him as it becomes me, for to that intent I have forsaken
the world, and all the vanities thereof. But quoth Desire others will account
you fantastical and partial, and every man will cast his eyes upon you, it
is no matter answered the Love of God, for I should not serve to please man,
and chiefly in things which are contrary to God. And when I give no offense to
my brother, I care not what the world speaks, so I do my duty in that which
is commanded me, And therefore if thou will have and possess me, do as I do.

The tenth Chapter entreats, that the Love of God brought Desire to the house.
DEsire was amassed at those things which the Love of God had told him, and
after long studying, said: When you do all these things, have you then any need
to stand in fear of any body? I truly answered ye Love of God, for I must be
very careful that I be not pust up in vain glory for my good works, or
entangled with self love, for if I gave any place unto these, my Lord presently
would thrust and turn me out of the doors. Therefor I have always at my
side my mother Humility. I pray you quoth Desire, to lead me into the house,
follow me said the Love of God, for thou have been now long enough with me,
and I will bring thee to another of my fellows who has a greater office then
I. How is he called quoth Desire. His name answered the Love of God, is To
desire God. Desire went merrely accompanied with ye Love of God, to seek out To
desire God, and when he had found him: said unto him: my Lord I would it would
please you to entertain me as one of your servants. Desires goodwill did
greatly please To desire God, and said unto him, it is needful (so you wilt
be with me) that you be first well instructed by my fellows, for thou must
know, that of the wine which flows out of the hoggeshead of the Love of God,
is made To desire God. Therefore do not deceive thy self, but see yt thou be
first well provided and replenished with the Love of God. My Lord quoth
Desire, I have dwelt long with ye Love of God, and he has instructed me in
all things which I must do, and with Gods grace I will endeavor my self to
put all things in ure and practice, but I cannot warrant you whether I have
the Love of God, or not, for he only knows who does love him, and in these
things the vest is to humble himself. As for my self I can not assure what I
have, but only this dog called good-wil, and yet I think not that he is mine
because he was but sent me. To desire God did take a great delight and pleasure
in all these words, and chiefly because Desire did not persuade himself that
he had ye Love of God, I pray you Sir, quoth Desire, to tell me your nature and
conditions. Even as a man said, The dersie of God comes through the
knowledge of himself to a hate and despising of himself, so likewise through
ye knowledge of God, he attaineth to Desire God. And whosoever does possess
me, he hated all worldly things, for I do frame in him so noble and
excellent a mind, that he thinks himself to good, to desire any thing else,
then the chiefest and the souerainest good, which is God only, besides I make
him very great and high tanored with God, and although he is but of base kindred,
yet I make him a mighty king, and whosoever does enjoy me, his mind runs
upon nothing but upon God only, he speaks nothing but of God, for where his
treasure is, there is his, heart also. And that which a man has conceived in
mind, the congue commonly speaks, for the mouth does always bewray the
inward affections of the heart. To the hungry I am meat, and restoritie, I am
the chiefest in this palace, and ain Chamberlain to love and Charity, I have
power to bring those in, whom I will that are my friends. I am the preacher,
who goes through the house trying, until my Lord does awake, and comes
forth of his chamber, for to speak with those yt do call upon him. Whom think
you did awake us, when thou did stand long before ye gates, knocking with the
two hammers hanging at the door, called To sigh and weep, but only the
continual barking of thy dog. I am the surest messinger, who comes first at
the gates, and goes to the Lord, who follows him always, and is next unto
him. I have in my power the fruit of a tree, yt which we that are here within
have to deliver out, and to give to every man thereof to eat, called See God.
Is it a sweet fruit, said Desire, for they gave me an other to eat in the
house of Humility, which was somewhat bitter: and chiefly at ye first fell
somewhat hard and uneasy to be swallowed. This fruit quoth he To desire
God, is marvelous sweet and pleasant, but to some more sweeter, and of
pleasanter taste then to others, which happens after the good appetite and
stomach that they have. And the sounder yt their taste is, and their teeth the
better, thereafter they find this fruit the sweeter and more pleasant. For
some there are, who have rotten teeth, and to those this fruit is unsavory,
for they are not able to chaw it. And some do eat it without appetite or
hunger, because their stomachs are already ouerladen with other meats, and to
those likewise it is unpleasant, because they cannot well digeste it, although
it does them but sinal hurt. And some there are, whose taste is marde through
a fever, or an unnatural heat, and these know nothing of this fruit, but
only by hear say. I pray you quoth Desire, let me taste of this fruit. I am glad
answered To desire G^d, art thou willing to taste of it, for it is not
possible, that we during this life should satisfy our selves, or sil our
bellies with it, but only taste how sweet and pleasant it is. Wherefore quoth
Desire? Therefore answered To desire God, for if man could here satisfy his
appetite with it, and feed plentifully unto his own will of it: he would
never be willing to leave this prison, and go to heaven, having here of this
fruit sufficient enough to maintain him. But for the better understanding
hereof, we die almost for hunger, and are famt and feeble with too long fasting,
looking always for the time till we shall come to the banquet of our
sovereign Lord and Ring. And even as a heart does thirst in the Summer after
the spring of water: so likewise do our souls hunger after yt day. This
fruit is of such force and virtue, that only a small bitte does fill our
stomach so much, that it is not able to contain more, how great a feeder
soever a man be. But when we shall be with the Lord, then he will give us
greater and stronger stomachs, that we may eat plentifully enough of these
fruits, without any hurt or surfeting: for if any would eat here in this
li^e, more then their stomachs were able to bear: it would more hinder then
profit them. Therefore it is needful, that we eat but a little and
inoderatly of these fruits, till we come to that place, where we may fully
satisfy our selves with them, whereof we have now but a taste only.

The eleventh Chapter entreats how to Desire God, did prepare Desire for to
eat of the fruit.
I Pray you sir quoth Desire. let me have a taste of these fruits so much or
little as it pleases you. First answered To desire God, because this fruit
does never remain but in a pure vessel, it is therefore most necessary that
thou do make cleave thy teeth, wash thy eyes, mouth, face, and hands. But
where shall I come to water here said Desire, I will bring thee to a fountain
of life, answered To desire God, which runs and flows both night and day,
and is called Godly exercise, besides I will call some Damselles of the house,
that will be willing to wash and cleanse thee: Desire was glad in tarrying for
these Damselles, and saw presently To desire God, accompainied with these
Ladies: and said, Behold friend these Ladies must wash thee. The first is
called Courtesy, the second Unity, the third Pity, the fourth Mercy, the
fifth Amiablenesse, the sixte Favor, the seventh Meekness, the eight Zeal,
the ninth Joy, the tenth Justice, the eleventh Fortitude, ye twelfth Providence
or Forecast. And this last will give thee an herb yt will provoke thine
appetite, for to eat thy meat with a better stomach. For this fruit is only
ministered to the hungry, and not to any other. The thirteenth Damsel is
called Long suffering, ye foureteenth Constancy, the fifteenth Peace, the
sixteenth Neatnes, the seventeenth Diligence, the eighteenth Prayer, the
nineteenth Labor, and the last am I to Desire God. And I am always found in
this company And so long as thou art to be found among them, they will
further thee greatly in the eating of this fruit. And whenever thou do eat
them, they will go always with thee, and never forsake thee, unless thy
self bears them away, and do misuse them, for they themselves are wondrous
desirous of this diet, and no sooner they fee this fruit, but presently they
swarm about it, ene^ as bees about the honey, and there is no surer token that
one has had a taste of these fruits, but when they see these Damsels about the
door. Desire was glad when he was washed, and had tasted of ye fruit. Brother
quoth to desire God, seeing thou have done this, thou must now sing also, for
the servants of God do always sing after their meals, praising and thanking
the Lord. And h^^t is (...) b^o^e in ye ho^^^ that can not one in ye ho^^ that
can not (...)* How shall I sing quoth Desire, Let us go within the house,
said To dessire God, where ^^ll the Musicians dwell. The ^^rst is called
Blessing, the second Honor, the third Praise, the fourth Thanksgiving. With
these must thou sing, for they are very good and skillful Musicians, and have
all good doyces. The first Musician called Blessing, sings the Superins or
troble and prayseth God for his great liberality. The second who supplieth
the Contratenor called Honor, praises the Lord for his unspeakable and
incomprehensible wi^^bom. And the third who is c^lled Praise, sings the
Tenor, and praises him in his endless goodness, bounty, excellency, and
generally in all that God is in himself. The sourth is Thanksgiving, and
serves the Base, who thanketh the Lord for all that he has created, and for
all his benefits most liberally powered and bestowed upon all his creatures.

The twenty two Chapter entreats how Desire did learn to sing.
THe music and ye manner thereof did please Desire greatly. Behold quoth to
desire God, will thou go hence, and return again from whence thou art come,
where should I travail answered Desire, for to be better then I am here where
I am come with so much pain and labor? Now that I am welcome to a place where I
may line in quiet, and be comforted, I am not minded to change, for they say in
a common proverb. De yt is in bliss, let him remain where he is. And I tell
you sir, I will not go hence, unless you do thrust me out of the doors. It is
not our custom, quoth To desire God, to turn any body out of the doors, unless
they themselves do desire it, but rather do entreat them to stay. But because
they may know yt we stand not in need of any body, therefore sometimes do ask
them, if they are desirous for to go or not. But because thou art willing to
tarry here with us, thou must not be idle. what must I do quoth Desire. All yt
they shall command thee answered To desire God. And when I shall not be
commanded at all, said Desire, what shall I do then? Sing answered To desire
God, praise, thank and magnify the Lord. And whenever you art about thy
business, and do that is commanded unto then, the^ thou may yet sing to thy
self, for to keep thy thoughts from idleness. Further wilt you please our
Lord, and become his familiar friend, see yt thou go to speak oftentimes
alone with him, and if you wilt profit greatly, be daily conversant with him.
Then shall thou hear his aunswers, who will disclose unto thee many secrets,
whereby you shall grow familiar with him, and become one of his minions. May
every man who will, said Desire, come in his chamber and speak with him? I
quoth To desire God, as far as he has Humility in his company, I tell thee yt
it is his greatest joy yt we should come to him, and awake him, for he is of
this nature yt he cannot abide to be alone, and how base and simple soever a
man is, yet he rejoices greatly in his company, and will have him to remain
with him continually. For his nobility and worthiness is so great, that he
does not regard the external person, for there is no exceptions of persons
with him, if his spirit be humble: for one man has cost him so dear as an
other, and has created the^ all of one substance, the earth. I which more is,
the baser and viler the person is, if he does but debase and humble himself,
the greater favor and courtesy he shows unto him, and will do him the more
good. And I tell thee plain, yt the most part of these, that are dwelling
here, are but of simple pare^tage and progeny. For God has chosen those for
his service, who were the abiectes of yt world, to the end yt no body who
dwells here should think him to be received and entertained for his deserts
and worthiness, but only through the goodness and mere mercy of God. Therefore
if you art willing for to dwell here, and desirous not to loose, but to profit
and further thy self, and procure that thy song be acceptable unto God,
remember these four parts. The first is Good Will, the second Humility, yt
third Patience, the fourth Love or Charity. And whenever thou singest with
these four parts, thou shall never fail in thy songs. And although sometimes
you flippest a note or two, or else do not sing fast enough, presently thou
shall come to the right tune again by hearing only. With good will thou shall
sing yt Superius or Treble, for all yt rest does frame it self after it, and
with the second and third, namely with Humility and Patience, you shall sing the
Contratenor, for Humilities and Patiences doings are contrary to a man's will
and wilfulnes. And with the fourth, namely Love, thou shall sing all manner of
music whatsoever, and that with thy soul. and the sweetness of yt holy Ghost.
But above all things do not forget to eat the fruit, which thou have eaten in
yt Palace of Humility, namely to Distrust in thy self, and the greater thy
love and desire is toward God, and the greater friend thou art of the Lord,
give him the more of this fruit, for he loves them well, and gladly eats of
them.

The thirteenth chapter, how to desire God, did bring Desire into the chamber
of the Lord, and besides entreats of an instruction to Prayer.
I would pray you for to get one sauoure more at your hands, which is, seeing
you have entertained me, and granted yt I shall dwell here, that it may please
you likewise to bring me to my Lord, for to know him, and to do unto him homage
and reverence. I am contented, quoth To Desire God, go with me. Desire went
trembling yt he now should speak with so mighty a king and monarch in his
chamber, and stand before his divine majesty, and was taken with such fear and
trembling, that he neither durst nor could come before yt Lord, in as much yt
he was minded to turn back again. But when he remembered again the
nobility and unspeakable courtesy and goodness of this king, and how loving
and affable* he was to every man, he comforted himself upon his
gratiousnesse, there upon putting only all his trust and confidence. Tarry
for me here at the door, said to desire God, for I will go see what my Lord
does, and tell him how you art here to speak with him, Desire was yet fearful,
studying what he should say unto the Lord, when he should come before him. Com
hither quoth to desire God, I have told my Lord how you art here. Go in therefore,
and I will stay here for thee. Desire began with great reverence to go through ye
chamber of presence, and as soon as he did see the Lord, fell down flat upon
his face weeping bitterly, and durst not once lift up his eyes, for he
remembered yt he had been a mortal enemy of his Lord, and had done him
oftentimes great injury and wrong, in as much that he was not able to utter one
word, but only did sigh and weep, thinking always yt now he was in the
presence of this endless goodness, whom he had so oftentimes, and so
grievously offended. What means this, quoth our Lord, wherefore do thou come
hither? do you not speak? Arise, and let me know thy desire. What can or
shall I speak before thy incomprehensible Majesty? answered Desire. O my Lord
I am not worthy to open my vile and unclean mouth in thy sight, but suffer me
now to bewail by silence, sighs, and tears, my forepast wickedness and
iniquity. Wherefore art you come hither quoth our Lord? I I am not come hither
my Lord, answered Desire, for I do not think, yt I have deserved to dwell here
in thy house, and yet less to come in thy majesty's chamber, and presence. Who
has bronght thee hither then said our Lord: Thy grace has drawn me hither,
has caused me to be calde, and commanded to let me come in, and to have
access unto thee. I cannot tell my Sovereign, what cause has moved thy
majesty here unto, or wherein thy grace has need of me, for it would suffice
me and be too much, that such a one as I am, might be ye least of the servants
of thy house, and yet deserve not so much, and am altogether unworthy of it.
But seeing thy goodness has now called me, and yt inpleaseth thee, yt I
should dwell here and speak unto thee, open you my lips, and teach me what I
have to say in thy presence, power in me ye spirit of fear and reverence, to
the end thy Majesty be not offended, or in dishonor served by me, and despised
of such a wicked and vile sinner as I am. Rather I would be ready to suffer a
thousand deaths then to offend and despise thy highness. For hereby I should
dishonor and injury the Angels, Archangelles, and all Celestial powers, who
entirely love thy goodness: and serve the with such zeal, glory, and reverence.
Declare unto me O Lord, what I shall speak and direct me in all my doings,
for I commit my self wholly into thy hands, yielding my soul and body wholly
unto thy majesty. Give me O Lord yt spirit of Humility, to ye end I may serve
thy congregation and children ye better, and that my service may be pleasant
and acceptable in thy sight for thy names sake, and yt thy majesty may be
honored and praised in me.

The fourteenth Chapter entreats of the instruction which our Lord did give
unto Desire, for to rule and govern himself.
ARise, quoth ye Lord to Desire and fear no more: and if thou hereafter wilt
become a new man, and such a one as y^ ought to be, then I will remember no
more the injury which you have done me, and put out of my memory all thy
misdeedes and offenses, wherewithal you have grieved me so oftentimes. But
because you inaiest amend and become better, I will teach thee four words which
will not profit thee a little, if thou do remember and printest them in thy
heart. Take these two, I, and thou, which are the two first: and ye other two
Slave and King. And if you can rightly put these words in practice, they will
bring thee to great virtue and perfection, and defend thee against all thy
natural and unbridled affections, and cause thee to remain and live with every
man in peace and unity. I pray thee, my only Lord, and Sovereign, quoth Desire,
that it may please thee to show unto me, how I might best exercise my self
with these four words? Thou may refer all thy exercise to these words, for
they contain in the^ a great and deep knowledge, whereof one might write great
volumes, and whereby without books one might likewise attain to great
perfection, Therefore whenever you co^mest to speak with me, or go about any
thing which is commanded thee, and art altogether faint, cold, and unwilling
then persuade thy self, that I do speak to thee these words, I and Thou and no
more: and thus forget al ye world, and think yt there is no body in the world,
but I and Thou. The other two words, Slave and King, shall serve thee, for to
deal and frequent with them: first of all, in imagining that y^ art Slave unto
them all, and by these means thou shall become humble and obedient. Secondly,
that you art thine own King, and that I make all Kings rich, and bestow upon
them pleasure and goods abundantly. Let this instruction at this time suffice
thee, and thus depart in peace.

Wherefore will thou O Lord, that I should go away, said Desire, because
answered the Lord, thou should not think that thou have deserved it, and
art worthy to remain always with me but ouely as long as I think good, or
whenever I call or send for thee, to the end thou become not presumptuous or
vainglorious. Therefore whenever I will have thee, I will send for thee, yet
before you goeft hence, leave thy heart with me, to ye end in what place soever
you come, that the chiefest and the best may still remam with me: I am hereunto
willing my Lord quoth Desire, I give thee trancke and freely my whole heart. I am
content answered ye Lord, y^ now it remain with me, but think not that you can
do it so oftentimes as thou will thy self, and besides I will never keep i^
with me without the profit and furtherance to humility. But yet of one thing,
which thou know not, I will admonish thee, which is, the more crosses,
adversities and miseries I lay upon my servants, the wore joy, comfort and
blessedness I am minded and endeavor to bestow upon them. But will thou leave
thy dog Good will here to me, for will may he remain here if you commend him
every day unto me, and do not thy self take him away from me. Wherefore quoth
Desire, is it necessary to commend him every day unto thee, once would it not
suffice? No, answered ye Lord, not because I should forget it, but because thou
should not come to forget me, and yt thou might always have occasion to
have me in remembrance, to ye end I may do thee good, and com to succor thee
in time of thy trouble and necessity. For what does it help or profit me,
whether you have me in mind or not? I thank thee my Lord, quoth Desire, that you
do acquaint me before with thy will and pleasure, whereby only thou worliest
and bring to pass in us all things, as if thou sholdest seem to stand in
need of us, where it is only but to our profit and salvation.

The fifteenth Chapter how Desire did exercise him in these four words, and
what profit he reaped thereby.
DEsire departed out of the Lords chamber, leauinge: his heart behind him, and
did find to Desire God watching at the door. What have thou done so long
within, quoth to Desire God. Do you think that many words please the Lord?
Sometimes you shall do more with one word with him, then with a hundredth. Ah
Sir, answered Desire, I think that I have not been long with him. Go within
answered to desire God, seeing thou are now entertained here. I will go into
my chamber, said Desire. Go in the name of the Lord, quoth he. Desire daily
remembered the four words, which the Lord had given him, oftentimes repeating
I, and Thou, Slave, King, and sometimes did part, confound, and mingle them
together, but they fell always right, for he took the one and said I, and
then the other Slave. Yet I speak right, quoth he, for I am for the love of my
Lord a slave. Sometimes he took the other and said, I King. I do not miss
yet, for I am a king, said he, being Gods seruante, for to serve him, is to
command, to govern, and to be a mighty Prince.

FINIS.

