To the Kings most excellent Majesty.

THE HVMBLE PETITION OF TWO SISTERS; THE CHVRCH AND Commonwealth: For the
restoring of their ancient Commons and liberties, which late Enclosure with
depopulation, uncharitably has taken away: Containing seven reasons as
evidences for the same.

PROVE. 14. 28. In the multitude of the people is the honor of a King, and for
the want of people, comes the destruction of the Prince. LONDINI, Impensis
GEORGII BISHOP. 1604.

TENEZ LE VRAY

Exlibris Bibliothecoe Domesticoe RICHARDI TOWNELEY de Tonmeley In Agro
Lancastrensi Armigeri Anno Aetatis. 73 Domin(...) 702



TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE JAMES, BY the grace of God, King of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
THat saying of Queen Hester to the most famous King Ahashuerosh, (most dread
Sovereign) does, as it were, enforce me, to make this my humble Petition to
your Highness: If we were sold to be bondslaues, or handmaides Hest. 7. 4.
(says she) I would have held my tongue, although the adversary could never
recompense the King this loss: But let my life Verse. 3.
be given me at my request, and my peoples.

There is a mighty Thorn sprung up of late, in diverse places of this Realm,
like to that cruel Haman; which does not only go about to impouerish your
Majesty's Subjects, but quite to root them out: I mean Enclosure of Fields
and Commons; whereas the Lords of Manours, and Freeholders will have all their
lands which have heretofore lien open, and in Common, (so that the poor
might enter Common with them) now laid together in several. And hereby the
poor cannot enjoy their ancient Commons and liberties. And this cankred Thorn
also deuoureth Gods people, which is his inheritance, as the Psalm teaches
us, Ask ofme, (says God) and I will give Psalm. 2. 8.
thee the people for thine inheritance, etc. and the uttermost parts of the
earth for thy possession. Inclosers to maintain their own inheritances, do
make no conscience to impair this inheritance. Where God 2. Cor. 1. 11
has been praised with many mouths, there now shreeking Owls, and other
unclean birds make their nestes.

It dishonoreth also your Majesty, and weakeneth your Highness power. For, in
the multitude of people is the Pro. 14. 28.
honor of a King, says Solomon, and for want of people comes the
destruction of the Prince. But this Enclosure where it comes, dispeoples
Towns, as common experience lamentably teaches. And whereas your Majesty
might have had great choice of Soldiers, and able men for service in war (if
need required) now there is almost none to be had, but a Shepherd and his
dog. This Enclosure also hurts the commonwealth: For where no oxen are,
there the cribbe is empty, (says Solomon) Prove. 14. 9.
but much increase comes by the strength of the ox. But enclosure decareth
Tellage, and turns good arable land to Pasture. These Inclosers think that
the gain of their Pastures, eaten with sheep, comes more easily to them
than being tilled; and therefore they will neither plowe nor sow themselves,
nor let their land to such as would till it: and so by this means they bring a
dearth upon this Land, which is one of Gods Eze. 14. 13.
plagues. Yea, the Cities and Towns Corporate are maintained by the Country:
For the plowe maintains all trades, as Mercers, Grocers, Tanners, shooemakers,
Glouers, Smiths, Tailors, Ioyners, Carpenters etc. But since Enclosure began,
all these Artificers prove by experience, that they cannot have such utterance
and return for their wares as heretofore: because that husbandmen were wont to
maintain many servants, which did yearly buy their wares of them; which
multitude of servants enclosure needs not. Oh Enclosure then, to be hated of
all Gods children, which deuoureth their fathers inheritance! and to be
detested of all your Majesty's faithful subjects, which dishonors your
Highness, by diminishing the people of your land, and procures your Majesty's
destruction (as says Solomon) and to be abhorred of all true hearted English
men, which brings afamine, one of Gods plagues upon this our Common wealth.
Nay, which goes about to impouerish our Grand mothers and most famous Cities.

I know, Inclosers can urge many plausible reasons for themselves, but their
reasons are humane, and not grounded on the word of God. These dangerous and
desperate effects so apparently spreading both into the heart of Gods Church,
and of the Commonwealth, inforceth me, humbly to present this my Petition to
your most sacred Majesty, with these reasons against Enclosure. Least by
holding my peace, and suffering the Lords inheritance to I know where there has
been before Enclosure 320. communica^ts: but now there be scant 160.
be impaired, I should be condemned at that day as an unjust Steward: and
seeing your Majesty's power to be diminished, and not giving warning, I should
be reputed a faithless subject to your Highness: and perceiving the Common
wealth hereby to be damnified and half beggered, I should be esteemed an
unnatural child, to this my most loving mother.

I am also encouraged with confidence of your Gracious acceptance of this my
humble suite, with that (Mashall) your Majesty's godly and golden saying, to
your Princely son, that he should be the poor man's King. The cure of this
canker, and the rooting out of this thorn, will make glad your poor subjects
hearts. For as we read, Salomons subjects were as many in number as the sand
of the 1. Kin. 4. 20
Sea, eating drinking and making merry; And at this mark should Christian
Kings aim, that their subjects should do the like. But enclosure diminishes
the number of Gods people, kills their hearts, and abridgeth both their mirth
and maintenance: And your Majesty being a second Solomon in this our Israel, I
most humbly crave your gracious and tender care hereof, in your sacred
session and high court of Parliament; for that all your afflicted subjects, are
ready to cry with the Prophet. It is high time for Psalm. 119. 126.
thee Lord to lay to thine hand, for they have destroyed thy law, which is
christian charity. The Lord Jesus bless your Majesty with a long and
prosperous reign, to the glory of his name, increase of his Church, and
benefit of this Commonwealth, for his glorious names sake.

Amen.
Your Majesty's most humble subject, FRANCIS TRIGGE.

To the Reader.
GOod Christian Reader, if any thing in this Treatise, seem to thee over
bitter or sharp, I humbly beseech thee to consider with thy self, that, that
purgation which Galen the prince of Physicians commonly used, was called
Hiera-picra, that is, holy-bitter; And such also are Jesus Christ's medicines,
which he applies to our sick souls: and that this is a canker that I go
about to cure, and therefore as Chirurgerie teaches, lenitiues will do no
good, but rather increase the venom thereof. Nay I beseech thee consider, that
I deal with the root of all evil, covetousness; and with that noisome
pestilence that reigns now in our age, as it did in the days of Jeremy: and
therefore I had need of a sharp hatchet, to cut up that root, and of some
forcible Mithridate to preserve from that plague: of whose effects and
infection and cure, Jeremy writes thus: I will give their wives Ier. 8. 10.
to others, and their fields to heirs; for every one of them, even from the
least to the greatest, is given to covetousness; and from the Prophet to the
Priest, every one deals falsely. Here first are the effects of this noisome
plague of covetousness, that their wives were given to others and their fields
to heirs: Here is also the infection or cause of these effects, because they
are all given to covetousness and they all deal falsely. It is reported that we
have tasted those former fruits and effects, for there died of the late plague
many more men than women: and is it not likely that the same effects sprung from
the same root? and if this be true, then let us all beware of covetousness
and falsehoode in our dealing. But the true cure of this plague which follows
in the Prophet, is taught us by the contrary. For they have cured the hurt of
the daughters of my people, (says the Prophet) with Verse. 11.
sweet words, saying peace peace when as there was no peace. Gods Ministers
must cure this plague not with oil: but with sharp wine, they must not here
speak fair, if they mean to do any good, but thunder. And therefore those
nice ears that cannot abide their thunder, shall die of this plague, and
perish in their sins.

Lastly, if through human frailty, any faults have escaped (as who is it
that erres not?) remember that lesson which nature teaches; That of all living
creatures man does most often twinckle with his eyes, to teach him not to be a
rigorous censurer of his brethren. Ponder wisely, judge charitable, pardon
courteously, and if thou be sick of this disease, repent speedily. For God
shakes his rod over thy head even now, and the day of the Lord draws nigh.

Thine in the Lord F. T.

A BRIEF OF THE CONTENTS OF THIS TREATISE.
1 IT decaieth Tillage. 2 It dispeopleth Towns. 3 It is against the
Commonwealth of the Jews. 4 It is against the state of Christ's Church. 5 It
is against Christian charity. 6 It is against the Church and Commonwealth,
and ancient liberties and customs of England. 7 Enclosure with depopulation
is a sin whereof God shall make especial inquiry at the day of Judgment.
AN HVMBLE PETITION OF THE Church and common wealth, with reasons out of Gods
word, against late enclosure and Depopulation of Towns.
A preoccupation of an objection.
WHereas this present treatise tends to the staying and decaying of
Enclosure; it is to be observed and noted (most dread Sovereign) that here
first I speak against late Enclosure, not condemning the Enclosure of Essex,
Hartfordshire, Devonshire, and such like Woodland Countries; wherein the
beginning, if the Woods had not been enclosed, they could not have been
preserved; and so as it may seem, the Enclosures there of necessity have ever
since been continued: for there, every Lordship is charitably divided amongst
the Tenants, and tillage also in most of their Closes is maintained, and Towns
nothing d^speopled: although those Woodland and enclosed countries be not so
populous as other countries are. But I condemn our covetous and new devised
^^closurs, which convert champian and fruitful soiles, being good arrable
ground, to pasture; casting half a cornefield to a sheep pasture. And so
thereby diminish Gods people, and depopulate Exo. 14. 13.
towns.

Secondly, I join depopulation of towns, and this new kind of Enclosure
together: because the one of them does follow the other commonly, even as
necessarily as the shadow does the body: for although in some places where
this Enclosure is put in practice (as our Inclosers can cunningly affirm) that
all the houses remain that have been: yet there be not so many people in them
as has been: because that tillage, by means of their Enclosure is decayed,
which required many more servants to accomplish it, then their pastures will do
to look to them.

And thirdly, whereas Inclosers distinguish, and say, that it is not Enclosure,
but the covetous minds of men, that pulls down towns. To this I answer,
that Enclosure is the means to pull them down; and depopulations follow
Enclosure, as an accident inseparable (as the Logicians call it.) For mark it
who list, where this Enclosure has set in foot, they shall see houses fallen
down, and lie in the dust: and shall I not here rather believe mine eyes than
their fair speeches?

The first reason against this Enclosure is, it decaies tillage.
THe Heathen ever made great account of Tillage. Cicero writes thus of
Husbandry: That of all things Cicero lib. 1 offi^.
whereby any gain is gotten, there is nothing more excellent than Tillage,
nothing more commodious, nothing more pleasant, and nothing more fit for a
Gentleman. O that our Gentlemen were of his mind.

The noble men of Rome take the names of corn, as (Fabij) of Beans, and Plin.
lib. 18. cap. 3.
(Cicerones) of a kind of Pease, and (Pisones) of Baking. They which were
married, had a garland of corn carried before them. Amongst the Romans also,
him whom they called (Bonum Colonum) A good plowman, they seemed to praise
exceedingly. Nay, he that did not till his land well, the Censors punished him.
Such Censors were to be wished amongst us, to make us till our land. It was
also by law enacted amongst them, that he that came to take an amercement, or
penalty, should not take an ox before a sheep. Nay, that a man stealing by
night, corn that was sown, should be put to death with greater severity,
then an homicide. They call Glory Adoriam of Ador, which signifies corn. Pliny
also writes thus of Ibidem.
the fruitfulness of the earth: What was the cause that the earth was so
fruitful then? because (says he) that then the earth was tilled with the
hands of Emperors. And it is not amiss to think, that the earth did rejoice
then, of her coulter, and share, being crowned, and of her Plowman being a
triumphant Emperor. They were then as careful of plowing their lands, as of
waging their wars, And they did as diligently order their fields, as their
camps. The like cause may be assigned of the barrenness of the earth in our
days. God plagues our contempt of tillage, with penury and scarcity.
Gentlemen now a days, think scorn of the Plough.

Tillage was the first work, that was imposed upon man, after that he was
banished out of Paradise. And God Genesis 3. 23.
sent man out of the garden of Eden (Langabath) to serve, to wait upon, to
till the earth. And shall the best of us all then think scorn of tillage?
Also this was that gracious promise made unto Noah after the flood, That
hereafter, Genesis 6. 22.
seed time and harvest, cold and heat, summer and winter, day and night shall
not cease, so long as the earth remains. But if all men should follow
Inclosers steps, why then in all towns we should have no tillage (or very
little) but all sheep. Is not this to contradict the ordinance of God? But
tillage is troublesome unto them, and the other is a more gaineful and easy
way, as they do imagine, and therefore they pass not for that. Let all such
great sheepe-maisters, that are decaiers of tillage take heed, which will have
no seed furrows, nor haruests, nor greatly pass not for them: they
contradict hoerein Gods ordinance, as this place proves. And after we read of
Noah (as of an obedient subject to God herein) thus. And Noah began to be (Ish
Haadhmah) Genesis 9. 20.
that is, a man wholly giving himself, to labor in the earth, and he planted a
vineyard. To plant a vineyard, is correspondent in some countries, to our
sowing of corn, and an acre of Mines yeeldes better increase, then an acre of
our Corn, as I have heard. Isaak also as heir of Noah, did follow his steps,
and though a stranger in Egypt, yet we read of him thus. And Isaak did sow
corn in that country, and he found in that year an hundred Genesis 26. 12.
measures, and God blessed him. Shall Isaak sow, being a stranger in Egypt,
and not we at home? Did he find an hundred measures for one? For so Munster
says, that the Chalde Munster in eundem locum.
Paraphrast does erpound this. And shall we say, that we can find no
commodity by tillage? And it follows, God blessed him, a blessing of God
follows tillage. They shall not thrive that decay it, as erperience teaches.
God appeated Iud. 6* 11.
to Gedeon as he was threshing, and appointed him Judge over Israel: And does
not this commend threshing? Elizeus also whom God did choose to be a Prophet in
Eliah his room, was a great maintainer of tillage: for thus we read. And
Eliah departed thence, and found Elishah the son of Shaphat: 1. King. 19. 19.
who was plowing with twelve yoke of oxen before him, and he was with the
twelve. And was not Elizeus a great husbandman who had twelve yoke of oxen, and
no doubt many plowes going together in his field, and many plowmen, among whom
after he divided those two oxen, which he killed? And do not all these, so
beloved of God, and giving themselves so greatly to tillage, commend it unto
us? shall we prefer pasture, and neglect this?

Master Camden writes, that in England were the stately Palaces of Lady Ceres,
Camden Britan. p. 3.
meaning great Barnes of corn. Now we may see in some places, some such great
Barnes still, and Inclosers makes them stand empty. I know, whereas 1500.
quarters of corn has been yearly growing: since enclosure has been
practiced, there grows not now 500. And again he writes, that England for
corn was the only storehouse of all the west Empire: And that out of England
yearly the Romans transported 400. ships, bigger then barks, laden with
corn to relieve their soldiers, that lay on the borders in Germany. In those
days England was able to relieve other countries with corn: but sometime now
she is glad to buie corn of other countries her self. Inclosers have partly
brought this to pass, who had rather have their wooll-houses filled with
wool, then their Barnes with corn. O dishonorable children to their mother!

The Preacher also in his book writes very excellently in the commendation of
tillage. If in a country Eccles. 5. 7.
(says he) thou see the oppression of the poor, and the defrawding of
judgment and justice, be not afraid at the matter, for he that is higher then
the highest, regards, and there be higher then they. And the abundance of
the earth is over all, the King also consists of the field that is tilled.
Solomon gives an Item to all that deal hardly with the poor: how that the
God of heaven beholds: Nay (Shomer as it is in the Hebrew, that is) marketh
and keeps in memory all their dealings. And that the tillage of the earth
surpasses all, and that even the King thereby is maintained: by the food that
it ministers, to strengthen his people; and by the multitude of valiant
soldiers it affords for his wars. For as Pliny writes, Most strong and
valiant soldiers Plin. lib. 18. cap. 5.
are made of husbandmen, and come forth of the country, and which think no
harm. And shall we deal hardly with those, that must fight and adventure
their lives for us? And shall we not maintain tillage, the honorable mother
of chivalry? Lechem in Hebrew signifies bread, and Lacham to fight: They
therefore which destroy bread, destroy chiualry. Nay, how can any christian
truly say the Lords prayer, and pray, Give Math. 6. 11.
us this day our daily bread* that decaieth tillage? Will he pray for bread,
and not use the ordinary means to have bread, which is tillage? This is
plainly to tempt God. Will he have God feed us miraculously, with Manna, as
he did Mat. 4. 7.
Israel in the wilderness? In Canaan God Exodus 16. 15
will have plowing and sowing used: And therefore after the children of Israel
came into the land of Canaan, Ios. 5. 12.
Manna ceased.

That history also of the plague in King David's days, must teach us some 2.
Sam. 14. 18.
thing: and therein, that is especially to be marked, to build an Altar, in the
threshing floor of Araunah. It should seem that God loves threshing flooers,
and there he will be praised. But Enclosure decaieth tillage, and therefore
God is not praised in our threshing fl^oers.

This may be a cause of the plague Psalm. 106. verse. 30. Phinehas stood up and
executed judgment and the plague was stayed.
amongst us even now. Let us erect Altars in the threshing flooers of Araunah,
and the plague shall cease: Inclosers do think that there are too many men
in this land, and that they may decaie towns by their Enclosure, and that it
is no great matter to ^e^aie a town But God s^^th their thoughts, and now he
begins to diminish the people of this land: he may diminish them, as well
as they; and he begins at the very head first.

Covetousness which is the root of Luke 12. 20.
all evil, which our Savior describes in the Gospel, and S. Paul to Timothy;
1. Tim. 1. 9.
and pride, which God hates and resists, which Esaias also paints out unto us in
his third chapter at large; and the taking Ia. 4. 6. Esa. (...). 16. 17. etc.
Exodus 20. 7. Psalm. 55. 10. 2. Sam. 12. 14. 1. Tim. 6. 1. Tit. (...)
Gods name in vain, for filthy lu^re. For which God will not hold us guiltles,
etc. And because deceit and guile go not out of our streets; And for that by
our wicked lives Gods word is evil spoken of: These no doubt may seem to be
the causes of the plague amongst us, God give all men eyes, to see their

sins and to amend them that the plague may cease; and especially Citizens
and such as inhabit in towns corporate, amongst whom these sins commonly
reign.

A second reason against this Enclosure is, that it dispeopleth towns.
THe people are called Gods inheritance, Ask of me and will give thee Psalm. 2.
8.
the heathen for thine inheritance and the ends of the earth for thy
possession. And again, Behold (says David) children are Psalm. 127. 3. 4.
the inheritance of the Lord, and a reward the fruit of the womb. He puts
behold before this his doctrine as though it were a strange thing and yet most
true. Secondly he adds that children are a reward: Inclosers many times
lack this reward, they love the earth so well that God will not bless them with
many sons: Nay David adds, Like as the arrows in the hand of the Giant, so
are the children of young men. Such arrows in the hands of Giants, and many
rich Farmers having tall and strong men to their sons, we might have seen:
But now, where this late enclosure has set in foot, either there are no
families left, or else they are so pinched by great rents, and pined with want
and penury, that they are rather like prisoners, then arrows in the hand of a
Giant.

Thus enclosure where it comes dispeoples towns, and impares the Lords
inheritance. Therefore all his stewards and ministers ought to inueigh 1. Cor.
4. 1.
against this sin, and all his children ought to condemn it. Again David
speaking of the reprobate and wicked gives them this cognizance. Have they
Psalm. 14. 4.
no understanding, or will they not know, or understand (as it is in the
Hebrew) all they that work wickedness, who eat up my people, as if they would
eat bread? they have not called upon God. Here first we may note, the
obstinacy of these sinners, and depopulators; They will not know, they will
not be persuaded, they will maintain and defend their enclosures, and
depopulations, say, what one can against them, yea and that out of Gods book,
they will writhe all things to maintain their covetousness. Secondly the
grieuousnesse of this sin with God, and the small account that men make of
it. They make no account, nor no more conscience to depopulate towns, and to
consume men, then to eat bread. They think that they may do it lawfully. But
God tells all such here by the Prophet David, that though they bear a show of
religion, vet they have not called upon God, that is, they are plainly
Atheists. For by a figure called Synecdoche, the part is put for the whole, ano
inuoration of the name of God, is put for all his religion. As Genesis 12. 8. 1.
Cor. 1. 2. Acts 9. 21.

Nay, David in another psalm touches narrowly these Inclosers and depopulators
Psalm. 80. 8.
of towns, speaking thus to God. Thou have brought a vine out of Egypt (saiih
he) thou have cast out the heathen, and planted it. No doubt David hear spoke
typically of the vine Christ's Church, which God has in our days brought out
of the Popes spiritual Egypt, as Saint John terms Reu. 11. 28.
it: and that he has cast out those spiritual heathen that trampled with
their feet, the holy city, 42. months. For what did they else in popery,
but trample in Gods Church with their feet? Their bodies were present in the
Church, but not their understanding, and therefore their hearts were away. For
where understanding is not, there the heart cannot properly be said to be. And
therefore their understanding was away, because Gods word was read to them in a
strange tongue; and also they prayed in a strange tongue. Except 1. Cor. 14. 11.
I know the power of the voice of him that speaks, I shall be to him a
Barbarian, says Saint Paul. And may not these be properly called heathen, whom
Saint Paul calls Barbarians? and may not these be said, to trample in the
holy city, when their bodies only were present and their heart were away?
God has brought a vine out of Egypt, and has expelled the heathen out of his
holy city, and planted this vine in their place. He swept before the Genesis 1. 2.
face of this vine, with the wind of his spirit, and the beesome os his word,
clensing all the dust and sand of man's devises, giving to it purity of
doctrine, It filled the land. This vine spread her branches through the whole
land and that speedily. The Papists marvel: they never dreamed, that this
vine would have spread her branches so far, and wide. Nay the hills were
covered with the shadow of it. Many noble men, very religiously and
zealouslie professed this religion, and drank the Mat. 2. 22.
comfortable wine of this vine.

But here now follows the mischief, here follows Satan Jesus Christ's
enemy. But why (says David) Psalm. 80. 12.
have thou pluct up her hedge, that every one that goes by the way, has a
snatch (as we say) at this vine? The wild Boar of the wood has destroyed it,
and the wild beasts of the field, have eaten it up. And the vineyard, which
thy right hand has planted, and the young vine which thou made so strong for
thine own self, It is burnt with fire and cut down. What does all this
mean? but that this vine, by covetous and cruel landlords is lopped and
diminished, and burnt with the fire of covetousness. Even that vine, which God
himself planted so miraculously, and had made so strong in faith, to go out
of popery, 1. Pet. 5. 9.
and not to fear the Devil. This beloved vine, and this strong vine, have our
wild Boares devoured, and our fiery covetousness has burnt up; for do we
think that David speaks of any material fire or vine? Will God take this at
their hands? Do they think, that he makes not high account, of every
christian soul? and do they not know, that he will be praised with Act. 20.
28. 2. Cor. 9. 12 Mat. 5. 1.
many mouths? And that Christ, when he saw the multitude went up to the hill
to preach? and that he knows, how many have been in towns, in time of
popery? and shall we now in the light of the Gospel, impare his sheep? dare
we do it? surely he will revenge it. And let all such depopulators know,
that they are but travelers by the way. They shall not long continue here
with their hedges.

Ioab a bloody warrier and soldier 2. Sam. 20. 20.
could say, God forbid, that I should devour or destroy the inheritance of the
Lord: and shall professors of the Gospel, be guilty of this sin, and
depopulate towns?

It was one of Gods blessings which he promised to Abraham, that he would Genesis
22. 17.
greatly multiply his seed, as the stars of heaven, and as the sand which is
upon the sea shore. And do we think, that they shall be blessed, which go
about to deprive him of this blessing? And Esaias likewise thus prophesies of
Christ's Church, I will power my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon
Esa. 44. 3 4.
thy buddes, and they shall grow as amongst the grass, and as the willowes by
the rivers of waters.. By how many types here, does the Prophet express unto
us Christ's Church? of seed, of buddes growing amongst grass, and of willowes?
and do not all these, insinuate unto us a multitude? They are not Christ's
friends but his enemies, that do not nourish and cherish this his seed, in
the besome of their hearts, that do not comfort these his buddes, with the
courtesy of their speeches, and which do not water, these his willowes, with
the continual stream of their liberalities. This was the cause why Solomon
desired wisdom of God. Thou have made me King over a great 2. Chr. 1. 7.
people, like to the dust of the earth. Give me now wisdom, and knowledge,
etc. Solomon was but a type of Jesus Christ: If that his subjects were like to
the dust of the earth; what shall Jesus Christ's subjects be likened unto?

I read in a book of the Survey of Mundus imper. Rex. gall.
France, made by Bodinus, in the days of King Henry the second, besides
Burgundy there were numbered in France 27. thousand villages with steeples. And
in another survey of France, made in the reign of Charles the ninth, it was
found that the number of the inhabitants there, were above 15. millions of men.
Did the French thus glory in their multitudes of people; and shall not we much
more in England, seek to maintain ours?

And here I cannot but take away some stumbling blocks: for these Inclosers
perchance will flatter themselves and say, that it is but a small village that
they have dispeopled, or a small farm or cottage that they have decayed or
pulled down; and what do you make so much to do thereof? But let all such
know, that little Zoar saved Genesis 19. 20 Luke 4. 16. Ioh. 1. 46.
Lot: and Nazareth that obscure city whereof Nathaniell said, can any good
come out of Nazareth, it nursed our Savior Jesus, and gave him a name which
from his cross to this day is honorable. And Saint Paul teaches us plainly,
that God has chosen the 1. Cor. 1. 27 28.
weak things of this world, to confound the mighty things; and vile things,
and things which are despised, has God chosen. And dare any contemn or make
light account of that, nay destroy that which God has chosen and makes great
account of? Out of that little village or poor cottage which he has decayed
(whosoever he is) might have come one as good as himself. what may I say then
of great husband towns where many rich farmers, and cottages are decayed?
Would any of us willingly have the little finger of his hand cut off? no more
no doubt, will Jesus Christ suffer one poor cottage, (which is as it were his
little finger) to be cut off, unpunished without repentance. There was a
statute made of late, for the maintenance of tillage, and reedifying farms
decayed: It is to be feared that God has observed how diligent some were to
see the poor whipped, by a statute made at the same time: and how slack in
the execution of that other act of reedifying and plowing.

Another stumbling block is, that some will say they must needs maintain
their states. And this cloak couers all their pride, and covetousness. But let
all such know that reason thus; Must they impare the Lords inheritance to
maintain their estates, even they whom the Lord himself has advanced? they
had better to be as poor as Lazarus in state and condition: nay, Luke 16. 20.
they had better never have been borne, then to exault themselves to impare
his inheritance. Oh let these men of all others take heed of this ingratitude.
Let the example of King Saul terrify them, who being made of a poor acorne, a
mighty oak, and of a seeker of his fathers asses, the first King of Israel,
yet afterward for his unthankfulness 1. Sam. 9. 26.
and disobedience, he and all his posterity was quite rejected of God 2. Sam.
16. 18.
for ever from the kingdom.

Let Jesus Christ's example teach and move them, who to do us good did not
respect his estate, being equal with God (as Saint Paul teaches us,) but
Phil. 2. 6. 7.
humbled himself, and became as a servant. He washed his apostles feet, and
became obedient to the death of the Cross. And what is the greatest of our
estates in comparison of his? Surely even like a little mould-hill to a
mountain. And shall we think much, to impair our estates to do our brethren
good? nay shall we hurt them to maintain it? nay shall we dishonor God? Oh
not Christ's disciples, but Mammons worldlings! There were as many noble men and
gentlemen in England heretofore, as are now, and of as great estate: and how
did they maintain themselves? They did not in the Popes dark kingdom
depopulate towns, and shall we in the light of the Gospel? Can we maintain
our estates by no way else, but by imparing the Lords inheritance? let that be
far from us. If Inclosers would be content with the ancient apparel, and
houses and diet of their ancestors, as they are not ashamed of their lands;
they need never raise rents, nor improve their lands.

They which stand so much on this point, that they must maintain their
estates, know not what humility is. All Christ's disciples must be humble.
Math. 11. 29.
And humility is to descend a degree or two from our estate, and not to seek
to maintain it: Surely that is a spice of pride. The danger and grieuousnes
of this sin makes me in all humility to write thus. It is to be feared that
God may now complain as he did in the days of Jeremy: Can a virgin forget
Ier. 2. 32.
her ornament, or a bride her attire? yet my people have forgotten me, days
without number, who have adorned and maintained them. Why do you as it were now
at last, begin to make your ways good again, to purchase my love? yea even
herein, thou declarest, that thy ways are evil. For in thy wings are found
the blood of souls, of poor innocents. Thou have not found them with
mattockes in their hands, such as are mentioned in Gre^us, where thieves are
said with mat^od^^s Exodus 22. 2.
to dig through walls, and to (...) into houses by night, but about all(...)
(says the Prophet) no doubt wi(...) ter instruments, even to pu^^ (...) As it
is in the Hebrew.
houses and towns. And yet th(...) because I am guiltless, surely (...) shall
turn from me. Behold I wi(...) with thee into judgment, because the^ say,
thou have not sinned. Incl^s^^s are as guilty of these sins, as were those
Jews. For after their enclosure, they will go about to make good their ways,
and they will give some poor widows, cowegates in their closes, as it were to
purchase Gods favor, whereas (as those Jews had) they have the blood of poor
innocent souls in their wings and worships. Nay, and they have also in their
hands not mattockes, but greater instruments then those, even to pull down
farms and towns. And yet nevertheless they say (as the Jews did) that they
are not guilty. Therefore (says God) I will enter into judgment with them.
And this may seem to be another cause, of the p^ague amongst us at this day.
We sin in wordly cares, and in Luke 21. 34.
excess in our diet, whereof our blessed Savior biddes us take heed: we
exceed in our stately buildings, which the Esa. 2. 15. Ier. 22. 14. Zeph. 1. 8.
Prophet Esaias and Jeremy plainly reprove: we sin in vanity of apparel,
which the Prophet Zephanie condemns; and we account these no sins: we say
that we are guiltles and therefore does God enter with us into judgment:
whereas it is the first lesson that the Apostle Saint Peter gives us which live
in the end of the world, that we should be sober, and keep (no doubt) 1. Pet.
4. 7.
that holy mean in all our worldly cares; in our diet, in our apparel, in
our buildings, and in the furniture of our houses, and to conclude, in all
things.

But that which follows in the Prophet, shall prove them guilty and condemue
them. Why labourest thou so much (says the Prophet) to change thy Verse 36.
ways, and to make them seem good? thou shall be confounded of Egypt, as
thou art also confounded of Ashur; that is, as the dead Paganes condemn thee,
so shall the blind Egyptians and Papists condemn thee also. And here first;
did the Paganes deal so hardly with their tenants? Pharaoh the Egyptian, may
teach all Inclosers and Landlords, christian charity, and the communicating of
their lands and commodities to their tenants. Behold (says Joseph) I have
bought you this day, and your land for Pharaoh, and four parts Genesis 47. 23.
shall be yours, for the seed of your field, and for your meat, and for them
of your household, and for your children to eat. Here first we may note, that
this Egyptia^ king, would have tillage maintained: Then, that although he had
purchased their land, yet he dealt courteously with his tenants, and had a
care, both of the seed of their land, and of their families: and shall not
Christians much more have this care of their brethren, whose land comes by
inheritance? He gave them seed, and yet he required but a fifth part for his
rent: Oh easy rent! this shall condemn one day our covetous rents, and cruel
exactions at our brethrens hands. This merciful Pharaoh was blessed of God:
but Exodus 5. 17.
his covetous successor, that laid heavy burdens on Gods people, and said as
Inclosers say now, The people are too Exodus 14. 27.
much idle, they must have more work imposed upon them, was drowned in the
Sea: let them choose now, whether of these they will follow. Such a good
landlord also was Job, not in Iewrie, but in the land of Hus. If my land rise
against Job. 31. 39.
me (says he) and the furrows thereof weep and wail: and if that I have
eaten of the heart thereof without money, or have made the souls of the
masters thereof pant: Then let thistles grow in stead of wheat, and cockle in
stead of barley: Here we may first note that Job never eat the strength or
heart of his land, but he paid for the plowing of it, contrary to many
Landlords amongst us, who will let their lands at great rents, and will make
their tenants plow with them (gratis) and for nothing. Secondly, that he calls
his tenants masters of his land: but many amongst us make their tenants by
their excessive payments, as good as bondslaues. They did not so much as once
pant or blow in the tilling of it, they plowed it joyfully, and at their ease.
But many tenants now adays, do not only pant at their plowes, but sigh,
caring how they may pay their rents.

Job also did never eat his morsel alone; Job 31. 17.
if he had but one dish, the poor had ever some part thereof: and shall
Inclosers think much to yield unto them some part of their grass? shall they
shut them out of their fields, whom he admitted daily to his table? And if
perchance they think that this was uery much, and that every one is not bound
to do so: let them mark well that Saint John in his epistle does charge every
Christian to do more than this: If that thou have the worlds good, and see thy
brother want (says he) and 1. Ioh. 3. 17.
shuttest up thy very entrals, or bowels from him, how dwells the love of
God in thee? If thy brother beg of thee, will thou deny him? Nay, by this
place thou art plainly commanded, if thou see him want, though he hold
his peace, and crave nothing of thee, to help him; and that not in opening thy
purse to give him money, but in opening thy very bowels unto him; and in doing
to Mat. 7. 12.
him, as thou would have done to thine own self. Then if so be that his
^owe lack grass, will thou not let her common in thy pastures? If he lack an
house, will thou not provide one for him? Nay Saint John teaches thee plainley
here, to do more for him then all these; even to receive him, not into thy
fields, or house, but (if it were possible) into thine own bowels: and this
was that common salutation among the Jews (like unto our good morrow) your
soul lives in me, as appears by the salutation of Anna to Elie, and the
salutation of Gedeon to 1. Sam. 1. 15.
the Angel, which is as much as to say I wish to you even as to my own soul;
Judge. 6. 13.
For so it is in the Hebrew tert. Oh that this salutation were pronounced
daily, not in mouth only, but in our dealings practiced amongst us Christians,
which no doubt ought to be; as both Saint Paul and Peter, do command all
Christians. Fulfill my joy (says Saint Paul) that ye be like minded, or of one
mind together: And Phil. 2. 2.
Saint Peter, finally be ye all of one mind. 1. Pet. 2. 8.


Such a merciful man was Mordoche the Jew, of whom we read thus, Hest. 10. 3.
And Mordoche the Jew was second to Ahashuerus, and great amongst the Jews,
and accepted (Ratsu) such a one as his brethren would have wished, who procured
the wealth of his people, and spoke peaceably to all his seed, who though hae
were lately advanced, to dignity and worship, yet used not these means, to
maintain his estate. Oh that Inclosers who profess the name of the Gospel,
would imitate this Jew! As for the blind Egyptians, that Apo. 11. 8.
is the Papists, how they have excelled Inclosers in the works of charity,
every town almost tells thee: which towns they have left to their successors,
like the wings of a dove which Psalm. 68. 13.
is covered with silver: and Inclosers pluck away these golden feathers from
them, and leave them not so good as they found them. Thus Inclosers may
plainly see, how that not only dead Assure, but blind Egypt also does confound
them.

But these Inclosers allege that saying of the gospel, Is it not lawful for
me Matthew. 20. 15.
to do with mine own as I list? They must remember, that parable represents
unto us that great Landlord of all Landlords, the king of heaven; he may say so
only, and none else. They must also remember that saying of the Psalm: And he
gave them the lands of the heathen, Psalm. 115. 44.
and they took the labor of the people in possession, that they might keep
his statutes and observe his laws. God has given them the earth in deed: but
upon this condition, that they should keep his laws, and his law is Joh. 13.
34.
Christian charity.

The third reason is, that this Enclosure is against the common wealth of the
Jews.
GOd said to Abraham, Get thee out of thy Country, and from thy Genesis 12. 1.
kindred, and from thy Fathers house, unto the land that I will show thee, and
I will make thee a great nation, and will bless thee, and will make thy name
great, and thou shall be a blessing. All Christians must be Abraham's sons,
Romans 4. 11.
and account this commandment of God spoken unto them, and go out (by their
loves, affections, studies and cares) of their father Adams house, that is, the
wor^^; and live here in this world, as their father Abraham did, like poor
pilgrims and trauailers: and then shall God bless them, and make them a
blessing, even the very members of Jesus Christ: who also when as he was in
this world, followed those very steps of Abraham, and lived here as a trauailer
or pilgrim, and not as a Citizen, or as an inhabiter. But how contrary is
this doctrine to the practice, and very speeches of these Inclosers, who say,
Is it not lawful for us to use the earth to the most advantage? This is their
maxim and principle: but Abraham and Saint Paul do tell them, that they
should use it as though they used it 1. Cor. 7. 31.
not. That they should use it as wise trauailers do their Innes in their
iourneis, who seek not for gain or superfluity there; who care for no more
then will serve their turns. Let the inhabitants of the earth seek to make
their most advantage thereof: But Genesis 14. 3.
all Christians who dwell therein as Pilgrims, seek for no more then will
serve their turns; let them go out of their countries in heart and affection,
with Abraham their father, and be Hebrews, that is, passengers with him, as the
Hebrew word signifies; and not Canaanites, that is, merchants, whose trade is
in this life. Thus much Abraham, the Zach. 14. 21
father of the faithful Jews, and the bery name of the Hebrews does teach
them a lesson worth the learning; for this is the sin of our age, that we are
too much in love with this earth, more than our forefathers, nay more than
Pagans have been.

The Jews whose fields lay together, Numb. 22. 24. Esaias. 5. 2. Pro. 24. 3.
did not enclose them: as the field of Boaz, which lay altogether and yet was
not enclosed, plainly proves. Their Orchards and Vineyards were walled about;
their common fields were bounded Josh. 15. 45. Deuteronomy. 27. 11
with stones or mountains: But our righteousness must exceed theirs, and
Matthew. 5. 20
therefore we ought not to enclose.

Among the Jews also, every year Exo 23. 10.
the poor might gleane in their fields, and they were commanded not to rake
Leuit. 19. 9.
them too clean, but to leave something for the poor, and not to gather in the
outsides of their fields, but to leave them also for the poor. Boaz did very
notably fulfill this law. Nay, every seventh year what grew in their
cornefields of it own accord, they were commanded to save, and to suffer the
poor Deuteronomy. 24. 19 Leuit. 25.
to gather and reap it. And does not this plainly commend and command
tillage? The poor must have some thing left them every year for to gleane,
and they must have every seventh year all the whole croppe that grew of it
own accord. And were not the Jews then bound to sow their fields, so that
the poor in Iewry had good and plentiful gleanings left them every year, and
the whole croppe of rich men's lands every seventh year? But Inclosers will cut
short all this, for neither will they sow any thing at all, and so bar them of
their gleaning and reaping; or if they sow any small quantity, they will rake
so clean, that the poor shall get very little that comes to gleane after
their rakers.

The Prophet Jeremy does prophecy of the return of the Jews from Babylon
out of captivity, and under the type of them, of Christ's Church thus. O
virgin Israel, thou shall be adorned Iere. 31. 5.
with the Timbrell, and thou shall go forth with the dance of them that be
joyful: Thou shall yet plant vines on Ephesians. 4. 6.
the mountains of Samaria and the planters that plant them, shall make them
common. As Christ's Church has a common Father, and a common Savior, and
common Sacraments, and a common country, and a common inheritance in heaven:
so on earth she should also have a brotherly community in her earthly
affairs; and she should make her grapes common. This did the Jews in the
shadow; and shall not Christians do thus much more in the clear sunneshine of
the Gospel?

The fourth reason; this Enclosure is against the estate of Christ's Church and
kingdom.
Esaias thus prophesies of it: Violence Esa. 60. 18.
and hard dealing shall no more be heard of in the land, neither desolation nor
destruction within thy borders, but thou shall call salvation thy walls (of a
word derived of the name of Jesus) and I^shu^gatha.
praise, thy gates. Our walls should taste of the love of Jesus, and should be
like him; they should all be built of free stones, and not of flint stones; and
all our gates should be praise; we should never set foot out of door, but we
should be merry and joyful: And are Inclosers tenants of this kingdom? Is not
their hard dealing and violence almost in all places complained of? Are not
their desolations and pulling down of farms apparent in every man's eyes? Are
the walls and dwelling houses of their Tenants built of free stone, and not
rather of flint stone? Do their rents taste of Jesus Christ, and not rather of
worldly covetousness? Are the doors of their Tenants houses praise, and not
rather lamentation, sighing and mourning?

Add again, he describes unto us the estate of Christ's Church, thus: The Wolf
shall dwell with the lamb, etc. And, the Cow and the Bear shall feed, their
young ones shall lie together, etc. This community of dwelling, Inclosers do
sometimes take away in Christ's Church: for they will have no man almost dwell
near them. We may see many of their houses built alone, like havens nests, no
birds building near them: but especially this community of feeding, they like
not of. They will eat their pastures by themselves, they will have none to
enter common with them. Geminianus a very learned man, agreeing herein with the
Prophet Esaias, writes thus very excellently; Good men Gemin. lib. 4. cap. 11.
ever love a common and sociable life, and they fly singularities or
solitariness by the example of Bees: For Bees, as Ambrose writes, do choose
unto them a common mansion or dwelling, and they are all shut up with one
door, and they all labor together; their meat is common, as also their
work; as they work together so also they eat together. Their occupation (as
I may so term it) is common, and their gain is common, and their swarming is
common. And has God given Bees these excellent virtues in vain, or for
themselves only, and not rather to teach men Christian charity, and humane
society? Such angry creatures do thus love, and live in common together, and
shall not much more men, to whom God has given no stings? Nay Christians, to
whom he has given that loving and sociable dove Mat. 3. 16.
of his holy Spirit?

The Prophet Micah also thus describes unto us the estate of all Gods people in
his Church. But they shall sit Micah. 4. 4.
every man under his vine, and under his Fig tree, and none shall make them
afraid: for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. Where the Hebrewe word
(Charadh) signifies to move one with thought, and care. All shall live merrily
in Christ's Church; they shall never fear thought nor care, much less taste of
it. And do not Inclosers, not only make their Tenants fear thought and care,
but also fill their heads with it? England has been famous throughout all
Christendom by the name of merry England: but covetous Inclosers have taken
this joy and mirth away; so that it may be now called sighing or sorrowful
England.

In England we have ever had three States, Lords Spiritual, Temporal, and the
Commons. And these Commons are divided again into Gentlemen, Yeomen, and
Husbandmen. But in other Countries there is no Yeomanrie, but only in England.
In France all are Gentlemen, or Pesants: In Denmark all are Noblemen, or
Rustici, as they term them: And in High and Low Germany there are the
Nobility, and the Boores. So that, Gentlemen which are Inclosers, overthrowing
the Yeomanrie, and decaying the Communalty, do blotte out the ancient glory of
England: for, no doubt, by the strength and hands of these two, have been
heretofore ever obtained, our admirable conquests, and most famous victories
throughout all Christendom. So that now these Inclosers do go about to make
England as barbarous, and as weak in this respect, as other nations. Nay let
them take heed that they prove not themselves Egyptians: for not the country,
but the conditions and manners, are wont to give names. As we may learn out of
the Prophet Esaias, whereas Esa. 1. 10.
he calls the Noblemen of Iewrie Princes of Sodom; and the people, the people
of Gomorah: though neither they nor their ancestors were borne there. So I
fear we have some Landlords of Egypt in England: for (Mitsraijm) the name of
Egypt, in our language is as much to say, as an Afflicter, or one that makes
another sorrowful: and are not these Inclosers Egyptians then, which pinch,
and vex their brethren? Let them take heed; the name agrees unto them: let
them fear the punishment; God is the same God still. He that heard the groans,
and sighs of his Psalm. 102. 27. Exodus 3. 7. 8.
people in Egypt, and came down to deliver them, will no doubt do the same
in England.

I have heard of an old prophecy, that Horn and thorn shall make England
forlorn. Inclosers verify this by their sheep and hedges at this day. They
kill poor men's hearts, by taking from them their ancient commons, to make
sheep pasture of; and by imposing upon them great rents, and by decaying
tillage; so that now they are forlorn having no joy to live in the world.

And according to these shadows, Saint John describes to us the truth of
Christ's Church: But if that we walk 1. Ioh. 1. 7.
in light (says he) as he is in light, we have fellowship one with another,
and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all our sins. Here
is, even to force us to the communicating of our vile earth one to another, the
communicating of Jesus Christ's most precious blood: as though they which would
not maintain this christian communion and fellowship among themselves, should
not be partakers of that. They are not children of God, but children of the
devil, that walk not in this light: they are not of Gods family and Church,
but of Satan's Synagogue, that have not this fellowship among themselves. And
Saint Paul commands Timothy, and 1. Tim. 6. 17
in him all ministers, to teach rich men the same lesson; Charge them that be
rich in this world that they be not high minded, etc. but to be very ready to
give and to be (...), making common their talents among their brethren: but
Inclosers do not so.

To conclude this point: Esaias in his prophecy, may seem to teach, and touch
us also very narrowly, that have lived under the gracious reign of Queen
Elizabeth, and do now live under the happy and religious government of King
James: for he also prophesied in the days of godly Ezechias, to whom Esa. 11.
both these may be compared. And God there complains, that when as he had
planted a most pleasant vine in Iewrie, and had hedged it from the hands of the
enemy, and had picked out of it Esa. 5. 2.
stones, that is, many unprofitable members and traitors, and when he had
planted a wine press in it, that is, a famous School of the Prophets which 1.
Sam. 19. 20. 2. King. 2. 3. 5.
should yield unto them the most pleasant wine, and also had built in the
midst of it a stately tower of defense, even a most godly and mighty Prince
and Magistrate: yet for all these benefits, when as he looked for sweet grapes
at their hands, they brought forth sower grapes. And has he not bestowed all
these former benefits and blessings upon us in England? He is very unthankful,
or stark blind that will not acknowledge this: and yet for all these benefits
these Inclosers (with those unkind Jews) yield sower grapes.

And what these sower grapes are, the Prophet Esaias after most manifestly
shows us. Woe unto them (says he) Verse. 8.
that join house to house, and lay field to field, till there be no place,
that you may be placed by your selves in the midst of the earth. Is not this
the mark that inclosers do aim at, to be placed alone by themselves on the
earth? But to such straggling sheep, from the holy fellowship of the Lords
flock, the Prophet here, cries woe. And are not these plainly the grapes
that Inclosers do yield, to join field to field? and these, they account
gainefull and pleasant grapes. Oh men desperately sick, whose mouths are thus
out of taste; And do they think that God will take these grapes at their
hands?

What talk they of the goodness of their land, that it is worth this, or
that? let them praise God that they enjoy it. If he had not hedged it about;
not long since, the cruel Spaniard had devoured us all. Oh, remembering this,
let them offer sweet and most pleasant grapes unto the Lord, that is, deal as
mercifully with their poor Tenants as is possible. All the mercy which they
can show, is nothing to that mercy, which God has showed to them already;
nay, to that he must show to them hereafter, or else they shall be damned. And
let them take heed; for with what measure they Math. 7. 2.
do now meat, shall be measured to them again: as it was done to that rich
man, who, as he would not give a crum Luke 16. 21.
or drop here on earth, so he could not have one crumme or drop of comfort
then granted him in hell: though he could cry father Abraham never so loud,
his uncharitable and unmerciful faith could do him no good; no more shall
theirs profit them: Let all men mark this well; It is written for our
learning. Romans 11. 4.
And let them mark well what measure of mercy they now give; and let them be
sure, that they give measure enough: for, without all doubt, at that day, they
shall receive the same again. And I pronounce unto them, that, do what they
can, they shall stand need of it all. Let them not flatter themselves in doing
some small trifles, and in giving the paring of their nails, and those things
which they may well spare: for as Saint Peter tells us, at that day 1. Pet. 4.
18.
the just man shall scarcely be saved: and then what case shall unmerciful men
be in?

The fifth reason is, that this Enclosure is against Christian charity.
SAint Paul says, Charity seeks not her own things, but every man also 1.
Cor. 13. 5 Phil. 2. 4.
the things of other men. But these Inclosers respect only their own
commodities, and therefore it is against charity. It was the voice of Cain,
and not of Sheth, nor of Gods Church, am I my brothers keeper? And even at this
Genesis 4. 9.
day they are of Cains petegree, and not of Gods family, that have no care of
the wealth and welfare of their brethren.

This Enclosure is also against the love which Jesus Christ commanded and
showed toward us; Ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ (says 2. Cor.
8. 9.
Saint Paul) that he being rich, for your sakes became poor, that you through
his poverty might be made rich. And I give you (...) my counsel, and 2. Cor.
8. 10.
mine advise herein. This is also that law of our Savior Christ, which he so
straitely commands all his, To love Ioh. 13. 34. Ioh. 15. 12.
one another, as he has loved them, and that with a repetition. This is Saint
Paul's advise; for our brethrens sakes, 2. Cor. 8. 10
even to become poor to do them good. But Inclosers do not thus, they seek
their own wealth and riches, therefore they contradict both our Saviors law,
and Saint Paul's advise.

The most comfortable words of our blessed Savior, even the first and most
joyful message that he sent to his Apostles after his resurrection were these,
Go to my brethren and say unto them, Ioh. 20. 17.
I ascend unto my Father and to your Father, to my God and to your God. Oh
joyful news! Shall we not believe this? And if we do, shall we not account
indeed all Christians now our brethren? even our most near and dear
brethren? which brotherhoode our Sa-Sauiour Jesus so dearly bought, even by
his most precious death; and shall we not deal with them as with our brethren?
But David in the person of our Savior Christ complains, that he is become a
stranger to his brethren, Psalm. 69. 8.
and an aliant to his mothers children. And is not Jesus Christ, in his members
amongst us, in this state even now? and may he not seem to make the same
complaint? Whosoever lets a farm, or sels any thing to his brother, does he
not deal with him, as with a stranger? does he not make him pay for it to the
uttermost? Nay, sometimes more then it is worth? A Turk might have it as
cheap at our hands as a Christian. And may not Jesus Christ then justly say,
that he is become a stranger to his brethren? surely as great a stranger, in
his members to Christians, as he was in his own person to the Jews. For as
they gave Mat. 26. 34.
him vinegar and gall to drink; so many now give to their brethren; and
especially Inclosers give this drink to their poor tenants.

And here we may note that excellent property of true charity that she is
always hard to her self, that she may be bountiful to others. So was the
widow 1. King. 17. 15.
of Sareptah, that she might feed Elias; and so was that widow in the Gospel,
Luke 21. 4.
which our Savior so highly commends; That she might give some thing into the
Treasury of God, she gave all her living, and punished her self. So was that
Samaritan and that stranger amongst the Jews (whose example all Luke 10. 37.
that will be accounted neighbors our Savior commands to follow) to that
wounded man. He set him on his own beast: he went a foot himself, and took
pains that he might ride. So were all the Church of Macedonia, as Saint Paul
shows, in their extreme 2. Cor. 8. 2.
poverty rich in liberality to the poor, They pinched themselves, that they
might be liberal to them. Do Inclosers follow these examples? do they pinch
themselves that they may do their brethren good? Shall not all these examples,
of Jews, widows, strangers, and Macedonians move them? They do quite
contrary; and they think, that they may do it lawfully; that is, they may
seek their own commodity howsoever that their brethren fare: surely this is
not charity. All Gods creatures may seem to teach us Sic vos non vobis
vellera fertis oues, etc.
this lesson, as Virgils verses avouch. The sheep bears not his fleece, nor
the ox his yoke for himself, nor the Bees hord up their honey, but all for
our use. Nay, those exceilent creatures; the Sun, the Moon, and stars, how
continually do they run their courses, for our commodity? And shall not we
take pains and pinch our selves to do our brethren good? And will not
Inclosers learn this lesson being taught it by so many schoolmasters? I am
verily persuaded that God has sent of late unseasonable weather, especially in
the hay-haruest, to teach Inclosers what an acre of their enclosed pasture
ground (which they do make so great a reckoning of) is worth. For the
hay-haruest, which yeeldes meat for their sheep, has been lately
unseasonable and wet: but the corn haruests which yeeldes meat for his Ioh.
12. 8.
sheep (the poor) the Lord has blessed: Or else no doubt, if the corn
harvest had bin as wet as the hay harvest was, there would have been a great
dearth of corn, to the undoing of the poor. But our most loving God, to
declare the love that he bears to his own sheep: and the small care in
comparison, that he has of their sheep; has as it were plagued the
hay-haruest of their sheep, and blessed the corne-haruest of his own sheep;
for nothing chances in vain. And Mat. 12. 29.
therefore whereas Inclosers do urge, the goodness of the ground, and the
benefit of Enclosure, and that an acre of their enclosed meadow and pasture, is
worth thus much; they must consider, yt unless God send seasonable weather, it
may prove almost worth nothing: they must learn to let God have a chief part
of their rents reserved to him. Unless Ier. 5. 24.
he keep for us the appointed weeks of the harvest, as Ieremic teaches, what
is all our land and labor taken about it worth? No doubt our ancestors had
consideration hereof, in letting their lands; which were so easily rented, that
the tenant might have the rent what weather soever God sent: and this was
Christian charity. But this charity is now vanished out of the world: The
Incloser will have his great rent, he will not abate one penie what weather
soever come. One writes that the poor hus^andman is more cruelly dealt withal
than the as^e; whom his master, if that the weather or the way prove not
convenient and good, will ease of his burden. But Husbandmen, come fair come
foul weather, are nothing pitied; they must bear still their accustomed
burdens, be they never so great.

This practice of Christian charity was used in the Primitive church. And the
multitude of them which believed Act. 4. 32.
(says S. Luke) were of one heart, and of one soul; neither any of them said
or accounted, that that which he possessed, was his own; but they had all
things common. Common like Christians, not like Anabaptists: common in use, not
in property. For Ananias possession Act. 5. 4.
was his own, to have either kept or sold it, as Peter told him. So was also
all other men's possessions and goods, but no man accounted it as his own.

Lodouicus Viues, a very learned man, thus describes Christian charity: To
love, says he, is the happiest and the Introduct. adsapient.
best thing in the world: and therefore God and Angels are most happy and
blessed, who love most. And to hate is the worst and most miserable thin in the
world: and for this cause the denils are most miserable. And after, lest any
man should coin to himself a counterfeite Christian charity; This true
charity makes all things equal; where that flourishes, no man desires to
be preferred before another, no man will desire to take away any thing from him
that he loves, when as he accounts that he himself has whatsoever his friend
has: no man will go to law with him, whom he loves: none will think that he
can receive any injury at his hands, and therefore never thinks on revenge:
no man will envy him, whom he loves; nor any man is glad of the harms of him
that is his friend, nor is agrieued at his welfare. But contrariwise, according
to the saying of the Apostle; He rejoices with them that rejoice, and weeps
with them that weep, Romans 12. 15.
and that not fa^nedly or counterfeitly. but from his very heart. Because love
makes all things common, and atcompts that his own which is his whom he
loves. Thus Lodouicus Viues describes Christian charity. And how far off
are Inclosers 1. Cor. 13. 1
from this? Saint Paul says, That if he had all knowledge, and all faith, even
to remove mountains, yet without this charity he were nothing before God:
And what are Inclosers then, that are destitute of all these gifts, and lack
this charity? Let them mark this well, that this i^well Charity, one day
before the Majesty of God, shall be more worth than all their gold, and great
rents and revenues. This is the charity of all the Saints in heaven. For
although there be differences of joys, 1. Cor. 15. 41.
yet the Saints which have lesser joys, account those joys, through charity,
also theirs, which their brethren do enjoy.

Now is fulfilled that prayer of David, It is time for thee Lord to put to thy
hand, for (Hephiru) they have abrogated, Psalm. 119. 126.
they have made no account of thy law. And what is Christ's law but Ioh. 13. 34.
charity? And that not any charity, but such a charity as he has showed
toward us; and as Lodou^cus Vi^es here has described to us. But it is time
for God to put to his hand, for this charity is vanished, is abrogated, is made
no account of, many think that it concerns them not.

But the very Pagans have had this charity, and, but that they wanted the eye
of faith, they have mounted up herein Act. 17. 27.
(like blind Hawks) far higher than some Christians, especially than
Inclosers.

Cymon the Athenian commanded all hedges and pales to be taken away from his
grounds, that both Citizens and strangers whosoever, that stood in need, might
have more free access into them, to gather Ap^les and corn. And Photion the
Athenian said, That a man had as good pull down Churches and Altars, as take
mercy from amongst men. And Julius Caesar was wont to say, That then he waxed
rich, when as he did any man good. And will Inclosers come behind any of these?
will they enclose? Cymon the Athenian would not do it. Will they not deal
charitably in letting of their farms to their brethren? Phocion tells them,
that they had as good pull down Churches Do they account the money in their
coffers their treasures? Caesar, that proud Roman Emperor shall condemn
them; he thought not so, but rather that which he had bestowed liberally.
Traiane the Emperor was accounted the joy of mankind, because that he never
sent any man sad home. Oh that all Landlords were Traianes! They should be
more; for it is more to be a Christian, than to be a Traiane; and Saint Paul
wills all Christians to walk worthy of their Ephesians. 4. 1.
vocation. The name of a Christian is 1. Pet. 4. 16.
the honorablest and bountifullest name in the world. Christians take their
names, of the anointing the holy Ghost. And what then can be more honorable 1.
Ioh. 2. 27.
and bountiful? Octauius Caesar ^ccompted that day lost, wherein he had done
good to no man. Oh that all Landlords would spend their days thus, in devising
the good of the towns, whereof they are Landlords, and not in the
impouerishing of them! Then we should have a flourishing Church, and a rich
Commonwealth. P^olome also King of Egypt was wont to say, That he had rather
make others rich, than be rich himself. Oh that Inclosers were of this mind
Curious also the Roman having a great deal of gold offered him of the
Samnites, ^had rather, says he, have the possessors of the gold Mine, than
their gold. O wise Curious he had rather have the hearts of the Samnites, than
their heaps of gold. Oh that Inclosers were in this point but as wise as he!
The day will come when the prayers of tenants, shall do their Landlords more
good than their great payments now. For that saying of our Savior shall stand
good, whe^as they with their chests full of gold and silver shall perish; Make
you friends of your unrighteous ma^mo^; Luke 15. 9.
that when as you shall depart hence and fail in your account, they may
receive you into everlasting Tabernacles. And our Savior adds an Emphasis or
a Memorandum (as we say) to this his sentence; (And I say unto you) as though
he should say, Mark this well, all you rich men, whom God has enriched with
his talents: Herein follow that same unjust Steward, and make you friends of
the poor; that when you shall depart hence, and God shall call you to an
account of your stewardships (as ye great rich man did his steward, and shall
fail therein, the best of you al, even as he did) the poor may receive you
into everlasting tabernacles. Make the poor as waters to cast your bread on,
as yt Preacher counsels you: that you may find it again, Eccle. 12. 1.
when as you shall stand in need, after Genesis 28. 12. 18.
many days: and as stones to power your oil upon; as did Jacob the Patriarch;
that when you shall die, you may sleep quietly as he did being alive; and see
that ladder Jesus Christ reaching from earth to heaven. For that strange fact
of Jacob contains in it some great mystery. And may not that ladder signify
faith, and this pouring oil on the stone, mercy? So that we must join to the
ladder of faith, the oil of mercy if we mean to ascend up to heaven. Or if
that Ephe. 2. 20.
stone signify Jesus Christ, are not the poor his members? and do not they
which show mercy unto them, power their oil on Jesus Christ's feet, as Mary
Ioh. 12. 3.
did in the gospel, and as it were on stones? Such an heir of Jacob, was
David, who of himself writes thus; Know Psalm. 4. 3.
ye that the Lord (Hiphlah) has as a wonderful and precious thing chosen to
himself (Chasidh) the merciful man. And he concludes, I will lay me down
Verse. 8.
in peace and take my rest, as though merciful men only, and they that power
their oil on stones, as Jacob did, should take their rest, and sleep
sweetly. For that sentence also shall stand good, wherein consistes one maine
point (next faith) of our salvation: Blessed are the merciful, for they shall
obtain Mat. 5. 7. Iam. 2. 13.
mercy; and judgment merciless shall be to him that has showed no mercy, as
S. James teaches us. But Inclosers, I think, never remember that day: if they
did, they would prefer prayers before payments, and the hearts of their tenants,
with that courteous Roman Curious, before their heaps of gold and silver. O
blind covetousness! O blind Inclosers! more blind than Grecians, more blind
than Romans, nay, more uncharitable and cruel than very Infidels. Nature
teaches, that the wild fig tree, if it be planted near unto the fig
tree, that it will make it more fruitful: and shall not these Heathen or
Pagans, who are wild fig trees in comparison of us Christians, make us
excel in good works? shall their figs be sweeter than ours? O degenerate and
wild Christians!

God by his Prophet Jeremy (says, Go to the isles of Chittim, and behold;
Ier. 2. 10.
and send unto Kedar, and take diligent heed, and see whether there be such
things. Our most gracious God, compares his people of the Jews, with the
Paganes: And will he not much more compare us christians with them? And is it
not a shame for us to be overcome of them in charity toward our brethren?
Surely, if we be, in the day of judgment they shall condemn us.

The sixth reason: this Enclosure is against the Church and Commonwealth, and
ancient customs and liberties of England,
GOds Ministers may make that complaint of Inclosers, that Jacob made of Laban:
Thou have now changed Genesis 31. 41
my wages ten times: So have they changed the ancient livings of Gods
Ministers. But in all their exchanges it has fallen out, as it does commonly
in casting of metals: that which has comne in the second place, has not been
so good as was the former. Their sums of money which they do now allow, are
not so good in value, as were heretofore tithes in kind: and again, the money
due is not so easily obtained at their hands. And thus they do not only
mussell the mouths of Gods 1. Cor. 9. 9.
Oxen, which do tread out his Corn, but also impouerish them yearly more and
more by this their enclosure; and yet for all this, they will be accounted
Laban, that is, they will seem white and religious.

Hierome, of covetous Patrons, and laie-men which study to get into their
Hier. part. 3. tract. 4. epist. 10. ad Damas.
hands Ecclesiastical livings, writes thus: They which serve at the Altar, let
them be partakers of the Altar: Therefore because Priests were wont to pray for
all them, whose alms and oblations they do receive, with what face dare lay
men, either themselves eat, or grant to others, the oblations which Christians
do offer for their sins, when as it becomes not Alludit ad illud 1.
Iohanis 5. 16. Orans pre fraire peccatore dat vitam.
them to pray for the people? For this cause, (O glorious Father) we ought to
excommunicate those presumptuous persons for ever; that others might be afraid,
and that these things might be no more done in the Church. O grievous sin,
which Hierome says, is to be excommunicated for ever!

And here first, the poor husbandmen and cottagers, may complain unto your
Majesty of the payments of the Subsidy inflicted upon them; that whereas
there has been rich farmers in every Town to pay it, now those towns
enclosed being dispeopled, and those rich farmers which were wont to pay it,
being fled away, the payments thereof are imposed on poor men: who being but
tenants, and having but a small flock of cattle (and perchance a great
family to maintain) are enforced to be three pound men in the Subsidy book;
whereas the Lord of the manor, or Freeholder; being their Landlords, living
in other places, having five hundred or a thousand sheep, in the said Lordship
(which they have enclosed and improued) and perchance fifty or a hundred
cattle, will pay nothing toward the payment of the same. Pleading for
themselves, that by law, they are to be assessed and bound to pay but in one
place, which for the most part is where they inhabit. And so they using and
enjoying the profits and commodities of the farms which they have decayed; and
also eating with their cattle, the chief commodity of the field; will bear
no part of that duty with their poor tenants, which makes them repine and
murmur. Nay (that which is the last refuge) if the towns enclosed be so poor,
that they are not able to pay the Subsidy; they will use means to mitigate
the same, and so make some towns near adjoining, help to bear out the
burden of those towns, that they have decayed and dispeopled by their
enclosure.

Secondly, the poor also may complain of Inclosers for taking away their
Common: for herein they are, first impious against God, and injurious to their
Ancestors, and distoyall to the Kings prerogative royal. For first, God
himself may seem to have given some Commons, as appears in Holland, and in
the Marsh in Lincolneshire, and Holdernes in Yorkshire, and in Kent, where
many miles of ground have been added by the Sea. Secondly, some people of godly
disposition, and great possessions, dying without issue, have given large
Commons in diverse places, as in Yorkshire, a great Common called Walling
Fenne. And lastly, Kings have given Commons also.

William Conqueror gave Commons and other liberties: so that Lords of Manors
did not appoint them, and therefore at their pleasures may not take them away.
And they were given as it should seem, upon these considerations: First, to
maintain the poor men that fought for him: for all were not Gentlemen in that
great army of the Conqueror. And as gentlemen had lordships bestowed upon them
for their service, so no doubt, the poor had Commons given to them also for
the same cause: that a poor man providing only meat for his Cow against
winter, was assured to have her kept and fed on the Commons all the summer
for nothing; and so might be the better employed about his Majesty's wars, so
often as need did require: whereas now in many places, the poor man is forced
to pay very dearly for the summer Common or pasture for his Cow (over and
besides his house rent) which in times past he had belonging to his house for
his said rents. And so the care for the provision for his family being great,
makes many not to be so forward to wars, as they both would and ought to be.

Boterus Benesius, writing of the estate of the whole world, and strength Mund.
Imp. Rex. Angl.
of England, which consistes on the poor Husbandman, Cottager, and common
Soldier, reports thus; Although (says he) the English men are able to bring
into the field 2000. Lances, and a great number of light horse, yet the
horsemen of England have never won to themselves such credit and praise in
war, as the footmen have done. King Edward the third, who made so many voyages
into France, and obtained there so many victories; to declare in which of his
forces he most trusted, forsook his horsemen, and went on foot amongst his
common Soldiers. But contrariwise the Frenchmen, because they will not have
their common people give themselves overmuch to warlike affairs (lest they
should forsake and contemn their handicrafts and occupations, and so, by being
soldiers, wax proud; to which thing the Frenchmen are very much inclined)
put all their strength of their wars in horsemen, which for the most part
consists of Noble men. The common Soldier heretofore has been for wars, the
glory of England, as this author affirms; and by him England has won so many
great victories, and obtained such great glory and fame; and shall he now be
despised? Nay shall he in some places be rooted out? What is this else, but to
put out Samsons eyes, the strength Iud. 16. 21.
and glory of our land, and to cut off his hair? To do this, is not to be
true Israelites, Ioh. 1. 47. 1. Sam. 17. 36.
but uncircumcised Philistimes. What will our riches do us good, if we lack
men to keep them? As the body cannot consist without legs and arms, so
neither the Commonwealth without Husbandmen, Laborers, and Soldiers. Surely,
they which will not maintain these arms and legs, which must fight and run
for them, are evil members of this Commonwealth. If the legs of our bodies
be weak, how will we complain? or if our arms be out of joint, what speed
will we make to have them put into the joint again? and shall we not nourish
bountifully these legs? shall we suffer these arms to be out of joint? And
here as Gods word may seem to be the most strong ligament, so in some sort
these Commons Psalm. 2. 3.
may seem to be the sinews of the Commonwealth: For, as our arms are
joined to our bodies by sinews and ligaments, so no doubt these arms were
tied in the beginning to the Commonwealth by their Commons bestowed upon them.
For benefits are the strongest bonds to bind men withal, as the Heathen have
taught.

Secondly, it may seem they were ordained for common works: For so have
Churches been repaired, and bridges built, and high ways made and maintained.
They would lay a piece of their Common, to be so wen, or for meadow, and with
the profit thereof being sold, perform any common work; and by that means,
such like works cost the poor of the Town very little. And hereof (as
appears now) comes the ridges and furrows in ancient Commons, which proves
that for such purposes they have been sown. And the like good would come to
the Commonwealth, if that they were used so still. Whereas now in many places,
where these Commons are taken away by Enclosure, every penie comes out of the
poor man's purse; and having no common stock, hardly any common work can be
brought to pass, as in times past has been.

Lastly, a part of these Commons were the Kings high ways; which name plainly
argues, that Kings were the authors of the^, as of all other Commons. And those
which are leading from one Market town to another, ought to be two hundred
foot broad, (as appears by a Statute of Winchester 13. made in 1. Ed. 5.)
which were large and safe, that your Majesty might pass the country in
progress with your train; and your Subjects travel without danger. But now
Inclosers have so pinched them in, by their ditches and hedges, allowing but
24. for the way, that your Majesty cannot pass in their ways and lanes,
unless they throw open their hedges again for that time, as experience
lately has proved. Neither can your poor Subjects travel with their weak
beasts without danger, the ways being thereby made strait and narrow, and
therefore deep and dangerous; neither without danger of their lives, both by
forestalling of thieves, and also by opening the dangerous gates. The poor
Cottager had his Common allowed him also (as should seem) for his pains taken
in mending of these high ways, which now Inclosers have quite spoiled, by
pinching them in: but the burden does remain on poor men's backs still; and
they are forced to do their common days, as before, and yet their Common is
taken from them.

But Lords of Mannours, and Freeholders, who have their Commons, and should
also work their common days, and for every plow-land they hold, either in
Tillage, or Pasture, should find one Cart or draught, to lead stones and
rubbish toward the repairing of high ways; do now of late, in many places
(where Tillage is converted to Pasture) where heretofore, there has been
thirty draughts or Carts in a town, which did perform their common days,
skant find ten: and he that has decayed four or five draughts, skant sends
one to keep his common days. And hereof it comes, that high ways in many
places, are not so well maintained, as heretofore they have been.

Nay, if these Commons had been appointed by the Lords of Manors, then as
men's natures in all ages have been diverse, so these Commons would also, in
some places have been better, and in other some worse: but in all places,
according to the proportion of the town, they are very liberal and bountiful:
declaring themselves to be beams coming from the same Sun; I mean from the
rich liberality of the Kings majesty.

There was a tenure in England called Bassa tenura, now called Copy hold: and
these had their freedoms according to the custom of the Manor. There was
another tenure called Tenure of villenage, and these had neither liberty of
Commons, nor of their very bodies, and seed. And this may be an evident
argument, that Kings gave these Commons: for those which had offended his
Majesty most grievously, he made them villens, and deprived them of the
ancient liberties, which all his other people enjoyed. So that as this
villenage, was by the King inflicted upon some: So no doubt the former
liberties and privileges also, were by Kings given and bestowed. But Inclosers
now, for no cause of disobedience, but for their own private lucres, take from
their tenants, that which Kings did not, but upon great offenses committed
against their person.

There is an ancient law, (in regard 20. Hen. 3. 4. 13 Edw. 4. 6.
that tenants complained of the Lords of Manors for enclosing as should seem
of their Commons) by which it was enacted that Lords should leave sufficient
Common for their tenants, with sufficient egresse and regresse: And, that being
performed, they might (as should seem) make their commodity of the rest. But
if that their egresse and regresse were any thing hindered by the deforceors, or
that they had not sufficient pasture; that the^ they should recover their
seison by the view of Jewrors; so that by their discretions and oaths, they
shall have sufficient Common and pasture with egresse and regresse, and the
dissesors should be amerced and render damages. This ancient statute plainly
proves, that Lords in every town, should leave to their tenants sufficient
Common. And therefore do they not break the meaning of this law, which
enclose, leaving no Common at all?

These Inclosers take upon them, as though they were, not Lords of Mannours,
but rather kings; and do make, as it were, a new Commonwealth, and a new form
of government in towns wherein they are Lords. They will have no Common left
at all. And whereas there has been common Leas and Meadow (which has been
without memory of man yearly letten, and the profit thereof has been employed
toward the repair of the Church, and such other good and Christian uses) they
will now take them away as waste due to themselves, except there can be good
evidence in writing to show for the same. They alter and change the ancient
high ways; so that travelers and strangers sometimes without danger, cannot
come to their towns. They will have no common Neat-heards, nor Hog-heards, nor
Pinder in their towns, by which poor men have lived, and had a stay and
maintenance, both for themselves, and families, though impotent, and not able
for other works.

Philarchus testifies, that the beans of Egypt, were first sown in Egypt,
and that if so be they were sown in any other country, they would grow in
none but there. But after in a certain Fenne of Epirus, nigh unto a river of
Thesposia, called Thyramnis, in the days of King Alexander Pyrrhus, two years
together they grew, and brought forth their fruit very pleasantly: but when
as King Alexander set a guard to keep and watch them, that none should take of
them, nor come into the Fenne, the Fenne was dried up, neither brought they
forth any more fruit.

In Edipso also there appeared a certain cold water running out of a spring,
not far from the sea, by the which they that were sick were very much
helped. Insomuch that many out of far countries, came thither to drink of
that water. But whenas the captains and governors of King Antiochus, began to
pinch them of this water, and commanded to give them of another water to
drink, quite contrary from the other, the spring by and by dried up.

In Troas it was lawful for any man to fetch Salem Tragosoeum (Troy salt) but
when as King Lisimachus made them pay for it, straightway the sault vanished
away: but afterward, he wondering at that strange alteration, he made the
place free agame, and the sault also increased again. Athenaeus lib. 3. cap.
1. reports all these histories. And do we not think then, that God mislikes
these covetous men, that for their own private lucre and gain, do take
Commons from men? Nay, if he plagued them, that thus dealt with Pagans, who
were his enemies; do we think that he will allow of them that deal so
hardly with Christians and with his own Children? Matthew. 6. 9. Offic. lib. 1.


T^llie by the light of nature could say, Justice used things common, as
common; and things private as her own: and shall not we much more do so? But
the men of our age, account it wisdom to look narrowly into Commons; and if
men cannot show good evidence for them, they take them away. The earth is
subject Romans 8. 20. and 23.
to our vanities, against her will, as Saint Paul teaches us. And what is she
now then, do we think, at our uncharitable ditches and hedges, made to the
hurt of our brethren? And what these vanities are, Solomon may seem to teach
us, Eccles. 2. 4. 5. 6. 11.

Nay, God himself may seem by his secret providence (which no doubt does
govern all things: who, contrary to the manner of the Jews fields, has
entermingled our Lands together) to have forbidden this our enclosure. No man
almost can Enclose in Champian countries, with out great exchange: and do we
think that this intermingling our Lands thus together, was done in vain? God
also by that miraculous moving of the ground at Kinnastone in Herefordshiere,
may seem to have condemned Enclosure: no doubt it taught some thing. The
ground moved Stow Anno Dom. 1571. Anno E(...)z. 13.
from his own place, carrying sheep and sheepecoats with it, and trees and high
ways: it overthrew Kingston Chapel, and changed Tillage into Pasture.
Howsoever some here will give their natural causes, or make no account hereof;
here was plainly the hand of God, and his extraordinary working for our
learning: this thing chanced not in vain. And the like strange alteration
upon the earth, is wrought by Inclosers. They change ancient and accustomed
high ways, they turn Tillage into pasture, they carry sheep and
Sheepeheards with them. And Churches now in many places, thorough
depopulation, may become Chapels; Inclosers have so greatly diminished Gods
people. Nay, the Caterpillars which God sent, not many years since, on thorns
and hedges, which did eat off all the leaves of them in summer, may they not
seem to condemn Inclosers? GOD has by many miracles condemned the sins of
our age. As our covetousness by a child that was Ruland. de dente auree.
borne with a golden tooth. And why may he not condemn this our covetous
enclosing, and exchanging the ancient customs and uses of the earth, even by
this miraculous and strange moving thereof?

Sir Thomas Moore a great commonwealths Lib. 1. V. topia.
man, and very expert in the laws of England, writes thus of Enclosure. Your
sheep I say which were wont to be mild and gentle, and to be fed with so
small cost, now as it is reported have begun to be so wild and ravenous of
late, that they eat up even men, and that they make waste and depopulate
towns. For, in what parts of your Realm grows finer wool, and therefore of
better price, there Noblemen and Gentlemen, yea and some Abbots (holy men I
assure you) not being content with the yearly rents and commodities, which
were wont to be paid out of farms unto their ancestors; and not content,
themselves to live idly and pleasantly, and to do no good to the common
wealth, unless also that they should hinder and hurt it; that they may leave
nothing but reap all commodities into their own hands: They enclose all their
pastures, they pull down houses, they overthrow towns, leaving the Church
only for to croowe up their sheep in. And as though your forests and parkes
had not spoiled ground enough amongst you, these holy men turn into a
wilderness all dwelling houses, and whatsoever heretofore has been tilled. And
therefore one insatiable glutton and most pestilent plague to his Country,
joins fields together, that he may enclose within one hedge some thousand
acres. The husbandmen are either thrust out of their inheritances, or else
being by craft beguiled, or by force oppressed, or deprived of them, or else
wearied with injuries and compelled to sell them. Therefore howsoever these
wretches do flit, men, women, husbands, wives, blind men, and widows,
fathers with their young children, with a greater, than a rich family (for
husbandry stands in need of many) they flit I say from their known and
accustomed dwellings, and they can find no place where to put in their heads;
They sell all their stuff when as they must needs be thrust out, (which is
not worth much if that they could tarry and get a good chapman for it) they
sell it I say almost for nothing. And when as by wandering a while they have
spent that, what must they needs do then, but either steal, and justly be
hanged for their labors, or else wander up and down and beg, and then also
are cast into prison as vagrant persons, seeing no man will set them a work,
when as they do most willingly offer their services? For now there is nothing
to be done about husbandry, wherein they have been brought up all their
lives, when as there is nothing sown. For now one Sheepeheard, and one
Neat-heard is sufficient to look to that ground with cattle, to the tillage
whereof, that it might bear corn, many men's hands and labors were required.
And by this means it comes to pass, that in many places Corn waxes very
dear.

We may note here first, how that Sir Thomas More, being a Papist, yet touched
this sin, even in Abbots, and that in the darkness of Popery: and shall not
we condemn it in the light of the Gospel? Secondly, he affirms that it makes
beggars, and that it makes thieves, and causes a dearth of corn in our land,
nay, it pulls down Towns. If in his days it wrought these mischiefs, when
as it began but to set in foot into this Commonwealth: what has it done
since, which has grown to the very heart thereof? nay, what will it do in
the end, if it proceed as it has begun, if some stay and remedy be not had?
It will no doubt beggar and quite decay the Commonwealth of England. How many
farms now, stand empty since Inclosers began; or only with some servants in
them; which dare give nothing not knowing their masters pleasure? so
hospitality is quite thereby decayed. How many poor men lack work, as
threshers; and poor women, as spinners; and do complain for lack of their
accustomed works? and how many poor men's children are enforced to beg or
else live idely, which heretofore where tillage was maintained were taken into
service, to drive the plough, or to keep cattle, and thereby in time grew to
be good members in the Commonwealth, which Inclosers need not.

The seventh reason; This Enclosure with depopulation is a sin whereof God
shall make special inquiry at the day of judgment.
IT is written in the book of Genesis, Genesis 6.
that the earth was full of cruelty, and that that was the principal cause of
the drowning thereof; and it is to be feared that this shall be the cause of
the burning thereof: as appears in the 25. of Math. verse 42. 43.

The Prophet David thus manifestly Psalm. 102. 16.
prophesies of Christ's coming to judgment. The Lord shall arise, and have
mercy upon Syon, for the appointed time is come; for all thy servants have
great pleasure in her stones, and it pitieth them to see her in the dust. And
all nations shall fear thy name O Lord, and all the kingdoms of the earth thy
glory: for the Lord does build Syon and he will be seen in his glory. He
has had respect unto the prayer of (Hangareger) as it is in the Hebrew; that
is, of the poor afflicted; and he has not despised their supplication. This
shall be written (Ledhor acharon) for the last generation of the world. And the
people created shall praise the Lord. Here we may mark first, that this Psalm
prophesies of our days, and that this lesson concerns us. The time is now
come for God to arise to judgment, and to have mercy upon Syon. And then, is
it not written for us that live in the end of the world? Oh that we would
mark it! The lesson is this; that all Gods servants rather delight in the
stones of Syon, that is, Raisu.
in the Lords sheep and faithful servants, more than in their flocks of
sheep, or in their brave walls and high Towers; and it pitieth them to see
these stones trodden under foot and lie in the dust, and to be made no account
off: And that in the Sunshine of the Gospel, when all nations shall fear the
name of the Lord, and all the Kings of the earth his glory, by the preaching of
his word. But God does build Syon, and will be seen in his glory. There be
some as should seem that have pulled down Syon, and Gods Church, and these
his stones: But God himself will build it up again (says the Prophet) and
will be seen in his glory. Let all depopulators of towns themselves build up
the Lords Syon and farms again, least if that they suffer God to build them,
when as he comes in his glory, that his building be too costly for them, and
cost them not some hundredth pounds of money, which now perchance they are loath
to disburse, but the damnation of their souls. For God has a regard unto the
prayer (Hangaregar) that is, of the poor afflicted that is trampled under
foot and made no account of, but is as a broom, (as that word signifies) and
has not despised their supplications. The just men should flourish in Gods
house like Psalm. 92. 12.
to Palm trees: and we have made them like broom, even beesomes to sweep and
make clean our houses. And do we think, that God will not revenge this? Who
sees not such broomes almost in every place, that is, many good farms pulled
down, and lie in the dust, to sweep and beutifie, and build, a new brave and
stately house? Let all such as make the Lords Palms, their broom beesomes to
swepe their houses with all, take heed: at the day of judgment, God shall
search out diligently for all such, and without speedy repentance and planting
his palms again shall cast them into hell. This is written for the last
generation as Arias Montanus translates it: and does it not concern us?

And a people (Nicrah) created, shall praise the Lord. This word Nicrah also,
that is, a people created, does most manifestly portray out unto us our days.
The Church of God was not seen, was as no body, was in the wilderness: Apoc.
12. 14.
and now God has as it were created it again, and brought it into light: and
this people shall praise the Lord. Nay, to confound Popery, all Gods people are
created again to good works: there Ephe. 2. 10.
is no natural faculties remaining in them to do good as the Papists teach.
The people created shall praise the Lord. God ceased his creation of natural
things the seventh day as we read in Genesis. Genesis 2. 2.
And therefore the Prophet David no doubt means another spiritual creation
and the regeneration of our John. 3. 3.
Souls: And to this place (for all Scripture has a most pleasant and sweet
harmony Psalm. 19. 9.
in it self (if any one do mark it) does Saint Paul allude, when as he Ephe.
2. 10.
says we are created in Jesus Christ to good works.

And Esaias also prophesies in the end Esa. 24. 5.
of the world of such covetous worldlings. The earth also says he, plays the
hypocrite, because of the inhabitants thereof, for they have transgressed the
laws, they have changed the ordinances, and customs, and they have broken the
everlasting covenant: here is plainly set down, why the earth does not now of
late, yield her accustomed increase: Because the inhabitants thereof, have
changed the ordinances of their Ancestors and have broken Eccl. 13. 16.
the law of nature in not loving their like: nay, the everlasting covenant of
God, in not loving their brethren, as Ioh. 13. 34. Ose. 2. 15. 19.
Jesus Christ our most blessed Savior has loved us.

But if that Inclosers will here attribute the barrenuesse of the earth to
other causes: yet let them mark what goes before. Behold (says the Prophet)
Esa. 24. 1.
the Lord will make empty the earth (Bokek) and he will vnhedge and vnwall
it. The nature of which word, Mercerus declares unto us thus. Videtur Mercer.
in lex. Pagn.
ex locis in quibus inuenitur, significare dissipare seu effringere quod
clausum and munitum erat, vt omnium iniu^ijs pateat: It seems by the places
wherein it is found, to signify to disperse and break up that which was
enclosed and fenced, that it may now lie open to the injuries of all things.

And does not this most manifestly touch Inclosers and their hedges? Nay Esaias
adds (Vangiua Paneha) he shall make crooked her face: No doubt that was
straight before. For (ngaua) signifies to pervert or make a straight thing
seem crooked. And may not this note also their straight chain lines drawn on
the face of the earth? For otherwise the fare of the earth cannot be made
crooked.

And that the 24. Chapter of Esaias concerns us that live in the end of the
world, and not the Jews only but as types of us, these circumstances may
seem to prove. First because the Prophet speaks of the earth, and not of
the land of Jewry. Then, that he says, that the earth shall deceive the
expectation of the Tillers thereof, which I think was never more truly
verified, than now in our days. Then also because the Prophet teaches, That
they shall break in those days the everlasting covenant of God made to us in
Jesus Christ; which covenant we have broken, in not observing Christian
charity, 1. Tim. 1. 5.
which is the only law thereof. Nay besides all these, the Prophet adds,
The Lord God of Israel shall be praised in the Isles of the sea. And again,
From the uttermost parts of the earth, we have heard praises, even glory to
that just. And who is that just, but Jesus Christ? whom Steven also honors
with that Act. 7. 52.
title, and by that name describes unto us. The Prophet also says, That the
earth shall reele too and fro like a drunken man. And what is this else, but
that which Saint Luke teaches us, That Luc. 21. 26
in the end of the world men shall be at their wits ends, not knowing what
shall come to pass in the world? And lastly, The bl^shing of the Sun and
Moon, when the Lord of hosts shall reign in Sion, and in Jerusalem, and glory
shall be before his Ancients: what do all these mean, but the coming of the
true Sun to judgment? And the glory Mal. 4. 2.
of the new Moon, that is of the Church triumphant, at whose presence, our
Sun and Moon shall blush? And Mat. 25. 29
what means the reigning of God in Sion, and in Jerusalem, but that we all,
both Jews and Gentiles shall be one Ioh. 10. 16.
sheepefold under one shepherd Jesus Christ? And glory before his ancients,
which they shall ever see: what is it else, but eternal glory? Sibylla also
seems herein to agree with the Prophet Esaias, and to point at our hedges now in
the end of the world; who speaking of the day of judgment, and of the days
before it, writes thus: (...),

(...). Sibyll. Orac. lib. 8.
In English thus,

The earth shall be equally common to all, without any walls or hedges.

Neither being divided (...), then, (that is, in the days before the
judgment) shall it yield more fruits.






Does not the plainly here name hedges? yea, and that which Inclosers voe
hope for, that the ground so enclosed shall not yield more fruits?

Sibylla also prophesies most truly of Jesus Christ, and of his Cross, and of
his coming to judgment, in those her most famous Arrostick verses, which she
made concerning him, as no man can deny: and do we think that the rest of her
prophesies, especially the remnant of those her Acrosticks, concerning the
state of the world before the day of judgment, not to be as true? In those her
verses of the condition and state of the world before that day, she writes
thus: (...),

(...). Sibyll. Orac. lib. 8.
In English thus:

When as the earth in sweating, shall be a sign of the judgment, etc.






And here first let us mark that she says, that the earth by sweating, shall
give a token of the judgment. Let covetous Landlords and Inclosers, which
ouerburthen their tenants take heed, that they be not the causes of this her
sweating: for otherwise, the earth properly cannot be said, to sweat of her
own nature, being of constitution the briest element; nay drier than any dog,
which as both Philosophy and experience teaches, does never sweat. And after
she prophesies thus: (...). In English thus:

All the whole world shall be untilled, and shall be turned into a briar or
thorn. And may not here the first word, (...), untilled, seem to touch
Inclosers that will not till the earth?






And secondly, whereas she says, That the world shall be a Thorn or Briar, as
Castalio translates it: does she not plainly signify men, who shall become
like to thorns and briars, which shall prick men's hands that deal with
them, and shall catch unto themselves all that they can get, and shall even pull
men's coats from their backs? For as concerning material briars and thorns,
the world was never so cleansed of them as at this day; which every man is
careful to root up for hurting their sheep. But those other spiritual
briars which Sibylla means, grow in many places very plentifully. But let
all such briars take heed, that they be not burned in hell fire.

Nay, to let Sibylla pass, does not our Savior himself prophecy of the
days of the son of man, before the end of the world? And does he not
plainly teach us, That they shall be like the days of Noah, and of Lot,
before the destruction of the old world, Luc. 17. 26.
and the burning of Sodom? How that they shall eat and drink, and marry, and
build, and plant in those days? and the word (...), which Saint Matthew uses,
teaches us; that not the use, Mat. 24. 38.
but the extraordinary abuse of all these things is here signified. And those
words, (...), which S. Luke uses, Luc. 17. 30.
plainly prove that according to these particulars, and not a general
security only (as some would feign have it) is meant by all these. And are
not our hedges now extraordinary? Now lived all our Ancestors without them?

And our Savior in this his doctrine, may seem to agree with the Prophet
Ioell; who of the day of judgment, Joel. 2. 3.
and of the estate of the world at that day most manifestly prophesies thus.
The earth shall be as the garden of Eden before him, but behind him it shall
be a desolate wilderness. What does th^^ garden signify, but that the earth
then shall have great cost bestowed upon her; and shall be hedged in as we use
to do our gardens If the Lord when he comes shall destroy the garden, let the
gardiners take heed; for their destruction shall be without all doubt the
greater. Let them willingly throw open their gardens and closes again, that
God do not throw them into hell.

And that this prophecy of Joel concerns us and our days, and not only the
coming of the Assirians against the Jews. First, that commandment in the
Joel. 2. 1.
first verse of this second chapter seems very evidently to prove, where the
Prophet says, Blow up the trumpet in Syon. Syon is taken usually for Christ's
church as we read. Esa. 2. v. 3. Ps. 87. 2. And the trumpet signifies the
preaching of the Gospel, as appears by those sene^ Angels which did blow
their trumpets from Apoc. 8. 6.
Jesus Christ's ascension to his coming to judgment. No doubt as Syon is not
Apoc. 10. 7.
here to be meant literally: so neither the trumpets. But that which Joel here
says, Blow up the trumpet in Syon for the day of the Lord is at hand, is all
one with that which our Savior says in the Gospel, The Gospel shall be Mat.
24. 14.
preached, and then shall the end come. Nay, Saint Peter in the Acts applies
some part of Ioels prophecy to Christ's Act. 2. 17.
first coming, as the sending down of the holy Ghost upon the Apostles; and
some part thereof to the day of judgment, when as the Sun shall be darkened
and the Moon turned to blood. And shall we say, that this prophecy concerns
not us? Nay we in our fasts apply the turning to the Lord with fasting Joel. 2.
12.
and weeping unto our days, which is as as it were the medicine: And shall we
not apply the sin and sore which Joel there touches, and that garden of Eden
also to our days? Nay, Saint Paul tells us plainly that all things 1. Cor.
10. 11.
chanced to the Jews typically, and are written for our learning, on whom the
ends of the world are come. And will any man say then, that this prophecy of
Joel concerns us not? Shall we not learn something thereby? And also the same
reason may be alleged concerning the 13. Chap. of Esaias, which hereafter I also
allege.

And here let all the Lords watchmen give these Inclosers and gardiners Heb. 3.
13.
warning before, while it is called to day, least they repent to late with
Dives in hell. So their blood shall be Luc. 16. 24. Ezec 3. 14.
upon their own heads, for surely Gods word is truth. And as the land shall be
most assuredly a garden before the face Ioh. 14. 6.
of the Lord at that day, so there shall be some gardiners.

The Gospel also condemns this Enclosure. Our Savior prophesies, Mat. 24.
12.
that in the end of the world, the charity of many shall wax cold, which
argues a precedent heat. And may not these Inclosers fulfill this prophecy,
who have some charity in them; but not the charity of their ancestors? But
Gal. 5. 6.
he that continues to the end in the faith of the Gospel working through
fervent and Christian charity (such charity as Christ himself showed toward
us and 2. Ioh. 4.
also commanded) he shall be saved, says our Savior, and none else. Therefore
Ioh. 13. 34.
let Inclosers take heed which have not this charity.

Saint Paul also prophesies thus of the latter times; that in the last days
2. Cor. 8. 9.
shall be (...), that is, dogged times: for as Gellius notes, (...), is
referred to Gellius lib. 4. cap. 15.
the most keen and fierce nature of dogs: And he wills Timothy to know
this, 2. Tit. 3. 1.
as a thing most certain. And does not this touch Inclosers, who catch and
snatch all they can from their brethren for their own lucre sake?

But although this had been enough to have declared them unto us, yet that
which follows paints them unto us lively: for many shall be (says Saint Paul)
(...), that is, lovers of themselves, and lovers of money. By what two marks,
could he have expressed Inclosers more manifestly? these two loves reigns in
them, but the love of their brethren is quite banished out of their hearts. Nay,
these Inclosers are (as it follows also in the Apostle) disobedient to their
parents: in not obeying after their deaths, their charitable customs which
they commanded, and in their lives observed. So did not the Ier. 35. 6.
Rechabites.

The Apostle Saint Peter of the day of judgment writes thus: The end of 1.
Pet. 4. 7.
all things is at hand, be ye therefore sober, and pray; (not on the day time
only, but even with our blessed Savior in the night) but above all things have
fervent Luc 6. 12. 1. Pet 4 8.
love among you; for Christian charity (as an effect of faith) shall cover a
multitude of sins. For the faithful, and merciful men's sins are covered
and Mat. 25. 34, 35, 36.
not mentioned, as appears in the Gospel. But to go on with our Apostle; Let
every man as he has received the gift, so minister the same as good Stewards
of the manyfold graces of God. Why 1. Pet. 4 10.
should Saint Peter here make mention of Stewards but that as sh(...) seem he
did foresee in the spirit, that some at the end of the world, should forget
themselves to be stewards; and deal here with the earth, and earthly things,
as though they were chief Lords of them: whereas Saint Peter tells them
here p^a^ely, that they are but peer Stewards. And David himself though a
king acknowledged the same: That the earth is the Lords and all that Psalm. 24.
1.
therein is. Nay, Cyrus that great Persian Monark confesses, that the Lord God
of heaven has given him all the Esd. 1. 2.
kingdoms of the earth, as to a freeholder, or Steward. Let all Landlords
learn this lesson, and remember it well, against the the day of Judgment; and
deal like stewards, and not like Lords, with Gods people. God no doubt shall
make inquiry at that day how they have dealt with them.

But to conclude that of this sin of depopulation of towns, shall be
especial inquiry made at the day of judgment.

The Prophet Esaias speaking of that Esa. 13. 9.
day writes thus: Behold the day of the Lord comes, cruel with wrath and
fierce anger, to lay the earth waste. And he shall destroy her sinners out of
her. What should the Prophet mean by those (Chatteah) her sinners but these
Inclosers, who are too much in love with the earth? Nay says God, I will cause
the arrogancy of the proud to cease (Gaauath Ngaritsim) the pride of these
terrible men, that no man durst speak against, or speak unto. And I will make
a man (says God) more precious than fine gold, even a man above the wedge of
the gold of Ophir. There shall be some at that day of judgment, as appears
by this place, that shall make no account of men, which shall depopulate towns.
God tells all such, that he will make a man, even one man (whereas they have
thought it a light matter, to depopulate towns and to root out many men) more
precious, than a wedge of gold. And what is all their wooll-money to a wedge of
gold? One man is more worth than a wedge of gold, much more then, than all
their wooll-money; God himself has spoken it.

Wherefore if Inclosers and depopulators of towns, mean to be saved at the
day of judgment: let them willingly cast open their closes again, and
reedifie the farms, they have decayed. It makes no matter for the charge of
hedging (which they shall loose) that they have been at. And let them banish
their sheep out of their pastures, and let them fill the Lords towns and
sheepefolds, with his sheep again, and that speedily, least the Lord coming
to Judgment do condemn them, as cruel and Ioh. 10. 27.
covetous tyrants. Fnd let them now prefer even one man, before a wedge of
gold, least hereafter God do teach them this lesson in hell, when it shall be
too late for them to learn.

And here I most humbly desire in the Lord, that all Gods children would
beware, that they be not guilty of that woe which Esaias proclaims. Woe to them
Esa. 5. 20.
that speak good of evil, and evil of good, which put darkness for light, and
light for darkness, that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter. And
that all Gods faithful servants, would remove that great sin far from
them, which Jeremy laid to the charge of the Jews: Ier. 9. 3.
that they would not bend their tongues like bows, to maintain lies: but that
they would (that which Saint James teaches them) lay a part all filthiness,
Iam. 1. 21.
and superflu^tie of wickedness: that is, that they would not sin, when they
need not sin. But that they would receive with meekness the word that is
grafted in them which is able to save their souls. The Lord Jesus open the
eyes and turn the hearts of all Inclosers, Ephesians. 1. 18 Psalm. 85. 4.
that they may let the greeuousnesse of this the^^ sin, and repent with
speed, while it is called to day: (Least with those (...) and c(...)tous
tyrants which Hebr. 3. 14. Esa. 13. 11.
Esaias speaks of, they he visited of God, that is, have (...) works looked
into, and be (...)ely punished at the day of Judgment) for his glorious name
sake: to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost be all praise honor and glory
now and for ever

Amen.
FINIS.

