A PITHIE AND SHORT TREATISE BY WAY of Dialogue, whereby a godly Christian is
directed how to make his last Will and testament, to dispose, well and wisely
of his temporal goods; and how to prepare himself to the Lord, to depart this
world peaceably and comfortably, committing himself in soul and body, into
the hands of God, his faithful Creator.

ESAIAS 38. Put thine house in order, for thou must die.

LONDON, Imprinted for WILLIAM JONES, 1612.

To the Reader.
THE holy Patriarch Jacob being demanded by Pharaoh how old he was, answered,
his days were few and evil; Genesis 47.9.
and yet the time of his pilgrimage had been an hundred and thirty years;
welnigh double man's ordinary race in this latter age. Holy Job also out of his
own sense and experience witnesses in these words, Job. 14.1.
Man that is borne of a woman is of short continuance, and full of trouble. Our
days are few and evil, and full of trouble; to weane us from setting o^^
affection and love upon this life which is subject to so much vanity and
molestation; and to teach us to employ, and use well and wisely the short and
uncertain time that is lent us, being so dear and precious, as being once
past cannot at any rate be recovered and got again; and therefore while we
have time so to bestow it, as not only our selves may be benefited, our souls
comforted, our calling and election assured; but also God himself glorified,
and our brethren and neighbors by our good example provoked, and by our good
instruction allured to religious and holy duties. And this duty of drawing
others to God and godliness, as it concerns the Ministers and teachers of
Gods word publicly, so parents and masters of families privately. Esaias
38.18.19.
The father, says the Prophet Esaias, shall declare thy truth to his children:
and so likewise the master, who is the father of the family, is to perform
the like duty to his servants. Oh that all whom it concerns would be
careful in this case, and shake off that carelessness, security and
forgetfulness of this duty, which too too much prevails in these days! Then
would they bestow more time than they do in instructing, governing and
bettering themselves, their charges and their families, in the knowledge,
service and obedience of God; and so should they rightly answer their name of
Paterfamilias, and be true fathers of their families. Great will be the anguish,
sorrow, grief, perplexity and distress, that the neglect and omission of
this duty may hereafter procure us upon our deathbeds, by a gnawing and
griping of conscience for our failing herein; and on the other side great is
the comfort, joy, peace, solace, quiet of conscience and tranquillity of mind,
that the godly and conscionable performance hereof will bring us in that day
when we shall lie upon our bed of sorrow, as David calls it Psalm. 41.3. in the
greatest extremities, pains and pangs of death. As it comforted Job in his
most grievous calamity, that he had not co^cealed or denied the words of the
Holy one. Job 6.10.
A full and certain assurance hereof to the conscience, at that day will be
more worth then all treasures of gold and silver. This might be confirmed by
many places of Scripture, and illustrated by many examples, but we a^^ in a
preface, and not in a treatise, and therefore unfit to be long and tedious; and
the rather because the treatise it self is so short and co^pendious. Yet as
short as it is, you shall find therein the performance of this duty laid
forth in very excellent manner, which many serve both for provocation to move
us unto it, and for direction to inform us in it. It is quickly read being so
short, and not hard to be practiced if God give grace. The God of grace from
whom comes every good and perfect gift, enlighten our understandings that we
may know; quicken and stir up our affections, that we may desire; and direct
our actions, that we may do those things that are pleasing in his sight; that
after his short and miserable life is ended, we may live in heaven, where in
his presence is all fulness of joy, Psalm. 16.11.
and pleasures for evermore. Amen.

Christian Instructions, given by a faithful Pastor to one of his flock,
concerning making his Will.
Minister. I Am come to see how you do, good neighbor, hearing of your extreme
sickness: that if it please God, to take you out of this life, I may set you
right in the way to heaven, as I have endeavored to do hitherto, since I came to
be your Pastor. How do you man? how feel you your self?


Christian. I thank you good Sir for this your great love and kindenes, and
also for all the co^forts I have had by you since your first coming hither. I
thank God, I am well in soul through the washing and purging by the blood of
my savior Jesus Christ, which through Gods superabundant mercy, cleanses me
from all my sin: but sick in body, I am so sick as that I suppose my death
and dissolution is near, to the finishing of this life, of misery, and the
entering and establishing of me in the blessed life of glory: which Lord I
beseech thee to hasten for thy Christ's sake, Amen. And now I am most glad that
you are come now to help me, and direct me to the right end of my journey,
desiring your assistance by Gods word in every duty yet to be performed by me,
both to God and man: And then with joy I will bid the world farewell, for I
feel death aproach. I beseech you therefore to be as brief as you may, and by
Gods word direct me first for the disposing of my worldly goods, lands, and
other things: for that it is undone.


Minister. I am glad to see you so strong in the Lord, dear brother, and most
willingly I will do that you request; but I must tell you by the way, that you
have done full evil, in not making your will in the time of your health,
seeing your old age so to approach, that by the course of nature your days
could not be long: and if God should have taken you away suddenly, as he does
in mercy some of his dear servants, then should you thereby have been perhaps
the Author of bitter strife and contention amongst your children; which is one
of the things so abominable and hateful in Gods sight, Prou. 6.19.
namely to raise contentions among brethren. And how you can avoid that yet,
though God in mercy do give you time in this your sickness to make your will,
I know not, except your children be the better disposed, and loving one to
another, and you distribute so equally unto them, that none of them have cause
to find fault. But if in the time of your health you had disposed of your
goods and lands, then should you have seen perchance, whether any would have
been discontent with your equal distribution; and they that had without just
cause, been offended, might by you have been deprived of that which otherwise
they should have had. The fear of which would have been happily one motive to
move them all, to have been content. But seeing it is otherwise, I will advise
you what is best yet to do in this case: first, you shall do well to call all
your children together, and such else of your friends as you would have present.


Christ. Should all my children be present at my last Will or testament making?


Min. Yea surely for these causes principally, first, that all of the^ might
have your blessing with encouragement in all good and Christian duties, wherein
they have walked; and reprehension with admonition, for their evils. Secondly,
for the avoiding of strife, and the establishing of peace and love amongst
them; which is a thing much to be respected amongst all, much more of a father
amongst his children. Thirdly, all that a father shall say at that time to his
children in reproouing and rebuking of sin, and allowing and commending of
virtue, shall be the more deeply imprinted in the hearts of his children, being
so sole^nly done, and the last words, as it were, of their father, upon his
deathbed: yea we see often that they which are far from being godly
disposed, do by the light of nature, much respect the things given them in
charge by their father upon his deathbed. Therefore it is meet that all your
children should be present, and all this must be performed, by you with
fatherly wisdom and judgment without partiality: not punishing a small
fault, with a great punishment, nor a great fault with a small punishment, but
proportionable to the offense must the punishment be; for so does God always
deal with his children, and so must earthly fathers with their children. A
notable president of all this we have, in that holy Patriarch Jacob and his
sons, wherewith I know you are well acquainted. Genesis 49.


Christian. But what if some children be so evil disposed, that for that cause
they should be thought not fit to be present at their fathers Will?


Minister. That any be so, is one principal reason that they should rather be
there, than the other better disposed: for that, as before is said, they should
be bettered, by their fathers last sharp reprehension, if any thing will
prevail with them. And this does that former insta^ce of Jacobs sons,
plainly set forth; for Ruben was present, though he had a curse, for lying
with his fathers concubine; Symeon and Leui, though the like for their cruel
murdering the Sichemites; all the ten sons of Jacob, beside Joseph and
Benjamin: though treacherously they had dealt concerning Joseph, and sold him.
Therefore they must be there the rather.


Christian. But what if distance of place do let that some cannot be present?


Minister. Such necessity then must be considered, and those absent the more
carefully, not the less respected.


Christian. Having but one small possession of land, and that in my power to
give to whom I will, who should by Gods ordinance be mine heir?


Minister. Your eldest son, for he is the beginning of your strength, and
your first borne. Deuteronomy. 21.15.16.17.


Christian. What if he be an evil and disobedient child, and likely to sell
it?


Minister. You may tie him in some covenants best to prevent that. But if he be
so dissolute, you may quite deprive him.


Christian. Is there any warrant of that in Gods word?


Minister. Yea plain: Ruben before mentioned, and Adoniah, whom David his
father did disinherite, and made godly Solomon his heir; whose words to
Adoniah his elder brother, are words to be written with the pen of a Diamond in
the heart of every father, that he may so give warning to his children: If thou will show thy self a worthy man, there shall not a hair fall from thy head,
but if wickedness be found in thee, thou shall surely die. But this must be
carefully looked unto, that so great a punishment, as the deprivation of an
inheritance, be not inflicted for too small offenses, especially if the party
offending be one that truly and uprightly fears God, and those offenses have
been but slips of infirmity. He that for a small fault in this kind will
disinherit his heir, may look himself to be by his heavenly Father
disinherited of the kingdom of heaven. Mat. 6.15. and Chap. 18.35.
And this is most fearful against those fathers, which do least esteem, or
rather hate any child that shall incline himself truly to fear the Lord; and
every slip or small fault of theirs shall be esteemed great, and great offenses
indeed in others shall be counted nothing: yea those that are best disposed,
many times have that which is due to them, given to those that are merely
carnal.


Christian. What is to be done with the rest, besides the heir?


Minister. All being alike godly and dutiful every way, and of like estate in
wealth or want, to have like portions given them.


Christian. What if some be in good estate to live already, and others poor,
yet not through any default of theirs?


Minister. The poorest must accordingly be helped, and the richer must have the
less; for God commands all to pity and relieve the poor, and there shall
be judgment merciless to him that is not merciful: Iam. 2.13.
to those that are distressed any manner of way, especially mercy and charity
must be extended, to those that are near of kin. 1 Timothy 5.4.16.
And fearful is it for any child to covet that, which belongs to another;
for Gods curse, not his blessing shall be sure to go with that. And most
unnatural were that father that would procure a curse upon his child with his
gift of some worldly thing, which by right according to Gods word and will,
belongs to some other: yet is it too common, that many children care not, so
they may have all, or the most part, though some other far better and godlier
then they do want, and are ready to beg with poverty: and they therewith get
the fearful curse of God upon themselves, and all that they have, yea, and
their posterity also.


Christian. This were very fearful, for any fathers, or children indeed. But
now for children that have had stocks already, as daughters to their marriage,
or sons for lawful and honest uses in their trades, or the like, they having
had portions already are to rest satisfied.


Minister. All this is rightly to be considered and they all in some
proportionable measure to be equalled at the last, as their estate with the
other circumstances, as is before mentioned, do require. But for daughters if
any part remain unpaid of that portion promised to their marriage, it must be
satisfied. For in that, as well as in all other things, no wrong must be done,
nor any, neither near nor far off, defrauded; 1 Thessalonians. 4.6.
for the Lord is an auenger of all such things. And they that regard not to
deal uprightly with all, much more with those near unto them, do come within
the compass of those wrong doers, and promise breakers, that shall not
inherit the kingdom of heaven. Psalm. 15.


Christian. May one sin then, in disposing of his own lands or goods, so
haynously that he may by God in his justice, be therefore deprived of heaven,
and consequently be cast down to hell to be tormented evermore? Me thinks that
seems very harsh.


Minister. Yet so it is most certainly; for first we know, that every sin
deserves the same in it self, as says the Apostle, the wages of sin is
death. Romans 6.23.
But in this, one may sin most haynously, as many do in giving their goods,
lands, or money, to their lewd harlots, or bastard children; having lived most
damnably in their former life, and leaving their own lawful wife and children
utterly destitute. Also those that make foolish and ridiculous Wills,
disposing some to this profane use, and some to that; all being wanted by some
near unto them, 1 Timothy 5.4.
to whom of right it does belong. Also all those that do in disposing of it
deal partially, without such judgment as God requires therein, so that those
which are best loved of God, shall be sure to have least, and such as are not
religious, but mere carnal, or else open profane, to have most: or depriving
the heir of his inheritance, because he is more godly then he would have him;
or for some small fault, and passing over gross offenses in others. Finally he
that loves not as God loves, and hates not as God hates, being merciful to
the poorest, loving to the godliest, sharp to the wickedst, and comfortable to
the distressedst, just and upright to all without carnal respects or
partiality; is culpable in this kind, and liable to the wrath and condemnation
of the Almighty, even for this last sin.


Christian. If this matter be of so great weight and moment, then me thinks it
is not to be taken in hand rashly, without the advice, and assistance of some
who are able to counsel in all things, according to Gods word, and to judge
thereby aright of every offense committed, with the circumstances, increasing
or lessening the fault: also the punishment, by Gods word proportionable to the
offense, as before you have declared: but this rule is little regarded. Nay my
self, though (I thank God for his mercy) I have learned something out of Gods
word in all my days, little considered the weight of this point, as now I do
see plainly by your godly instructions. And well I perceive, that they which
headily further their friends in making their Wills, without such as can thus
instruct them, do most dangerously further them in the way to hell, as much as
in them lies. I would not for a thousand pounds but have had this your happy
and blessed counsel and instruction in this my last action, as it were, or
will making: for little thought I of taking such rules or warrants in every
thing from Gods word about this.


Minister. It is indeed too much neglected, neither do any almost teach it, or
write it effectually, that so it might be learned by all as it ought. But one
thing is yet behind, whereof I have not yet advised you from the Lord, and
that is this, namely your remembering the poor members of Jesus Christ (your
poor neighbors:) for all that you shall do unto such, Mat. 25.
our Lord Jesus Christ does esteem it, as done unto himself, yea if one be
able to give but a cup of cold water, and having been charitable, as every true
member of Christ is, and must be, in your life; you shall do well to testify
at the end, when you are going to give up your account to God, that you are not
less loving, and pitiful to the poor, than you have been before. For they
that have not, for the love of Christ only, done any such good to his poor
members, to them that cannot be said in the last and everlasting blessing: Mat.
25.
When I was hungry ye fed me, when I was thirsty, ye gave me drink, I was a
stranger and ye lodged me, naked, and ye clothed me, etc. But that shall be
said to all, that go into life eternal: Therefore they that have done no such
good to the poor, shall never enter into life eternal.


Christian. This point also I never was so effectually taught in before, as now
you have showed it: and well I perceive that they which regard not with pity
and compassion, to give to Christ in his poor members, can justly look for no
part of that blessing of Christ which you mentioned before. And most woeful is
this, me thinks, against all those, who have little or no feeling of their
poor distressed brethren. And alas, this is the most common charity now a
days, even that which Saint James reproves so sharply: Go warm your selves,
Iam. 2.15.16.
and fill your bellies, but they give them neither of that they want: so we use
to say in these days, Alas poor wretches, God help you, and comfort you; and
this is all. But here is one thing doubtful, some are very wicked, and ungodly
of the poor, and should they be pitied, as the godly and Christian should?


Minister. We must do good unto all, but especially to them that are of the
household of faith: but those that are not yet called we must love, as our
selves, for they are our neighbors, even all men and women: as the example of
the Samaritan does notably set forth; and therefore in distress ought to be
relieved. And who knows whether our kindness, and good example, as also
Christian admonition, may not be an occasion to win them to Christ? Therefore
what you will give that way, commit the distribution thereof to some Christian
neighbor, with general direction from you, and in particular, if you know any
poor Christians that have more need then other; or to whom by any special
band, you are more near then to other, them in particular you may nominate
your self: and you may also refer the like disposing of some, to your
Christian friends or ouerseeers, unto such particular distressed Christians as
they know stand in need, besides the general.


Christian. I do most heartily thank you, and God for you; and now I will
crave your favor and further assistance, to do all this that you have showed
me: and I pray you, if I do fail in any thing, help me and assist me; for
through my pain, or weakness of memory, or distraction other ways, I may,
and shall surely do amiss.


Minister. I will be your assistant in what I can, as God by his grace shall
enable me.


All that before said being finished and fully accomplished, here follows a
prayer, containing the sum of all, very profitable for one in that case to
contemplate of.
O Lord my God, I am now ready, when it pleases thee, to appear before thy
judgment seat, to give up an account of my stewardship, Luke 16.2.
as all men must do, when thou shall call them. Of thy bounty o merciful
Father, I received and have enjoyed all these worldly things, for my better and
more cheerful serving of thee, in my Journey toward heaven: and not mine,
but thine they be o Lord: and therefore now I leave them to those who^ thou in
thy word have commanded me to dispose them unto. I know dear Father that the
same which thy word says, the same will thou thy self say, and nothing else,
when my soul shall appear before thy tribunal: whatsoever thy word
justifies, that will thou justify; whatsoever thy word condemns, that will thou condemn. Knowing therefore the terror of thy wrath against all sin, I
have endeavored to the uttermost, according to thy grace given me, (for of my
self I can do nothing that is good) to finish and close up this my mortal
life, by the sacred line and rule of thy holy word in every thing. As
therefore, heavenly Father, thou have ordained it a rule in nature, that
fathers should lay up for their children, 2 Cor. 12.14.
and give them their portions to their abilities; so have I endeavored to do.
As thou have dealt with thy Churches and children, so have I thy unworthy
servant endeavored to follow thy example in reproving vice, Revel. 2.3. Chap.
in commending virtue, in encouraging in goodness, and discouraging and
condemning all evil: in blessing where thou do bless, and cursing where
thou do curse; in loving most those that love thee most, and least those that
show least love to thee. I have given most to those who^ thou in thy word
command me to give most unto, and least to those to whom thou in thy word
appoyntest least unto. For I know o Lord, that as thou did appoint out the
lots and several portions of thy peoples inherita^ces in the land of Canaa^,
namely of Jacobs twelve sons: and Joshua whom thou appointedst to divide it
unto thine, Josh. 14.1.2.
might not distribute any otherwise then thou did appoint him, more, or
less: so should I and all thy servants, as near as possible we can, follow
thy direction therein. And if I have not so done to the uttermost of my power,
but dealt partially through carnal affection: if I have looked least to thy
glory, and most to worldly respects, then woe be unto me, now I am approaching
before thee, to give up mine accounts. But thou o Lord see the vprightnes of
my heart, that I desire to do in all things as thou command: be merciful
unto me dear Father in Christ thy son, according to the uprightness of my
heart, and pass by all my infirmities. I know o heavenly Father that there
shall be judgment merciless, Iam. 2.13.
to him that shows not mercy. That he must be pitiful and compassionate,
Mat. 18.33.
that would have thee pitiful to him. That he which will not forgive, Mat.
6.15.
shall never be forgiven of thee. O Lord, I freely from my heart forgive all that ever have wronged me, and am therein comforted that thou also have freely
forgiven me for Christ's sake: and I beseech thee o Lord to forgive all those,
that have done me wrong, and pardon all their sins, if it be thy blessed
will. And Lord in mercy behold all thy people; those that fear thy name in
truth establish them to the end therein: those that are yet in blindness, open
their eyes to see the things pertaining to their salvation. And let the light
of thy Gospel shine more and more brightly to the banishing of all error and
ignorance throughout the whole world, if it be thy blessed will. Particularly
for my children and posterity, (members of thy Church,) Lord bless them and
their seed to the end of the world; and let thy blessings both spiritual and
temporal be powered plentifully upon them: establish those of them, that are
already effectually called to thy fear, and strengthen them every way to the
end therein. Convert those of them that are not yet so effectually called, and
make them all zealous in thy ways, to their everlasting salvation through
Jesus Christ. Thou gave them me O Lord, the greatest blessing of all worldly
blessings: and now I resign them up to thee again, beseeching thee to be a
Father unto them as thou have been to me, and them too, ever since we had a
being. O teach them to bring up their children in thy fear, and to esteem
that above all worldly things whatsoever. And thus Lord I commend my self,
soul, body, and all that I have, into thy hands, beseeching thee to qualify
my pains, and give me strength and patience to the end to bear the extremity
thereof. And hasten sweet Savior to deliver me out of misery, and wipe away
all tears from mine eyes; even so, come Lord Jesus, come quickly, Amen, Amen:
and let thy whole family in heaven and in earth say, Amen.

Me thinks I hear this joyful sentence sounding in mine ears, Come thou
blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for thee, from the
beginning of the world. Mat. 25.34.


