Thabridgment of the Histories of TROGVS Pompeius, Collected and written in the
Laten tongue, by the famous Historiographer Iustine, and translated into English
by Arthur Goldyng: a work conteynyng briefly great plenty of most
delectable Hystories, and notable examples, worthy not only to be read, but
also to be embraced and followed of all men.

Anno Domini. M. D. LXIIII. Mense. Man

Imprinted at London in Fletestrete, nere unto Saint Dunstons church, by
Thomas Marshe.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABL and his singular good Lord and Master, Edward de Veer,
Earl of Oxinford L. great Chamberlayne of England, Vicount Bulbeck, etc. Arthur
Goldyng wishes health and prosperity with furtherance, in knowledge and
increase of Honor.
RIght Honorable, I find in peru^yng of ancient writers, that it has been the
custom of the greatest Estates and Princes in the world, when they have had
inter mission from the serious and weighty affairs of their Realms, to
bestow their ydell times in reuoluyng and pervsyng stories. For we read that
Artaxerxes, surnamed Longimanus, the fyfte king of Persia, used to have the
Chronacles, both of his predecessors and of his own time, also read before
him a nights when he went to rest. And Alexander the great, ^ad that noble
writer of the famous battle of Troy in such veneration, that he never went
any where, but he had his works about him, nor never slept, but that he had
the^ under his pyllowe. Moreover coming into a schole, and fyndyng not Homers
works there, he gave the Master a buffet with his fyste: Meaning thereby that
ye knowledge of Histories was a thing so necessary to all estates and degrees,
that it was an offense to be without them. For like as in Music many notes and
many tunes make one concent and one Harmony: so also in an History, the
variety and multitude of examples, tend all to one end, that is,
thaduauncement of Virtue, and the defacyng of Vice. Offryng themselves as a
most clear and perfect myrror, where in for a man to behold, I say not the
outward portrayture and lineamentes of his body, but the very lively Image
and express figur of his inward mind enstructyng him how to gwyde and order
himself in all things. For what can be a greater enforceme^t to cheualrie,
then not barely to hear, but in a manner presently to behold the sage and grave
consultacio^s of expert Captains? the spedie puttyng in practice of things
devised? the policies and stratagenies in executyng of them? the favorable
assistence of fortune to the same, with the fame and renown of valiant
enterprises? what can be a greater encouragement to Virtue? then to se men
raised from low and base degree (as it were out of the dust) unto high estate
and honor? to se Realms flourish? to see common welthes prosper? to se good me^
exalted and evil me^ suppressed to se peace and tranquillity observed? to se
Nations willingly offer their obediens? to se long continuance in felicity? with
honorable report and wishyng for after ye decease? On the contrary part, what
ca^ be a greater dehortacion from vice, then to have laid before ones eyes not
only the heynousnesse and enormitie of the offense? but also the miseries,
calamities, shames and punishments worthily ensewyng upon the same? with
endless reproach and infamy after death? and so consequently what can be more
commodious and profitable then an Historye? Again, what can be more pleasant,
or more to the satisfying and contentacion of man's nature (which is always
desirous of news and covetous of knowledge) then syttyng quietly by himself,
to receive tidings of things done through the whole world? to behold the
places, the persons, the times, and the things with thorder and circumstances
in doing of the same? to se so many ru^ nyng streams? so many high montaynes,
so many ragyng seas? so many wild forests and deserts, so many strange
beasts, fowls, fyshes, serpents, herbs and trees? so many large contries? so
many rich and populous Cities? so many welgouerned common wealths? so many
good laws and customs? and so many sundry sorts of people? together with the
natures, disposicions, effects, descriptions, situacions, commodities,
pleasures and displeasures, foundacions, continuances and decays, beginnings,
procedynges and endynges of the same? and that in such sort as every thing may
seem, not to be reported, but to be present ly in doing? Now at such time as I
had finished my translacion of thistories of Iustine (who in so small room and
in so few words, comprehends so many and so notable things, that it is to
be doubted, whether he be more brief of sentence, or copious of matter) as I
stayed with my self (as it were to take breath at thend of my race) deuisyng
to whom I might specially dedicate the same: It came to my remembrance, that
since it had pleased Almighty God, to take to his mercy your Lordships noble
father, (to whom I had long before vowed this my tra uell) there was not any,
who either of duty might more justly claim the same. or for whose estate it
seemed more requisite and necessary, or of whom I thought it should be more
favorably accepted, then of your honor. For (to omit other things, whereof this
time and matter serves not to speak) it is not unknown to others, and I have
had experience thereof myself, how earnest a desire your honor has natu rally
graffed in you, to read, peruse, and communicate with others, as well the
Histories of ancient time, and things done long ago, as also of the present
estate of things in our days, and that not without a certain pregnancie of
wit and rypenesse of understanding: The which do not only now rejoice the
hearts of all such as bear faithful affection to thonorable house of your
ancestors, but also stir up a great hope and expectacion of such wysedom
and experience in you in time to come, as is mete and besemyng for so noble a
race. To the furthera^ce where of (because I will not be over taedious in
words) I will briefly propound unto your L. no mo but two examples, which are
mentioned among many other of like purport in this book. The One is of the
valiant Epaminondas Prince of Thebe, who being an expert Captayn and politic
in all Martial feats and warlike affairs, was nevertheless so well learned,
that it was a wonder to se how a man bredde, and brought up in Philosophy,
should come by such knowledge in feats of Arms, or how a man accustomed to
the licentious liberty of the Camp, should reteyne such exquisite knowledge
in Philosophy, with unspotted innocence of living and conversation: whose
fortune was such (by the consent of all writers) that the strength, the
glory, and the renown of his country, did both rise with him and dye with
him. The Other example is of Arymba king of Epyre, who being very young at the
decease of his father, was by the advice and consent of the whole Realm,
during his nouage, sent to Athenes to be enstructed in Learning and in
Phylosophie. At his return then into his own Realm again, he chose him a
sage and grave counsel, created officers, made good laws, abrogated evil
customs, and finally so stablished the state of the common welthe, that he
seemed to have made the Realm new. And look how much he was better learned
then his ancestors, so much the story reports him to have been the better
beloved and honored of his subjects. Let these and such other examples (where
your L. shall find store in this work) encourage your tender years, runnyng
in the renoumed fotesteppes of your famous ancestors, to proceed in learning
and virtue (which are thonly ornaments of nobility, or rather the very true
nobility it self,) i^ such sort as you may be able to do acceptable service
to your Prince and your country, Your Prince and your country for your
weldoyngs embrace you and esteem you as a Jewel, and Yourself thereby become
equal to any of your worthy Predecessors in aduauncyng thonor of your noble
house: whereof as your great forwardness gives assured hope and expectacion,
so I most heartily beseech Almighty God to further, augment, establish, and
confirmate the same in your L. with thabundaunce of his grace.

Your L. humble Servant, Arthur Goldyng.

To the Reader.
COnsydering there is not a more precious Jewel given us of God then time: and
that nothing reioyseth a man's mind more then the remembrance of the well
spending, nor any thing more greueth, then the remembrance of the idle and
vain bestowynge thereof: It ought to be the chief regard and endeavor of all
men, in such wise to employ the same, as may most redownd to the utility of
others, (for the which intent we be chiefly borne into this world) to
thaduauncement of Virtue, and to the purchasing toward themselves a laudable
name and monument of their well doings. To aspire unto the which, we se it
has be^ and is the study and travel of all good and virtuous men: some by
doing things themselves whereby others might take good ensample, and some by
puttyng thactes of other men in writing, to the profit and commodity of such
as should come after. Wherein albeit the travel be not like of the writer and
of the dooer: yet the one deserves not much less co^mendacion then the other.
For like as their could have been no Historiographer, if noble acts and
enterprises had not ben atcheued: so if no man should have put such deeds in
writing, besides that the fame of the dooers should after a while have utterly
ben condemned to oblivion, the frutifull example of their doings, (which now
remains to posterity) must also needs have perished. Therefore are we not a
little beholding to Chronaclers, as to them that are the guydes, instructours,
and masters of our life: by whom we are not only admonished of our
duties: but also by evident and plain demonstracions told before, and as it
were pointed to with the finger, what we ought to eschew, what we ought to
do, and in what manner to enterprise and bring every thing to effect, as may be
most to the praise and be hoof of the dooer. In such wise annexing and
enterlacinge, pleasure, variety, and delectacion, with utility and profit,
that I can not devise how a man should lightly feel any weariness. Howbeit even
as the commodity is great if we read and peruse Histories advisedly: so it
nothing avails, if we purpose not to put in ure thxamples of the true and
vndistayned virtue lefi in the^ for the rereformatio^ of our lives. For like as
when a man comes into a goodly Garden plentifully replenished with all kind
of wholesome herbs, sweet Flowers, and pleasant noryshyng fruits, if he
neither gather of the herbs and flowers, nor tastes of the fruits, but
runs up and down neglige^tly, feding his eyes with the vain sight and
beholding of them only, he takes neither benefit nor pleasure of the same:
Even so if a man read over Histories, not minding to put then samples in
practice, but only contenteth himself with the pleasantness of thenditing,
or with the straungenes and variety of the matters, he loses his labo^r and
misspendeth his life. Neither is there any difference between such a one, and
him that looks upon his own image in a glass, the which he forgets
as soon as his back is turned. For all our life consists wholly in virtuous
act^s and exercises: the residue thero befing otherwise misspent, differing
nothing at al from death. Diverse noble personages therefore, (as well for ye
worthynesse and excellency of the work, as to thentent to win double
honor, and thereby to give good Ensample to such as should come after, to
contend by the like industry to aspire to the like glory and renown,) have
not only done noble feats and adventures them selves, but also put in writing
as well their own deeds as the doings of other men. Iuba king of Mauritanie
made a Collection of Thistories of sundry Nations: Julius Caesar compiled his
own acts. Trogus Po^peius wrate Thistories of the whole world: from the
beginning of the Monarchy of Allyria, unto the reign of The Emperor Augustus.
Thabridgement of whose works, gathered out by Iustine (who partly by his
own industry, but more by the decay and loss of his Aucthor Trogus, obtained
the name of a famous Historiographer) I have translated out of Latin into
English, though not so eloquently as a no^bre could hau^ done: yet (I trust)
according to the true sense and meaning of Thaucthor: wherein albeit I may
seem to iome, to have taken in hand a vain and frivolous travel, namely to
put forth that thing in rude Englisshe which is written in good and pure
Latin: Yet notwithstanding (as well for thauoydyng of Idleness the Mother and
nourissher of al vice, as also for the zeal I bear to this my native
country, desirous to gratify yea and to profit such as have not
understanding in the Latin tongue if I could) I have not stopped my race,
until such time as I had atteined to the final scope of my prepensed
purpose: following the Ensample of diverse wise and well learned, both of old
time and also of our age of all sorts of Nations, whose study and travel
has always ben to bring into their mother tongue, such works as they found
either in the Greek (the head and welspryng of all Philosophy, connyng and
lernyng) or in any other language, worthy to be known and had in memory. And
in like manner as oftentimes beautiful and welfauored persons, turned out of
their gorgeous apparel and costly attire, into simple raiment, do like the
beholders as well as they did in their gayest garments: Even in like wise
(I trust) it may so comme to pass, that this my rude translation void of
ornate terms and eloquent indityng, may (as it were) in his plain and homely
English cote, be as well accepted of the favorable reader, as when it were
richely clad in Romayn vesture: consyderyng that the valewe an estimacion of
Thistory, is no more abased thereby, then should the virtue of a precious
stone, by setting it in brass or iron, or by carrying it in a closur of
Leather. If any errors have escaped me in the doing hereof (as I do not
think, but that some things worthy to be corrected, may have escaped my
hand, I desire the learned Reader, as well to admonish me friendly of mine
error, as also to put his helpyng hand to thamendme^t of the same. In doing
whereof as he shall greatly benefyte others, so let him assure himself, he cannot
do me a greater pleasure, nor a higher frendshippe. And thus wishyng that my
travel and labor in doing hereof, may turn to thy commodity and profit, I
bid the, Fare well.

The Succession of the kings of the three Monarchies mentioned in this Book,
taken out of (...), Berosus, and Megasthenes.
The first Monarchy of (...).
1. NInus the Son of (...) Belus the first Emperor of Assi^ia reigned. (...).
years 2. (...) wife of the sayo Ninus. (...). years. 3, (...) Nineas, other
wise call led (...), son of the foresaid Ninus and (...). ((...). years. 4
Artus. xxx. years 5 Aralius. xl. years. 6 Baleus (...). xxx. years. 7 (...).
xxxvlii. years 8 Belothus the priest of Baal. (xxxv. years. 9 Baleus. lii.
years 10 (...). xxxii. years 11 Mamytus. xxx. years 12 Manealeus. xxx. years 13
Sterus or Pherus. xx. years 14 (...). xxx. years 15 (...). xl. years 16
Ascatades. xl. years 17 (...). xlv. years 18 Belothus. xxv. years 19
Bellopares. xxx. years 20 Lamprydes. xxxii. years 21 Sosares. xx. years 22
Lampares. xxx. years 23 (...). xiv. years 24 (...). xix. years 25 Mytreus
xxvii. years 26 Tautanes. xxxii. years 27 Tautens. xl. years 28 Tineus. xxx.
years 29 Dercilius. xl. years 30 Eupalus xxxviii. years 31 (...). xlv. ye^es 32
(...). xxx. years 33 Ophrateus* xx. years 34 Ophratanes. l. (...) 35 Ocrasapes.
xlii. years 36 Tonos Concoleros at Sar^a napolis. xx. years
This Empire continued, M. C C. xxix. years.

The second Monarchy of the Medians and Persian^.
The Medee.
1 (...). xxviii. years 2 Mandanes. l. years 3 Sosarmon. xxx. years 4 (...)* l.
years 5 (...). xxii. years 6 Arcens. xl. years 7 Artines. xxii. years 8
Astybares. xx. years 9 Astyages. xxx. years
The kings of M^dia held the Empire. Clxxxxii. years.

The Persians.
1 ^yrus. xxx. years 2 (...). vii. y^res. v. (...). 3 (...) and (...) ^pers.
vii. (...) 4 Darius. (...). (...) 5 (...). xx. (...) 6 (...) that (...). vii.
months 7 (...) lo^gimanus. xl. (...). 8 (...). (...). (...) 9 (...). viii.
(...) 10 Darius the (...). xix. years 11 (...)* xl (...) 12 (...). (...). years
13 (...). (...). years 14 (...) the son^e of (...) Codo^ vi. years
The kings of Persia held Thempyrs. CC. xxx. years. and. v. months.

The second Monarchy of the Medes and Persians endured (...). years. v. months

The third Monarchy, of the Macedones.
1. Alexander the great, after whose death his kingdom was ^ded among his
noble me^. xii. y^ 2. Aridens. vii. years 3. Cassander. xviii. years 4
Antipater and Alexa^d. iiii. years 5 Demetrius. vi. years 6 Py^rhus. vi.
months 7 Lysimachus. v. years 8 Ptolomeus Ceramicus i. year 9 (...). ii.
months 10 Antipater. (...). year 11 Sosthenes. ii. years 12 Antigonus (...).
xxxvi. ye 13 (...). x. years 14 Antigonus. xv. years 15 Phylip. xlii. years 16
Perses the last king. x. years
The^pyre of Macedone, lasts with Alexander. (...). years, and viii. monthe^.

The kings of Asia.
Antigonus. xviii. years Demetrius (...). xvii. ye.
The kings of Syria.
(...) Nicanor. xxxii. yer.
The kings of Syria and Asia.
Antiochus Soter. xliiii. years Antiochus Theos. xv. years Sileucus callinicus.
xx. years (...). iii. years Antiochus the grea^e. xxxvi. (...) Seleucus (...).
xii. years (...) Epiphanes. xi. years (...) Eupater. ii. years (...). xxii.
years Alexander. x. years (...). iii. years (...). ix. years (...). iiii. years
Antiochus (...) xxi. years Anciochus (...). xviii. yer. Phylyppe. ii. years
The kingdom of Syria endured. (...). lxxxix. (...).

The kings of Egypt.
Ptolomeus the son of Lagus. xl. is Ptolomeus (...) hus. lviii. y Ptolomeus
Euergetes. xxvi. yer. Ptolomeus Philopater. xvii. years Ptolomeus Epiphanes.
xxiiii. yer. Ptolomeus (...). xx. years Ptolomeus phisco^ al. (...). xvii. y.
(...) Alexander. x. years Ptolomeus Lathyrus. viii. (...) Ptolomeus (...), xxx.
(...) Cleopatra. xxii. years
Thempyre of Egypt (...) after Alexander. (...) lxxxviii. years.

The Monarchy of Alexander continued in altogyther (...). years.

FINIS.
The Contents of the. xliiii. Books of Iustine.
The contents of the syrst Book. NInus lays the ^ondacion of the Monarchy
of Assyria. (...) conterfayteth herself to be a man, builds Babylon,
conquereth Ethiope, (...) war against Inde, and is slain by her son Ninus.
Sa^ danapolis is deposed for his (...) and with his life ends thempyre of
Assyria. Arbactus translateth thempyre to the Medes. (...) causes Cyrus to be
cast away as soon as he is borne, he is (...) by the providence of God Harpagus
loses his son for the same, Syrus ouerco^m^ (...) ges and translateth
thempyre from the Medes to the Persians. Babylon rebelleth and is subdued,
Cresus is taken prisoner, and his real^e brought to miserable subieccion.
Candaules through his own ^oliy, is slain by Gyges, who enjoys the
kingdom for his (...): Cyrus with two hundred thouand Persians is slain by
(...) of the Massagettes. His (...) cambyses succedeth, he conque^h Egypt,
commands his brother Sinerdes to be murd^, and is slain with his own
sword. Comaris and (...) stes (...), Orthanes boutteth out their treason,
Seven of the noble men cons^e their deaths: Darius is made king by the neyng
of his horse, he (...) king Cyrus daughter, recouereth Babylon by the help of
(...), and prepares war against the Scithians. The contents of the second
Book. THe Scy^thians and Egyptians contend for thantiquitie of their
countries. The descript^on of (...) with the manners and customs of the people,
their fortunate enterprises, and the Empyres founded by them. Plynos and
Scolopythus are driven out of Scythia with a great number of youth and are
slain by a (...), their wifes reueng their deaths and set up thempyre of
^mazone. The manners and customs of the Amazones, the succession of (...)
Queen's of Amazonie: Hercules excha^geth Menalyppe for the Queen's ar^or:
Penthesilea coydeth the Troyans against the Greeks: Thalestris having obtained
the company of great Alexander, returns and dies* with whom the name of
Amazons de cayeth. The Scythians are received wi^h war by their ^men. Darius
warreth upon them, and flies shametully, he co^quereth Asia and Macedone, and
vendeth himself against the Atheniens. Thoriginall of Thathe^ens, their
in^utions, the succession of their kings, the change of their government, the
^wes of So^on and his policy. Pysistratus usurps, Hyppias is deposed and
flies to Darius, the notable battle of Marathon, wherein Hippias is slain.
Darius dies, Xerxes succedeth, he renews the wars against Gre^ and is
overcome, the notable prowess of Leonidas. Xerxes retyreth fearfully and
dishonorablye into his kingdom. Mardonius is vanquished in Beotia. Them
istocles has the pro rogatiue for his prowess: Athens is builded again, the
Lacedemo nians make war upon the Persians, Pausanias is condemned of
treason. Xerxes proclaymeth open war again, against Greece, he is ouercomme by
Cymo duke of Athenes, both on sea and land, and returns into his kingdom.
The conteyntes of the third Book. XErxes and his sons are slain, by the
treason of Artabanus, Artax^xes reuengeth the death of his father. The
Lacedaemonians and Thatheniens fall at varians: Lycurgus makes laws, and
willyngly vannisheth himself, the Lacedaemonians make war upon the
Messeniens, the Partheniens place themselfs at Tarent in Italy: Messene
rebelleth and is subdued, war is renewed between the Lacedaemonians and
Thatheniens, the Lacedaemonians break the truce, the notable demeanor of
Pericles, truce is taken again and broken by the Lacedaemonians. The conteyntes
of the fowerth Book. THe description of Sycill, with the wonders thereof, ^olus
takes upon him the crown of the same, after whom every eytie has his
Tyrrant, among whom Anaxilaus contendeth against thothers cruelty. with
Justice and Equity, The men of Rhegium are cruelly dispossessed of their City
by their con ^ederates. The Cathanenses and Syracusans fall at debate: the
Athentens aid the Catanenses, truce is taken and broken by the Syracusans,
Ahatheniens succor the Catanenses again: (...) rescoweth Syracuse, vanquisheth
the Atheniens, both by sea and by land, and utterly destroys both their
men and ships. The contyentes of the fyft Book. AL^ibiades willyngly
bannisheth himself, and compels the king of Lacedemon to war upon
Thathenie^s, the which Darius king of Persia furthereth also. (...) causes the
cities o^ Asia to reuolte from Thathentens, the Lacede monians lie in wayt to
kill him, he escapes by the admonition of the wife of king Agis, and flies to
(...) king Darius lyeuetenaunt in Lydia, whom he withdraws from the
Lacedaemonians, the Ambassadors of Athens come unto him, he is revoked into his
country and made admiral, he overcomes the Lacedaemonians and is joyfully
received of his Cytizens, he receives a loss by ou^rsyght, and bannisheth
himself again, (...) are brought to utter distress, Conon their Captayn flies
to Cyprus, the city is yielded up to the Lacedaemonians, thyrty Tyrants have the
governance thereof, Darius king of Persia dies, Dionyse the younger is
expulsed out of Sycill, Al^biades is burned in his lodgyng, (...) expulseth
the xxx. (...), ten others are plac^d in their stead* Pauianias king of
Lacedeuion commaun death them out of the city, and gives peace to the
Atheniens, the Tyraun^s making war against Athenes, are taken and put to
death, Artaxerxes suc^edeth his father Darius in y^ Persian kingdom, Cyrus
rebelieth against his broth^r A^xerxes and is slain, the Grek^ that came to his
aid, return into their country vnvanquished. The contents of the syxte
Book. THe Lacedaemonians covet Thempyre of Asia, ^nes is displaced of his
office of Lieuetenauntship: Conon of Athenes is made Admyrall of the Persian
flete, the Lacedaemonians send for aid into Egypt, (...) is sent against
Conon, Conon overcomes Lysander upon the sea. Athens is set at liberty
again, Epamynondas overcomes the ^a cedemonians, and sleath Lysander:
Agesyiaus wresteth the victory from the Thebanes, the Atheniens send
Iphicrates with an host to chayd of the Thebans, ye Lacedaemonians are brought to
(...) despair, Conon is received with great joy of his cytizens, Athenes is
repaired. A^axerxes proclaymeth a general peace through all Greece, and sets
all the cities at liberty, he makes war against Egypt, Rome is taken by the
Frenchmen, war ryseth between the Lacedaemonians, and Arcadians, and is ceased
of their own accord, Epamynondas Duke of Thebes invaded Lacedemon, and is
repulsed by the old men, Agesylaus encountereth with him, Epaminondas is
slain, with whom the prowess of the Greeks decays. The conteintes of the
seventh Book. HE entreats of (...) and of the kings thereof. ^ranus
followyng a herd of goats, wynneth the cy^ie Edyssa, he turns the name
thereof, makes it the head of Macedone, and subdueth diverse kings, after him
(...) Perdicas and prophecieth of his posterity, Argeus takes his place, and
(...) the crown to his son Europ^, the Macedones overcome the Illyrians, (...)
succedeth whose son Alexander kylleth the Persian Ambassadors sent by Darius,
of whom mention is made in the first and second books. Bubares marryeth
Alexanders sister. Amynthas succedeth Alexander, the mother kylleth her own
children, Philyp is brought up at Thebes, and afterward he is crowned king, he
vanquisheth his border^rs, conquereth the ^ens, maryeth Olympias the mother of
great Alexander, and wins Methone. The contents of the eight Book. THe
Lacedaemonians and Phocenses are condemned in a great sum of money: the Phocenses
rob the Temple of Delphos: Philip is chosen Captayn general against them
and vanquisheth them, the which being done, he spoyleth the Thebanes, whom he
came to defend he steals the kingdom of Cappadocia, destroeth Olynthe in
Thrace, in^th the goldmynes in Chessa^ and the syluet ^es in Thrace, spoyleth
the two kings of Thrace of their kingdom, makes peace with Chate^ens, gives
s^le aunswers to Cha^ of Greece, breaks premis with the Phocenses, remoueth
whole nations and Cities from country to country, s^th the Dardamerans, and
d^seth Arymba king of E^yre, geuyng the kyngdo me to Alexander the brother of
his (...) Olympsas. The contents of the nynethe Book. PH^ besieges
Constantinople, during the which he wi^ neth many cities ^f Chersonesus, and
feighteth vnprosperously against the Tryballes, he makes war to the ^niens,
and wynneth the Soueranity of Greece, executes str^ghte Justice upon the
Thebanes, somoneth a Parliament at Cormthe, prepateth for war astaynst the
Persians, and is s^ayne by Paus^ras at his daughters ma^ge. The description of
his nature and conditions with a comparison between him and his son
Alexander. The contents of the tenthe Book. THe natural affection of
Artaxerxes Mnemon toward his son Darius, and his treason against his father,
y^ punishment of Darius and his fyfty brothers, the cruelty of Ochus, the
prowess of Codoman, for the which he is created king by the name of Daius. The
conteyntes of the eleventh Book. THe disquietnesse of the Macedones after the
death of Phylype the which Alexander appeaseth, Alexander puts his
kynsfelke to death, suppressed rebellio^s, goes forward with the wars that
his father purposed against the Persians* pardons the Atheniens, (...)
Thebes, enters into Asia, van^ (...), overcomes diverse of his
Lieuetenantes, goes (...) city (...) and vntyeth the knot of the wayne: a
digression to tha^yres and the kings of Phrygia. Alexander makes haste to
Ch^us in Cilicia, is re^ered of a dangerous disease, overcomes Darius
again, takes the mother, wife and daughters of Darius prisoners, maryeth one
of his prisoners called Barsiue: sends Parmenio to invade the ^ersian flete,
and other of his noble (...) to receive the Cities of Asia, makes abdolominus
a king of a Gardener, wins the (...) Cyrus perforce: goes to the temple of
Ha^o in Egypt* buyldeth the city Alexandria, receives letters twyse from
Darius, and replyeth to the same, mourns for the death of Darius wise, (...)
the third letter from (...) and (...) thereunto, (...) Darius and (...) the
Monarchy of the (...) with thempyre of Asia, rewards his soldiers, and
fyndeth ^eadyng riches in the city (...). Da rius is bound by his ^wne (...),
found by a soldier half dead and sore wounded, (...) whom he (...) his mind
and dies, and Alexander causes him to be (...) according to his estate. The
conteyntes of the twelueth Book. ALexander buryeth his soldiers sumptuously,
Agis king of (...) makes insurreccion in Greece and is (...)* Al^xander king of
Epyre warreth in Italy and is (...) to death, ^yron with his host is slain by
the Scyth^s Alexanders soldiers being in Parthia, desire to return home, he
subdueth Hyrcanie and the mardes, Thalestris Queen of ^hamazones, companyeth
with Alexander, he usurps the manners of the Persians, frequenteth feastyng,
licenceth his soldiers to mary their prisoners, outrageth against his noble
men, conquereth the people that inhabit the foot of Cancasus, in the which
time Bessus that killed Darius, is brought bound unto him, whom he delivers
to be punished to Oxatres the brother of Darius, he buyldeth Alexandria upon
Tanais, kylleth Clytus at the table, falls in great despair for the same,
receives countries by composicion, puts Calisthenes and other noble men to
death, gives his soldiers silver Bucklars, enters into Inde, where a Queen
called Cleophis, yeldyng herself and her kingdom unto him, recepueth it again
at his hand, overcomes king Porus. buyldeth two cities, subdueth fow^
Nations, is desired by his souldieurs again to return home, vanquisheth the
Eu^ytes, ^ceyueth by co^posicion the Gessones and Asybanes, conquereth the
Ambres and Syca^bres, is sore wounded in the city of y^ Dpydrakes, preserves
his host from poisoned wounds by thadmonishment of a dream, buy^deth a City
in the mouth of the river Indus, returns to Babylon, puts the
Lieuetenauntes of diverse countries to death, punishes a (...) among his
soldiers, mourns for the death of (...) on, enterteyneth thambassadours of
Carthage, Spain, France, etc. is poisoned by Antipater, comfort his
soldiers, making (...) tumult for his death, delivers his ryng to Perdiccas
and dye^. The contents of the thirtenth Book. THe mother of Darius dies for
sorrow. Aridens is made king, thempyre is d^utded among the noblemen of
Alexander: Thatheniens and A^tolians drive ^ntypater out of Greece, Perdiccas
make^h war against (...) king of Cappadocia, the noblemen of Macedone fall at
varians among themselfs the foundation of the city (...) in (...)., Perdiccas
is hated for his pry^, and Eumenes wynneth two fields* The contents of the
fourtenth Book. EUmenes preuenteth the policies of his enemies, he is beseged
by A^tigonus, rescowed by Antipater, resorteth to the A^gyraspides for succor,
is over come by Antigonus, and is betrayed by his own soldiers. Cassander is
made Regent of Greece, the Lacedaemonians enclose their City with a wall,
Eurydice and Arideus are slain at the commandment of Olympias, Cassander
likewise puts Olympias to death, and ^prysoneth the son of Alexander. The
conteyntes of the xv. Book. THe Conquerours fall at debate for partyng of the
pray, the Abderties are driven out of their country with frogs and myce,
Cassander put^eth the sons of Alexander to death, Ptolomy is vanquished on
the sea by Demetrius. Alexanders Lieuetenauntes proclay me the^es kings,
Lysymachus takes part with Cassander against Antigonus, a discourse of the
doings of the said Lysimachus, the wonderful (...) of Seleucu^, with his par
taking against Antigonus, and his conquestes in the East, Sandrocotte deliu^th
the Indians from the subjection of Macedone and oppressed them with Tyranny
himself* Antigonus is slain and his son Demetrius put to flight, the
Conquerors ^al at bar^ans again among themselves, and Cassander dies. The
conteyntes of the. xvi. Book* THabominable murder of Antipater the son of
(...), for the which his brother Alexander proclay^th war against him,
Demetrius slays Alexander, and usurps his part of Macedone, Lysimachus
yeld^h unto him the portion of Antipater also, Ptolomy, Lysimachus, Seleucus
and Pyrrhus yoine themselfes in league against Demetrius, Pyrrhus dryueth
Demetrius out of Macedone. Lysimachus puts his son in law Antipater to
death in whom the house of Cassander is extincted, Demetrius yield* th himself
prisoner to Seleucus, Ptolomy dies, debate falls betwe^ Lysimachus and Pyr^,
he expuls^th Pyrthus out of Macedone* the buyldyng of the City Heraciea in
Pon^us, the g^es of the Heracleans, their cour^e toward their enemies, their
miserable oppression by tyranny, the bold enterprise of Chion and Leonides,
and the death of them. The conteyntes of the. xvii. Book. THe horrible
Earthquake in Hellesponte and Chersonesus, the cruelty of Lysimachus to his
own children by thinstigacion of their ^tepmother Arsyrice, the last war
between the succ^ssoro of Alexander, wherein (...) is slain by Seleucus, who
also within a while after is slain by Ptolomy the kings brother of Egypt.
Pyrrhus ayd^th the ^tynes against the Romans, a discourse of the Realm of
Epyre with a declaracion of thactes of the kings thereof. The contents of
the. xviii. Book. PYrrhus (...) the Romans, Mage Duke of Carthagbrynge^h aid
to them, and is sent home again, the Romayues take a truce with Pyrrhus, the
which is ^ynged by Appius Claudius* Pyr^us tak^th upon him the kingdom of
Sy^l, the foundation of Sydon and Tire, with a declaracion of th^re Histories,
Dydo buyldeth Carthage, and sleath herself: The Carthaginenses (...)
abominable kind of sacrifice, they su^er loss by war and p^ens, Macheus
Duke of Carthage (...) his own (...), wins Carthage, is accused of treason
and (...) put to death. The conteyntes of the. (...). Book. MAgo Duke of
Carthage dies, his sons Hasor^ball and Hamilcar succeed, the Carthaginenses
are overcome by the (...)* fres, and pay the rent for their city s^ill: they
make war in Sardynia and Sycill, themessage of the Ambassadors of Darius to
the Earthaginenses, the Afres are compelled to releace the rent* the army of
Hamilco perishe^ (...) pescilent influence of the star res, the remnant whereof
he brings home and kylleth himself. The contents of the. xx. Book. DEnnys
the elder dryueth the Carthagine^ses out of Sycill, and makes war in Italy,
a declaracion of the fondacion of the cities in Italy, the wars between the
(...) and the Locrenses, the life, doctrine and death of Pythagoras, Dennys is
ouercomme by the Croteniens, and concludes a league with the Frenchemen, the
doings of the Frenchemen in Italy, Dennys re turns into Sycill, against the
(...) and is slain by his own men. The contents of the. xxi. Book. THe younger
Dennys exercyseth all kind Tyranny, is expulsed the realm exercyseth most
unspeakable tyranny at Locres in Italy* is driven from thence and takes
Syracuse, Hanno goes about to oppress the common weal of Carthage, is ^rayed
twyse and put to death. Dennys deposes himself and flies to Corynthe, where
he lives a fylthie life, (...) surnamed Rhodanus, veweth the doings and
counselles of great Alexander, ^yeth his countrymen thereof, and at his return
is put to death for his labor. The contents of the. xxii. Book. AGathocles
ryseth from abase Degree, like as if it were by low steps, to the Kyngedome
of Sycill, he exercises great cruelty v^xeth the consederates of the
Carthaginenses, by the sufferans o^ Hamilcar, whose death preuenteth the
secret verdites of the Carthaginenses, (...) is veseged by Hamilcar the son
of ^ysgo, he remoueth the war into (...), vanquisseth the ^arthagine, whervppon
the Aphres reuol^ unto him, he kylleth the king of Cy rene, overcomes the
(...) again he rayseth the siege before Syracuse, is received with a mutiny,
is ouercomme by unadvisedness, forsakes his men of war and his children
which are put to death for his sake, he makes peace with the Carthaginenses in
Sycill. The conteyntes of the. xxiii. Book* A Gathocles makes war in Italy,
the trades and customs of the Lucanes* the Original of the Brutians, the
miserable e^de of Agathocles, the Carthaginenses invade Sycill, Pyrrhus oryueth
them out, r^turneth into Italy, whervppon Sycill reuolteth, he is diseomfyted
by the R^mayns, and retyreth with great loss and dishonor into his kingdom,
the birth, educacion, and commendacion of Hiero. The contents of the. xxiiii.
Book. THe Lacedaemonians stir the Greeks to rebellion, and are overcome by
the Etolian shepeherdes, the wicked and abhomi nable (...) of Ptolomy toward
his sister and her children Rome is sacked by the Frenchemen, whereof some place
themselfes in Italy, and some in Pannokie: they of (...) raise a power deuidyng
themselfes in two hosts, of which the one kylleth Ptolomy king of Maccdone, and
are suppressed by Sosthenes, the other under the conduct of Bremso, inu^deth
Macedone again, ouercom meth Sosthenes, spoyleth the Realm, inuadeth the
temple of Delphos, the situacion whereof is there deseribed, is vanquished with
lightnyng and thunder, and Bremis sleath himself. The conteintes of the. xxv.
Book. THe Frenchemen of Pannony raise an other power and invade Ma cedone,
Antigonus overcomes them by a policy, the Frenchmen are so redouted, that
all kings crave their aid, they succor the king of Bythinia, and deuyde his
Realm with him, calling themselfes Frenchegrekes, Pyrrhus expulseth Antigonus
out of Macedone, he makes war against the Lacedaemonians, the force and
hardines of Ptolomy his son, who is slain in the wynnyng of Lacedemon:
Pyrrhus is slain at Argos, the moderacion and gentleness of Antigonus, with a
commendacion of the said Pyrrhus. The contents of the. xxvi. Book. THe extreme
cruelty of (...) Tyrant of Epyre, the wise invention of old Helematus in
suppressyng of him, the cruelnesse of the Frenchegrekes toward their wives
and children, whom Antigonus overcomes and viterly d^stroyeth, (...) is
(...) both of his kingdom and men of war by Alexander the son of Pyrrhus
king of Epyre, Demetrius the son of Antigonus, not only recouereth his
fathers kingdom, but also spoyleth Alexander of his kingdom of Epyre,
Alexander by thelpe of the (...), and the favor of his own countrymen is
restored to his kingdom again, Agas king of ^yrene dies, Demetrius the brother
of Antigonus by means of Beronice the ^aughter of king Agas is slay^ in her
mothers bed. The conteyntes of the. xxvii. Book. SEleucus king of Spria,
puts his step mother Beronice, and her son to death, Ptolomy king of
Egypt in reuengemente of her death inuadeth Syria, (...) suffers a happy
ship wreke, for by m^anes thereof for pytie and compassion, the cities that
Ptolomy had obtained, r^uolted again, he is vanquished in battle by Ptolomy,
and (...) aid of his brother (...). Ptolomy makes peace with Seleu^us,
Antiochus warreth upon his brother, and overcomes him by the help of the
Frenchgrekes, who after the battle bend themselfes against Antiochus, and he
raunsometh himself from them, Eumenes king of Bythinia sets up pon Antiochus
and the Frenchemen and takes the most part of Asia from them, the brothers
continue still at deba^e, by means whero^ they comme both to a mis^rable
end. The contents of the. xxviii. Book. (...) Queen of Epyre, by the marriage
of her daughter Pythia, sets variaunce between Demetrius king of Ma cedone,
and Antiochus king of Syria, the proud answer of the Atolians to the
Ambassadors of Rome, Olympias dies for sorrow for the death of her two
sons, Laodomia is (...) at the Altar of Diana, (...) dies, Antigonus being
left protector of the sons of Demetrius makes himself king, he subdueth the
Lacedaemonians, wherein appears as well the stoutnes of the Spar tanes in
adversity, as also the modeste and gentle behavior of Antigonus in
prosperity. The conteyntes of the. xxix. Book. THe alteracion of the famousest
kingdoms, by the succession of young kings, Demetrius king of (...) seweth to
Phylippe king of Macedone for help against the Ramaynes, Philyp exhor^eth the
Greeks to concord, he proclaymeth open war against the Romans, the
D^rdanians invade Macedone, he makes peace (...) the Romapnes, Phylopemenes
causes the Acheans to revolt from him. The (...) of the. xxx. Book. THe (...)
of Ptolomy king of Egypt, Antiochus in undeth Egypt. and is put to the (...)
Ptolomy gives him self utterly to sloth and (...), he dies, his concubines
are hanged up, the Romans take the governance of the young king, the (...)
rebel against Philip king of Macedone, he desires peace of the Romans, a
quauyng of the Sea, an earthquake in Asia, Philip is vanquished in battle by
the Romans, and speyled of all his Dominions, saving only the r^alme of
Macedone, the E to lyans provoke (...) to war upon the Romans. The
conteintes of the. xxxi. Book. ANtiochus inuadeth the territories of the
Dominion of Egypt, the Romans proclayme war against him, Nabis king of La
cedemon subdueth many cities in Greece, y^ Romans send an Ambas sador to note
Hannibals doings in (...). and to kill him, he espieth their purpose, and
flies unto Antiochus, Nabis is vanquished by Flaminius, after whose departure
he follows the wars again, Hanniball is highly enterteyned by Antiochus,
he gives council how to proceed in his wars against the Romans, sends a
messenger to Carthage, to stir them to rebellion, the Romans send an
Ambassade to Antiochus, who through their daily conversation with Hannyball,
bring him in the kings displeasur, who nevertheless shows his opynion of,
as concerning the wars with the Romans, the which is neglected, antiochus is
ouercomme of the Romans, and takes Hannibal into favor again, Han niball is
put to the worse upon the sea, the magnimitie of Scipio affricanus, articles
of peace are propounded, and by Antiochus rejected, the romans come to ^roye,
Antiochus is vanquished with a great slaughter, and peace given him upon the
foresaid articles. The conteyntes of the. xxxii. Book. THe (...) are subdued,
the (...) and Acheans (...) for the souerainty, Phylopemenes ^aptayne of
thacheans is is taken prisoner and poisoned by the (...), the Mesnians are
ouercomme and punished for the death of Phylomenes, Antiochus and all his host
is slain by the men of the country, the cities of Greece make complaynt of
Phylyp king of Macedone at Rome, he is absoyled by the (...) of his son
Demetrius, who by the false accusacions of his brother Perfes, is brought in
displen sure with his father and put to death, Phylyp dies for sorrow, Perses
makes (...) for (...) against the romans, thoriginall of the I strians, The
ignominy of the Daces, Prusias upon trust of Hannybal that fled from
Antiochus unto him, breaks the truce ^gaynst Eumenes, the ^ollicy of
Hanniball, conueyng himself out of Candie, Prusias is (...) upon the land,
Hannibal through ^ subtle inucncion vanquisheth the ^nemie upon the sea,
Ambassa ^ours are sent from Rome to set the two kings at one, and to desire to
have (...) yielded unto the^, Hannibal poisoneth himself. The conteyntes of the.
xxxiii. Book. PAulus Emilius encoun^ereth with Perses, the valiant demeanor of
Cato, Per^es is ouercomme and taken with his sons, flying toward Samothrace,
with whom (...) of Mac^done ends, the noblemen of Etoly with their wives and
children are led prisoners to Rome. The conteyntes of the. xxxiiii. Book. THe
Romans subdue the (...), (...) is (...) down. Antiochus makes war against
Prolomy king of Egyt, and (...) him out of his country. P. Popilius is sent
Ambassador to bid him depart out of Egyyt, the severity of Popilius in
executyng his commission, Antiochus dies, his brother Demetrius (...) leth
pryuely from Rome, and killyng his young nephew, usurps the crown. Prusias
is deposed and murdered by his own son. The conteyntes of the. xxxv. Book.
(...) makes war against (...) king of Cappadocia, supporteth his brother
Holofernes aganyst him, who^ afterward for treason prepensed he k^peth in
prison, one Pro^ palus is suborned as the son of Antiochus by the name of
Alex^der against (...), by whom Demetrius is depryued of life and kingdom,
Demetrius the ^on of Demetrius recouereth his fathers kingdom. The conteyntes
of the. xxxvi. Book. Demetrius makes war against the Parthians, and is
taken prisoner, (...) usurps the kingdom of Syria, Antiochus the brother of
(...) it out of his hands, and subdueth the Jews, Thoriginall of the Jews,
the (...) of (...), the going of the (...) out of Egypt under Moses, the
halowyng of the sabbath day, the srute sulnesse of Jury, with a description of
the vale of (...), and of the dead sea, of Attalus king of (...)* of his
^rueltie, and his madness, and how he made the people of Rome his heir.
Aristomicus the b^stard son of (...) chalengeth the crown and is overcome by
the Romans. The conteyntes of the. xxxvii. Book. THe Massyliens entreat the
Romans, to r^lease their displeasure against the (...), the romans reward
the kings that aided them against (...)* and the crueliye of (...) toward her
own children, the birth, education, and daunger^ of Mythridates, he subdueth
the Scythians, he trauaileth through ^sia disguysed, he puts his wife ^o
death, for going about to poi son him, his warlyke conversation, he enters in
league with Nico medes king of Bythima, and they jointly conquer Paphlagonia,
he subdueth also Galatia contrary to the prohibitio of the Romans, Nicoinedes
al^ereth the name of his son, an^ proclaymeth him king of Paphlagonta. The
conteyntes of the. xxxviii. Book. MIthridates destroys Ariarathes king of
Cappadocia, and Nicomedes inuadeth the kingdom, My^hridates under pre tence of
helpyng his systers son, dryueth Nicomedes out of the realm, by a cautele
ryddeth his said systers son of his life, and and makes one of his own
sons king, The Cappad^cians rebeil and set up Ariarathes, the brother of the
king slain before, who^ Mythridates overcomes, and dryueth him out of the
realm, the said Ariarathes dies, wherevpyon Nicomedes suborneth a beautiful
young man under the color of being brother to the said Ariarath^s to sue to the
Senate of Rome for the kingdom: Mythridates does the like with an other of
his own sons, the Cap padocians being set at liberty desire a king.
Ariobarzanes is appointed by the Senate: Mythridates enters in leage with
Tygranes king of Armeny, who expulseth Ariobarzanes out of Cappadocia, the
Romans sent their Lieutenaunte^ to set Ariobarzanes again in his kingdom,
Mythridates makes great preparicions and forniture for the wars, he
encourages his soldiers and consulteth of thorderyng of his wars, Ptolomy
king of Cyrene obteynyng the kingdom of Egypt after the death of his brother,
worcester keth most extreme cruelty against thauthors of his promocion, the
Ambassadors of Rome come to Alexandria, Ptolomye flies out of Egypt, makes
war against the same, commits most execrable cruelnesse against his own
children, the courtesy showed by the king of Parthia to Demetrius, being th^yr
prisoner: Demetrius steals away twyse, and is set back again, Antiochus the
brother of Demetrius, makes war against the Parthians, Demetrius is let go
into Syria. Antiochus is slain and all his host murd^red by a sudden
conspiracy: Demetrius escapes into his kingdom. The contents of the. xxxix.
Book. Demetrius, while he goes about for to conquer the whole ^alme of
Egypt, loses his own Realm by sodayn rebelion, the king of Egypt suborneth
one as adopted by Antiochus, to challenge the kynged^ of Syria, proclaimyng him
by the name of Alexander, who overcomes Demetrius and ^ylieth him. Grypho the
son of Demetrius is crowned king by name, (his mother bearyng all the rule)
he is supported by the power of the Egyptians against Alexander, whom he
vanquisheth. Alexander is taken by thieves, brought unto Grypho, and put to
death. The mother of Grypho, offering her sone a cup of poison, is comp^lled to
drink it her sclfe. His brother Cyrice^us makes insurreccion against him, the
King of Egypt dies: Grypho ouercom^eth Cyri cenus, the cruelty of Gryphin
toward her sister Cleopatra the wife of Cyricenus: Cyricenus vanquisheth
Grypho, and reuengeth his wyfes death upon her sister, Cleopatra Queen of
Egypt, s^tteth up and pulls down her sons at her pleasur, and (...) length
is slain by Alexander the younger of them, who for his labor is bannished the
Realm, and his brother P^olomy made king in his stead. The king of (...)
b^queateth his kingdom to the To maynes. Hero^yinus king of Araby in^teth
Egypt and Syria. The cont^yntes of the. xl. Book. TYgranes king of armeny is
creat^d king of Syria, by eleccio^, a great earthquake in Syria, A^granes is
vanquished by Luc^llus, by whom the kingdom of Syria is given to Antiochus
the son of Cyricenus, whom Pompeius afterward depose^h, and makes the
Realm a pronynce of the Romans. The xli. Book. THe Original, increase and
habitacion of the Parthia^s, the order of their common weal, their lenguage
and apparel, the manner of the wars and th^ducacion of their bondmen, their
trade of living, bur^all, supersti^ion, and natural inclynacion: How they
served under diverse kings, whose Realms they afterward brought in subie^ion.
Of the kingdom of Bactria. The foundation of the Parthian Empire by A^aces with
a reher sall of thactes of him and his successors, the exe^rable deed of (...)
son of Eucratides, and the for^unate assayres of Mythrida^s king of the
Parthians. The contents of the. xlii. Book. THe Scythians make war upon
the Parthians, Phr^haties king of Parthia for his cruelty is betrayed and
slain: Actabanus succedeth, after whose death reygneth Mythridates, surnamed
the great, who greatly enlarged the Parthian Empire. Thore^nall and
description of Armenie, the History of Jason and Med^, and of the Argonantes:
Thoriginall of the Albanes in the East, the descryption of the river Tygris.
Mithridat^s is deposed and slain by his brother Horodes. The battelles of the
Parthians against the Romans, the furi^ and madness of horo^s, for the death
of his son Pacorus, the great wickedness of Phrahar^es, who overcomes
Themperout Antony, is deposed and set up again by the Scythians: Tyridates who
during his absence, was created king, hearing of his return, flies to
Augustus The Emperor: Phrahartes sent Ambassadoures for him, Augustus subdued
the Par^tians with the Majesty of his Name. The contents of the. xliii.
Book. THe first inhabiters of Italy, the coming thither of Euander, and Eneas
and of his warrres there, the buyldyng of long alba, with the succession of the
kings thereof, the buyldyng of Rome by Remus and Romulus, the buildyng of
Marsieles in France, with the praise and commendacion, and with the wars
thereof, the stead fast ^ayth of the Massiliens toward the Romans, the
ancestors of thauthor of this work. The contents of the. xliiii. Book. THe
situacion, fertility and description of Spayn, a wonderful example of
patience, the deeds of Uiriatus Captain of the Spanyardes, of the genettes,
and of the steel that is in that country, what things were invented by
Gargoris, how Gargoris assayed by all means to put his daughters child to
death, and could not, whereupon moved with compassion for the perilles he had
escaped, he made him his heir, whose name was Habis: the inventions of the
said Habis: the story of Hercules and Gerion, the inhabityng of the Gades,
upon what occasion the Carthaginenses entered first into spayn, and of the
doyngs of their Captayns there, ^ynallie how it was subdued by Augustus
^hemperour, and made a Prouynce of the Romans.
A PREFACE OF SIMON Grineus to the Reader as concerning the profit of readyng
Hystoryes.
IF it were as Easy for every man to take out and use to his own be hofe, the
examples and instructions left in Hystories, as the Hystories have sure and
grounded examples to lean unto: I would give all men advise to run the
strayie and nea rest way into the most plentiful and fruiteful fields of
Histories, without tariens. For what (...) be thought more pleasant or
profitable, than sytting as it were in the Theater or Stage of man's life (the
which an Historye has most exquisitely furnished in all points, and to all
ententes and purposes) to be made ware and wise at the perilles of other men,
without any danger on his own behalf to take ensample of all sorts, the
which a man may apply to his own behoof and utility in every thing: and at
such^ time as he shall chance to be present among^ great men, when with
greatest aduisement they do debate most weighty affairs, to be able to
discuss the end and sequel of the same, which thing we al do chiefly
desire and covet, and that which otherwise (considering the shorteness^ of man's
life) were a thing impossible to comprise in memory the times of many hundred
years past, to behold the beginninges, the procedinges, and the endinges of
the gretest Empyres of all euilles either private or public, manifest ly to
discern the ground and occasion: In every hard and difficult matter to have
one to try out the ieoperdyes and perilles before thee, and to have as it
were, a lod^sman to go before thee in every danger: never to be de^itute of
tried experience: and to be brief, of things paste (which properlye and
peculiarlye, apper^ayneth to the duty of a wise man,) polliti^ely to fore see
what may follow in all chances, and so to judge of them as if they were
present. Now forasmuch as we ought to come to the readyng of Histories, so
much the better furnyshed, as an Historye is more replenished and laden with
plenteous fruit: and for as much as it is as difficulte a matter, to give
right judge mente of another man's life as of his own and that no man is
able (be he never so sharp syghted in this case) to view another man's life
well, that can not view his own, both are to be understood, namely that
there is in this case very great difficultnesse, and also that long time
before we enterprise hereunto, we ought not only to have a little snatche of
civil policy, but also, that we ought to be fully resolved and established in
our selves, as concerning the whole tenor of our life: onles we will
continually waver in our minds, and be miserably led about with vain
imaginacions of this life like unto ghostes. For in like ma ner as at a great
and sumptuous feast, that is furnyshed with all kind of deynties and delicate
viandes, it comes to pass that one thing is set before one man, another to
another, few taste of one thing, every man of that he lyketh best, the r^eners
of all that come before them, and as every man's taste and dyete is, so takes
hepleasure of the deinties that stand before him, yet notwithstanding, there
should be some one kind of measure which nature has appointed, and some one
kind of meat simple and in any wise uncorrupted, that is most for the health
and nourish^ment of the body, from either of the which whosoever steppeth
aside, and follows his own appe^ite beyond either measure or thordinaunce of
nature, he may take more hurt than pleasure of the delicates: Even so in that
great variety of mann^s life although there be a thousand sundry sorts of
things, and a thousand purposes, and after what sort so ever a man (...) led
by fancy or stayed by judgment, so does he deem of his own life, and of
other men's: yet there is but one only pathwaye of virtue, in the which who
so walks advisedly, is only to be counted to live well. All others, like as
they did at the sumptuous feast, when al things provoke them, being able
neither in their own life, nor yet in another man's at any time to find what
is best to follow, or how to proceed. But if nature have given any thing to
man, the which he may use or abuse at his pleasure, certesse he ought most
circumspectely to use this. But I pray you what man is there almost, that
applyenge the rule of virtue unto all sayenges and doings, as well of his own
as of other men's, does with more aduisement adventure upon them, then upon
the daintye dishes, set before him on the table: or which thinks not him
self sufficiently learned in this behalf? In the which thing it is awonder
to see, how sore men deceive them selves, whiles they imagine that the bare
hystory, is of it self able enough to enstruct the reader, whereas in deed it
does no more but minister matter to learn upon, offering it self to all uses
according as the person is affectioned, in like case as does the feast. For
some we see have none other delyght but only in the reading, who sekyng no more
but that only one delectation, do loose all the other goodly and pleasant
fruits thereof. Such men gain nothing more by the readyng of an Historye,
than they that play upon a harp or a lute to drive away the time, as a man
would say, to pass over the troublesomnesse of the time present, shortly
after to enter into a greater and more troublesome conflycte with them selves.
For it is no pleasure that has no respect unto virtue. Othersome the
glyttering gloss of glory so much pricketh forward, and (which in other
matters is vnstablenessof mind) to no purpose transformeth, that they think
nothing to great for them, nor nothing to ^arre above their reach, quyte
forgettyng that those glorious examples are not set for the^ by writers for any
other intent, then that such as read them ensewynge virtue, may learn^ to
condemn glory if none be offered, or if it accompany the^ not to be proud and
arrogant therefore. And although that none but fools* will go about to aspire
to the like glory without the like virtue, yet notwithstanding we see some,
which for none other cause but that they have read the noble acts of others,
do think them selves high wise men, and take much upon them, like unto
players of Tragedies, which when they have put of thapparell, wherein they
played the parts of most noble personage, do also counterfeyte them in
countenance and behavior. There are also, and those not a few, which
delyghte only in strannge things and wonders, men of vulgar and rude
understanding, who after the manner of thunskylfull people, oftentimes make
more of a man's gaye cote, than of the person him self, and more of the
outward show than of the work. So wonderful a power has an Historye, to
work in the minds of the Readers. Now, whereas it is the chiefest point that
belongs to an Historye, to stir up the mind of man from slothfulness,
and to fence it against all dangers: and that the strength of examples,
(then the which there is nothing of greater force to persuade and dissuade)
inespecially tends to that end and purpose, it comes to pass through the
careless securitye of men, (believing that other men's perilles perteyne
nothing to them selves) that such things as are most worthy of remembrance,
are heard and read with deaffe and stopped ears. Finallye there be (which a
man would not believe) that transgress even against the very same part, that
contains most grave and serious matters as though things should be written,
not as they were done in deed, but as they ought to have been done. Therefore
partly by means of that careless securitye, and partlye by means of that
surfeit of rash and unadvised reading, it comes to pass, that even as it
were of corrupt humors, a certain corruptnesse of judgment, and
perverseness of opinion, (which ought to be most upright and found as
concerning the life) and an unsteadfast and slipperye trad^ and tenor of
living is taken up: and that in likewise as to inordinate persons, their meat
does them no good, even in like cas^, there comes no profit at all to us of
our reading.

I think you may now perceive, how the manner of readyng Hystories, and of
looking upon a man's life, is well nigh all one. And the greatest difficulty
is this. I mean the perverseness of our own judgment, which causes us to be
driven, not that way that the examples ought to bear greatest sway of them
selves, but that way that our mind is most inclined and bent unto. This is
also another, and of no less force than the other aforesaid, that writes do in
such wise set forth things, that they not only seek to be well liked, but also
(following as it were the taste of their own mouths) like as they were forgers
of it them selves, give their judgment and verdite upon matters, extollynge
some things with high commendacions, as though they would have all other men
to like those things, which they most fancied them selves. The which thing, if
so be it they did it without color, it were easier to consent or dissente
therefro. But now in likewise, as Cooks have oftentimes more regard to the
belly, then to their masters commodity and profit: even so I would God that
the writers of Hystories, for the most part, sought not so much to please and
entice the Reader. Therefore by two means are we led awrye: that is to say,
by our own judgment, and by the forespeakyng of the writers, as by them that
write not matters plainly and sincerely. For an Historiographer is but an
interpretour of things done: with whose judgment (it there be any fault
therein) it stands in like case, as when a piece of wine, that of it self
being good, pleasant, and beawtifull, does either take an evil talent of
the Caske, or else is other wise marred, by minglyng some other thing with yt,
the which is either a shameful and intolerable (...), or else a point of
extreme folly and ignorance. It is to be seen by this one example, what matter
the judgment of the writer makes. A man of raw aduisement, that attributes
the bryngyng to pass of great matters to man's policy, although that by the
determinacion of so many things, he prove him self a liar, yet he casts men
into a great follye: as whose knowledge (do the best they can) being scarce
able to wey and consider accordinglye, the things that lie before their eyes,
their power and strength not much excedyng the little worms, because of one
prosperous success, rashely takes upon it the rule of the whole world. But
such a man as is otherwise informed, teaching that things are in deed put in
execution by the pollicye of man, but yet ruled and governed by the providence
of God delivers men both from folly, and also from another mischief as great
as that, which is supersticion. By the resydue, such as be good men (whose
study is altogether employed about matters apperteynyng to God) ought to know
what difference there is between each of them, and what their duty is. I give
this warning first of all for this purpose, that forasmuch as I am of opinion,
that such kind of Authors are to be read, and yt were for nothing else but
for the great aboundeunce of examples that they entreat of, young men should
also think this, how circumpectelye and carefully they ought to be read,
considering how great fruytes or discommodities are in them propounded. For it
happens in like case to such as ymagine that in Hystorys may be read over
lightly, or the life to be passed over unadvisedly, without thexacte observing
and executyng of a man's duetye: as it does to men of the country, which in
the sackyng of a city come to the ryffling of some Apothecaries of Grocers
shop, plenteouslye furnyshed with all things belongyng to the craft, and
being allured with the sweetness of the confections and spices which they
chance first to lay their hands on, thynking all the residue to be of the
same sort, do eat suppe, devour, cramme in, and lycke up all that comes to
hand, in such wise that some fall sick, some run mad, some dye out of hand,
and every one of them be maruaylou^ye distempered, so that all the army laugh
them to skorne for their labor. For even as the life is full of commodities
and discommodities, even so is an hystorye which is the image and
representacion of the life. And the wisdom of the life consists only in
the usage of the life. Farewell, and enjoy these things to thy most
furtheraunce and commoditye.

THE PREFACE OF THE MOST famous Historiographer Iustine upon the Histories of
Trogus Pompeius unto anto^ye the Emperor.
WHereas many of the Romans even such as were of the state of Consuls, had
put thactes of the Romans in writing, both in Greek, and also in other
strange language. Trogus Pompeius a man of aunciente eloquence, whether it
were for desire of like renown and glory, or for pleasure that he had in the
variety and strangeness of the work, compiled as well the hystories of the
Greeks, as the Histories of all the whole world besides, in the Lating tou^g to
thentent, that as our Chronicles are read in Greek, so the Chronicles of the
Greeks might be red in our tongue also. Wherein he enterprysed a piece of work
of great pain both to body and mind. For seeing that many Authors, which
have taken upon them to put in writing the doings of some one king, or of
some one peculiar kind of people, do think them selves to have taken a matter
of great weight in hand, may we not wrothelye think Pompeius to have been as
bold as Hercules, that durst adventure upon the whole world, in whose books
are contained the doings of all ages, of all Kings, of all nations, and of
all contreyes? And those things that the Greek Chroniclers have entreated
upon disorderly, as every man thought most conueniente for him self, all the
same things has Pompeius (plaring them in their times, and setting them in
due order) compyled in Hystorye, omittyng all such things as were not
profitable to be spoken of. Therefore of these xliiii. volumes, (for so many did
Pompeye set forth) by leisure during the time that I was in the City, I drew
out all such things as I thought worthy to be known, ^ leaving out such
things, the knowledge whereof could not have delyghted, nor yet were necessary
for example, I have gathered as it were a little bundle of flowers, to the^tent
that such as have learned Greek might have whereby to be admonyshed, and they
which have not learned Greek, whereby to be instructed. The which I have
dedicated unto your majesty, not so much to read, as to peruse and correct,
and also to thentent to give an acc^unpte of spending my time, whereof Cato
wills a due account to be made. For it suffiseth me at this present, if your
highenes do allow my doings, trusting hereafter, that when the brunte of
slanderous envy is ouerpaste, they that come after me, shall bear witness
of my travail and pains taking. Farewell.

The first Book OF THABRIDGEMENT OF Histories, taken out of the Hystorye of
Trogus Pompeius by Iustine the Historiographer.
IN the first beginning of things the rule and government of countries, and
nations was in the hands of kings. Who were advanced Princ^s first elected
for virtues sake
to this high estate and pre-eminence, not through ambicion and favor of the
comminaltye, but for their virtuous and modeste behauioure suffycientlye tried
and approved amongst good men. There were no laws to bynd men to their
obedience: but the commandments of Princes were in stead of laws, whose
custom was rather to defend tha^ enlarge y^ borders, of their kingdoms. And
there was none that would usurp or take upon him, further than in his own
countreye where he was borne. Ninus king of The beginning of the Monarchy of
Assiria.
Thassirians, did first alter and break this old and aunci^t custom of the
Gentiles, through a strange desire of bearyng rule. For he first made war
upon his neighbors, and conquered the nations which yesiknewe not how to
make resystence against him, even unto the borders of Affricke. There were
before his time two ancient kings, Uexores king of Egypt, and Tanais king of
Scithia of the which the one made a voyage into Pontus, and the other into Egypt.
But they made war a far of, and not nere home, not of purpose to enlarge
their empire, but to wine honor and renown of Chiualry to their subjects:
and so being satisfied with the victory they absteined from desire of honor
the first cause of war.
bearing rule. But Ninus continually dilated his Empire by seizing into his
possession such countries as he won. By reason whereof having subdewed his
neighbors, and joining their power unto his, and so going ever stronger and
stronger to the next, each former victory being an occasion and furtheraunce to
the next followyng, he conquered all the Easter part of the world. The last
fyeld that he fought The invention of magic and A^^ronomy.
was with zoroastres king of the Bactrians, who is reported to have first
inverted art Magic, and diligently to have serched out the beginning of the
world, and the mouinge of the stars. This zoroastres being slain, Ninius him
self also dyed: leaving behind him a son as then under age, called Ninus,
by his wife Semiramis. She durst neither An example of a pollityke w^^an.
put the government of the Empire to the child being under years of
discrescion, nor yet her self take it upon her openly Wisely foreseing and
thinkinge with her self, that so many and so mighty nations which scarcelye
by their good wills would obey a man, would much less abide to be subject to
a woman. Therefore, where as she was Ninus wife, she feigned her self to be his
son: and whereas she was a woman, she feigned her self to be a boy. And she
might well do it. For they were both of a mean stature, both of them spoke
small, and in the ^amentes and proporcion of body was little difference
betwyxte them.

Wherefore she put on man's apparayle and close hosen, and on her head she
ware a kind of coy^e called Tyara. And for because folk should not mistrust
any thing to be hidden under this new found apparel, she commanded the
people to be apparelled after the same sort, the which kind of attire all
Thassirians have ever used from that day to this. Thus at the first by
counterfaytyng the kind, she was taken for a boy.

Afterward she achieved many noble enterprises: by the greatness whereof,
when she thought she had overcome Virtue ouercometh envy
envy, she confessed who she was, and who^ she counterfeyted. Neither did this
her doing diminishe the honor and estimation of her empire, but rather
brought her in greater admiration of all men, that she being a woman, had
surmounted in prowess not only women, but also men.

She builded Babylon and enclosed it with a wall of brycke The buylding of
Babylon.
enterlayed with sand and Bytamen, which is a kind of slymye mortar, yssuyng
out of the ground, in diverse places of that country. Many other noble
enterprises this Queen achieved. For being not content to maynteyne the state
of thempyre and bounds of the same, as her husband left it unto her, she
subdued Aethyop thereunto. And besides that, she made war upon Indie,
whereunto there was never any that durst give the adventure, saving she only
and great Alexander. At the last, unnaturally desyryng to Semiramis slain of
her own son.
company with her own son, she was by him slain, when she had reigned.
xlii. years after the death of her husband Ninus. Her son Ninus being
contented with the countries, won by his parents, layeng aside all
Chiualrye, and knighthoode, as though he had changed nature with his mother,
was seldom seen of men, but spente his time among a sort of women. His
posterity also followynge his example, gave answer to the people and to
ambassadors by messengers. The Empire of Thassirians which afterward were
called Syrians, continued. 1300. years. The last king that reigned among
them, was Sardanapalus, a man more vicious than any woman. Unto whose presence
Arbactus whom he had made lyeuetenaunt over the Medes, being Sardanapalus.
by long suyte had much intreataunce hardly at length admitted, (which thing
was never granted to any man be fore) found him among a sort of concubines
spinning purple on a rock, in woman's apparayle, passing all the women there in
softness of body, and nycenesse of countenance, and weyeng out to each of
them their task. At the which light Arbactus disdayning, that so many men
should be subject (...) are the (...) cay of the gr^test king domes.
to such a woman, and that so many valiaunte knights and men of war should
be slaves to a woman, went forth and told his peers what he had seen: saying,
he could not find in his heart to serve and obey such a one as had rather be a
woman then a man. Whereupon the Lords confedered them selves together and had
him battle. Who hearing thereof, not like a man entendyng to defend his
kingdom, but as women are wont to do for fear of death, first sought a corner
to hyde his head, and soon after with a few and out of array, he came into the
field, where being vanquished, he retired into his palace, and there making a
great Thempyre of the Medes begins.
bonefire, cast him self and all his riches thereinto, plainge the man in this
only point. After this, Arbactus the worker of his confusion, which before was
lieutenaunte over ye Medes, was instituted and made king. And he translated the
empire from the Assirians to the Medes. In process of time (...) of his (...)*
after many kings, by order of descent, the kingdom came unto Astyage. This
man having done issue saving one only daughter, dreamed that he saw spryng
out of her priuye members, a vine whose branches shadowed all Asia. The
interpretours of dreams and wonders being asked their judgment and advice in
the matter, made answer that his daughter should bring him fothe a nephewe
whose greatness was by his vision declared before, and that by Her (...) was
(...).
him be should he deposed from his kingdom. The king being not a little abash^d
with this interpretacion, married his daughter neither to a Noble man, nor to
one of his own country, least the nobility of the pare^tes should advance
and encourage his nephewe to take much upon him but unto a man of mean estate
and living of the country of Persia, which in those ^ayes was reputed as a
base countreye, and The (...) of (...).
of no regard or estimation. Nevertheless being not by this act quite
dispatched of the fear of this dream, he sent for his daughter being great
with child, that as soon as she were delivered, he might see the babe killed*
As Soon as the child was borne, it was delivered to be ^layne, unto Harpagus
one of ye kings priuye counsel. Harpagus fearing that if after the decease
of the king, because he had no issue male to succeed him, the kingdom should
descend unto his daughter, she would revenge the death of her child upon him
being a subject, which she could not do upon her father* delivered the child
to the kings herman commau^ ding him to cast it away. By chance the very
same time the herdman him self had a son newlye borne. Whose That God will
have saved can not (...) lost.
wife hearing of the casting away of the kings child, earnestly besought her
husband to fetch the child unto her that she might see him.

The shepeherd overcome with the earnest intreataunce of his own wife,
returned into the wood, where he found a bytche giving the child suck, and
defending it from fowls and wild beasts. Then being moved with pity to see
the bytche so natural and pitiful, he took up the child and bare it home to
his cottage, the bitche following him egerlye all the way. As Soon as the woman
took the babe in her arms, he smiled and played with her, as though he had
known her, and there appeared in him such a cheerfulness, and as it were a
certain smiling and flattering countenance that she desired the shepeherd
herhusbande, to cast away (...) ^ayth it was borne dead.
his own child and suffer her to bring up that in the sted of it: such was
the good fortune of the child or else the hope that she of him conceived. And
so the destinye of the two children being changed, the kings nephewe was
brought up for the shepeherdes son, and the shepeherdes son was cast away
for the kings nephewe, the nources name was afterward called Sparcon, because
the Persia^s do call a Cyrus is cho sen king a^ong children.
bytche so in their language. The child being brought up among the
shepeherdes, was named Cyrus. And in the mean time being chosen king among
children as they were a playeng, when in sport he whypped such as were
stubbourne against him, the parents of the children made thereof a great
complaynt to the king, saying it stood not with their honor that their
children should be beaten like slaves of the kings bondsman. The king sendynge
for ^he The (...) of (...).
child, demanded of him why he did so. He answered (without any chaungyng
of countenance at all for the mat ter) that he had done as it became a king
to do. The king maruayling at his audacitye, came in remembrance of his
dream, and the interpretacion thereof, and so when both the countenance of
the child, and also his likeness unto him self, the time of his castyng
away, and the examinacio^ of the shepeherd agreed in one, he acknowledged him
to be his nephewe. And for because he thought him self dispatched of his
dream, in as much as the child had played the king among the shepeherdes, the
cruel heart that he bare ^ous cruelty (...).
toward the child, was clearly thereby relented. But to his friend Harpagus he
became so deadly an enemy, for saving of his nephewe, that to revenge his
displeasure upon him, he killed his son, and set him before his father to
eat. Displeasure wisely (...) bled.


Harpagus disse^bling his inward grief, for the time, differred the hatred
justly against the king conceived, until he might espy occasion of
reuengement. At the length when Cyrus came to man's estate, being moved
thereunto with The letter of Harpagus unto Cyrus.
sorrow for the loss of his son, he wrate unto him how his graundfather had
as it were banished him into Persia, how his graundfather had commanded him to
be slain, how by his benefit he had been preserved, how for the same he had
gotten the kings displeasure, and how he had lost his own son, exhorting
him to raise an army and to take the kingdom forthwyth upon him, promisynge
that the Medes should at the day of battle turn to his side.

And forasmuch as the letter could not be carried openly ^unning (...)
ueyaunce of (...) letter.
for the kings officers which kept all the passages and sear ched such as
came by, it was put into a Hares bellye, the ^owels first taken out, and the
Hare was (...) to a trusty servant to carye to Cirus into Persia. Moreover h^
took nets with him, to (...) that under pretense of hunting his purpose
might be hidden.

When Cyrus had read the letter, he was commanded in a dream to take the
same way as he was counsayled in the epistle. Nevertheless, he was furthermore
warned, that whom soever he met first the next day, him he should make his
companion in all his enterprises. Wherefore as he went into the countreye,
before the dawning of the day he met with a servant called Sibaris, that had
escaped out of pri son, from a certain man of Media, and enquiring what coun
treyman he was, understanding that he was borne in Persia The pollicye of Cyrus
to cause the Persians to rebel.
he pulled of his fetters, took him to be his companion, and returned to the
city Persepolis. There he called the people together, commanding the^ every
man to take his Are, and go cut down the wood that grew by the high way side.
The which thing being lustely done, the ^ext day he made a feast and bade them
all to it. When he saw them merry in the midst of their good cheer, he
demanded of them (if they were put to the choice) whether they had rather
chose to live in labor and toil as they had done the day before, or in
myrthe and pleasure as they did that present day. The cried all with one
voice, in mirth and pleasure as we do to day. Then (quod he) as long as ye be
in subjection to the Medes, so long shall ye lead all your lives in labor and
toil like unto yesterday, but if you will follow me, ye shall live in pleasure
even as you have done this day. And Cyrus rebelleth.
so with merry cheer and glad hearts of them all, he made war against the
Medes. Astyages for getting the great displeasure done to Harpagus, made him
his lieutenaunt ge The crueltye revenged.
neral and committed to his charge the whole stay of his bat tell, who
immediately upon the receypt thereof, yielded and betrayed the same unto Cirus,
and so through treason and disloyaltye, requited the kings cruelty. When
word Necessitye gives heart.
thereof came unto Astyages, he raised another power with all speed possible,
and went him self into Persia, where ^ly renewing the battle, as his men were
fightinge he set a company at their backs. commanding them to beat them*
perforce upon their enemies that made any countenance to fly away, causyng it
to be plainly told them that if they wanne not the victory, they should find
as good men behind their backs as before their faces. And therefore ad uise
them selves well, whether it were better for th^ym to break through the one
flyeng cowardly, or through the other by fighting manfullye. His soldiers
perceiving there was none other remedy, took courage to them and stood to it
stoutly. By means whereof, when the host of the Persia^s Force and wysdom
(...) to ^tune.
being euercharged began somewhat to give back and by little and little to lose
ground, their mothers and wives came running ou^ against them, desyring them to
return into the battle, and perceiving that they made no haste (as men that
were at their wits ends) they lifted up their clothes and showing the privy
parts of their bodies, asked them if they would run into their mothers and
wives bellyes for succor. The Persia^s being stayed with this reproach, re
turned into battle, and making a prease upon their enemies, compelled them
to fly, from whom but even now they fled themselves. In this battle Astyage
was taken prisoner. From whom Cyrus took nothing save the kingdom, The (...)
of Cyrus.
behauing him self in this conflycte rather like a nephewe than like a
conqueroure, and he made him ruler over the Hircanians. For he would not
return unto the Medes. This was then of the Empire of the Medes, which
endured. (...) the (...).
CCC. L. years. In the beginning of his reign Cirus made (...) (whom
according to his vision in the night he had delivered out of prison, and takeu
as companion in all his enterprises and affairs) lieutenaunt over the Perfi
ans, and gave him his sister in marriage. But the cities which were tributare
before to the Medes, forasmuch as thempire was changed, supposing their estate
to be changed also, fell from Cirus, which thing was unto him a cause and
beginning ^
of much war and many battelles. At the length, ha uing brought many of them
to their accustomed obedience, when he made war against the Babilonians,
Cr^asus king of Lidia, whose wealth and riches were at those days very notable
came to succor the Babilonians. Where being ba^quished, and now careful what
should beecome of him (...).
self, he retired into his own kyngome. Cyrus also, having set althinges at a
stay in Babylon, passed from thence with his host into Lyd^a, where he
overcame the power of Craesus with no ado to speak of, being already dismayed
with Cresus is ta ken prisoner.
the discomfiture taken before at Babylon. Craesus him self was taken
prisoner, but the lesser danger the battle was The magnitycence of Cyrus.
of, the gentlyer was the victory used. For besides that he pardoned Cresus of
his life, he gave him also the most part of his inheritance, and the city of
Barce. In the which although he lived not a king in deed, yet might he live a
like a king as might be devised. This mercy and clemency was profitable as well
to the conqueror as to the conquered.

For after it was once known that war was made against Cresus, throughout al
Greece soldiers were mustered and sent for the to his aid, as it had been to
quench some commen fire. So well was Cresus beloved with all the cities, that
the Greeks would have made sharp war upon Cyrus, if he had dealt with Cresus
any thing cruellye Afterward in process of time, while Cyrus was occupied The
Lydi^ rebel and are ^bdued.
in other wars, the Lydians rebelled. From whem being vanquished again, he
took quite their horses, armor, and weapon commaundyng them to use victaling,
minstralsye, gamyng, and all kind of ribawdrye and wantonness. And so by this
means the people which sometime were of great prowess, and redoubted for their
chyualrye, through e^eminate cowardnesse and riot, lost all their puyssaunce
and strength, and they which before Cyrus time cculde by no The reward of
rebellion.
wars be vanquyshed, now falling to all kind of riot and excess, are
overcome with sloth and idleness. There were before Cresus many kings in
Lydia, for diverse chances worthy to be spoken of, but none had like fortune
as had The foolyshe love and demeanor of (...).
Candaules, who having a wife who^ for her excellent beau tie he loved out of
all measure, and not content with the secret knowledge of his pleasures,
praised her to every body and bewraied the priui ies of wedlock, as though that
silence had been an hinderance to her beauty: at the last, to make good his
words, he showed her naked to his companion Gyges, By the which deed, on the
one side he so entyced and allured his friend to commit aduoutrie with his
wife, that he made him his enemy: and on the other side he withdrew his wives
love from him self and (as ye would say) surrendered it (...) ^eth Candaules,
and makes hius sel^kyng.
to another man. For ere it was long after, Gyges slew Candaules, and married
his mistres for his labor. The wife being endowed with the blood of her
husband, yielded both her self and the kingdom into his hands that
committed aououtry with her. When Cyrus had conquered Asye, and pacified the
whole East, he made war against the Scithions. The same time reigned over the
Scithians Queen Thomyris who not abashed like a woman at the coming of A
manly women.
her enemy, whereas she might have stopped their passage over the river Araxes,
suffered the^ to come over: thinkings that she should fight more to her own
advantage within her own country, and that her enemies should the hardlyer
escape if they were put to the worse, because of the river be twene them and
home. Cyrus therefore having ferried over his carmy, when he had gone a little
way into Scithia, pitched his camp, and the next day counterfetting a fear,
as though he would have retired back again, forsook his camp, the which he
left sufficiently furnished with plenty of wine, and all kind of delicate
viandes meet for feastynge, which His name was Spargapises.
thing being declared to the Queen, she sent her young son with the third
part of her host to follow after Cyrus.

When they were come to Cyrus camp, the young man being ignorant in feats of
war, as though he had come to Ignoraunc^ pernicious in a Captayns.
banquet and not to battle, leauyng the pursuyte of his enemies, suffered his
barbarous countrymen to ouercharge them selves with wine, by means whereof
they were so drunken that they could not fight. Cyrus having knoweledge
thereof by his espyalles, returned secretelye in the night, and falling upon
them unawares, slew all the Scithians, and the Queens son among them.

Thomiris having lost so great an army, and (that which should have grieved the
worse her only son, fell not a weeping The invincible courage of Thomiris.
for sorrow, but devised with her self how she might he revenged, and with
like policy and deceypte begyled her enemies now being in their chief ruff
for their now got thenvictory Whereupon, feyning a mistruse for the slaughter in
the last overthrow, she gave back so long, till she had brought Cyrus into
a strait, and there enuironing him The great ^aughter of the Persians
with a bushement of soldiers laid before in the mountains for the same
purpose, she slew. 200000 Persians and y^ king him self. In the which
conflycte, this thing is worthy to be noted, that there was not so much as one
man left to bear home tidinges of so great a slaughter. The Queen The death
of Cyrus.
commanded the head of Cyrus to be cut of, and thrown in to a boll of man's
blood, castyng him in the teeth in this wise with his crueltye. Now fill thy
self with blood, which thou have ever thyrsted. Cyrus reigned thirty years,
being maruaylous notable, not only in the beginning of his reygne, but also
during all the continuance of the same. Cambyses succedeth.


After him succeeded Cambisis, which to his fathers empire, by conquest annexed.
Egipte. But being offended with the suspersticion of the Egiptians, he
commanded the Temples of Apis and other their Gods to be beaten down.

Furthermore also, he sent an army to destroy the renowned Temple of Ammon,
which being overwhelmed with tempests and heaps of sand, was utterly
destroyed. ^own will have no pere.


These things being done, he dreamed that his brother Smerdis should reygne
after him, the which dream made him so afraid, that he sticked not after
sacrilege to commit most unnatural murder in killing his own brother. For it
was a hard and an unlikely matter, that he should take any pity upon his own,
which in spite of religion did violently set upon the Gods. As an instrument
to bring this cruel act to pass, he chose a friend of his one of the Magia^s
called (...) ca not continue ^ong.
Comaris. In the mean while he him self being sore wou^ ded in the thygh,
with his sword falling out of the sheathe by it self, dyed, and so suffered
worthy punyshemente, whether it were for the murder commanded, or for the
The great treason of (...).
sacrylege already committed. When tidings here of came to the wyso man, or
ener it was openly known that the king was dead, he dispatched his purpose,
and having slain Smerdis which by right should have been king, set up his
own brother, Oropastes in his stead For he was very like the kings brother
in making and favor. By reason whereof, uo man misdeemynge any such treason
to be wrought, in stead of Smerdis, Oropastes was made Oropast^reigneth in
stead of (...).
king. The which thing was the easier to be brought to pass and to be kept
from knowledge, because that among the Persians for the more honor and
reverence of his person the king shows not him felfe bare faced. The wise men
therefore, thereby to win the favor of the comminaltye, released unto them
three years tribute, and exempted them from the wars during all the said
term, to thentente, they might establyshe by briberye, and flatterye the
kingdom that they had gotten by treason and pollicye. The which thing was
first suspected by one Orthanes a noble man, and The treason is mistruste^
one that had a great foresight in coniecturyng Therefore he sent to his
daughter which was one of the kings concubynes, to know if he that was king,
were kynga Cyrus son or no? She sent hiw word that she her self could not
tell, nor yet learn the truth at onye of her follows han des, because every
one of them were kept alone in a house by them selves. Then he sent her word
again, that she should feel about his head when he were a sleep. For Cambyses
had cut of both the wise man's cares before. Her father The treason comes to
light.
being certified that the king had no ears, bewrayed the matter to the noble
men of the realm^, and compelled them to bind them selves, with an oth^, that
they should Counsel (...) not be kept long in a multitude.
confound the wrongful king. There were no mo but seven priuye to this
conspiracye, the which incontinentlye (least if they had time and space to
bethynke them, the matter might be by some of the company bewrayed) with
every man his weapon under his gown, went strayt to the pallaice, where
having slain such as withstoode them, they came to the place where the wise
men were: who showed Necessity ge^ courage.
well that they wanted no courage to defend them selves.

For they drew their weapons and slew two of the conspiracye. Nevertheless
the other being mo in noumber, ca^ght The zeal ^obryas Gobryas to his country.
hold of them. Of the which Gobryas having one of the wise me^ fast in his
arms (perceiving y^ his fellows stayed their hands, for doubt of stryking
him through in stead of the wise man, because the matter was done in a dark
place) Thend of vs^pe authori ty^.
bad the^ thrust their swords into the wise man, though yt were through his
body. Yet notwithstanding his fortune was such that the wise man was slain,
and be escaped unhurt. The wysemen being thus slain, the noble men atteyned
great honor and renown for recovering of the kingdom: but much more honor
did they atteyne, in that when they were in controversy for the kingdom, they
could agree among them selves. For both in prowess, and e^ate they A
singu^ar ex ample of modesty in great esta^es.
were so equal, that it should have been a hard matter for the people to have
said which of them was worthyest.

Therefore they inuent^d a way among them selves, where by to commit the
determinacion of their matter to God and good Fortune. They agreed among them
selves that at the time appointed, every one of them should come before the
palace on horsabacke, by the break of the day, and be whose horse neyed first
before the rising of the son should be king. For the Persians believe, that
there is no god but the son, and that horses are unto him hallowed.

There was among the conspiratours o^ Darius thesone of Histaspis that feign
would have had the kingdom if he had wist how to come by it. To whom being
sad and care full for the matter, his horsekeper said: sir if nothing may The
policy of a horse^.
hinder you but that, be of good cheer, and take no thought at a^ for the
matter, the day shall be yours. Thereupon, the night before the day appointed, he
brought his masters horse into the same place, and there put him to a Mare,
thin king that for desire of the Mare the thing would come to pass, as
afterward it did in deed. The next morning eu^ry one of them being come at the
hour appointed, Darius horse knowing the place of courage to the mare,
forthwith neyed alowde, and (the residewe being slow) first of all the
company, gave his master a token of god luck. The rest of the lords were of
such modestye, that as soon as they heard the tooken of good luck, by and by
they lept of their horses, and saluted Darius by the name of king. All the peo
ple also, following the judgment of the princes, appointed Da^ (...) made king
b^ the neying (...) a horse.
and took him for their king. And so the kyngedome of the Persians recovered
by the prowess of seven of the noblest men of all the realm, was in the
turning of a hand brought into one man's hand again. A man would scarce
be leave that such great estates, should end so weyghty matter, with such
reverence and love one to another. Considering that they spared not their lives
to wresse it out of the wise men's hands. Although (to say the truth) besides
man hoode, personage, favor, and prowess, meet and worthy so great a
kingdom. Darius was also near of aliaunce un to the ancient kings of
Persia. Therefore in the beginning of his reygne, he took in marriage with great
solemnity Da^ius ^keth to wife the daughte^ of Cyrus named A^ossa.
and royalty the daughter of king Cirus, to thentent it might seem that the
kingdom was not so much b^tow ed upon a stranger, as rather reduced and
brought again into the family of Cirus. Within a while after, when the
Assyrians had rebelled and taken the city of Babylon, the king being in a
great rage by cause he could not devise how to recover the town again, one of
them that helped to slay the wise men named zopyrus, caused his body to be
piteouslye torn al over with whipping at home at his own house The (...)
^opyrus to his king and to his countr^
and his nose, lips, and ears to be cut of, and in the same plyghte
sodainelye came into the kings preseuce which thought of nothing less than
such a matter. Darius being amassed, and dem^undinge who had so shamefullye
mangled him, and upon what occasyon, he informed ^ym secreatelye for what
purpose he had done it, and after ^e had suffycyentlye and thorowelye
establyshed his purpose, and taught the king how he would do, he fled like a
rennagate unto Babilo^. There he showed the people his forne skin, and maimed
face, making exclamacion of the kings crueltye, through who^ he lost his part
of the kingdom, not by prowess and manhood, but by luck not by the
judgment of men but by the neyenge of a horse, he cou^ sailed them to take
warning by their friends, how to beware of their foes, he exhorted them not
to trust more to their walls, than to their weapons, and that they would
give him leave, to revenge his displeasure upon the king in their behalf,
now while his anger was fresh in his re membraunce. He was well known among
them all, to be a noble man, and a man of much prowess, and as for his cre
dite they doubted not at all, as whereof they thought his wounds and
wrongful maymes to be a sufficient pledge and witness. Therefore by a common
consent, they made him a captain, who with a small band of soldiers twyse or
thrice put to flight the Persias giving way for the nones At the last being put
in trust with the whole army, ^pirus de^lluereth Babylon to the king.
he betrayed it to the king, and brought the city again under his obeisance.
After this the king made war against the Scithians, of the which we will
entreat in the next book folyowing.

THE SCEOND BOOK of Iustine.
EOr as much as we be come to the rehersall of the acts of the Scithians,
which were both great and honorable: I htynke it good to entreat even of
their very original begynny^g.

For their first beginning was no less famous, than was the whole process of
their Empire, neither were the more renowned through the chiualrye of their
men, then through the prowess of their women. For where as their men were
the founders of the Parthians, and Bactrians, their women founded the kingdom
of the Amazons, so that if a man consider and wey indifferently the doings of
the men and the doings of the women together, he shall not be able to judge,
whether of them were worthier of renown and honor. The Scithian nation has
ever been counted of gretest antiquitye. Contention as concernin^ antiquity.
Aowbeit between them and the Egiptians has been great strife a long time as
concerning the auncientnesse of them both. The Egiptians alleging that in the
first beginning of things, whereas some countries did so borne through the
feruente heat of the Son, and othersome to fryse through the excessiveness
of the could, that not only they were not able to engender men, but also not
able to receive and keep men that came out of other countries, before that
garments were invented to defend the body from heat or cold, or that the
faults of the places were eased with remedies found out by cunning and
practice: The temp^ tenesse of Egypt and the ^uitfulnesse th^eof*
Egypt was always so temperate, that neither the could in the wynther, nor
the heat of the son in the summer, grieved the inhabitauntes thereof, the
soil of the ground so fruiteful, that there is no land under the son that
brings mo things necessary and meet for man's use. And that therefore of
right men ought to be bred first there, where with most ease they might be
best brought up. On The replication of the (...).
the other side, the Scithians denied that the temperatenesse of the air made
any thing to the proof of antiquity, forasmuch as nature as soon as it had
given to each country of heat or cold as much as seemed good, forthewith
also engendered living creatures, able to endure in those places and thereunto
sundry sorts of trees and fruits, in their kinds according as the estate of
the country required.

And look how much the weather was harder in Scithia then in Egypt, so much
were the Scithians harder of body and of nature than the Egiptians. But if the
world which is now divided in parts, were sometime al one, whether water at
the first beginning overwhelmed all the earth, or else fire possessed all
things, whereof also the world it self was made, the Scithians in both of
them must needs be the auncienter. For if fire first possessed all, the which
by little and little being quenched, gave place to the earth, no part was
sooner separated from the fire by the coldenesse of the winter, then the North:
insomuch that at this present day, there is no part that feels more
excessine cold: where as Egypt and all the East, were a longer season ere they
could come to any temperatnesse, which well appears by the^ even yet in
that the unmeasurable heat of the son skorcheth them at this day. But if so
be it that all the world were sometime drowned with the sea, undoubted it must
needs follow, that the higher that any place is the sooner it must be
discovered: forasmuch as the waters withdraw theymselues from thence into the
lower grounds, and there remain a great while. And the sooner that any place
was dried up, the sonner it began to engender living creatures. Furthermore
Scithia is so much bigger than al other countries, that all the rivers that
spryng there, do fall into the sea Maeotis, and from thence into the sea of
Pontus, and so into the Aegiptian sea. But as for Aegipte it self, (which
being by the costs and charges of so many kings, so many hundred years,
with so huge and strong dammes and banks against the vyolence of the waters
renning thereinto, strengthened and fortifyed, cut, and divided with so many
diches and trenches, to thentent that the waters being in the one received,
might by the other be kept of from going any further, could nathe rather be
inhabited, except the river Nilus were excluded) can not seem to be auncienter
than all other countries, but rather what for the great costs that the kings
have bestowed thereupon, and what for the great heaps of mudde that the river
Nilus leaves behind him, may seem the last inhabited of all countries. The
Egiptia^s being vanquished The (...) of Scithia.
by these arguments, y^ Scithians were ever counted most ancient. Scithia
stretches into the East, and is enclosed on the one side with Pontus, on the other
sid with the mountains the custome^ and maner^ of the (...) ^ns called (...).
Rhiphael, on the back with Asia, and the river Tanais, and it is very long
and very wide. The people of that country have no bounds between man and man.
For they occupy no tillage, neither have they any house or home to resort to,
or any certain dwelling place.

As they feed and graze their catell, wanderyng through the deserts and wild
forestes, they carrye their wives and children with them in wagons and
chariotes covered with hides, to keep out the wind and weather, the which they
occupye instede of houses.

They use (...) and equity of a natural ^ysposycyon, and not for fear of any
law. No offense is counted so heinous among them as stealing. For
considering they have no houses. nor any place of safegarde, and that all
their riches consists in cattle, what should they have in safetye, if it
were lawefull for them to steal?

Gold and silver they do as much despise, as other nations do covet and desire
it.

They line by Milk and Honny, they know not what to d^ with woll, nor how to
make them selves garments thereof. And although they be vexed wit continual
cold, yet have they nothing to clothe them selves with, but the skynnes of
wild beasts, and of myce. This temperance causes them to be so vpryght in
their living, and is an occasion, that they covet not other men's goods. For
where as riches be: there also is covetousness. I would to God that all other
men could vfe the like temperance and abstinent from other men's goods. Certes
then should there not be The power and force of nature.
so much war and manslaughter of so long continuance as there is in all
lands. Neither should there dye more of the sword than of natural destynye.
It is a wonderful thing, that they should have that thing g^uen them of
nature, which the Greeks by thenstructions of their wise me^ and the precepts
of their Philosophers so long time together, conld never attain unto, and
that the fine civil manners Asia tributatye to the ^cithians.
of the Greeks should be to no pupose at all, in comparison of the rude and
barbarous Scithians. So much more profited in these the ignorance of vice,
than in the other the knowledge of virtue. Thryse the Scithians gat the em
Their fortunate success.
pire of Asye they them selves remaining all the while, either untouched, or at
the least vnsubdewed of any for reyne power. They put Darius king of Persia to
shameful flight, and drove him out of their country. The slew Cyrus and The
nature of the Parthians and Bactrians.
all his army. After the same forte they utterly destroyed zopyron one of
great Alexaunders chiefetaynes with all his host. As for the wars of the
Romans, they heard of them, but they never felt them. Within a while they
founded Who first made war upon the Scithians.
thempires of the Parthians and Bactrians: people given to endure labor, and
^out men of war, of strength of bo dye wonderful, desiring not to win the
thiug they thought they could not keep, and in their conquestes seking nothing
but honor. The first y^ ever offered war unto the Scithians, was Uexores king
of Egypt, who sent his ambassadors before to offer them peace, condicionally
that they would become his bassalles and liege me^. But the Scithta^s being
advertised before by their neighbors of the kings coming: answered the
ambassadors in this wise. We can not but maruayle that the ruler of so welthy
a people, will so foolishely move war against beggars, which thing was
rather to have been mistrusted on his part, consideringe that the end of
war is doubtful, and no reward though he wanne the victory, but apparent
loss if he were overcome. Wherefore, let him not think that the Scythia^s will
wait for his coming hither, seeing there is in their enemy so much worth the
fetchinge, and going for, but they will with all their hearts go and mete him.
As they had said, so did they in deed. When the king understood that they
made toward him with such speed, he fled for fear, and leaving behind him
his host and all his furniture for the wars, he fearefullye retired into his
kyngedome. The Scithians could not pursue him into Egypt because of the
fennes. As they returned from thence they conquered al Asia, and put them to a
little tribute rather in token of their conquest, than in reward of their
victory. The Scith^ans are revoked out of Asia by (...) wyuce.


Fyftene years they tarried in pacifieng and setting a stay in the countreye.
From whence they were called home by the importunat requests of their wives,
which sent them word, that if they hyed them ^ot home the sooner, they would
lie with their (...) to have fruit by them, and not suffer the (...) of the
Scith^s to decay through In this place he gre^ly exreth.
their default. Thus was Asia tributary to them by y^ space of 1500 years.
Ninus king of Thassirians made an end of paying this trybute. But in the mean
time among the Scithians, t^o young gentlemen of the blood royal, named Plinos
and Scolopythus, being through debate among the noble me^, driven out of their
country, led with the^ a great noumber of youth, and settled them selves in the
borders of Cappadocia, about the river Thermodoon, and kept all the fields
about the city Themiscira. There, many years together, being wont to rob
their neighbors, at the last. the people prfuily conspired together and set
upon them unawares, and by a train slew them eueryechone. The wives of these
men, perceiving that besides their banyshement, Example of fortitude in women.
they were also made widows, armed them selves, and defended their borders:
first by standing in their own defense, and afterward by making war unto
others. Moreover they had no mind to marry any more with their neighbors,
calling it a bondage and not marriage. A singular example for all ages to look
upon. They increased their common wealth without men and defended them selves
even in despyght of men. And to thentente some of them should not think them
selves, in better case then the rest, they killed their husbands that were left
alive at home Furthermore, in reuengement of the deaths of their husbands,
they destroyed their neighbors also. Th^n having The kingdom of the Amazones.
by war gotten peace and tranquillity, they sent for their neighbors and
companied with them. If any male children were borne, they were killed. The
women children were brought up, not in idleness* nor to spinning and The
customs of the Amazones.
carding, but in feats of arms, ridinge of horses, and huntinge as the
custom is to bring up men. And forbycaus^ their shooting and throwing of
darts should not be hindered, their right pappes were seared of while they
were children, whereupon they were named Bamazons. They had two queens, the
one called Marth^, the other Lampedo, the which dividing their host in two
parts, and growinge to The queens of Amazone.
great wealth and richesse made war by turns, the one cir cumspectely
defending the country at home, while the other made war abroad, as their
turns came about. And o^ thentent to be the more renowned in all their
enterprises and affairs, they proclaimed them selves the daughters of Mars.
Wherefore having conquered the greater part o^ The buylding of Ephe ^us.
Europe, they subdewed also many cities of Asia. Where having builded Ephesus
and diverse other cities, part of their army being sent home with a great
bootye, the rest which tarried still to defend thempyreof Asia, were by a
sodayn^ ^ssault of the barbarous people, with their queen Marthesia all
slain. In whose room secceded in thempyre, her daughter Orithia. Who besides
her singular actiuitie in feats ^ myr^ of virginity^ and prowess.
of war, was as a myrrour to all women for preseruyng of her maydenhed* and
virginitye while she lived. Through the prowess of her, the honor and renown
of the Amazones was so greatly auaunced, that the king for (...) sedeth
Hercules for the Queen of amazonies armor.
whose pleasure Hercules achieved. xii. dangerous adventures, commanded him
as a thing impossible, to fetch him the armor of the Queen of Amazonie.
Hercules therefore accompanied with many of the young lords and noble me^ of
Greece, arriving with nine galleyes assailed them unawares. At the same time the
kingdom of Thamazones was governed by two of the four systers, atiope and
Orithia. Of the which Orithia was making war in forreyne countries, by
reason whereof, there was but a slender company about the queen Antyope, when
Hercules arrived at the shore of Amazonye, because there was no such thing
mistrusted, nor any enemy thought upon. Wherefore it came to pass, that those
few being raised with the sudden alarm, armed them selves and gave their
enemies an easy victory. For many were slain and many taken, among whom were
two of Antiopes sisters M^alyppe taken by Hercules, and Hippolite by Theseus.
Theseus Hercules exchaungeth Menalyppe for y^ que^nes armor.
married his prisoner, of whom he begat Hippolitus. But Hercules after the
victory restored Menal^ppe to her sister and for her ransom took the queens
armoure. And so having accomplyshed his charge, returned to the king. Orithia
having knowledge that war was made against her systers, and that the prince
of Athens had led away one of them perforce, exhorts her company to be
revenged, affirmyng, that all their conquestes in Po^us and Asia were to no
purpose, if they should take such a foil at the hands of the Greeks, as to
suffer not so much the wars, as the rauishementes of Thatheniens.

And thereupon she sent for succor unto Sagillus king o^ Scithia. Alleging
that she and her people were by descent Scithians Orithia sends for aid to
the king of Scithia.
borne, declaringe furthermore the loss of their husbands, whereby they were
constrained to take armoure upon them, and what was the cause of the wars
which they now took in hand, saying, that through their prowess they had
brought to pass, that the Scithians might seem, to have as valiant women as
men. The king being moved with the honor of his house, sent to her aid his
son She is ^orsaken of her (...) cour and over come of the Atheniens.
Penaxagoras with a greatbande of horsemen. But before the battle, being by
means of dissension suddenly fallen between them, forsaken of their succoures,
and so left destitute of thelpe and aid of them, the Atheniens put them to
the worser. Nevertheless the camp of the Scythians was a refuge unto them,
^y whose help they returned into their country untouched of other nations.
After Orithia, Penthesile^.
Penthesilea obtained the soueraynetye, Who left behind her a noble
remembrance of her worthy acts, in that famous assemble of valiant men, in
the defense of the Troianes against the Greeks. Finally Penthesilea being
slain, and her army wasted, those sewe that remained, with much a do
scarcely defendyng them selves against their neighbors, continued unto the
time of great Alexander. Whose Queen Minothea, otherwise called Thalestris
after she had obtained the company of Alexander by the space of. xiiii. days
to thentente to have issue by him, returned into her kingdom, and within a
whole after de The decay of ^hamazones
ceased, with whom the name of the Amazones utterly decayed. The Scithians in
their third viage into Asia, when they had been a seven years from their wy^es
and children, He retorneth to the stories of the Stithians.
were welcomed home with war by their own servants. For their wives being
weryed with long tarieng for their husbands, supposing that they were not so
long deteyned with wars, but rather all slain married themselves to their
slaves whom their masters had left ^t home to look to their cattle The
which hearing o^ their masters return with conquest, met them in order of
battle well appointed and harnessed, to keep them out of their country as if
they had been strangers. The Scithians The stratageme of the Scithians against
their bond^en.
perceiving that by battle they lost as much as they won, advised them selves
to use another kind of fight, remembering that they had not to do with their
ennemies but with their slaves, who ought to be ouercom not by the law of
arms, but by the law of masters, against whom it was more mete to bring
whippes into the field then weapons, and laying a side swords, every man to
furnishe him self with rods and whips, and such other kind of stuff, where of
slaves and bondmen are wont to be afraid. This counsel was well allowed, and
therefore every man being furnished as was before appointed, when they aproched
to their enemies, suddenly they shoke their whippes at them, wherewith they so
amassed them, that whom they could not overcome by battle, they overcame with
fear of beating and made them run away, not like enemies overcome by battle,
but like runnagate slaves. As many of them as were taken were hanged up. The
women also that knew them selves gilty of the matter, partly by wepon, partly
by hanging, wilfully dispatched them selves. After this the Scithians Here
ended the first bok^
lived in peace, until the time of Lanthine their king, to whom Darius king
of Persie (as is before mentioned,) because he would not give him his Daughter
in marriage,) made war: and with seven hundred thousand men in armor, entering
into Scithia, when he saw his enemies would The shameful retire of Dar^us out
of Scithia.
not come and give him battle, fearing that if the bridge over the river of
Danow should chance to be broken, he should be enclosed. From retourning home
again, fearfully retired over the water with the los of four skore and x. M.
me^. The which nevertheless was counted as no loss, for the exceeding great
nombre of me^ that he had in his host. Afterward He conquereth the lesser Asia
and M^ cedonie.
he conquered Asia and Macedonie, and vanquished the Iomans upon the sea.
Finally understanding that the Atheniens had aided the Ionians against him, he
turned the whole brunt of the war upon them. Now forasmuch as we be come to
the wars of the Atheniens, which were A ^igression to the acts of the
^henie^s.
done in such wise, not only as a man could not well have hoped for. But also
far otherwise then a man would almost believe them to have been done. And
forasmuch as the deeds of the Atheniens were greater in effect then could
have been wished before they came to pass: I think it convenient to speak
so^what even of their original beginning, because they did not increase from a
base and vile be ginning, to the highest estate that could be, like as al other
The noblenes and antiqui ty of Athens.
nations have done. For they alone may make their vau^t, as well of their very
first beginning, as of their good success and increasement. For it was not
strangers, nor a sort of raskals gathered here and there together, that
founded that city, but they were bred in the same soil where they inhabit,
and the place of their dwellinge, is the place of Of what things the a^henie^s
were the first inue^ ters.
their beginning. They first taught the use of Woll, Oil, and wine. And whereas
men in times paste were wont to live by eating of Acorns, they taught how to
plow y^ ground and to sow corn. And certainly as for lerning, eloquens and all
civil policy, and order of governance, may worthelye take Athens for their
Temple. Before the time of Dencalion, they had a king called Cecrops, who
according to the re The first ordainer of marriage among the heathen.
port of all the ancient fables, had two faces, because he first joined man
and woman together in marriage. After him succeeded Crands, whose daughter
Atthis gave the name unto the country. Next him reigned Amphitrion which first
consecrated the City to Minerua, and called it by the name of Athens. In his
time a flood of water drowned the grea The ^loud of Dencalion.
ter part of Greece: only such eskaped, as could recover the tops of the
mountains, or elsse such as could get ships and sail unto Dencalion king of
Thessalie. Who by reason thereof is reported to have repaired and made mankind.
Afterward by order of succession the kingdom descended to Ericthens under
Sowinge of corn ^ue^ted.
whom the sowing of corn was found out at Elensis by Tripto lemus. In reward of
the which deed, the night sacrifices were i^tituted in the honor of Ceres.
aegeus also the father of Theseus reigned in Athens, from whom Medea being
divorced The succession of the kings of Athe^s.
because her son in law Theseus was mangrowne, departed to Col^hos with her
son medus whom she had by aegeus. After aegeus, Theseus enjoyed the kingdom,
and next to him his son Demophoon, which aided the Greeks against the
Troyans. There was between thatheniens and the Dorie^s an old grudge and
displeasure, the which the Dorienses entending to revenge by battle, asked
counsel of the Oracles. Answer was made that they should have the upper hand, so
they killed not the king of Athens. When they came into the field, great
charge was given to all the Soldiers in any wise not to hurt the king. At the
same time, king of Athe^s an ex ample of great love toward the native country
was Cadrus, who having understanding both of thanswer of Appollo, and of the
charge that was given among his ennemies, laid a side his robes and princely
apparel, and in a ragged cote with a bundle of vineshreds in his neck, entered
into his ennemies camp. There in a throng that stood about him, he was slain
by a soldier whom he of pretensed purpose had wounded with a hoke that he had
in his hand. The Dorienses when they knew it was the king that lay there
slain, departed without any stroke striking. By this means the Atheniens
through the prowess of their captain yelding him self to death for the
safegarde of his country were delivered from war. After Codrus was never The
alterat^on of government in athens.
king more in Athe^s, the which was attributed to his high renown and
remembrans of his name. The gouernans of the commonwealth was appointed to
yearly officers. But the City at that time had no laws, because that hitherto
the commandment of their kings was accounted as a law. Therefore was chosen
one Solon a man of marvelous uprightness, which should as it were make a new
city by The comme^dat ion and do ings of solon.
his laws. Who used such an indifferency, and bare him self so even between
the people and the Senate (where as if he made any thing for the one estate, he
was like to displese the other) that he gate like favor at both their hands.

Amongst the noble acts of this man which were many, this is in especially
worthy to be remembered. The Atheniens and Megarenses had fought together for
the chalen ging of the I Will of Salamine, almost to their utter destruction.
After many great slaughters, it began to be taken for a heinous matter among
the Atheniens, if any man should go about to make any claim or title to the
Island. Solon therefore The pollicye of Solon.
being sorrowful, least by holdinge his peace he should not so greatly further
the common wealth as he ought to do, or by putting forth his counsel bring
him self in danger, suddenly fained himself mad: under pretens whereof he might
not only say, but also do things forbidden. He ran abroad in a foles cote
like a disard, and in a great company of men that gathered about him, the more
to cloak his pretensed purpose, in rimes and meters to him unaccustomed, he
began to move the people to that thing which was unlawful, wherein he so
persuaded them all, that forthwith they proclaimed war against the
Megarenses, in the which they va^ quished their enemies, and reduced the Island
under their subjection. In the mean season the Megarenses being mindful of the
wars that the Atheniens made against them, and b^ing loathe to leave without
some gain, took shipping of purpose to take the noble women and matrones of
Athens, as they were celebrating the sacri^ces unto Ceres, in the night time at
Elensis. The which thing being known Pisistratus captain of the Atheniens
laid bushments of men in places convenient, commaundinge the women to celebrate
their ceremonies, with like noise and hurly burly, as they were wont to do,
even when their ennemies came, to thentent they should not suspecte that their
coming was heard of. When the Megarenses were come out of their ships, he
suddenly brake upon them and ^ue them every Deceit turned upon the workers head
one, and forthwith entering into their ships, (the which he entermedled with
women, to make a show, as though they had been the matrones taken prisoners) he
went straighte to Megara. The towns men seeing their own ships and the women
in them (which they supposed to be the ^ootye that they sought for) went
forth to the haven to meet them, the which company Pysistratus ^ue, and
missed but little of winninge the City. So by their own pollicye, the
Megarenses gave their ennemies the victory. But Pysistratus An example of a
craftye ^ subtle dec^ uer.
as though he had won to his own behoof, and not to the behoof of his
Country, by craft and policy made him self king. For at home at his own
house, when he had of set purpose caused his body to be rent and ma^gled with
scourging and whipping, he came abroad, and there sommoning the people together,
showed them his wounds, making exclamation of the crueltye of the Noble
men, at whose hands he surmised himself to have suffered this hurt. As he
spoke he wept, and with his spiteful words set the light people on fire,
assuringe them that for the love he bare to them, he was hated of the Senate,
(...) hervpon he obtained a guard of men for the safetye of his person, by
whose means he usurped the Luperioritye, and reigned xxxiiii. years. After
his death Diocles one of his Sons as he Diocles slain for rape.
ravished a maiden perforce, was by the brother of the same maid slain. His
other son named Hyppias possessynge his fathers kingdom, commanded him that
slew his brother to be apprehended, who being compelled by torments A constant
and inuicible stomach.
to appeal such as were necessary to the murder, named all the Tyrannes
friends, which being put to death, and the Tyran demanding if there were yet
any moo a Counsel or preuye to the deed, there is no moo (quod he) alive
whom I would gladly see die, saving the Tyran him self: by which saying he
declared him self both to have the upper hand of the Tyran, and also to have
revenged the cha stity of his sister. The city through his stoutnesse being put
in remembrance of their liberty, at length deposed Hyppias from his kingdom,
and banished him their country. Who taking his iourny into Persie, offered him
self to Darius, making war against the Atheniens, (as is before specified)
as a captain against his own country.

Wherefore the Atheniens hearing of Darius approach, sent He returns to the
historye of Darius
for aid to the Lacedaemonians who at that time were in leage with them. But
perceiving that they were busied about matters of religion for the space of
iiii. days, they thought not good to tarry the coming of their succors, but
with x. M well appointed of their own citizens, and one thousand of the (...)
which came to their aid, they went forth to battle, against vi. C. M. of their
enemies in the plains of Marathon. Melciades was Captain of this war, and
counselor not to tarry The noble en terprise of Milciades.
(...) their succors. Who was of such courage, that he thought there was (...)
advantage in spedy settinge forward, then in lingering for succor. Therefore
they ran into the battle with wonderful cherefulnesse. In so much that when
the The courage of the Atheniens, and me co wardise of the Persians.
ii. armies were a mile a sondre, they hasted forward as fast as they could
^un, to ioyn with their ennemies before they might discharge their arowes.
Neither wanted this boldness good success. For the battle was fought with
such courage, that a man would have thought the one side to have been men, and
the other to have been beasts. The Persians be Fortune helps the coura gious.
ing vanquished fled to their ships, whereof many were drow ned and many were
taken. In that battle the prowess and manhood of every man was so great, that
it were hard to judge who deserved most to be praised. How be it amongst all
other, brast forth the glory of a young man called Themistocles, in whom even
then appeared such towardness, as it The praise of Themistocles
was like he should for his valiantness hereafter be made their chief
captain and governor. The glory of one Cynaegirus also a souldior of Athens, is
highly commended and set for the with great praises among writers, who after
innumerable The commendation of Cynegirus.
slaughter in the battle, when he had pursued his ennemies to their ships, as
they fled, he caught hold of a ship that was laden with his right hand, and
would not let goo his hold till he had lost his hand. His right hand being
cut of, he laid hold on it with his left hand, the which also being lost
in likewise, at the last he held the ship with his teethe.

Such was his courage, that being not wearied with so many slaughters, nor
discouraged with the loss of both his hands, at the last being utterly
maimed, like a savage The slaughter of the (...). The vengans of God upon
tyraunts and tra^oures.
beast he fought with his teethe. The Persians lost in that battle two
hundred thousand men, beside their ships. Hyppias also the Tyran of Atbens,
the author and stirrer of this war, through the just vengaunce of God, which
punished him for his country sake, was there slain.

In the mean time Darius as he was about to renew the war, died in the
preparation thereof, leauinge many The death o^ Darius.
sons behind him, whereof some were begotten before he was king, and other
some in the time of his reign. Of the which Artobazanes the eldest, claimed
the Crown by prerogative A brotherly. conte^^n for the kingdom.
of his age, alledginge that by order of law, by order of birthe, by order of
nature, and by custom of all Countries, he ought to have it. Xerxes replied
and said, that their controuersye was not as concerning the order of their
birthe, but as concerning the nobilitye and worthiness of their birth.

For he granted that Artobazanes was in deed the first that was borne unto
Darius, but Darius was then a private person, and that he him self was the
first that was borne to Darius being king.

Wherefore his brothers that were borne during the time his father was a
subject, might lawfully claim such private inheritance as Darius then had,
but not the kingdom, which apperteined to him being the first, whom his father
begat in his kingdom. This also made for his purpose in that artobazanes was
borne a private person, not only by the fathers side, but also by the mothers
side, and also (...) his graundfathers side by the mother. Where he himself had
a Queen to his mother, and he (...) his father but king, and he had a king
(...) his grau^father by the mother, namelye king Cyrus who was not an
inheritor, but the first founder of that great Empire. And therefore if their
father had left them (...) like right to the (...), yet notwithstande in
consideration of his Mother and his graundfather, he ought to be preferred.
They put this controversy quietly and gently with a good will, to the
discretion of their uncle Artaphe^ as to a household judge, who discussing the
matter at home, preferred Xerxes. And this contention between them was so
brotherly, that neither he that had the upper hand vaunted him self, neither he
that was overcome was sorye for the matter. And even in the chiefest time of
all their strife, they sent gifts and presents one to another, and merely
banketted together, without mistrust of treason or deceit, and the matter was
ended without days men, or without reprochful words betwixt them. So much
more modestly could brothers in those days divide the greatest kingdoms, then
they can now divide a small inheritance. Xerxes therefore by the space of
five years together, made preparatyon for the wars which his father had
begone against the Greeks. xerxes succe death Darius in his kingdom The ^oue of
Demaratus to his country
The which thing when Demeratus king of the Lacedaemonians, (who at that time
being banished his Country, lived in king Xerxes Court,) understood, being
more frendlye to his country after his banishment, then to the king for all
his benefits, to the entente they should not be oppressed with sudden war,
wrate all things in tables of wode to the Magistrates of Sparta, and covered
the letters over with ware, least that either the writing without a cover might
bewray it self, or the new ware disclose his devise. When they were finished,
he took the^ to a trnsty servant, commanding him to deliver to the magistrates
of the Spartanes. When they were brought to Lacedemon, the matter hong long in
question what it should mean, because they saw no writing, and again they
thought the tables were not sent for nothing, and the closer the thing was, so
much they judged it to be of greater importance. Whiles the men with
sondrye op^nions slack in the matter, the Sister of L^oindas the king found
out the intent and meaning of the writer. The ware therefore being skraped of,
it appeared was wrought against them.

By this time had Xerxes armed seven hundred thousand of his own kingdom, and
hired three hundred thousand Mercenaries. The hnge host of xerxes
So that it has not without good cause been reported, that his army drunk the
rivers dry, and that al Greece was skarse able to receive his hooste. It is also
said that he had ten hundred thousand ships. To this huge host wan His
richesse and want of good gouer naunce.
ted a mete Captain. For if ye have respect unto the king, ye may praise his
riches, but not his good guidans or know ledge requisite in a Captain, of which
there was so great abundance in his realm, that when rivers were not able
to find his huge multitude drink, yet had he treasure more then could be
spent. He would be sure to be the last that should come to encounter, and the
first that should run away. In danger he was fearful, out of danger proud
and full of bosting. Finally before he should come to the trial of battle, he
gloried so much in his own strength, that as if he had been even a Lord over
nature, and had been able to rule it at his pleasure, he brought mountains
to plain ground, and filled up the valleis, made bridges over the sea, and cut
through the main land to make nerer way for his ships to pass. Whose coming
into Greece as it was terrible, so his departure was as shameful and
dishonorable. For when that Leonides king of the Sartanes with four thousand
men, had taken the strength of Thermopyle, Xerxes in disdain of his small
noumber, commanded that none should assail them, but they whose kinsfolk
were slain at the battle of Marathon: the which while they sought to revenge
the deaths of their friends, were the beginning of the slaughter that ensued.

In their places succeeded still mo and mo, to the great increase of their own
slaughter. Three days the Persians fought there to their great anguish,
displesure and sorrow, The fourth day when it was told Leonides that twentye
thousand of his ennemies had taken the top of the hill, then he began to
exhort his partakers to depart, and to reserve them selves till some better
time might come, wherein they might do service to their country, for he and his
Spartanes would stand to thadue^ture of fortune, saying that he set not so much
by his life, as by his country, and that the resi due ought to be spared for
the defice of Greece, when the kin ges pleasure was published, the rest departed
all saving the Lacedaemonians which tarried still with him. In the beginning of
this war, when counsel was asked of apollo at Delphos, answer was given that
either the king of these partanes must be slain, or else the city be destroid.
And therefore when the king Leonides should go forth to the war, he had so
encoraged his soldiers, that every man went with a willing heart to dye The
love of Leonidas toward his country.
with their master. He took the straites for this purpose, that with his
small number, he might either win with more honor, or die with les damage to
the commonwealth: wherefore when he had dismissed his partakers, he exhorted the
Spar tanes to remember the^ selves, that how so ever they fought they must be
slain, warning them to take heed, that they gave no cause to baue it reported
of them hereafter, that their hearts served them better to tarry, then to fight,
saying that it was not for the^ to stand still til their enemies should enclose
them about, but as soon as night should serve their turn, to set upon their
enemies, making merry without care in their te^ts. For conquerors could no where
die more honorably, then in the camp of their enemies. It was no hard matter to
persuade the^ that were al ready bent to die. Forth with they armed them selves,
and being but vi. C. men in all, The noble prowess of Lconida and the Sparta^es
brake into the ca^p of v. C. M. and forthwith went unto the kings pauilion, of
purpose either to die with him, or elsse if they were ouerlaid, to die in
especialli in his tent. All the ca^p was on a rore. The Lacedaemonians when they
could not find the king, ranged through all the camp like co^querors, slaying
and throwing down al things, as men that knew that they fought not in hope of
victory, but to revenge their own death. The battle was prolonged from the
beginning of the night, until the more part of the next day was spent. At
the last not vanquished, but weary of vanquishing they fell down dead among the
heaps of their dead ennemies. Xerxes having received two iosses in battle on
the land, intended to try his fortune. But Themistocles the captain of the
Atheniens, when he understood that the Ion^s, in whose quarrel the king of
Persie made all this war, were come to the aid of A ^olitique prouisy on of
themistocles.
the Persians with a navy of ships, he intended to draw the^ to his part if
he could. And because he could have no opportunity to talk with the, he caused
these words to be engraued in stones, and set at the places where they should
ariue. How mad are ye O ye Ionians? what mischief intend you now to do, purpose
ye to make war against your first founders, and now of late your new reuengers,
have we builded your walls, to thentent they should destroy ours? I put the case
we had not this occasion of war, first with Darius, and now with Xerxes,
saying we forsook you not when ye rebelled, why do ye not come out of that
siege into this our ca^p? Or if ye think ye may not do so without danger, when
the Man (...) power against God. Xerxes burns Thesp^ and (...) and Athens.
battle shall be joined step you aside, draw back your ships and depart out of
the battle. Before they should encounter upon the sea, Xerxes had sent iiii. M.
men to Delphos, to spoil the temple of apollo: as though he had made war not
only with the Greeks, but even with the gods immortal, which ba^d of men was
utterly destroid with tempest and lightnynge, to thentent he might understand
that the more that God is wroth and displesed with man, the less power or
rather none at all has man against god. After this he burned the cities of
Thespie, Plate and Athens: but there were no men in them, and because he could
not have the men to kill in his displesure he wreked his teme upon their houses.
For the Athenies after the battle of Barathon by the counsel of Themistocles,
which gave the warning that victory won of the Persians was not at end, but
rather a cause of greater war,) made them a flcte of two hundred ships.
Therefore when Than^wer of the (...)
Xerxes was coming toward them, they asked counsel of the Oracle at Delphos,
where it was answered that they must provide for their sauegard in wodden
walls.

Themistocles deming it to be spoken and meant of ships. persuaded all the
people that their Country was not the Themistocles interpre teth the same
walls, but the men: and that the City was not the houses and buildinges, but
the Citizens and inhabitauntes. Wherefore it was better for them and more for
their safeguard, to betake them selves to ships, then to abide in the town,
whereunto God himself seemed to counsel them. The counsel was well liked, and
thereupon abandoning the City, they conveyed their wives and children with all
their preciousest stuff and jewels into secret Islands, and there bestowed
them in safety, which being done, they armed them selves and took shipping.
Other Cities also followed the example of the Atheniens. Therefore when all the
whole fiete of their accomplices and parrakers were assembled together in the
narow seas by the I Will of Salamine, to thentent they might not be enclosed of
Xerxes great multitude, as they were consulting how to maintain the wars
upon the sea, suddenly sprang a variaunce between the princes of the Cities,
every man devising how to break up privily, and to steal home to defend his
own. Themistocies fearing least by the departure of his Companions, his
strength should be abated, sent word unto Xerxes by a trustye servant, The
devise of Themistocles to make his confederates abide
that now was the time that he might easly take al Greece together in one place,
whereas if every man were dispersed home to his own City, as they were about to
do, it should be more to his pain to pursue them one by one. Thorough this
policy he caused the king to give a sign of battle. The Greeks also being
prevented with thapproche of their ene mies, laid their power together and
joined battle. During the time of thencounter, the king as a loker on and no
medler with certain ships lay still at the roode. But Artemysia the Queen
of Halicarnassus, which came to the aid of Xerxes, (...) cowardice of Xerxes
The valiantnes of art mysia.
fought fierslye even among the formest Captain in the battle. So that as
in Xerxes was to be seen a kind of femine fearfulness, so in her was to be
seen the kind of manlye couragiousnesse. In the whottest of the battle, the
Ionians according to the commandment of Themistocles began by little and little
to withdraw them selves out of the prease. Whose departure discouraged all the
rest. The Per The Persians are disco^fyted on the sea.
sians loking about which way to eskape, were put out of a ray, and sone after
being vanquished were put to open flight. In the which discomfiture many
ships were drowned and many were taken. But mo fearing more the kings
cruelty then their ennemy, stale away and went home.

The king Xerxes being stricken in great fear, by reason of The couonse^ of
Mardonius.
this slaughter, and knowing not what to do, Mardonius came unto him counselling
him to depart into his kingdom with as much speed as might be, least the
brute of the discomfiture might cause any insurrection or he came there, which
commonly is wont to make more of things then they be in deed. Leaving him;
0000. thousand of the tallest men and picked soldiers of all his host, with
the which company he promised either to his great honor to subdue al Greece, or
if it were his misfortune to be overcome, he would without infamy or dishonor
to his Majesty give place to his ennemies. The counsel of Mardonius was well
allowed.

Whereupon the said number of men were to him delivered, and the remnaunt of his
host the king him self purposed to convey home again. But the Greeks hearing
of the kings flight consulted together to break the bridge which he as Lord
of the sea had made at Abydus, to the intent that his passage being cut of, he
might either with his army be utterly destroyed, or elsse be brought to such
an exigent, that as clearly overcome he should be compelled to desire peace at
their hands. But Themistocles fearing least his enemies being stopped of their
passage, should tourn their despair into hardines, and (seeing none other
remedy) make them selves way with their swords, told them that there were
enemies enough and to many all ready in Greece, the ^cles sends again to
(...) erxes.
number whereof ought not to be increased by keeping them against their wills. ^ut
when he perceived his counsel pre uailed not, be sent the same servant again
unto Xerxes, aduertising him of their intent and purpose, and willing him to
get him away with speed if he intended to eskape. The king being stricken in
fear with this message, delivered his (...) flies for fear.
soldiers to be conveyed home by their captains, and he with a few went toward
abydos: where finding the bridge broken with the te^pests of the winter, he
feried over fearfully in a fishers bote. It was a thing worth the beholding,
and as in consideration and valewing of man's ^ckle wealth and prosperity, a
thing to be wondered at, to behold him now lurking A worthy ex ample of the
fickleness of fortune, and of the frailnes of man's estate.
in a little boat, whom lately before, skarse all the Sea was able to receive,
and to se him destitute of all attenda^s and service, whose army by reason of
the huge multitude thereof, was even a burden to the earth. Neither had the army
whom he had assigned to captains, any luckier or more for tunate iournying by
land. For besides their daily travel, (as surely there is no rest to such as
be in fear) they were all The afflictions of the Persian host
so afflicted with hunger. Furthermore the ^ant of victels brought upon them
the pestilence, by means whereof they died so thick, that the ways were
covered with their dead carcasses, in so much that the beasts and fowls
allured with desire of pray, followed the host. In the mean time Mardonius
took Olynthus in Greece by assault. Also he entreted with the Atheniens to sue
to the king for peace and friendship, promising to build up their city which he
had Mardonius with O^hus.
burnt, larger and fairer then ever it was before. When he saw they would not
sell their liberty for any worldly good, he set on fire that which they had
bego^ to build again, and from thence he passed with his army into Bo^, thither
followed also the host of the Greeks, which was a hundred M. men, and there was
a battle fought. But the changing of the captain A battle between Mar do^s
and the greeks.
changed not the kings fortune. For Mardonius being ouerco^e, eskaped with a
few as it were out of shipwrak. His ^entes replenished withal kind of
richesse, after the princeliest sort that could be, were taken and riffled.
Whervp Excess of richesse.
on first of al among the Greeks, when they had parted the gold of the Parsians
among them grew excess and riot. By chance the same day that Mardonius host
was destroyed, there was another battle fought upon the sea against The swift
nes of ^ame.
the Persians in Asia, hard by the mountain Mycale. There before the encounter,
as the two fleetes stood in order of battle one against another, a fame
came unto both the armies, that the Greeks had gotten the upper hand, and
utterly slain all Mardonius host. So great was the swiftness of fame, that
the battle being fought in Boetia in the morning, by noone tidinges was
brought of the victory into Asia over so many seas, and over so much ground
in so short a moment of time.

When the wars were fynished, and that consultation was had how every City
should be rewarded, by judgment of them all, the Atheniens were demed to have
don most valiantlye. Among the Captains also Themistocles was by the
verdite of all the Cities judged chief and sovereign, to the great renown of
his country. The Atheniens therefore being increased as well in richesse as in
honor began to build their City new out of the ground. When the
Lacedaemonians heard how they had enlarged the walls of their City, and set
them further out then they were before, they began to have them in a
gelowsye, wiselye forecastinge what they were like to grow unto, having ones
made their City strong and defensyble, which by the decay of their City
had gotten so much as they had. Wherefore they sent Ambassadoures,
admonishynge them not to build Fortresses for their enemies, and holds for
the Wars that were like to ensue hereafter.

Themistocles perceiving them to grudge and to repine The wise (...) menor of
The^o cles.
at the raising of his city, thinking that it stood him in hand to beware that
he did nothing unadvisedly, answered the ambassadors that there should certain
go with them to La^mon, fully authorized to entreat and conclude with the^, as
concerning that matter.

So when he had dispatched the ambassadors of Sparta, he exhorted his Citezens
to make speed in their work, and he him self within a while after went of
ambassade. In the which iourny what by faining him self sick, and what by
putting fault in the slacknesse of such as were in commission with him,
without whom he said he was able to do nothing, by virtue of his commissyon,
he drove of still from day to day, and all to thentent that they might have
leisure to furnish their work. During which time it was reported at
Lacedemon, that the work went f^r ward a pace at Athens: Whereupon they
sent Ambassadoures again to see if it were so or no. Then Themistocles by a
Servant of his sent a letter to the high Magystrates of Themistocles comes
unto Lacede^n.
Athens, willing them to hold the Spartane ambassadors in safe keeping as
pledges, least otherwise then well might be done or committed against him at
Lacedemon. Then he went boldly before the Lacedaemonians, declaring that Athens
was now thoroughly fortified, and that it was able to withstand the force of
enemies, not only by the sword, but also by the strength of their walls, and
if they entreated him otherwise then well for the matter, their ambassadors were
kept as pledges for the same purpose at Athens. Then he gave them a great
rebuke, in that they sought to make them selves strong, and to obtain
seueraignty, not by their own power, but by the weakness of their fellows. So
being The Spartanes make war against the Persians.
dismissed, in manner triumphing over the Lacedaemonians, he was joyfully
received o^ his own Citezens. After this the Spartanes least their strength
should decay through idleness, and to revenge them selves upon the Persians,
which P^ius works treson against his country.
twice before had made war upon the Greeks, of their own accord in^aded
the borders of their Empire. They chose for captain both of their own army
and of the army of the adherents, one Pansanias, who being not content with
the Captainship, but coveting instead thereof to make him self king of all
Greece, privily conspired with Xerxes. In reward whereof he should have the
kings daughter in marriage, and because the king should have the more confidens
in him, he sent home the prisoners skot free without ransom. Moreover he
wrote unto Xerxes, that what messengers so ever he sent unto him, he should
put them to death, to the intent their purpose should not by talk be
bewrayed. But Aristides the captain of the Atheniens, elected Aristides
preuenteth his tr^.
his fellow in the war, what by working against his enterprises, and what
foreseing wiselye what was like to ensue, disclosed the intent and purpose of
his treason. Whereupon ere it was long after, Pansanias was arrained and
condemned. Xerxes therefore when he perceived that his secret Pansa^ (...).
conspiracies were disclosed, determined to proclaim open war again. The
Grecians also appointed for their captain, Cymo of Athens the son of
Milciades their graundcaptaine Cyno is made graund (...) tain against the P^
at the battle of Marathon, a noble young gentleman whose natural and godly
disposition, declared before hand what great honor he was like to come unto.
For when his father being cast in prison for robbing of the common tresure, The
natural love of (...) to his fa^*
was there departed and could not be buried, he by taking his fathers irons
upon him, redeamed his body and buried it. Neither were they any thing at all
deceived, that chose him to be their soueraign Captain. For being a man of no
less prowess then was his father, he vanquished Xerxes Xerxes (...).
both upon the sea and upon the land, and compelled him fearfully to retire
into his own kingdom.

The third Book.
XErxes king of Persia of whom all nations a little Xerxes is (...) by his own
subject.
before stood in fear, after he had sped so un fortunatelye in his wars in
Greece, began to be had in contempt even of his own subjects. For Artabanus his
lieuetenaunt perceiving the kings estate dailye to decay, being therewith
brought in good hope to obtain the kingdom, one evening with vii. of his
sons all men grown, and stout men of their hands, entered the kings palace.
For he was so well be trusted and beloved with the king, that he might come in
whenso ever he would. Wherefore when he had slain the king, he wrought by policy
to destroy his children, whom he knew to be a let to his enterprise. As for
Artaxerxes which was but a The cautele and treson of Artabanus.
child to speak of, he took no great thought, and therefore the sooner to
compass his matters, he surmised that Darius which was a tall strippling had
slain his father, to the intent he might the sooner possess the kingdom.
Whereby he compelled artaxerxes to revenge murder with murder. When they came to
Darius lodginge, they found him as it were neither sleping nor waking, and
there killed him. Afterward artabanus perceiving that for all the mischief he
could devise, there was yet one of the kings sons alive, and fearing that
the peers of the realm would stand in con tention with him for the kingdom,
made of his Counsel one Baccabassus, who being content with his present
estate, bewrayed the whole matter to artaxerxes: how his Father The treason
disclosed.
was slain, how his brother upon false presumption of murder was put to death,
and finallye how there was treason Treson politiquely reuen ged.
a woorking against his own person. When artaxerxes knew that, fearing to
attempt any thing rashly or against artabanus, because he had so many of his
sons about him, he commanded his army to be in a readiness in their armor
before him the next day, saying that he would take musters of them him self,
and see a trial of every man's behauioure, how he could handle his weapon.
Therefore when as among the rest, artabanus himself stood by in his harness,
the king fained that his Curet was to short for him, commaundinge artabanus
to change with him. As he was putting it of, the king espying him naked,
thrust him through with his sword, and there with all commanded all his
sons to be laid hand on. And by this means the worthy young Prince revenged
the death of his father, and the murder of his brother, and saved him self
out of the bands of traitoures.

While these things were a doing among the Persians, in the mean season all
Greece dividing it self in ii. parts, whereof The discord of the gr^kes among
them s^lues.
the one followed the Lacedaemonians, the other the Atheniens turned their wepons
from forain enemies, against their own bowels. Of one people was made two
bodies, and the soldiers of one camp were parted into ii. hosts of deadly and
mortal enemies. On the one side the Lacedaemonians drue to their part, all such
as were before times waged at the common charges of all the cities, for the
defense of the whole country. On the other side the Atheniens being renowned as
well for their antiquity and long continuance, as also by their deeds of
cheualry, trusted all to their own strength. And so two of the mightiest people
of all Greece, egall by the statutes of Solon and laws of Lycurgus, through
envy one at another estate, fell together by the ears among them Rightuousn^s
is to be preferred before akingdo^.
selves. For Lycurgus succeadinge his brother Polybita in the kingdom of
Sparta, when as he might lawfullye have challenged it to him self, surrendered
the same with as much faithfulness as might be, unto his son Charilans
which was borne after the death of his father, as soon as he came to man's
estate. To the intent that all men might understand how much good men do
set more by righteousness, then by all the richesse in the world. In the mean
while therefore that the child grew, of whom as protector he had the
government, he devised laws for the Spartanes which hitherto had none, in
which doing he deserved not more renown for inuenting of them, then for
geuyng example in keeping them For certainlye he ordained no law for any other
man, whereof he gave not ensample first of all by him self. The notable laws
of L^curgus.


He taught the people due obedience to their Princes, and the Princes to
minister iu^ice indifferently to al their subjects. He counseled all estates
to use temperance and frugalitye, thincking that through the dailye and
accustomable use thereof, the travel and penye of warfare, should seem much
more light and easy.

he commanded all things to be bought, not for money but for exchange of
wares. The use of gold and silver, as the occasion of all mischief, he utterly
took away. The government of the public weal he distributed to certain
estates and degrees. Unto the kings he gave power absolutely in all matters
concerning the wars, unto the magistrates authority in judgments and
matters of law: whom he would to continue in office but one year at ones:
unto the Senatoures, to see the laws executed and kept: to the commons power
to choose the Senatoures, or to create what officers they listed. He parted all
their lands equallye amongste them, portion and portion like, to the intent
that every man having like liuelihode, no man should take more upon him then
other. He ordained that they should all eat and drink together openly, to
the intent that no man should secreatly use any excess or super^uitye: he
permitted not the young men to wear any moo garments then one, all the year,
nor one to go gayer then another, nor one to fare better then an other, least
by followinge one another example they should fall to riot. Children under xv.
years age, were not suffered to come into the Court, but The bringing up of
children.
were commanded to keep in the Country, to the intent they might spend their
first years, not in riotousnesse, but in labor and travel. And when they
slept, they might not lay any thing under them to rest upon, or eat any
daintye meat al their lives. nor retourn into the City before they were men
grown. He made a law that maidens should marrye without dowrye: and gave
commandment that The marriage of maidens.
men should choose their wives for love and not for monye, thinckinge by that
means men would more straitlye observe the duties of wedlock, when there
was no dowrye to let them. The greatest reuerens, he would should be
assigned, not to rich men and men of authority, but to aged men according to
the degree of their years. And to Re^erence unto old age.
say the truth there is no place in all the world, where age is more honored
then in ^parta. Now forasmuch as these things at the first, seemed hard to
them that before times The devise of Licurgus to make his laws eternal.
were w^nt to live as they listed, he fained Apollo of Delphos to be the author
of them, and that he had fetched them fro thence at the commandment of God,
to the intent that the fear of God might enure them unto it, until that
custom had driven away all weariness. Afterward to the intent he might
^stablishe his laws for ever, he caused all the City to be sworn, not to
alter or break any part of his laws, until he returned again, tellinge them
that he was going to the Oracle at Delphos, to take counsel what was to be
altered, put to, or taken from his laws. But in Licurgus v^ nisheth him self
to do his country good.
very deed he sailed unto Candy, where gladlye he lived the residue of his life
like a banished man. And when he should die, he commanded his bones to be
thrown into the sea, least if they were carried again to Lacedemon, the
Spartanes might think them selves clear of their oath in disanulling and
abrogating of his laws. By means of these statutes The wa^a of the Spartanes
against the Me^ans.
and ordinances, the City grew so strong within a while, that when as they
made war against the Messenians for rauishing certain of their maidens in a
sol^mpne sacrifice of the Messenians, they bound them selves with a grievous
oath, and thereunto cursed them selves, if they returned home before they had
won the City of Messenia, so much did they trust either to their own
strength or to their fortune. The which thing was the beginning of discord,
and the chief cause and occasion of war in Greece. Therefore when contrary to
their presumption, they had beseged the town x. years, and could not take it,
and that their wives thinking them selves all this while as widows, sent often
to them, requesting them earnestly to come home, at length fearing least by
their obstinate perseueraunce, they might do them selves more harm then the
Messenians. For as much as the youth which the Messenians lost, was supplied
the frutefulnesse of their wives being daily among the^, whereas their own loss
during the wars was unrecoverable, for as much as in the time of their
absens their wives as barraine folk brought for the no fruit at all: There The
original of the Partheniens.
fore they chose out certain young men of that band of Soldiers that came
to supplye their noumber after the oath was taken, and sent them home to Sparta
with free liberty to company with any women whom so ever they would,
supposinge their wives should sooner conceive, by attemptinge it with diverse
men. They that were so begotten, in respect of their mothers dishonor, were
called Partheniens: who when they came to the age of xxx. years for fear of
pouertye, (for none of them could say who was his father, by whom he might
hope for any inheritance or living took to be their Captain, Phalanthus the
son of Aracus, which gave the Spartanes the forsaid counsel to send home
these young men to engender issue. To the Phalanthus
intent that as of late his father was the authoure of their begetting, so
might they have the son the author of their hope and prosperiti. Therefore not
so much as once bidding The Parthe niens seek the^ a new dwelling place.
their mothers farewell, whose aduoutry they thought sou^ded greatly to their
shame and reproach, they took their way to seek them a new dwelling place, and
after diverse aduen tures being long tossed from post to pillar, at length they
came into Italy, where they besieged the fortress of Tarent, They place them
selves in Italye.
the which being won by assault, they drove out the ancient inhabiters
thereof, and dwelled there them selves. But many years after, their captain
Phalanthus being by a tumult driven into exile, went unto Brundusium whether
as the ancient inhabitants of Tarent being expulsed their native The love of
Phalanthus toward his country.
country had withdrawn them selves. When he should die, he persuaded them to
take his bones, and the residue of his body being dead and beat them into
poulder, and secretly to cause them to be strowed in the market place of
Tarent, saying that apollo at Delphos had told him, that in so doing they
should recover their country again. The Tarentines ^upposing that to revenge the
displesure don unto him, he had bewrayed the desteny of his citizens, obeyed
his counsel.

But the meaning of the Oracle was clean contrary. For it promised by so doing
the continual possession of the town, and not the loss o^ it. And so through
the counsel of their banished captain and the working of their enemies the
Parthenians enjoyed the possession of Tarent for ever. In remembrance
Pha^anthus is honored for a God. The Messeniens are subdued and afterward do
rebel.
of the which good turn, they ever after honored Phalanthus as a God. In the
mean time the Messenians being not able to be overcome by plain force, were
overcome by pollicye. Afterward having by the space of lxxx. years suffered
sore punishments of bondage, with emprisonment and other miseries and
calamities of thraldom and captivity, after long sufferance of these
mischeues, they renewed the war again. The Lacedaemonians also came to the field
so much the more earnestlye, because they seemed to fight against their
bo^dmen. The courages of both parties therefore being quickened, the one with
injury, the other with disdain, the Lacedaemonians demanded counsel of the
Oracle at Delphos to what end the war should come, there they were commanded
to send to the Atheniens for a capte^. Thatheniens having intelligence of
thanswer of apollo, in Tirteus bring^th the spartanes in despair.
despite of the Lacedaemonians sent the^ a poet called tirteus lame of one foot,
who being vanquished in iii. battles, brought the Lacedaemonians to such an
afterdele, that to suppli their army they were feign to make their bondmen
free, and promise to give them the wives of them that were slain, so that they
should succeed such as were lost, not only in number, but also in estate and
worship. But the kings of the Lacedaemonians, least by str^inge against
fortune they might bring more damage upon their country, were myneded to
have conveyed home their host. If Tyrteus had not come The force of Poetrye
in the mean season, who sommoning his army together, rehearsed unto them
certain verses that he had compiled wherein was contained the encouragemente to
virtue, the comfort of adversity, and the policies of war.

Wherewith he set his soldiers on such a courage, that taking more thought for
their burial the^ for their lives, every manne put about his right arm, a
bracelet wherein was graven his own name, and the name of his father: to the
intent that if they had so ill fortune as to be all slain in the battle, and
that by continuance of time their bodies should rotte out of fashion, by the
marks of their bracelets they might be known and buried.

When the kings saw the host so minded, they caused the matter to be showed
to their ennemies. The Messenians The courage of the Messenians.
were therewith nothing abashed, but rather made more earnest. Therefore they
met with such courage, that there has not lightlye a bloudier battle
been hard of. Nevertheless at the last the Lacedaemonians got the upper
hand. In process of time the Messenians made insurrection Occasyon of war
between the Lacedaemonians and ^atheniens.
the third time. In the which among other the Lacedaemonians sent for aid to
the Atheniens. Whom they having in distruste, made an excuse that as at that
time they should not neade to trouble them, and so s^nte them home again. The
Atheniens taking this matter in displeasure, fetched from Delos to Athens, the
money which was there laid by all Greece, for the maintenance of the wars
against the Persians: least if the Lacedaemonians should break the league,
they might take it as a botye, or as their own gotten good. But the
Lacedaemonians could not be in quiet. For being entangled in the wars with
See the nature of envy.
the Messenians, they waged the Peloponnesians to make war against the
Atheniens. The Atheniens were as then able to raise but a small power, by reason
they had sent a navy of ships into Egypt. Wherefore in a battle upon the Sea
they were vanquished with small a do. Within a while after, when their flete
was come home, being increased both in noumber of ships and in strength of
men they rered the war a new. And at that time the Lacedaemonians leauinge the
Messenians, turned them selves against the Atheniens: long time the victory
hong in doubtful balance, sometime the one winninge and sometime the other. At
the last they departed of even hand. The Lacedaemonians being called again to
the wars of Messenia, because they were loath that the Atheniens should be
idle, and having nothing to do in the mean while, couenanted with the Thebanes
to restore to them the kingdom of (...), which was taken from them in the time
of the Persian wars, upon condition that they should make war to the
Atheniens. So mad were the Lacedaemonians, that being all ready entangled in two
wars at ones, they passed not to take the third in hand, and only to stir
up ennemies to the Atheniens. The noble ^o ings of Pericles.
The Atheniens therefore to withstand the great tempests of war that were
like shortly to ensue, chose two captains. Pericles a man of tried virtue,
and Sophocles a writer of tragedies, the which with two sundry armies wasted
the territories of the Spartanes, and subdued many cities of Achaia to
thempire of Athens. The Lacedaemonians The Lacedaemonians take a truce and break
it.
being all together discouraged with these misfortunes took a truce for xxx.
years. But their privy grudge could not suffer them to abide so long in reast.
Therefore ere xv. years were fullye accomplished, they brake the truce, and in
despite of God and man, invaded the borders of Athens. And because they would
not seem so greatly to have sought the pray, as the encounter, they bad them
battle. But the The wisdom of P^icles in reuengyng his country.
Atheniens by the counsel of their captain Pericles delaid the reuengment of
this wastinge their country, until more convenient time and occasion,
thinckinge it but a follye to trouble them selves as then, consideringe they
might ere long after, be revenged more to their profit and les to their
displesure. Within a few days after, they embarked them selves, and or ever
the Lacedaemonians wist thereof, wasted and forraged all the country of Sparta,
and carried away a great deal more the^ before they had lost. So that in
comparison of the domages, the reuengement was much greater the^ the
displesure. This viage of Pericles was counted very honorable, His wisdom in
a^oidinge his own peri^s.
but much more honorable was the despising of his patrimony and inheritans. For
when the Spartanes wasted the country of Athens, and spoiled all other men's
lands, they left his untouched, hoping either to bring him in danger through
envy, or elsse in a slander upon presumption of treason. The which thing
Pericles foreseing before hand, told the people how it would come to pass, and
to avoid the brunt of envy, he gave the lands for a gift to the common w^ale.
And so by that means, the thing whereupon most hurt and danger was wrought
against him, turned most of all to his renown and honor. Within a few days
after, there Battle on the ^ea.
was a battle fought upon the sea, in the which the Lacedaemonians being
vanquished, fled. And from that time foreward they ceased not to slay and kill
one another, both by sea and by land as fortune inclined or bare favor to any
of the sides. Finally being wearied with so many domages and losses, the^ took
a truce for fifty years, the which they kept The Lacedemoni^s brake the truce
again.
no longer then fix years. For the truce which they had taken in their own
name, they brake under couloure and pretense of aiding their fellows: as
though they should less have committed periurye in fightinge in the
maintenance of the quarrel of their accomplices, then in making open war. After
this the war was removed into Sicil: but or ever I entreat thereof, I will
write somewhat of the situation of the Island.

The fourth Book.
MEn say that Sicil cleued sometime unto Italye, and that it was (as it were)
rent The description of Sicil, with the nature thereof.
from the body, by violence of the upper sea, which withal the force of his
waves comes thither. The earth of it self is fine and brittle, so holowe
with holes and pipes in the ground, that in manner it li^s wide open to every
blast of wind. And besides that, the nature of the soil is such, that of it
self it engenders and nourishes fire. For the molde within is after a
brimston^ and rosen, by means whereof it comes to pass, that the wind
striving with the fire in the innermost part of the earth, oftentimes and in
many places casts out, sometimes flakes of fire, so^times vapors, and sometimes
smoke, thervp on also grows the fire of the mountain Aetna continuinge so
many C. years. And when there is any great wind in the forsaid holes, great
heaps of sand ar^ cast out of the^. The next promontory over against Italy is
Rhegium: so called be cause the Greeks in their language do term things broken
of, by that name. It is no meruel though in old time there went many fables
and tales of this place, in the which are conveyed The narow seas of Sicil
so many strange things. First and formest there is no narow sea in all the
world so raginge as it, not only by the swiftness of the waves, but also by
the violent meting of the tides, so that it is terrible not only to the^ that
try it, but also to such as behold it a far of. Moreover there is such a do when
the waves mete, that a man shall se some as it were running away drowned in the
whorlpoles, and falling into the bottom of the sea, and other some in manner of
conqueroures proudly bear the^ selves a loft. And again hear in one place the
roaring of the raging tide, and in another place as it were the sighing of the
falling into the gulf. And to the increase thereof makes also the nere and
continual burning of the mou^tain Aetna, and of aeolus isles, as though the
fire were norished with the water. For it is not possible that so great a fire
should other wise continue so long season together in so small a roum, onles it
were norished by moisture. Herevpo^ Scilla and Charybdis.
therefore grew the tales of Scylla and Charibdis, hereupon came it that men
hard the barking of dogs, hervpon me^ believed that they saw monsters, which
sailing that way, being feared with the noise of the waves falli^g into the
great gulfs, imagined the waves to bark, which was nothig else, but the noise of
the waters beting one against another as they were drawn by viol^ce into the
whorlpoles. The like cause is also of the co^tinua^ce of the fire of the
mou^tain aetna. For this vi ole^t meting of the waters, draws, the wind with
it perforce into the bowels of therth, and there holds him pent so long,
until being spread into the holes of ther^h, it sets the ^iry matter a
burnig. Now Italy and Sicilie ar so near together and the promontories of both
so like in height, that look how much we now wonder at it, so much men in old
time were afraid of it, believing that the hills met and departed a sonder again,
and that whole nauies of ships were swalowed up and never seen after. Nether
was this thing devised in old time, for pleasantness of the tale, but for
the wonderment of such as passed that way. For such is the nature of the
place, that they which behold it a far of, would rather take it to be an
elbowe of the Sea shotyng into the land, then a passage. And when a man comes
near, he would think that the Mountains parted and went a sondre. Sicill
was first of all named Trinacria, afterward The names of Sicil.
it was called Sicania. This Island from the beginnynge was the country of the
Giauntes with one eye in their forehead called Cyclopes. The which being
roted out, acolus took^ upon him the rule of the (...), after whose decease,
every City had a Tyran by them selves, and there was never country that had
better store of them the^ had Sicilie. Of the noumber of these tirauntes there
was one Anaxilaus, that striued against the crueltye of the others An example
of justice and good governance, and the fruit the^of.
with justice, whose modest governance profited him not a little. For when he
was departed out of this life, leaving his children very young under the
tuition and government of a trusty servant of his called Mycithus, he was so
well beloved of al his subjects, that they were conteted to obey his servant,
rather then to abandon and forsake his children. And the princes of the city
forgettinge their estate, suffered the kingdom to be ruled by a bondsman. The
Carthaginenses assaid to conquer thempire of Sicil, and fought a long season
with the kings there of, sometime to their gain ^de more hereof in the xviii.
xix. xx. and xxii. books.
and sometime to their loss.

At the last when they had lost their graund captain Hamilcar and al his host,
their hearts were discoraged, and so kept them selves in quiet for a good while
after. In the mean season the inhabitauntes of ^hegium fallinge at debate
among them selves, and the City being divided in two factio^s the one part
thinking them selves to weak* sent for the old souldioures which were then at
the city of ^mera to come and healpe them, who having driven out of the
Town those against whom they were called, and forthwith slaying them whose
quarrel they supported, took their City with their wives and children and all
that ever they had, which was such a cruel act as never tiraunt attempted
in so much that it had been far better for the men of Rhegium to have
been vanquished, then to have gotten the victory. For whether they had been
driven by the law of arms to have served the Conqueroures, or whether they
had been driven to forsake their country as banished persons, yet
notwithstanding they should not have been miserably murdered between the
temples and their dwelling houses, and have left their native country with
their wives and children as a pray to such cruel tirants. The Catenenses ^iuil
war^s in Sicil, by means where of the ath^ ens were brough^ to a sore after
(...)
also being sore oppressed by the Syracusans, distrustynge their own
strength, demanded succor of the Atheniens, the which (whether it were for
desire to dilate their Empire, because they had all ready conquered all Greece
and Asi^, or that they feared least the great navy of ships which the
Syrac^sanes had lately builded, should aid and stre^gthen the Lacedaemonians,)
sent a Captain called Lampozius with a navy into Sicill, to the intent that
under the color of aiding the Catenienses, they might attempt to get the
kingdom of Sicill. And because that they had prosperous success in their
affair^s at the beginning, and made great slaughter of their ennemies, they
went to Sicil again with a greater ^eete and a stronger power, whereof were
captains Lachetes and Char^ades. But the Cateu^nses whether it were for f^are
of the Atheniens, or that they were wearye of the wars, made peace with the
Syracusanes and sent home the Athe^ens again that came to their rescue. Within
a while after when the Syracusanes observed not iustlye the peace, they sent
their ambassadors again to Athens, who in filthy apparel with long heads and
long beardes, fafashioning their countenance and gesture as much as might be
to provoke pity, came sorowfullye before the people. In making their complainte
they wept, and with their humble submission so moved the sely people to pity,
that the cap tains were condemned for withdrawing their succors from them.
Wherefore a great navy was sent forth, whereof were appointed captains, Nicias,
Albiciades, Lamachus, and they entered Sicilie with such a power, that even they
who^ they alcibiades ari ueth in Sicil, and is sent for home again tanswer to
accusano^s.
came to defend were a fraid of them. Shortly after alcibiades being sent for
home to answer to certain enditements that were put up against him, Nicias and
Lamachus fought two prosperous battles upon the land. And soon after so
enclosed their ennemies and kept them so straighte, that they could have
neither rescue nor victailes from the sea* The Syracusanes being so sore
distressed, desired healp of the Lacedaemonians. Unto them was sent no mo but
only Gylippus, but he was such a one as was worth all the help they had
beside. For he hearing of the manner of the war, The praise of Gylippus.
and perceiving his accomplices to be brought to a low ebb, raised a power
partlye in Greece, and partlye in Sicill, and took such a piece of ground as he
thought meet for the two hosts to encounter in. Where being twice put to the
wors at the third encounter he slew Lamachus, put ^is ennemies to flight, and
raised the siege. But when gylippus perceived that the Atheniens removed from
the land to battle, on the Sea, he sent for the nauye of Lacedemon to aid
him, the which thing being known at Athens, they also to supplye the rowme of
the captain that was slain, sent Demosthenes and (...) with a new furniture
of soldiers. The Xeloponesians also by a common decree of all the Cities*
sent great aid to the Syracusanes, and all the power that either part could
make was sent thither, as though the war Thatheniens are vanqui^ed.
had been removed out of Greece into Sicilie. Therefore at the first encounter
upon the Sea the Atheniens were vanquished, their tents also with all their
Treasure private, and common were taken. Besides al these mischeues, when The
third di^ comfiture of them.
they were overcome upon the land also, then Demosthenes began to counsel them
to depart out of Sicilie betimes, before their matters which all ready were in
great hasarde, were not yet all together brought to utter despair. Saying it
was not good to pe^uer and longer in the war so vnluckely begone, and that
there was sorer and perchance more unfortunate war toward at home in their
own country, for the defense and withstandinge whereof. That furniture of the
City ought to be reserved, Nicias whether it were for shame of his ill
success, or for fear of his own Citizens disapoynted of that they looked for,
or that his destenye compelled him there unto, made all the means he might to
abide still.

Whereupon eftsoon was renewed the war by sea, and The fourth ouerthr^ o^ them.
for all the storms of their former misfortune, yet they took courage to
encounter again. But through the unskillfulness of their captains that set
upon the Siracusanes, keeping them selves in the straights, they were lightly
overcome. The captain (...) fighting very valiantly in the foreward was the
first that was slain. The xxx. ships whereof he had the charge, were set on
fire. Demosthenes and Nicias being also vanquished, did set their men a land,
supposing by that way the better to eskape. Gylippus (...) lowe^h the victory*
The hundred and xxx. ships which they left behind, them Gylippus invaded,
and afterward pursuing them as they fled, some he slew and some he took
prisoners. Demosthenes Demosthenes (...) him self.
when he had lost his army, delivered him self from bondage by wilful
sleing of him self with his sword. But Nicias having not the heart to do by him
self as did Demosthenes, dishonourably increased the slaughter of his men by
yelding him self unto shameful captivity.

The fifthe Book.
VUhile the Atheniens warred in Sicilie by the space of ii. years with more
gredinesse The points whereof Alcibiades was appealed.
then success, in the mean season Alcibiades the stirrer and chieftaine
thereof, in his absence was accused at Athens to have published the misteryes of
Ceres, and the night sacrifices done in her honor, which are by no means so
highly solemnized as by silence. And being sent for from the wars, to
answer to his complainte, whether his conscience gave him to be giltye, or
that he could not abide such a reproach to his honor, he made no words but
went as a banished man to Elis. Afterward when he understood that he was
alcibiades stirs the Lacedaemonians against his own country.
not only condemned, but also accursed by the priests of all the orders of
religion, he went to Lacedemon, and there persuaded the king to war upon
the Atheniens, now auexed and troubled with their misaduentures in Sicilie.
Immediately whervppon, all the kingdoms of Greece gathered them selves together,
as it had been to quench some common fire, so great hatred had the Atheniens
gotten, through their unmeasurable desire of bearing rule. Darius He was the
son of artax erxes and was the viii. king of Persia.
also the king of Persians, remembering the hatred that his father and
graundfather bare to this City, entered in leage with the Lacedaemonians, by
Tyssaphernes lieuetenaunte of Lydia, and promised to bear the charges of the
war. This was the pretense of entrance in leage with the Greeks, but in
very deed he doubted, least when the Lacedaemonians had overcome the
Atheniens, they would set upon him. What wonder is it then if the estate of
Athens were so flourishinge, since that to oppress that one City, all the
power of the whole East bent them selves together. Yet The prowes of thathenie^s
notwithstanding they were not as cowardes overcome without great bloodshed,
but fightinge to the uttermost, and some whiles also getting the upper hand,
they were at length rather by unstableness of fortune consumed, then ^auour
^oloweth fortu^
by plain force vanquished. In the beginning of the war, not so much but
even their own fellows forsook them as it is daily seen, that whereas fortune
seems to favor thither also, do men's hearts incline. Alcibiades also
furthered The doings of Alcibiades against his own country
this war that was moved against his country, with all the power he might,
not like a common soldier, but like a puissaunt captain. For taking with him
x. ships, he sailed into Asia, and there by the authority of his name,
compelled the Cities that were tributary unto the Atheniens, to turn to the
Lacedaemonians. For they knew well that he was a man of great power in his own
country, and they thought he was not the less by reason of his banishmente,
supposing him not to much to be taken from the Atheniens, as to be delivered
for a captain to the Lacedaemonians and so they set his winninges against his
losses. But among the Lacedaemonians, Alcibiades great prowess and
^aliantnesse He (...) no less^*
wan him more envy then thank. Therefore when the Princes laid wait secreatly to
kill him by treason, as an enemy to their glory and renown, Alcibiades
having knowledge thereof by the wife of king agis with whom he had committed
aduoutry, fled to Tissaphernes king Darius lieuetenaunt, with whom through
his curtesy and lowly behauior he quickly wound him self in. For he was then in
the flourishing time of his youth, and for his beautye, personage and eloquence,
among all the Atheniens was none The nature ^ manners of (...) cibiades.
like unto him. But he was better in winning frendshippe then in keepinge:
because that ever at the first, under the fair shadow of eloquence, were
cloked his evil manners and conditions. Therefore he persuaded Tissafernes that
he should not allow to much wages and viand to the fleet of Mark (...)
the Lacedaemonians, and that the Ionians ought to be called to part of the
charges, for whose liberty when they paid tribute to the Atheniens, this
war was first begone. Moreover that the Lacedaemonians ought not to have to
much help, consideringe he prepared for another man's victory and not for his
own, wherefore the war ought so far forth to be maintained, that it be not
broken up for want of things necessary. For as long as the Greeks were thus at
debate among them selves, the king of Persia should always be an indifferent
judge both of peace and war at his own pleasure. And he should overcome
them with their own power, whom he could not overcome with all the power he
was able to make of his own. And as soon as the war were ended, which way
so ever the gole went, he should be compelled to have war with the
conquerors. Wherefore it were good to suffer the Greeks to busy them selves in
wasting their own country, to the intent they have no leisure to invade forain
countries. To the performance whereof, either part ought to be maintained in
strength able to match his aduersari, and the weaker to be aided with new
succors. For it was not to be thought that the Lacedaemonians would be in rest,
if they might get the upper hand, considering they had professed and proclaimed
them selves all ready, the defenders of the liberty of Greece. This Oration liked
Tissaphemes very well, whervppon he allowed them not so liberal expenses,
neither sent he forth all the kings flete, least he should either give them the
victory out of hand, or elsse constrain them to break up the wars. In
the mean season Alcibiades did thus much for Note his crafty deling.
his country men, that when the Atheniens sent their ambassadors unto him, he
promised to get them the kings favor, if so be it that the administration of
the commonwealth were removed from the people, and put into the senators
hands. Hopinge there by that if the City agreed well, he should be chosen
captain of the war by their common assent, or else if there arose any
variaunce between the two estates, he should be called to the aid of the one
part. But the Atheniens saying the danger of the war that they were wrapped
in, had more respect of their safegarde then of their honor.

Therefore with the good will of the people, the governance of the common wealth
was put into the hands of the senators. The which because that through a
certain pride natu rallye engraffed in that estate, they dealed with the people
^om what cruelly, every man taking upon him to be a lord, alcibiades is called
out^ of exite and (...) general of the wars.
the souldioures called home the banished alcibiades, and made him admiral of
the Sea. Whervppon immediately he sent word to Athens, that he would
incontinently come thither with an host of men, and take the government out
of the CCCC. Senatoures hands, whether they would or no, unless they
surrendered it up of their own accord before he came.

The great men of the City being sore fro^hled with this message, first
attempted to betraye the Town to the Lacedaemonians, which thing being not
able to bring to pass, they willinglye forsook their Country, and became as
banished men. alcibiades therefore having delivered his country from inward
sedition, furnished his ships with all diligence possible, and so proceeded into
warfare against the Lacedaemonians. Now Mindarus and (...) the Captains of the
Lacedaemonians, with their ships furnished alc^tades overcome the
Lacedemontans.
likewise, awaited his coming. The battle being sought, the victory fell
to the Atheniens. In this conflicte the greater part of the army, and
almooste all the captains of their enemies were slain, and lxxx. ships taken.
Within a few days after the Lacedaemonians removing from the Sea unto the
land, were eftsoon in another encounter put to the worse. The which
discomfiture being greatly afflicted and discouraged, they sued for peace. The
which was let to be granted through their mean es, and had advantage and
gain by the wars. In the mean season the Carthaginenses made war in Sicil, by
reason whereof the Siracusanes were fain to call home their succors to defend
their own. The Lacedemonia^s being thereby destitute of al aid and comfort,
Alcibiades with his victorious nauye, wasted and spoiled the coaste of Asia,
fought battles in diverse places, and every where getting the victory,
recovered the Cities which were turned from the Atheniens, and diverse he His
tryumphan^ returu unto athens.
won of new, and subdued them to the dominion of the Atheniens also. And so
having recovered his ancient renown and honor, in battle on the sea, with
thencrese and augmentation thereof by his conquestes on the land, he returned to
Athens to the great reioycement of all his Citezens. In all these battles were
taken of their enemies, two C. ships and a great pray. To behold this
triumphante return of the army, all the people came out of the City by
heaps, praising highlye all the souldioures, but in espetially wondering at
Alcibiades. On him all the City gased, on him they earnestlye fastened their
eyes, as though they could never have seen enough of him, him they beheld as
one sent from heaven, and as it were the victory it self, they praised his noble
acts done for his country, no less extolling the things which he did
against the same, in the time of his banishment: making his excuse them
selves, as that he did them in his anger and provoked there unto. It is a
marvelous thing to see, that there should be in one manne such power and
valor, as to be the only cause of the overthrow of so mighty a kingdom, and
of the settinge up The fortune of alcibiades.
of the same again, victory ever following that side that he took, and that
fortune should so wonderfully always incline that way that he went. Wherefore
they honored him not as a man, but as a God, they striued with them selves,
whether they had banished him more spitefullye, or called him home again more
honorably. They brought their Gods with them for joy to welcome him home,
by which not long before they had accursed him. And whom of late they had
forbidden all man's help, now and if they could they would have set him in
heaven. Recompensing the despite with honor, his harms and losses with gifts
and rewards, and his curses with blessings. There was no words among them of
the battles that he lost in Sicil, but of the victories that he wo^e in Greece.
There was no speaking of the ships that he had lost, but of the ships
that he had taken. The Syracusanes were forgotten, and there was no talk but
of his conquestes in Ionia and Hellespont. Thus was Alcibiades never meanly
hated, nor meanly honored and exalted of his country men.

While these things were a doing among the Lacedaemonians Lysander was made
Captain general of the wars both by sea and by land, and in stead of
Tissaphernes, Darius king of Persians had made his son Cyrus lieuetenant
of Ionia and Lydia, who aided the Lacedaemonians in such wise both with men and
money, that they doub ted not to recover their former estate. Being therefore
thus increased in strength, and hearing that Alcibiades was gone into Asia with
a nauye of a C. ships, whiles he was Oversight pernicious in a captain.
there wasting and spoiling the country, which was grown rich by reason there
had been no war of a long time be fore, and took no head to his souldioures,
but suffered them for covetousness of booties to disperse them selves where
they lifted, as though there had been no treason to be feared, they suddenly
came upon them, and assailed them ere they could gather them selves together.
And they made such a slaughter among them as they were skatred, that the
Atheniens took more loss and hurt in that one battle, then they had done to
their ennemies in all the battles before, wherewith they were brought to luche a
despair, that forthwith they put away alcibiades, and chose conon to be their
captain in his stead. Thincking them selves to have been vanquished not by the
chance of wars, but through the Alci^des is banished again.
treson of their captain, which more regarded the old displesure then the
benefits newly bestowed upon him. And that he had vanquished his ennemies in
the former battles for ndne other purpose, but only to show unto them what a
captain they had despised, and to thentent to sell them the victory the derer.
And to say the truth alcibiades had so subtle a head, and was therewith so much
given to vice and lascivious living, that it was like enough he would work such
a thing. Fering therefore the displesure of the people in their rage, of his own
will he banished him self again. Then Conon being put in the room of
Alcibsades, having before his eyes what a captain he had suc^eded, furnished
his navy with all diligence and circumspectinesse tha tmyght be. But there
wanted men to furnish the ships, for the ^ou test and strongest soldiers
were lost in the forraginge of Asia. Yet notwithstanding old men and berdlesse
boys were armed, and so filled up the number of soldiers, without any strength
of the host. Yet for all that, they let not A great slaughter of the
atheniens.
to encounter with their enemies, by whom like weak and unable soldiers, they
were every where beaten down or else taken running away. And there was such a
destruction, what of them that were slain, and what of them that were taken,
that not only the Empire, but even the very name of the Atheniens seemed to be
utterly extinct: By the which battle they were brought to so low an ebb and
left so bare, by reason all their warlike men were consumed and spent, that they
were driven folet their city to strangers, to set their slaves and bondmen
fre, and to give pardon to such as were condemned to die. And with this rout
of raskals whereof their army was compact, they (which lately before were lords
of al Greece,) were now skarse able to maintain their own liberty.
Nevertheless they determined yet The courage of thathen^e^s
once again to try their fortune upon the sea. So stout were their stomakes,
and so coragious were their hearts, that whereas a little before they were in
despair of their own safeguard, they were now in good hope to get the victor^e.
But these were not the souldioures that were able to uphold the honor of
Athens, nether was that the power wherewith they were wont to give their ennemies
the overthrow, neither was there such knowledge of feats of arms in those
that had been kept in prison, and not in the camp. Therefore Their last
overthrow and slaughter.
they were all either slain or taken prisoners: The captain Conon which
eskaped alone from the battle, fering the cruelty of his country men, took
viii. ships, and sailed to Eu^goras king of cyprus. But the captain of the
Lacedaemonians having atcheued al things prosperously and according to his own
desire, proudly reioysig at thaduersity of his enemies, sent the ships that he
had taken withal the boty gotten in the wars, decked and garnished in manner
of a triumph unto Lacedemon, and received by composition all the cities that
were tributary to the Atheniens, which as yet continued in their due obedience,
because they knew not to what end the war would come, leuing nothing under the
dominion of the Atheniens, saving only the bare city. Of all the which mise ries
when tidings came to Athens, all the people forsakyng a Rhetorical description
of the afflicted state of (...)
their houses ran up and down the city amassed, one askyng an other what
tidings, seking for him that brought up first the news, not the children,
their want of discretion, not the old men want of strength, not the women the
weakness and delibity of nature, could keep at home, so sore did the feling of
that misfortune perce unto alages. They met together in the market sted, and
there al night long lamented and bewailed their common misfortune, some made
moan for their brothers, some for their sons, some for their fathers, some for
their kinsfolk, and other some for their friends which were derer to them then
their kinsfolk, and among their private mischances, was always repeated the
common misfortune, loking for none other but present and utter destruction both
to them selves and to their country, esteming them that were alive to be in
worse case then them that were dead. Each person setting before their eyes,
besiegement, hunger, and the arrogant enemy having them in his hand to work
his pleasure upon the^. And therewith came to their reme^bra^s the overthrow and
burninge of their city, the captiuitye of them selves, and the most miserable
servitude and bondage which they were all like to be brought unto. Thincking
the first overthrow of the city by the Per. to be counted hapy in co^pariso^,
in the which their wives and children, parents and kinsfolk remaining in
safeguard, they lost nothing but their houses, whereas now they had no ships left
whereunto they might fly for su^ had no army of soldiers through whose help
they might be defended til they were able to build a fairer City.

And as they werthus bewailing their misfortune and misery, Athens is be sieged.
their enemies coming upon them, environed the town with a strong siege, and
constrained them greatly with hu^ ger: For it was well known that there were
not many of the soldioures left alive within the town, and they were so
straightly looked to, that no new succors could be brought in. By which
mischeues the Atheniens being brought low after long famine and daily pestilence
desired peace. There was long debatinge between the Lacedaemonians and their
adherentes whether it was to be granted or no. When many gave counsel, utterly
to rote out the name of the Atheniens, and to put the city to the fire, the
Spartanes said they would not in any wise condescend, that if the two eyes of
Greece the one should be put out. And so they granted peace is gra^ ted to the
Atheniens.
the^ peace, upon condition they should cast down the arms of the walls that
stretched toward the haven of Pyreum, de liver up all their ships that were
left, and receive at their hand xxx. rulers to govern their common wealth. Upon
these articles the city was yielded to the Lacedaemonians: who co^ mitted
thordering thereof to the discretion of their captain Lysander: This year was
worthy to be noted, both for the It was the 400. before the coming of
Christ. Eu sebius. This was the younger Dennis, of whom read in the xxi. book.
Athens is op pressed with tyranny.
winning of Athens, for the death of Darius king of Persia, and also for the
banishment of Dyonise tiraunt of Sicil. The estate of Athens being thus
altered, the estate of the people was altered also. The xxx. rulers of the
commonwealth fell to tyranny. For at their first coming they chose them a
guard of three M. men, whereas in all the city remained skarse as many moo, they
were so wasted and consumed by the wars before. And yet not so content, as
though this band were to weak to keep the City in awe, they borrowed DCC.
soldiers of the conquerors. Then they began the slaughter of the citizens at
aicibiades, least under pretens of restoring their liberty, he might invade the
common wealth again. For having intelligens that he was going toward Art
axe^xes king of Persia, they sent certain after him in post, to cut him of by
the way, by whom he was ouertake^. The final (...) of alcibiades.
But because they could not kill him openly, they set fire on his chamber
where he slept and burnte him up quick. The tirauntes being delivered out of
fear of this revenger of his country, with their slaughter, extorcion, and
rauishmentes made even a spoil of the miserable and wretched outcastes that
were left in the City, the which their The cruelty^ of the tirants.
doing when they understood to displease one of their fellows, whose name
was Tbemeranes, to the terror of all the reast they put him to death. Whereupon
glad was he that might get himself out of the city, insomuche that all Greece
was full of banished men of Athens, and yet even that one only re^uge and
comfort, was taken from the poor wretches. For the Lacedaemonians had given
straight charge and commandment, that no city should be so bold, as to receive
or harbrough the banished men of Athens. Nevertheless they withdrew them
selves al, unto Argos and Thebes, whereas they not only lived out of danger.
During the time of their exile, but also received hope of recovering their
Country. There was among the banished men, one Thrasibulus a stout The love of
Thrasibulu^ to his tountry.
man and one that came of a noble house, who thinckinge that a man was bound to
adventure for his country sake, though it were to his own peril and ieoperdy
of his life, assem bled a company of his banished country men, and took the
castle Phyle in the territory of Athens. And he wanted not the favor and help
of certain Cities that had pitye and compassion of their miserable estate and
cruel handlynge. For Ismenias the prince of the Thebanes, although he could
not aid them openly with the power of his country, yet notwithstanding he
helped them with such goods as he had of his own. And Lysias an Orator of
Syracuse being at The like example of Lysias.
the same time also a banished man, sent CCCCC. Souldioures well furnished at
his own proper ^ostes and charges, to the aid of the country of all eloquens,
therefore anon after was a sharp encounter.

But forasmuchas the one part fought earnestly for the recovery of their
country, and the other part negligently as they that (...) for the (...) of
other men's ti^: the (...) were put to the worse, and retiring into the City
which they had in manner wasted and made desolate with their murderinges (...)
extortion, and sacked it. This done having all the Atheniens in a gelouly of
treson, they (...) them every one to remove out of the city, and dwell in
tharmes of the wa^ that were woken down, defending their superiority and do^ions
with soldiers ^aunts. Uncorrupted faithfulness.
Afterward they went about to corrupt (...), promising to make him (...) and
partaker of their Empire, which thing when they could not bring to effect, they
sent for aid to the Lacedaemonians, at whose coming they made a new encounter.
In the which Critios and Hyppoma^us the cruellest (...) of them all were
(...). The residue also being vanquished, when their army whereof the most part
were Atheniens fled toward the city, (...) calling to them as loud as ^e could
cry, demanded why they should fly from him having obtained the victory, and
not rather help him as the defendor and revenger of the liberty of them all
bidding them remember, that his soldiers were their own neighbors and
Citizens, and not their ennemies. And that he had not taken wepon in hand, to
then^ to take anything from them being vanquished, but to the intent to restore
the^ such things as have been taken from them by others, professing that he made
war against the (...), and not against the city. Moreover he put them (...) of
the (...) and affinitye between them of their laws, of their rites and
ceremonies common amongst them and of the fellowship and company that had been
betwixt them in so many battles in times paste, beseching them to have pity
upon their banished country men. And if they could find in their hearts to
^eare the yoke of bondage so patiently them selves he besought them to restore
him his country, and he would set them at liberty again. He did so much with
this persuasion, that when tharmy was retur ned into the city, they commanded
the xxx. tirants to depart The tyrants are (...) sh^d.
unto El^sis, and in their stead they substituted others and to go^ the (...)
wealth. Who nothing abashed at the ensample of their predecessors, fell to the
same cruelty: that they had exercised. While these things were a doing word was
brought to Lacedemon, that the Atheniens were very destrous of war, the which
to repress, they sent their king Pansanias who having compassion upon the
banished peo ple, restored the wretched citizens to their country agains, (...)
the x. tirants to remove out of the City unto Elensis to the re^due of their
company. Peace being by this means established, within a few days after, the
Tirans (disdaining as much the restitution of the banished citizens, as their
own deposinges and banishment, as though a another man's liberty ^ad ben their
bondage,) made war against the (...). But as they came forth to commu The
worthy reward of tyranye.
(...), as though they would have taken upon them their preheminency and
souerainty again, they were by a policye taken and (...) a sacrifice for peace.
The people which they had commanded out of the city, were called in again. And
so Thathenie^s at restored to their count^ again.
the city which was dispersed into diverse members, was at length brought into
one body and corporation again. And to thentent no dissension might grow upon
things past, they were al sworn to forget and bury under foot all old debate and
grudge. In the mean while the Thebanes and the Corinthians sent ambassadors to
the Lacedaemonians, demau^dyng cause of (...) ge between the Corinthi ans and
Lacedaemonians.
their portion of the praise and botles taken in the wars, whereof they had
helped for their part to bear out the charges and dangers. Having denial of
their requests, they did not immediately proclaim open war against the Lacedemo
nians, but they conceived such an inward displeasure in their hearts, that it
might well be understand, that they mened The death of Darius Nothus.
no less to make war when they saw their time. About the same time almost died
Darius king of Persia, leaving behind him his two sons Artaxerxes and C^rus.

He bequethed by his last will unto Artaxerxes the kingdom, and unto Cyrus the
rities whereof he was that time ruler. But Cyrus thought his father did him
wrong in that bequest, and therefore he co^spired privily against his brother.
(...) having knowledge thereof, set for him and not regarding his counter fait
pretense of innocencye, nor his fained excuses, as that he was not privy to the
conspiracye, bound him in fetters of gold, and would have put him to death,
had not his mother let him. Cyrus therefore being set at large, prepared not
war as now any more secreatly, The wicked war between Cyrus and ar tax^rxes.
but openly, nor by dissimulation, but by open de^aunce, and raised a great
power both of his own and of his friends and accomplices, as many as he could
hire for money, or for favor. The Lacedaemonians remembrynge that by his
means, they were greatly aided in their wars with the Atheniens like men
ignorant against whom the war^e was raised, determined to send aid unto
Cyrus, when occasion should require, seking both for thank^ at Cyrus hand, and
also for pardon at Artaxerxes hand, if he should get the victory, in as much
as they had attempted nothing against him openly. But in the battle such
Cyrus is slain.
was their chance, that the two brothers meting together, encountered the one with
the other, whereas Artaxerxes was wounded by Cyrus, but by the swiftness of his
horse he was delivered from danger, and has brother Cyrus was overthrown by
the kings band, and so slain. And so Artax erxes getting the victory, obtained
the spoil of his brothers war and his army also. In that battle there were
x. M. Greeks that came to the aid of Cyrus, the which in the winge where they
stead, gate the upper hand, and after the death of Cyrus, could neither be
overcome of so great an host perforce, nor yet be entrapped or taken by
policy. ^ut in their return homewarde, through so many wild and savage
nations, so long a iourny defended them selves by their manhood and prowess,
even unto the borders of their country.

The syxthe Book.
THe Lacedaemonians as the nature of Ambition is never satisfied.
man is, the more they have, the more they covet, not content that their power
by conqueringe the Atheniens, and annexinge their power to their own, was now
doubled, began to devise how to attain thempire of all Asia, the most part
whereof was under the dominyon of the Persians. Therefore Dercillides being
appointed lieue tenant general for these Wars, when he saw that he The
wars between the Lacedaemonians and the Persians.
must have to do against two of Artaxerxes lieuetenauntes, Pharnabazus and
Tyssaphernes, which had about them in a readiness the whole power of the
mightiest Countries in all the world, he thought it good to make peace with
the one of them. The meeter for his purpose seemed Tyssaphernes, a man both of
more experience and actiuity then the other, and also better furnished with the
souldioures that belonged sometime to king Cyrus. After communication had,
agreement was made upon certain conditions, that he should not intermeddle him
self with the wars. Pharnabazus being Tyssaphernes is accused to y^ king
herewith agreued, complained thereof to the king their master, declaring how he
withstoode not the Lacedaemonians by force when they entered into Asia, but
nourished the^ there at the kings charges, and that he bargained with them to
delay the wars which they took in hand, as though the damage thereof
should not equally redounde to the displeasure of the whole Empire. He said it
was an unseemly thing, that the war was not gone through wythall, but bought
of, and that the enemy was hired of for money and not rather driven away by dint
of sword. When he had by this complaint brought the king in displesure with
Tyssaphernes, he exhorted him to make his Admiral of the sea in stead of
Tyssaphernes, Conon of Athens, who since the the time he had in battle lost his
country, lived in exile at Cyprus. For though the Atheniens were bereft of
power and richesse, yet notwithstanding their experience in ordering and
guiding a navy remains still unto them. And if one were to be chosen among
them all, there was not a better then Conon. Hereupon he had delivered unto
him CCCCC. talentes, with commission to make Conon admiral Conon is ma de
admiral of the Persian ^ete.
of the kings flete. The Lacedaemonians having intelligence hereof, sent an
ambassade to the king of Egypt, requi ring him to send Hercymones to their aid
with a noumber of ships. Who sent them a C. galeis and DC. bushels of corn.
Other of their confederates also sent them great succors. But unto this great
army and against so great a captain, there wanted a mete governor. Therefore
when as the con federates of the Lacedaemonians demanded to their grau^d
captain agesilaus at that time king of the Lacedaemonians. The Lacedaemonians
debated the matter a great while, whether they might make him lieuetenant
general or no, by reason of the answer of the Oracle at Delphos, the effect
whereof was that their Empire should come to an end, at such time as the
royal estate halted, for agesilaus was lame of one foot. At the length they
determined that it were better for their king to hault in his goinge, then the
kingdom to hault for want of a meet gouernoure. When Agesilaus The praise of
Conon, audof agesilaus.
was sent into Asia with a great host of men, I can not think that ever any
couple of Captains were so well matched together as they two were. For both in
years, in prowess, in counsel* in wisdom and in policy, they were in manner
all one, and in honor for their enterprises they were both a like. And although
fortune had made them equal in all things, yet she preserved each of them
unconquered of other. Great was the furniture of them both to the wars, and
great were both their attempts and enterprises. But the soldiers of Conon
raised a mutiny against him, because ^ mutinye for nonpaiment of wages.
the kings lieuetenaunts before time had been wont to abridge and defraud them
of their wages. Demanding their duties so much the earnestlier, in that they
took upon them to serve in so great wars under so noble a chiefetaine. The
(...) o^ Conon to (...) king.
Conon therefore having long time sued in vain to the king by his letters, at
the length went unto him him self. Whose presence and speech he might not be
suffered to come unto, because he would not worship him after the manner of
the Persians. Nevertheless he entreated with him by messengers, lamenting that
the wars of so rich a prince as he was, should be forslowed for want of money,
and that having as puissaunt an army as his enemies had, ^e should be overcome
in richesse, whereof he had more aboundans then they, and that he should be found
weak in that kind of strength, wherein he far exceded the^. Wherefore he demau^
ded to have the disbursing of the money him self, because it would be very
pernitius and hurtful, to put the doing thereof in to many men's hands. When he
had obtaind the tresure, he returned to his flete, and immediately set his
matters abroch. Many things he adue^tred valia^tlye and many things he at
cheued luckely. He wasted his enemies lands, won their towns and cities, and
as a tempest bare down al things before him. With which his doings the Lace.
being a fraid, determined to call home agesilaus out of Asia, to the defense of
his The (...) of Conon.
own country. In the mean seson Lisa^der whom Agesilaus at his setting forth
had substituted his vicegerent to defend the country at home* collecting a
great navy, rigged and furnished it withal the power he could, purposing to try
the fortune The circum^spectnesse of the two Cap taines Lysa^der and Conon.
of battle. Conon also forasmuch as it was the first time that he should
encounter with the host of his ennemy, took great pain and care in ordring and
apoynting of his men, and this contention was not all only among the captains,
but also even among the common Souldioures. For the Captain him self Conon,
was not so careful of the Persians, as of his own country, desirous that in
likewise as in their aduersitye, he had been the cause that the Atheniens
lost all their dominion and Empire, even so now to be the raiser and setter up
of the same again. and by conquest to recover his country which by being
vanquished he had lost, the which should redownde so much the more to his
honor, in that he should not have the Atheniens his cou^trimen to fight
under him, but the power of a forrayne prince, so that the peril and danger of
the loss should be the kings, and the gain and reward of the victory should
be his Countries. In which his doing he should attain to honor after a
another sort, and in manner clean contrary, then other that had been Captains
in his country before times. For whereas they defended the country by
vanquishinge the Persians, he should restore it to her former estate, by
making the Persians conquerors. On the other side Lysander beside that he was
near of kin to Agesilans, he was also an earnest follower of his virtuous
endeavoring by all means possible, not to step a side from his noble
examples, and from the brightness of his renown and The praise of Lysanda.
glory, but so to behave him self, that the Empire gotten in so many battles
and in so many C. years, might not be overthrown through his default in the
turning of a hand. The kings and all the Souldioures also were in the like
perplexity, not so greatly disquieted for the keeping of the richesse that they
them selves had all ready gotten, as for fear least the Atheniens should
recover their own again. But the sorer that the battle was, the more glorious
was The Lacedaemonians are vanquished on the sea.
the victory of Conon. The Lacedaemonians being put to the worse took them to
flight, and their garrisons were led away to Athens. The people were restored
to their former estate, and their bondage taken away from them, many cities
also were recovered to their Empire. This was unto the Atheniens a beginning of
the recovery of their ancient preheminens, and unto the Lacedaemonians an end
of reteining that they had. For as though that with their Empire they had lost
their prowess also, their neighbors after misfortune follows disdain.
began to have them in disdain.

First of all therefore the (...) with help of the Atheniens rered war
against them. The which city out of innumerable encreasementes. Through the
prowess of their Duke Epaminondas, began to aspire to the Empire of al Greece.
There was therefore between them a battle on the land, in the which the
Lacedaemonians had like success as in the encounter upon the Sea against Conon.
In the same conflict Lysander, who was Captain the same time that the
Lacedaemonians subdued the Atheniens,) was slain. Pansanias also a another of
the Captains of the Lacedaemonians Lysander (...) slain.
being appeached of treason, fled into exile. The (...) therefore, having
gotten the up* hand, led their whole host to the city of Lacedemon,
thincking easly to have won it, because they were abondoned of al their aiders
and com fortors. The which thing the Lacedaemonians fearing, sent for their king
Agesilaus (which atcheued many great enterprises in Asia,) home to the defense
of his Country. For after time that Lysander was slain, they had none other
cap tain in whom they durst put their trust and confidence. Nevertheless
because it was long ere Agesilaus came, they raised a power and went to mete
their enemy. But nether their courages nor their strength was able to stand
against them, of whom they had been put to the worse so latelye before, and
therefore at the first encounter they were put to flight. As the host of his
country men was thus discomfited, Agesilans (...) covers the victory being
lost.
and in manner utterly destroyed, Agesilaus the king came suddenly upon them. Who
with his fresh souldioures hardened in many viages and encounters before, with
little a do wrested the victory out of his enemies hand: How be it he him self
was sore wounded. When news thereof came to Athens, the Atheniens (fearing
least if the Lacedaemonians should get the upper hand again, they should be
brought to their old estate of servitude and bondage,) raised an host and sent
it to the aid of the Beotians, by Iphicrates The co^mendacion of Iphicrates.
a young ^ripling not above xxi. years old, but of wonderful towardness. The
prowess of this young man was marvelous and far above his years. For amongst
all the noble and valiant Dukes and captains that the Atheni^ns had before
him, there was never none, either of greater likelihode, or of more ripe
towardnes the^ he was: In whose person were planted not only the feats of
cheualry which ought to be an expert graund captain, but also knowledge
belonging to a perfect orator. Conon also hearing of the return of Agesilaus
out of Asia, returned himself likewise from thence to wast the country of
Lacedemon. And so the (...) being enclosed on every side round about with fear
of the war that continually rong in their ears, were brought to utter despair.
But Conon when he had forraged the fields of his enemies, Conon retur neth to
A^he^s
made toward Athes, where being welcomed with great joy of his country men: yet
notwithstanding he took more sorrow to se how his country had been burned and
defaced by the Lacedaemonians, then pleasure of the recovery of the same after so
long a time. Therefore such things as were burnt down, he builded a new of the
spoils of the Lacedaemonians, and at the charges of the army of the Persians,
and such things as were defaced he repaired again. Such was the desteny of
Athe^s, that being before burned by the Persians, it was repaired with the
boties of the Persians, and being now defaced by the Lacedaemonians, it was
repaired with the spoils of the Lacedaemonians also: and even clean contrary,
to have them now their fellows which the^ were their enemies, and to have them
now their uttermost ennemies, with whom they were then knit in most straightest
bonds of league and friendship. While these things were a doing, Artaxerxes
king of Persia sent ambassadoures into An universal peace is en joined to
all Greece.
Greece, commanding all parties to cease from war, and who so enterprised to
the contrary should be taken as his enemy. He restored unto the cities their
liberty, and all that was their own. The which thing he did not so much in
regard of the continual labors and daily battles of the cities, for the hatred
and malice they bare one to another, as least while he were occupied about his
wars in Egypt, (the which he moved for sending aid to the Lacedaemonians
against his lieuetenaunts,) his host should be detained in Greece. The Greeks
therefore being weried with so many battles, were content to obey withal their
hearts. This year was notable It was (...) year before the birthe of Christ.
(...).
not only because peace was so suddenly made through all Greece, but also
because the same time, the City of Rome was taken by the frenchmen. But the
Lacedaemonians being now at rest, and lying in await for advantage, ^spying the
Arcadians from home, surprised their castle, and put a garrison of their own
men therein. The Arcadians therefore with the help of the Theba^es, came into
the field well armed and in good array to recover that that they had lost by the
sword. In the which conflict Archidamus captain of the Lacedaemonians was
wounded: who seeing his men beaten down as vanquished, demanded by an heralt
to have the dead bodies of such as were slain, to thentent he might bury them.
The token o^ the victory given.
For this is a token among the Greeks of giving the victory with the which
confession the Thebanes being contented, blew to the retreit and pursued no
further, with a few days after, neither party atte^pting any displesure, when
a man would have thought they had been at a truce, as it were by a secret consent
and agreement among them selves, while the Lacedaemonians were busied in other
wars against their neighbors, the Thebanes under the conduicte and leading of
their captain Epaminondas, purposed to have won their city ere they were aware
of it. Where upon in the beginning of The courage of the old (...) of (...).
the night, they setforth as closelye as they could devise toward Lacedemon.
But yet they could not take them unawares. For thold men and other persons
vnme^e for the wars by reason of their years, having understanding ofthapproche
of their enemies, armed the^ selves and met them in the very entrance of the
gates: and against xv. M. soldiers, not above a C. old and forgrown men put
the^ selves to thencounter. So much courage and strength does the present sight
of a man's country and household give a man, and so much does ^he presence of
things give men (...) stomachs, the^ the remembrance of the^ being away. For
when theysaw within what, ^ for what they stood at defense, they determined
either to win (...) die.

A few old men therefore held them play, whom ere the next morning all the
youth they had was not able to withstand. In that battle two of the captains
of their enemies were slain. In the mean while word was brought that agesilaus
was come, where upon the Thebanes retired, and it was not long after but they
encountered again. For the young men of Lacedemon being incensed with the
prowess and valiant demenor of the old men, could not be with held, but that
they would needs try the matter immediatlye in open field, when as the victory
was all ready the Thebanes. And Epaminondas whiles he executed the duty and
office, not only of a stout captain, but also of a valiant soldier (...) is
wounded to death.
was grievously wounded. The which thing being hard of, the one party was so
stricken in fear, and the other party for joy was so amazed, that both
parties as it were by a peaceable consent departed the field. Within a few
days after Epaminondas deceased, with whom the strength of the The praise of
Epamino^das in whom is ex pressed the Image of a good captain and of a just
magistrate.
commonwealth decayed. For in like manner as if ye break of the edge of a
wepon, the rest of it is able to do no great harm: even so this Duke being
dead, who was as it were the edge of the common wealth of Thebes, the
strength thereof was appalled and in manner dulled, in so much that they seemed
not so much to have lost him, as altogether to have died with him. For neither
before this Dukes time, atcheued they any notable conquest, nor afterward
deserved to be spoken of for any famous attempt by them accom plished, but only
for the slaughters that were made of the^. So that it appears manifestly, that
the glory and renown of his country, did both spring up with him, and die with
him. And a man is not able to judge whether he were a better captain and
soldier, or a better man of his living. For always he sought pre-eminence to
his country, rather then to him self, and he was such a sparer of monye, that
be wanted wherewith to bury him according to his estate. And he was even as
covetous of praise as of monye. For authority and offices were laid upon him
even utterly against his will. And he behaved him self in such wise in his
authority, that he seemed not to receive, but rather to give honor to the same.
Furthermore he was so studious of lerning, and so instructed in the knowledge
of philosophy, that it was a wonder to se, how a man bred and brought up in
lerning should come by such sight and experience in feats of war. Neither did
his death dissent from this his trade of living. For being brought into his
tent half dead, when he was come to him self again and had received his
speech, he demanded this one thing of such as stood about him, whether his
ene mies had taken his shield from him when he was felled or The (...) of (...)
das at his death.
no? when he understood it was saved, he commanded it to be brought to him,
and as the partaker of all his travels and glory he kissed it. Then he enquired
again which part had won the field, and hearing that the Thebanes had gotten
it, he said all was well, and so as it were rejoicing for his countries sake, he
gave up the ghost. By the death of this man, the prowess of the Atheniens
also decayed. For after the time that he was once gone, whose fotesteps they were
wont to fo low, now giving the selves all together to sloth and idleness, they
lashed out the common revenues, not upon ships and men of war as they had don
in times past, but in feastful days and holy days, and in making preparation
for pagiants and enterludes: gathering the^ selves together into the theaters,
to behold the famous stage players and Poets, visitinge oftener the stage then
the camp, setting more by versifiers and oratoures, then by Captains. Then
the common tresure wherewith men of war and mariners were wont to be maintained,
began to be divided among the people of the city. By means whereof it came to
pass, that while the Greeks gave them selves to idleness. The name of the
Macedones which before time was ^ile and obscure, spro^g up and grew to great
honor: and that Philip who was kept iii. years as an hostage at Thebes, being
enstructed in all feats of arms and cheualry by (...) and the Pelo^, after
his return into his country, laid the kingdom of Macedony as a yoke of
bondage, upon the necks both of Greece and of ^sia.

The seventh Book.
MAcedonie in ancient time was called ^inathia after the name of emathio king
of the country, who was the first that gave any notable proof of his prowess
in those parts. As this country increased slowly by little and little, so the
bounds thereof were very narowe. The inhabitauntes were called Pclascians, and
the Country it self Bcotia. But afterward through the prowess of the kings,
and industry of the people, first by subduinge their neighbors, and shortly
after other foreign people and nations thempire thereof was dilated even to the
vttermooste borders of the East. In the region of Peonic which now is a
portion of (...), reigned by report (...) the father of astriopeus, whose name
we here spoken of in the battle of Troy, among the chiefest and most ^aliaunt
defendours of the City. And on the one side of Hellespont in Europe reigned a
kig called Europe. Caran^ also with a great multitude The first king of Macedo^.
of Greeks, being commanded by thaunswer of the Oracle to seek an habitation
in Macedony, when he came into emathia, following a heard of Goats that ^ed out
of the shour of rain, entered and wan the ^eld of edissa, ere the me^ of the
town perceived his coming, by reason of the greatness of the storm: whereupon
calling to mind the answer of the Oracle, by which he was commanded to seek a
kingdom where gotes should be his guides, he appointed it to be the seat of his
kingdom. And ever after he observed deuoutly^ that whether so ever he led any
host, he would have the same gotes before his standerde, to the intent that
as they were thautors of his kingdom, so might they be also as leaders in all
his enterprises: And in remembrance of this benefit, he changed the name of
edyssa, and called it (...), and the people thereof (...). Afterward when he had
expulsed Midas (for he also held a part of Macedonie) and diverse other kings,
in the stead of the^ all he succeeded alone, and first of al gathering and
knitting together so^dry sorts of people made as it were one entire body of
Macedonie, and laid a strong fou^datio^ for his kingdom hereafter, to grow
upon. After him reigned Perdicas, whose life was notable, and the warnings at
his last departure (which were as thanswer of an oracle,) Of (...) and of his
(...) ph^y.
worthy to be remebred. For when he drue toward his end by reason of age, he
showed his son Argeu^ the place in the which he would be buried: willing not
only his own body, but also all the bodies of the^ that should succeed him in
the kingdom, to be buried in the same place: prophesying before, that as long
as the bones of his posterity were buried there, so long the kingdom should
continue in his line and family. And upon this superstition it is believed that
his ofspringe failed in great Alexander, because he changed the place of
burial. argeus having governed the kingdom with justice and love of his people,
left to succeed him his son Philip, who Arg^
being surprised by hasty death substituted his heir Europe a very babe. But
the Macedones were at continual debate and strife with the Thracians and
Illyrians, by whose wars as by daily exercise being hardened, they grew so
famous and redouted in feats of arms, that all their neighbors were afraid of
the^. The Illirians therefore despising thinfancy of the young king, assailed the
Macedones with battle, who be The (...) of the M^ c^dones.
ing put to the worse, brougbt forth their king in his cradel and set him
before the battle beginning the field new again: as though they had been
vanquished before, upon none other occasion, but because they wanted y^ good
luck of their king in the battle, thincking to get the upper hand, and it were
for none other cause elsse, then that upon this superstition they had persuaded
them selves they should win. Moreover they had pity and compassion of the
infant, whom it was none other like, but they should make a captine of a king,
if they should happen to be overcome.

In the mean season Darius king of Perfia, being put to shameful flighte,
and driven out of S^ythia, because he would not seem to be dishonored every
where by his losses in the wars, sent (...) with part of his army to subdu^
Thrace and the other kingdoms of that climat, among the which for the slender
regard and estimation thereof, he should take Macedonie for one: who shortly
executing his masters The frendlye entertainme^t of the Persian ambassa^ors.
commandment, sent ambassadors to Amyntas king of Macedonie, demanding
hostages for performance of the peace that should be concluded between the^. But
tha^bassadors be ing gently enterteined, as they began to be somewhat over come
with drink, desired Amyntas that forasmuch as he had made them such a su^ptuous
feast, he would also grant them the rights and duties of familiarity, (that is
to say) that their sons, their wives and their daughters might come and keep
them company at the banquet, for it was counted among the Persians, as a sure
token and pledge of hospitality and frendlye entertainment. Who coming in to
bear them company, the Persians began to daly with more wantonly then was
semely and convenient. Where upon Alexander the son of amino tas, Note the
modesty of the barbarous people in cho^e days.
desired his father to have respect to his age and gravity, and to withdraw
himself from the banquet, promising to find means to delay the dalians of his
quests well enough, when ^yntas was gone, Alexander called out the women one by
one, as though it had been to dress and attire the^ more gorgeously, and so to
bring them in again. In whose sted he dressed in women's apparel he sent young
men, commau^ding them Thambassadors of Persia murdeted for incontine^cye.
to repress the wa^tonnes of thambassadors with their we pons that they carried
under their garments. The which being done and al thambassadors killed,
Mogabyzus knowing nothing hereof (when he saw his ambassadors returned not a
gain), sent thither Bubares with a part of his host, as to a war so easy and
so mean, as that he disdained to troble himself therewith, least men should
speak dishonor of him for fighting against so base and vile a kind of people.
But (...) be A^nce by matiage be^wene the Persians and the macedons
fore the battle, being taken in love with Amyntas daughter, leaving of the
wars, solempniled the marriage and laying a side all rancor and emnity,
joined him self in aliaunce with his enemy. After the departure of Bubares out
of Macedone, the king Amyntas deceased. Unto whose son and successor
Alexander, this affinity of Bubares did great ple sure. For by means thereof,
he not only lived in peace all the time of Darius, but also grew in great
favor with Xerxes. In so much that when like a tempest he invaded all Greece,
he gave him the seniory and royalty of all the countries between the mountains
of Olympus and Hemus. Yet notwithstanding he enlarged his kingdom as much by
his own prowes, as by the liberality of the Persians. At length by order of
succession the kingdom of Macedone, came unto Amyntas the second.
Amyntas the son of his brother Menelaus. This man al so was notable for his
actiuity, and endowed with all royal and warlike qualities. He begat of his
wife Eurydice three sons, Alexander, Perdicas, and Philip the father of great
Alexander, and a da^ghter named Euryone. And of a another wife called Cygea, he
engendered Archilaus, Aridens and (...) who had sore wars first with the
Illyrians and after with the Olynt^ans. But he had been cut short by the treson
of The (...) of (...).
his wife Eurydice, (who concluding privily a marriage with her son in law
that should have married her daughter, had taken upon her to kill her husband and
make her peramor king: If her daughter had not bewrayed all her mothers
whordome and priuye conspiracies to her father. Theolde man therefore being
delivered out of so many pearils died, The (...) on of king (...).
leaving the kingdom to his eldest son Alexander, who in the very entrance
of his reign, made peace with the ^yrians, and delivered his brother Philip in
hostage. In pro cesse of time also by the same hostage, he entered a league of
peace with the Thebanes, the which thing was a great furtherans unto Philip
in all princely virtues, whereunto he was meruelously inclined of nature. For
being (...) as an hostage iii. years at Thebes, a city of ancient seueritye, A
(...) and wicked mother.
he passed his childhode in the house of the most renoumed captain and
Philosopher (...). Ere it was long after, Alexander was surprised and slain ^y
the treson of his mother Eurydice, whom Amyntas (having taken her with the
fault) had before pardoned, for the Childrens sake that he had by her not
knowing y^ in time to com she would be their utter destruction. His brother
Perdicas also was by like tree sonpreuented. It is an abominable thing, y^ for
filthy lusts sake, the mother shu^d work the death of her own children, at
whose co^templation she was saved from the punishment that her wickedness had
deserved. The murder of Perdicas seemed so much more heinous, in that not so
much as his little child could find any mercy at his cruel mothers hand.
Philip therefore a long time, took not upon (...) as Philiptaketh the kingdom
upon him.
king, but as protector of the infant. But when the country was sore oppressed
with war, and that it would be to late to tarry for help until the child came
to age, he was compelled of the people to take the kingdom upon him. As Soon as
he bego^ his reign, al me^ conceived great hope of him, both for his wit (which
in manner all ready declared that he would prove a great man.) And also for the
ancient Prophecies of Macedonie, which said that while one of the sons of
amin tas reigned, thestate of Macedone should be most flourishing, the which hope
and prophecies to fulfill, there were now no mo left alive through the
wickedness of their mother, but only he. In the beginning of his reign, when
on thoue side The troubled state of Macedone.
the murder of his brothers unworthily slain, on the other side the multitude
of his enemies, on a another side the fear of treson, and on another side want
of money and artillery, the realm being in manner wasted and consumed with
continual war, disquieted the mind of this young souldioure, and that sundry
nations out of diverse places at one time flocked together, as it were by a
common conspiracy, to the intent to oppress Macedonie by battle. For as much
as he The pollitike demcanor of Philip.
was not able to match them all at once, he thought it convenient to dispense
with them, some he took truce with upon reasonable Articles* some he bought of
for money, and such as were weakest he assailed by force, by vanquishing of
whom he did both strengthen the faint hearts of his soldiers, and took
away the disdain that his ennemies had at him.

The first encounter that he had was with the Atheniens, whom he overcame by
policy, and for fear of a worser afterclap, The (...) wars o^ king (...).
whereas he might have slain them all, he sent them all safe home without
ransom. After this he turned his power against the Illyrians, of whom he slew
many thousands, and took their head city called Laryssa. Next, (not so much
for covetousness of pray, as for d^syre to join the Thessalian horsemen to
his fotemen, thereby to increase the strength of his army,) he conquered the
country of Thessaly ^re any hostilitye or war was looked for, and so of
their horsemen and his own fotemen, made one body and invincible army. The
which things coming luckelye to (...) a wife.
pass, he took to wife Olympias the Daughter of Neoptolemus king of the
Molosses. The maker of this marriage was his brother Arimbas king of the
Molosses, uncle to the maid by the fathers side, who had the bringinge up of
her, and had taken in marriage Troas, (...) of y^ said Olympias, which was the
cause of much mischief unto him, and finallye of his destruction. For whereas
by the affinity of king Philip, A good (...)
he hoped to have had his kingdom enlarged, he was by the same Philip deprived
of his own Realm, and compelled in his old age to live a banished man. These
things thus brought to pass, Philip could not now content him self to
repulse iniurye offered by others, but provoked and distroubled such as sat
still in quiet. As he besieged the city of Methon, one threw a dart at him
from the wall as he passed by, and struck out his right eye. For y^ which wound
An (...) of modesty.
he became neither the slouthfuller in his enterprise, nor the angrier against
his ennemies. In so much that within few days after, when they desired peace
be granted it, and used the victory against them, not only modestlye, but also
mercifully.

The eyghte Book.
THe cities of Greece while every of them sought to bear rule, were every chone
The discord of the Cities of greece.
brought under subjection. For after the time they could not with hold them
selves. ^ut that they must seek each others destruction, they were vnuanqui
shed of all men, and brought to confusi on. None but such as were oppressed
did feel the loss and smart hereof. For Philip king of Macedone lying in a
wait like a spy out of a watch toure to surprise them all of their liberty, by
nourishing debate between City and City, and by supporting the weaker side,
compelled both the conque red and the conquerors to become his vassals and
subjects. The original cause of all this mischief were the Thebanes: who
having the sovereignty and wanting discretion to use The Thebanes can not (...)
their good fortune.
their good fortune, arrogantly accused at the common counsel of Greece the Lace
demonians and the Phocenses, whom they had vanquished in battle, as though
the slaughters and ravish ments that they had abidden, had been to little
punishment for them. It was laid to the Lacedaemonians charge, that they had
taken the tower of Thebes in the time of truce: and to the Phocenses, that they
had wasted the country of Beotia, as though that after war and battle: they
would have the laws also to work their for^e. Judgment being executed
according to the pleasure of the conquerors, they were condemned in such a
sum of money as was not possible to be paid. The Phocenses therefore when they
Need has no law.
should have been bereft of their lands, their children and their wives,
compelled thereby to utter necessity, chose one Philomelus to their captain, and
as men offended with God him self, invaded the Temple of Apollo at Delphos.

Hereupon being enriched with gold and other money, they waged an army of
soldiers strangers, and made war to the Thebanes. This deed of the
Phocenses although all men abhorred, by reason of their sacrilege, yet
notwythsta^ding it procured more envy to the Thebanes, by whom they were driven
to this extremity, then to them. And therefore both the Atheniens and the
Lacedaemonians set forth men to their aid. At the first encounter Philomelus
turned the Thebanes out of their camp, at the next fighting The Thebanes are
overcome.
valiantly amongste the thickest, he was the first that was slain, and so with
his wicked blood did worthily abye for committing sacrilege. In his sted
Ornomarchus was created Captain: against whom the Thebanes and These salians
chose for their captain, not one of their own country The (...) folly of the
Thebanes.
men, for fear least if he gate the victory, he should bear him self so Lordly,
that no man were able to abide him, but Philip king of Macedonie: willingly
submitting the^ selves under the subjection of a forrener, which was the
thing they most of all feared in their own country men. Phillip therefore as
though he had been the revenger of sacrilege, and not of the Thebanes,
commanding all his soldiers to put garlandes of Laurel upon their heads,
and in this wise as having God the chief Captain of his enterprise, he
marched into the field. The Phocenses at the sight of The force of
supersticion.
the cognisaunce of the God, stricken with inward remorse of conscience for
their offenses, ^ast down their wepons and took them to flight. And so with
their own blood and slaughter of them selves, suffered worthy punishment for
violating of religion. Ye will not believe what glory and renown Phi lip won
among al nations for executing this deed. As who would say, he was the punisher
of sacrilege, he was the revenger of religion, and he only was worthy to
compel offenders to make satisfaction, to the execution where of all the world
ought to have put their help. Therefore they honored him next unto the Gods,
by whom the majesty of the Gods was defended. But the Atheniens hearing of
the adventure of the war, to thentent that Philip should not pass into Greece,
took the straights of Thermopyle in like manner and after the same sort as they
had done before, against the coming of the Persians, but nether with like
courage A discour^ a against the im piety of the atheniens.
nor for like quarrel. For then it was for the liberty of Greece, but now it was
for open sacrilege: then in the def^nce of the temples against the invasions
of the ennemy: now in the maintenance of churchrobbers against the right (...)
reuengers. Making them selves bolsterers and bearers out of that heinous
offense, whereof it was a shame for the^ that any other the^ the^ selves should
have been the punishers. Quite forgetting that even in their most aduersitye
they had used that God as their chefest counselor, that by his guidance they
had finished so many battles with conquest, builded so many cities with
fortunate success, attained so great an Empire both by sea and la^d. And
finally atcheued no thing, either in public or private affairs, without the ma
iesty of his Godhed. Certesse it is great pity, that such fine wits so
exquisitely polished withal kind of learning, and traded in so goodly laws
and institutions, should be so far ouerseene as to commit so heinous an act,
that of right they can have no cause here after to be offended with the
barbarus nations for doing of the like. But Philip him self kept not even touch
with his fellows. For as it were to thente^t his The falshead and untruth of
king Philip.
enemies should not go beyond him in committing sacrilege the cities whereof a
little before he was captain which had fought under his standerd, which had
reioysed in him, and which had helped him to the victory, like an utter ennemy
he invaded and sacked. The wives and children of them al he sold by the drom.
He spared not the temples of the Gods immortal, not the houses of religion, not
the common nor private household gods unto who^ a little before h^ ^ntred as a
guest so that it might evidently appear, he sought not so much to have
punished sacrilege as to procure fre liberty to perpe trate the same. From
thence as though he had accomplished al things to his honor he passed into
Cappadocia, where making war with like falshod, and having taken and slain by
policy the kings that were the next borderers, he brought all the whole province
under thempire of Macedon^. Then to abolyshe the shameful brute that went of
his doings, through the which he was more spoken and talked of then any other
man in those days, he sent into the kingdoms and most welthy Cities, into
the Churches and temples, certain to raise a rumor and to put it into folks
heds, that king Philip would bestow a great mass of monye in building walls
about the Cities, and in making of Churches and temples, and that masters of
the work should be pro cured by proclamation. The which when they came into
Macedone, being driven of with diverse delays, for fear of the kings
displesure, were feign to get them away again The (...) of Philip.
and make no mo words. After this he assailed the Olynthians. For when they
saw that Philip had put one of his brothers to death for very pities sake
they received two other of his brothers borne of his stepmother, whom as
partners of his kingdom he sought by all means to dispatch out of the way.
Therefore upon this occasion, he utterly destroyed that ancient and noble
city, and put his brothers to the death that he had before determined and
appointed for them, enjoying thereby both a great pray and also his wicked lust
in slaying of his brothers. Whereupon as though al things had been lawful that he
purposed in his mind, he sesed upon the gold mines in Thessaly and upon the
Philip (...) allawe and right.
silver mines in Thrace. And to the intent no law nor right should be left
unviolated, he determined to be a rouer on y^ seas. These things being thus
accomplished, it fortuned by chance, that ii. brothers both kings of Thrace,
being at variaunce betwixt them selves, not in respect of his indiffere^cy and
justice, but for fear least he should help to support either of the parties,
chose him to be judge of their controversies. But Philip according to his
accustomed nature, proceeding to judgment as if he should have gone to battle,
came suddenly upon the brothers ere they wist thereof with his men in battle ray,
and not like an upright judge, but like a craftye thief, and wicked kaitife
spoiled the^ both of their kingdoms. While these things were a doing, the
ambassadors of Athens came unto him to require peace whom he heard, and sent
him self other ambassadoures to Athens with Articles of peace, and there to
the commodity of both parties a peace was concluded. Out of other Cities of
Greece came ambassaders also, not so much for desire of his frendshyp The
malice o^ the Theba (...).
as for fear of war. For the Thebanes and Beotians of very rancor and malice
that boiled in their stomachs, requested him to show him self as captain of
Greece against the Phocenses, according as he had professed him self to be. So
sore were they inflamed with hatred against the Phocenses, that utterly
forgetting their own slaughters, they had rather pearishe them selves then to
suffer them undestroyed, and had rather to abide the cruelty of Philip which
they knew all ready by experience, then by any means to for bear their
enemies. On the contrary part the (...) with thambassadours of Lace. and
Athens, besought him The mis^rable state of Greece.
that he would not make war, the which they had all ready iii. times
bought of at his hand with their monye.

Surely it was a foul and miserable sight, to behold Greece (which even yet at
that time both in strength and dignity was princess of the whole world
always a conqueresse of kings and countries, and as yet the Lady of many
cities, daunsing attendaunce in a forain land, and there entreting for war or
peace, to put her head under a another man's girdle. And that the reuengers of
the whole world, should be brought to that point through their own discord,
and civil wars, that they were glad to fawn and hang upon their sleues, who
not long before were accounted as the vilest part of their retinue and hangers
on* and that in espe cially to be don of the Thebanes and Lacedaemonians, who
lately before ruled the whole roast betwixt them, and now in the time that Greece
bare the souerainty, were enemies one of another estate.

Philip in the mean season for the advancement of his own glory, debated as
concerning the pre-eminence and estate of so mighty cities, devising of which
he were best to The (...) ^sage of Philip.
make most account. And therefore when he had seacreatly heard thambassades of
both parts severally, he promised the one to discharge them of the wars,
taking an oath of them, not to bewray his answer to any man. On the contrary
part he promised the other to come and help them, giving both parties straight
charge and commandment, not to fear or prepare for any war. Through this
variable answer it came to pass, that while every man kept him self in
quiet, he took the straightes of Thermopile. Then first of all the Phocenses,
perceiving them selves entrapped by the policy of Philip, fearfully took them
to their weapons. But they had no leisure, either to surnish their own
battles, or to send for succor to their neighbors. And Philip threatened he
would utterly destroy them, unless they yielded Philip (...) no promise.
incontinent. Being therefore overcome with necessity, they yielded them selves
simply their lives only saved. But even of as much force was this composition,
as was his promise before to discharge them of the wars. Therefore they were
every where slain and spoiled. The children were not left to their parents, nor
the wives to their husbands, nor the Images of the Gods in the temples. One
only comfort had this wretched people, that whereas Philip defrauded his own
companions of their part of the pray, they saw nothing of theirs in their
enemies hands. When he was returned into his kingdom, like as Grasiers shift
their cattle sometime into one layer, sometime into another Philip ^emoueth
whole countries with their people.
according as the season of the year requires: even so remo ued he at his own
pleasure whole countries and Cities, according as he thought the places mete to
be replenished or forsaken. It was a miserable sight to behold in all places,
and in respect even like to a desolation. For this fear was not like as when
the ennemy approaches, or when men of war run up and down a City, or when
two hosts encounter vielently in the field, nor when men are slain in the
streets and their goods taken away perforce, but a secret sorrow and mourning,
fearing least even their forced tears, should be taken for contimacy, the
grief encresed by the cloking thereof, so much the depelier persing the heart, as
it had less liberty to utter it self. Sometime they considered the sepulchers
of their ancestors, sometime their old household gods, sometime the houses where
they were begotten, and had begotten children them selves. Bewailing eft their
own case in that they had lived to that day: and eft the state of their
children, y^ it had not been their fortune to be borne after ye time. Some
people he placed in the utmost bounds of his kingdom even in his enemies
mouths, other he set in the furthermost borders of all his realm, other some
that were mete for the wars, he put in garrison in cities as need required.
And so of many kinds of people and many nations, he made one entire kingdom
and one people. The affairs of Macedonie being set at a stay, through fraud
and policy he took the chief of the Dardamans and other borders, and subdued
their countries. Nether withheld he his hand from his own kindred. For he
determined to put Arymba king of Epyrus his wife Olympias near kinsman from
his royalty. And thereupon he Philip abuses alexander and deposes arimba kings
of Eplre.
sent for Alexander his son in law, brother of his wife Olympias, a boy of
excellent beuty, in his sisters name, to com unto him into Macedonie. And there
by all means possible ha uing entised him with hope of the kingdom, under
pretens of counterfeit love, abused him in most filthy buggery, thin king that
either shame and remorse of his own conscience, or elsse the making of him
king, should cause him to be the more at his commandment. Therefore when the
child was come to xx. years of age, he took the kingdom from Arymba, and gave
it to him being a very boy: playinge a wicked part with them both. For neither
dealt he like a natural kinsman with him, from whom he took the kingdom, and
him to whom he gave it, he made a harlot before he made him king.

The ninthe Book.
When Philip was come into Greece, allured with the sacking of a few cities,
and the spoil of a few small towns, there upon gathering in his mind how great
were the richesse of them all, he determined to make war against all Greece. To
the furtherance whereof he thought it would Philip ^geth Consta^inople.
greatly advantage him, if he might bring in his subjection the noble haven
town of Byzance, as a refuge for his hosts both by-sea and la^d. The same
(because they shut their gates against him) he besieged. This City was builded
at the first by Pansanias king of the Spartanes, and by him was possessed by
the space of vii. years* Afterward as victory inclined to either part, it
belonged eft to the Lacedaemonians, and eft to the Atheniens. The which
uncertain possession made it to stand stiflye in the defense of her own
liberty, forasmuch as neither party succored or rescued it as their own.
Phillip therefore having spent his treasure with the long continuance of his
siege, made a shifte to get money by rouing on the Lea. And having taken lxr.
ships laden with marchaundise, he refreshed his gready necessity for a while.
Furthermore because so great an army should not be detained about the siege
of one city, he went with a number of the stoutest of his souldioures, and wan
many cities of Chersonesus. Moreover he sent for his son Alexander of the
age of xviii. years, to the intent he might trade him up in the wars under
him. He made a rode into Scythia also to fetch some boty from thence, enten
Philip makes a rode in to Tarta^*
ding after the manner of merchantmen, to bear out y^ char ges of one war to
the gain of another. The same time was king of the Scythians Matthey, who being
ouercharged with the wars of y^ Istrias, desired help of Philip by ye
Apollonien^s, promising him to adopt him to be the king of Scythia, But in the
mean season the king of the Istri^es departing out of this life, delivered
the Scythians both from fear of The ingratitude of the king of Scythia.
battle, and from neade of help. Matthey therefore ^ending ye Macedones home
again, willed them to bear word to their master, that he neither requested him
of succoure, nor yet gave the Apollonienses commission to adopte him. For
neither had the Scythians neade of the rescues of the Macedones saying they
were better men then they were, and as for heir he wanted none nor none would
adopt, as long as he had a son of his own in health. Upon the receyte of
this message, Philip sent ambassadors to king Matthey requiring somewhat
toward the charges of his siege, least he be constrained through poverty to
break up his camp. To the which request he ought of reason so much the
willinglier to condescend, in that he did not allow the soldiers that he sent
to his aid so much as their costs and spendinge monye by the way, nor gave
them any reward for their travel and pains taking. Matthey alleging for his
excuse that his country was so vnmercifullye cold and so barrain, that no
Scythian had any patrimonye to enryche him, no nor skarse wherewith to find him
meat and drink: answered that he had no richesse wherewith to satisfye so great
a king, and therefore he thought it a greater dishonor to reward him with to
little, then to give him nothing at all. For the Scythians were esteemed
according to the courage of the mind and hardiness of the body, and not
according to their substance. Philip seeing him self skorned in this wise,
brake up his siege at Byzance, and bent his whole power against Sc^thia: And
for because he would make them the more careless, he sent his ambassadoures
before him to declare unto king Matthey, that while he besieged Byzance, he
vowed an Image unto Hercules, the which he was coming to erect in the mouth of
the river of Danow, desiringe to have peaceable access to the performaunce of
his vow to God ward, for he would not come otherwise then as a friend to the
Scythians. The king sent him word that if he would perform his vow, he should
send him the Image, promising that it should not only be set up, but al so
should remain and stand safe and unviolated. But as to suffer any army to come
within his borders, that he denied utterly. And if he would attempt to place
the Image whether the Scythians would or no, he should not be so sone gone, but
he would pull it down again, and turn the brass of it, into spear heads
and arowe heads. The minds of both parties being in this wise stirred, they
encountered in open field. The Scythians whereas they were of greater power and
mo in number, were nevertheless by the policy of Phillip overcome. Twenty
thousand women and children were taken prisoners, and a great booty of cattle,
but of gold and silver nothing at al, which was a sufficient trial and proof
of the poverty of the Scythians. Twenty M. fair Mares were sent into Macedone
to bread. But as Philip returned out of Scytbia, the Tribals met him by the
way, denying him passage through their country, unless he would give them part
of his boty. Hereupon they fell to words, and sone after to hand strokes. In
the which skirmish Philip was so sore wounded in the thighe, that his horse was
slain under him, and he left for dead, by means whereof y^ boty was lost. So
the boty of Scythia being as it were forespoken, had like to have turned the
Macedones to great sorrow. Yet notwithstanding as soon as he was recovered of
his wound, he made war against the Atheniens, y^ which he had so long time
before dissembled. Whose part the Thebanes took, for fear least if the
Atheniens were overcome, the brunt of the war, like as when one neighbors
house is on fire) should ensue upon them. A league therefore being taken between
these two cities, which a little before were at most mortal hatred, they sent
ambassade upon am bassade over all Greece, persuading that the common enemy
ought to be removed by the common force of the country. For if Philip should
happen to speed well at the first. He would never cease, until he had subdued
all Greece. Some being moved herewith, joined the^ selves to thattheniens, other
some for fear of the war, took part with Phillip. When it came to then^ounter.
Although the Atheniens were far mo in number then their ennemies, yet not
withstandinge the Macedones were so hardened with continual warsare The
ath^nie^s are vanqui^hed.
that they put them to the worse. How be it they died not unmindful of their
ancient glory. For look what place every man took of his Captain to keep,
the same (being first wounded in diverse places of his foreparte) he covered
with his carkase when he died. This day ended the renown of the Empire, and
the ancient liberty of al Greece. The joy of this victory was pollitikelye
cloked and dissembled. For that day Phillip made not sacrifice as he ^as as
The (...) dissi^lation of king Phillip.
wont to do, he laughed not at the table, he would not suffer any enterludes
at his banquet, he ware no Crown, nor anointed him self with sweet oyntmentes,
and as much as lay in his power, he so used the victory, that no man could
perceive by him that he had won the victory. Moreover he would not suffer him
self to be called the king, but the captain of Greece. And so through his secret
reioys^ng with him self, he so mitigated the sorrow of his enemies, that it
seemed not that he either bosted him self among his own men, or proudly
reioysed at the overthrow of his ennemies. For as touching the Atheniens, whom
he had tried to be his most The gentleness of Phillip toward the ^theniens.
utter enemies, he let go their prisoners skotfre, and delivered the bodies of
such as were stain to be buried, and of his own accord erhorted them to carye
home their bones, and bestow them in the sepulchers of their ancestors. Besides
all this, he sent his son Alexander with his friend Antipater to Athens, to
conclude a small peace and friendship with them. But as concerning the Thebanes,
he did not only put their prisoners to ransom, but also made them pay His
rigor toward the Th^banes.
for the burying of their dead men. The princes of the city, some he beheaded,
some he banished, and the goods of them all he took by force, such as had
been wrongfullye driven out of their country, he called home again. Of the
which sort, he made three hundred judges and rulers of the City. Before whom
when all the greatest men of the City A notable ^xample of constancy.
were araigned as giltye of their wrongful banishment, they were of such
constancye, that they all confessed them selves to have been authors thereof in
deed: Affirmynge y^ it was better with the common wealth, when they were
condemned, then when they were restored again. It was out of doubt a
marvelous audacitye, ^or prisoners to give sentence on their judges that sat
upon their life and death, (as who would say) they disdained to be acquit at
their ennemies hands: and for as much as they could not revenge them selves in
work, to usurp their liberty in words. When Phillip had set things at a
stay in Greece, he commanded (...).
all the cities to send ambassadors to Corynthe, for the reformation of the
things that were a miss. There he enacted a statute of peace for all Greece,
according to the deseruinges of every City, and he elected out of them all,
one Counsel, and as it were one Senate. Only the Lacedaemonians despised both
the king and his law, acco^pting that peace but as a servitude or bondage,
which was not agreeable to the cities them selves, but was given at y^ pleasure
of the conqueror. Furthermore every city was apoyn ted what manner of men they
should setforth to y^ wars, if the king should have neade, either to assiste
him when he were assailed by foraine power, or else to make war unto others
under him. For it was to be thought none other, but that all this great
preparation was made to assayl the Empire of the Persians. The sum of al his
succors was The nomb^ of king P^lips men of war. Phillip ^deth the Empire of
pers^ He (...) him seife (...) Olympias.
two hundred thousand footmen, and fiftene hundred horsemen. Besides this
number, was also the host of Macedone, and other barbarous nations bordering
there upon, whom he had subdued. In the beginning of y^ spring, he s^t over
before into Asia, which belo^ged to the Persians, three captains Parmenio,
Amyntas, and Attalus. Whose sister (having put away Olympias the mother of
Alexander upon suspicion of aduoutry) he had lately taken in marriage.

In the mean season, while his succors were assemblynge out of Greece, he
solemnized a marriage between his daughter He maryeth his daughter to alexander
king of epyre.
Cleopatra, and Alexander whom he had made king of Epyre. That day was great
solempnity and feasting according to thestate of the two kings, the one giving
his daughter, the other taking her in marriage. And there wanted no kind of
royal shows and pageauntes that could be devised, to see the which as Philip
was going forth without The death of king Phillip.
any guard, in the mids between the two Alexanders his son and son in law.
A noble young manne of Macedone called Pansanias, mistrusted of no man where
aboutes he w^nt, stepped upon the king in a strait, and as he would have passed
by, slew him, turning the day into sorrow and heaviness, that was appointed to
mirth and pleasure. This Pansa^as in the first prime of his youth, had
suffered Attalus The cause of Ph^ps de^h.
perforce against his will to abuse him most filthely, wherewith being not
contented he offered him this villanye besides. He brought him into a banquet,
and there making him dronken, compelled him like a st^king strompet, to
sustain not only his beastly lechery, but also the shameless and abominable
lust of al y^ guests, whereby he madehim a laugh ing stock to all men when he
came among hisco^panions. Pansanias being with this his doing sore agreued,
did oftentimes make complainte thereof to the king. At whose hand being with
diverse delays put of, not without a mock for his labor, and perceiving his
adversary to be advanced furthermore to a captainship, he turned his wrath
upon the king him self, and for because he could not be revenged upon his
adversary, he revenged him upon the wrongful judge. It is thought that he was
sent by Olympias the mother of Alexander, and that Alexander him self ^as pre
Occasions of great displea^re between Phllip and his son alexandre
uy to his fathers murthre. For it is not unlike but that Olympias took ber
deuorcement, and the preferment of Cle opitra, as grievously as Pansanias did
his abusing, and that Alexander feared his brother begotten of his stepmother
as an enemy of his kingdom. Whereupon it came to pass before this time that he
fell at words at a banquet, first with Attalus, and after with his father.
In so much that his father pursued him with his sword drawn, and his friends
had much a do to entreat him to hold his hand from killing him. Upon which
occasion Alexander with his mother fled unto his uncle into Epyre, and from
thence went to the king of Sclauonye, and would skarse by any means be
reconciled to his father when he sent for him, in so much that his friends
could not in manner by any intretaunce compel him to return again,
Olympias al so was procuring her brother Alexander king of Epyre to raise war
against Philip, and had obtained her suit, if he had not prevented him with the
marriage of his daughter, and made him his son in law. These things
therefore were as spurs unto Pansanias just displeasure, prickyng him forward
to the accomplishment of this act, upon his complaint, sorowing to be so
shamefully abused, and could have no redress. This is certain that Olympias
had laid post horses to convey him away when he had stricken the king.
Afterward when she hard of the murder of the king The doing^ of (...) at the
(...) of Ph^p.
she came to his funerals, the same night under pretense of doing obsequies to
him, and there the very same night that she came, she set a crown of gold
upon Pansanias head as he ^ong upon the galowes: the which thing no body durst
have been so bold to have done but she, Philip having a son a live. And
within a few days after, she took down the body of Pansanias, and burned it
upon her husbands ashes, and builded him a tomb in the same place, causyng
yearly certain Ceremonies and obsequies to be done for him, whereby she drove
a superstition into the peoples heds. This done she compelled Clep^tra (for
whose sake Phillip had divorced him self from her) having first killed her
daughter even in the mothers lap, to hang her self: and in beholdinge The (...)
of a (...)*
her how she hong, enjoyed the reuengement, unto which she made so much have
by the murder of her own hus^and.

Last of al she consecrated the sword wherewith the king was stain, unto Apollo
by the name of Myrtalis: for that was Olympias name when she was a little one.
Al y^ which things were don so openly, that it was to be thought she should
have feared least her doing would not be allowed, or rather as though she cared
not who knew that she had done the deed* Philip deceased of thage of xlvii.
years, when he had reigned xxv. years. He begat of Larissa a daunsing damosel
a son named Arideus that reigned after Alexander. He had many other sons,
begotten of diverse women, as the manner of kings is, of whom some died of
their natural death, and some of the sword. He was a king more desirous of
battle then of banketting, whose richesse consisted chefely The description of
king Philip.
in furniture of the wars, and he was more conninge in getting and purchasing
richesse, then in keeping. And therefore for all that he pilled and polled every
day, yet was he ever neady. Mercy and falshode he loved a like. He thought it
no shame to purchase his desire, how so ever he came by it, so he might have
it. Where as he favored he would make as though he were displesed. Subtle and
captious was he to talk unto, promising more then he would perform. In
devising serious matters, and in merye conceits conning, winning friendship
for advantage and luker, and not for faithfulness. Where he hated most, there
to pretend most favor, and to sow discord between such as he knew agreed best
together, seking for thank with both parties, he used as a solemn custom.
Furthermore his talk was marvelous eloquent, and full of sharpness and witty
sayings, so that neither facility wanted to set out his pleasant inventions,
neither was his facility without ornate eloquens and pleasant devises. Unto him
succeaded Alexander, going beyond A comparison between Phi lip and alexadre.
his father both in virtues and in vices. First for their manner of conquest it
was clean contrary one to a another. For this man atcheued his battles by open
force, the other by policy. He reioysed to begile his ennemies, this man to
vanquish them in open field. The other was more prudent in counsel, but this
man was of a more Princely and royal stomach. The father would oftentimes
dissemble his anger and overcome it: but if this man were ones in a rage, there
was nothing but reuengement out of hand, and that should be done without all
mesure or reason. Both of them were given over much to drinckyng of win^, but
in their drunkenness they were not both of one disposition. The father would
customably from his meat run upon his enemy, fight hand to hand, and
unadvisedly cast him self in danger, But Alexander would not outrage upon
his ennemy, but upon his own men. And therefore Philip returned oftentimes out
of the battle wounded himself, whereas this man oftentimes as a murderer of his
own friends at his table, was feign to depart out of company. The father loved
to reign among his friends, and to have his friends reign with him. The son
would play the tiraunt with his friends. The father had rather be beloved, the
son to be feared. As for learning was a like in both of them. The father was
a man of more craft and pollicye, but the son was more to be betrusted.
Phillippe was more modest in words and communication, but Alexander more
modest in his deeds. The son was of a more gentle and honest nature, and
more prone to show mercy to the^ that he had overcome, but the father would
not abstain so much as from his own confederates and partakers. The Father
was more given to frugalitye, and the son more to ryotousnesse. By the which
means the father laid the foundation of the Monarchy of the whole world, and
the son to his high renown and glory finished the whole work.

The tenthe Book.
ARtaxerxes king of Persia had a C. and xv. sons by his concubines, but he
This ^ame is he that is me^tiond of in the v. and vi. books before.
had no mo then iii. persons that were begotten in lawful wedlock: Darius,
Ariarates, and Ochus. Of these three contrary to the custom of the Persians,
which are not wo^t to change their king unless he die,) the father of his
gentleness during his own life, made Darius king, thinckynge that he had
nothing the less him self, for that that he bestowed upon his son, and that
he should take the more joy of the begetting him, if he might in his life time
behold in his son, the lively representation of his own estate. But The
wickedness of Darius toward his father.
Darius as soon as his father had by evident proof, newlye expressed his tender
and loving affection toward him, began to devise means how to kill his
father he had been a wicked man, if he had gone about to kill his father
alone: but so much the more wicked was he, in that he intised fifty of his
brothers, to consent to the killing of their father. It is a monstrous thing,
that so heinous a murder, should not only be consented to, but also concealed in
such a multitude of people: that of fifty children there could not one be
found, whom either the fear of his fathers majesty, or the reverence of his
age, or the earnest affection that he had showed, could withdraw or call
back from an outrageous cruelty. Was the name of father so vile among so
many sons in number, that by whose defense he ought to have been preserved
even against his enemies, even by the treson of the same he should be
surprised, and be in more safety of his enemies then of his own sons? The
cause of this pretensed murder, was more wicked then the murder it self. For
after the time that Cyrus was slain in the war that he made against his
brother as is before mentioned: king Artaxerxes took his concubine Aspasia in
marriage. Now Darius required his father to depart with her to hi, like as he
had don with the kingdom. His father for y^ love he bare to him, granted at
the first to do it: anon after being stricken with repentance, to thentent he
might honestly deny, the thing he had rashly promised, he made her chief priest
to the son, whereby she was bound to keep her self chaste from all men during
her life. The young man being The just reward of treson.
herewith provoked to anger, first fell at words with his father: and
immediately after, as he conspired with his brothers to work treson against his
father, he and al his rabble were taken, and by the just vengaunce of God (the
punisher of such as rebel against their fathers,) put to erecution for their
prepensed murder. And to thentent no impe nor slyp should remain of such a
wicked race, the wines and children of them all, were in like wise put to
death. After this, Artaxerxes fell sick for sorrow and died, happyer in that
he was a king, then in that he was a father. The inheritance of the kingdom was
delivered unto Ochus, who fearing the like conspiracy, replenished his palace
with the slaugh The (...) of Ochus.
ter of his kinsfolk, and of his noble men. No consanguinity no sex, no age,
could move his heart to pity: verelye for none other purpose, then least men
should account him more in nocent then his brothers that went about to slay
their father. And so having as it were purified and cleansed his kingdom, he
made war to the Armenians. In the which one Codoman putting forth him self
with y^ favor of al men, to combat against one of the enemies that made a
challenge to fight hand to hand, slew his enemy* whereby he both won the victory,
and also saved ye honor of his country, which lay in hasard to be lost. For
the which valiant enterprise, y^ same Codoman was made lieuetenaunte of the
Armenians. In process of time after y^ death of king Ochus, in reme^brans of
his former prowess, the people created him king. And to thentent nothing should
want in him that appertained to thestate of a king, they called him by the
renowned name o^ Darius. Who afterward with great prowess held war a long
time with great Alexander, sometime to his gain, and sometime to his loss. At
last being vanquished of Alexander, and slain of his own kinsmen, he ended
his life to gether with the Empire of the Persians.

The eleventh Book.
IN tharmy of Philip, as there were sundry The estate of macedone after the
death of king philip
sorts of people. Even so after y^ time that he was slain, their minds were
diversely moved. For some that were oppressed with wrongful servitude,
comforted them selves with hoope of liberty. Others wearye of the warfares so
far from their native country, reioysed to think y^ the viage should be broken
up and they dismissed. Many were sorry to see the Tapers y^ were made to set
before the daughter at her marriage, stand upon the hearse of the father. His
friends also were not a little amassed, at so sudden mutation of things considering
how Asia was lately challenged. Europe scarsly yet conquered, and how the
Illyrians, Thracians, Dardanians and other barbarous nations, were of mind
unconstant and vnwauerig, and of promise unfaithful, and not to be trusted to.
All the which people if they should forsake their obediens and rebel The wise
and discrete behavior of Alexander.
all at ones, it were not possible by any means to resist them. Unto all these
mischeues the coming of Alexander was as it were a present salve. Who in an
oration so c^forted forted and encoraged all the people for the time, y^ he
both exempted al fear out of their hearts, and made them to conceive good hope
and expectation of him self. He was then xx. years old, in the which he
promised many things of him self with such modesty, y^ it appeared he would do
more when it came to the proof, then he spoke of. He gave the Macedones a quite
discharge of al things, saving he would not exempt them from the wars, by the
which deed he purchased him self such at al men's hands, y^ they said they had
changed the body of their king, but not his virtues, the first and chiefest
regard y^ he had, was to enter his father according to his estate. In
executing whereof, before al other things, he caused all such persons to be put
to death upon his fathers tomb, as were The murderers (...) kyngPhilip are
punished.
accessory to the same. Only he pardoned Alexander of Lyncests his brother,
reserving in him the good fore token of his own estate, for as much as he was
y^ first that saluted him by the name of a king. Moreover he caused Caranus
his mother in laws son and his brother in law to be put to death as one that
looked to be a partner with him in the kingdom. In the beginning of his reign
he subdued many countries that rebelled, and suppressed many insurrections
even in the very rising. Whereby being greatly encouraged, he went leiserly
into Greece, where after the example of his father, sommoning the Cities to
appear before him at Corinthe, he was substituted captain general in his
stead.

And thereupon he went immediately in hand with y^ wars Alexander g^ eth forward
with the wa^ against the Persians tha^ his father ph^ lip had bego^*
against the Persians, which his father had begone. While he was busy in the
furniture thereof, tidinges was brought him that the Atheniens, the
Lacedaemonians and the Thebanes were revolted from him to the Persians, and that
the author of this reuolting was the orator Demosthen^s corrup ted by ^he
Persians for a great sum of gold, who auowed before the people, that the king
of Macedone with all his host was slain of the Tribales, bringinge the tales
man in open audience, who to make good the matter, said he was wounded him
self in the same battle that the king was slain. Upon the which report,
the minds almost Alexander su^ presses the commotions in greece.
of all the Cities were changed, and the Garrisons of the Macedones besieged.
The which motions intending to prevent, he entered into Greece with an host
well aparelled and in good order, with such celerity, that they skarse believed
their own e^es when they saw him, because they heard not of his coming. In
his way thither ward he exhorted the Thessalians to keep their allegiaunce,
putting them in mind of the benefits of his father Phillip toward them, and
of the kindred that was betwixt him and them by his mothers side, which came of
the stock of A^acus. The Thessalians were glad to hear those words of him,
and thereupon made him lieuetenaunte general of al their country as his father
had been before, and rendered unto him all the tributes and revenues that he was
wont to have. But the Atheniens as they were the first that revolted, so were
they the first that repented: turnyng the disdain of their ennemy into
admiration and wondreme^t, and extollinge the childehode of Alexander (which
before they had in despite) above the prowess of the ancient captains.
Therefore they sent ambassadors desiringe pardon, and that they might have
peace. Whom Alexander hard, and with grievous rebuke granted them their request.

From thence he turned his power toward Thebes, intending to have showed like
mercy, if he had found like repen taunce. But the Thebanes went to it with
force of arms and not with intretaunce and submission. Being therefore The
hatred of all greece to ward the Thebanes.
vanquished, they suffered most grievous punishment of miserable captivity. When
the matter came to debatinge in counsel as concerning the d^truction of the
city, the Phocenses, the Platecenses, the Thespienses, and the Orchome^ians,
Alexanders companions in arms and partakers of his victory, rehearsed the
crueltye of the Thebanes in destroyinge their Cities, and the good will that
they always bare to y^ Persians, not only at that time, but also of old time,
to the open prejudice and damage of the liberty of Greece, which thing was not
to be borne withal. In consideration where of, they were worthelye hated of all
people* for the proof whereof there neaded none other trial nor witness then
this, that they all bound them selves with an oath to raze Thebes, as soon as
ever they had overcome and made an end with the Persians. Furthermore they
told what enterludes had been made of their former noughtinesse, in so much
that there was well nie no stage whereon they made not open shows thereof, to the
intent they should be hated and abhorred, not only for their present
unfaithfulness, but also for their old follye and madness. Then Eleadas one
of the prisoners having liberty given him to speak, said that the Thebanes had
not revolted from the king, in as much The ^sion of ^das for the (...) of t^
c^y.
as they hard say he was slain, but from the kings heirs. In which doing if
there were any trespass, it was rather to be imputed as an ou^rsight for
being so light of credit, then as a promise br^aking or unfaithfulness, and
yet if it were so, they had all ready suffered great punishment therefore.

For the youth of the City being put to the sword, there remained none but a
sort of women and children and old folk, which as they were feeble, so were
they able to do no harm, the which notwithstanding had been so vexed with
rauishme^ts and other displesures and reproaches, that they never felt thing so
bitter to them in all their lives. Wherefore he made intercession, not for his
Citezens, whereof there were so few left, but for the innocent soil of his
country and for the town it self, which had brought up and engendered not only
men, but also Gods. Moreover he alleged a private superstition to entreat
the king withal, how that Hercules was borne among them, from whom the house
of the A^acides do fetch their petigry, and how that his father Philip passed
his childhode at Thebes: beseching him to spare that City, which honored some
of his ancestors that were borne among them as Gods, and had seen some other
of them that were brought up among them, rise to the royal estate of kings.
But the wrath was greater then that any entretaunce could prevail. The City
therefore The City of Thebes is (...) stroyed.
was rased, the lands d^uided among the conquerors, the prisoners sold under a
garland, whose price was set, not to the advantage of the biers, but according
to the hatred of thenemies. The Atheniens thought it a miserable sight, and
therefore they opened their gates for the refuge of such as eskaped by flying,
contrary to the kings prohibition.

The which doing Alexander took so grievously, that at the second time when
their ambassadors came to entreat for peace again, he remitted their offense,
upon condition they should yield into his hands their captains and orators, upon
trust of whom they did so often rebel. The Atheniens being ready to fulfill his
commandment, because they would not be constrained to have war with him, the
matter was brought to this issue, that they should keep still their orators and
banishe their captains: who incontinently taking their way to Darius, did not
a little increase y^ strength The same is he that in the ^ast book is called
Codo^an. alexander set^eth an ordee in his kingdom.
of the Persians. When ^e should setforth toward y^ wars in Persia, he put to
death all his mother in laws kinsme^, whom Philip had advanced to great
promotions, and made rulers of countries: neither spared he such of his own
kindred as seemed mete to bear rule, least any occasion of rebellyon should remain
in Macedone, while he was making war a far of. Such kings also as were
tributaries y^ were of any wis dom and policy, he took with him to the wars,
leaving y^ old men to govern his kingdom at home. Then when he had gotten his
men of war together, he fraighted his ships and embarked his host. Out of y^
which beholding Asia a far of, ^he noble co rage and free heart of alexan der.
he was wonderfully enflamed in his courage, and made xii. altares to the Gods
as a vow for prosperous success in his wars. All thinheritans y^ he had in
Macedone and Europe, he parted among his friends, saying y^ Asia was enough for
himself. Before y^ any sail departed fro the shore, he slew sacrifices, making
his prayer for victory by battle, as by the which he was left to be the
revenger of Greece so oftentimes before assailed of the Persians, whose monarch
had continued now long enough, and was come to his perfect ripeness, and
therefore it was high time for other to take the roum that could serve the turn
better. Neither was his army of less courage then the king him self. For they
al forgetting their wives and children, and y^ they should make war far from
home, made as sure account of the gold of the Persians, and of the richesse of
the whole East, as if it had been their own al ready, thinking nothing of the
dangers of the war, but of the great richesse. As Soon as they were come to
land, Alexander first of all threw a dart as it were into his enemies land, and
in his armor lept out of his ship in manner of dansing, and so killed his
sacrifices, praying the gods y^ those countrics might willinglye receive him
as their king. In the same place also he did obsequies at the tombs of them
that were slain at the battle of Troy. Then sought he for his enemy,
straightly charging his Souldioures, that they made no wast in the country of
Asia, saying it was but reason to spare that that was their own, and y^ they
ought not to make hauock of those things that they came to possess. In his
army were two and xxx. thousand foot men. iiii. ^. and v. C. horsemen, and a C.
four skore and two ships. It is to be doubted whether it were more to be
wondered at, alexanders host.
that with so small a handful of men he conquered y^ whole world, or that he
durst ones give thenterprise to attempt it: considering that to so dangerous a
warfare he chose, not lusty young men and such as were in the flour of youth,
but old worn soldiers, and such whereof many by reason of their years, were
priueledged and exempted from the wars, which had served under his father and
under his uncles, so that a man would have thought he had not picked out
soldiers, but rather masters of cheualry. ^oreouer none had the leading of
any band, that was not lx. years old. So that if ye had beheld the chief
officers of his camp, ye would have said, ^e had seen the senate of some
ancient common wealth. Therefore there was no man that thought of running away
but of getting the victory, nor there was not any that put his trust in his
legs but in his arms. On the other side, (...) of Da rius.
Darius king of Persia trusting in his own strength, would do nothing by
policy, affirming that it was not beseminge for him and his, to devise with
them selves to steal the victory, nor yet to keep his ennemy out of the
borders of his kingdom, but rather to receive him into the bowels of his
realm: thincking it should be more to his honor to expulse ^im perforce, then
not to suffer him to enter.

The first encounter therefore was in the plains of adrast. In the host of
the Persians were DC. M. fightinge men, The number of the Persians.
the which being vanquished as much by the pollicye of Alexander, as by the
puissaunce of the Macedones, turned their backs and fled. Great therefore was
the slaughter of the Persians. Of Alexanders host were slain ix. footmen, and
a C. and xx. horsemen. Whom the king the more to encourage Darius is vanquished.
the residue of his souldioures, sumptuously buried and set up their Images on
horsback on their tombs, and gave great fraunchises and privileges to their
kinsfolk. After this victory the more part of Asia fell unto him. He fought
many battles also with the lieutenants of Darius, whom ^e now vanquished not
so much by force, as with the terror of his name. While these things were a
doing, in the mean time Alexander was informed by the confession of a
prisoner, that Alexander of Lyncestes the son in law of antipater, whom he
had left his vicegerent in Macedone, went about to work treson against him.
For which cause fearing that if he should put him to death, there would rise
sum commotion in Macedone, he put him in safekeping. This done he marched
toward the city Gordis, the which is situate between the greater and the
lesser Phrygia. Of the city Gordis and of Gordius (...).
The desire that Alexander had to get this city into his possession, was not so
much for the spoil of it, as for because he hard say that in that City in the
temple of Jupiter, was the yoke of Gordius waine, the knot whereof whosoever
could undo, should be king of all Asia, as the ancient Oracles had
prophesyed. The occasion and original hereof was this. As one Gordius was
going to plough in the country, with Oxen that he had hired, birds of all
sorts began to fly about him. Whervppon as he went to ask counsel of the
Southsayers of the city thereby, in the gate he met with a maid of excellent
beautye, and demanding of her what Southsayer he were best to goo to. When
she heard thoccasion wherefore he would ask counsel, being seen her self
in the science by thenstruction of her Father and mother, she answered that it
meaned he should be a king, and there upon offered her self to be his partaker
both of wedlock, and of the kingdom y^ was behighted. He thought himself happy
to have such a fair offer at the first entrye of his kingdom. After the
marriage, the Phrygians fell at discord among them selves. And when they asked
counsel of the Oracle how they might bring it to an end, answer was made
that they could not end their controversies with out the healpe of a king.
Demanding again as touching the person of their king, what manner of man he
should be commandment was given them to mark whom they saw first after their
return, ridinge into the temple of Jupiter in a cart, and to take him for
their king. The first man that they met, was this gordius, where upon
immediatlye they saluted him by the name of king. The cart wh^rin he rode when
the kingdom was laid upon him, he set in the temple of Jupiter, and
consecrated it for an offeringe, as kings are wont to do at their coronation.

After this man reigned his son Midas, who being traded up by Orpheus in
many superstitious Ceremonies, filled all the realm full of sects of
religion, by the which he lived more in safegarde all his life, then by his
chiualry. Alexander therefore having taken the Town, when he came into the
temple of Jupiter, immediatlye enquired for the yoke of the Waine: the which
being brought before him, when he saw he could not find the end of the
thonges that were bidden within the wrethes, constraining the Oracle to the
vttermooste, he cut the wrethes a sonder with a sword, and so when he had
losed the wreathes, he found the ends of the knottes within the braides. As he
was a doing this, tidinges was brought him that Darius approached with a great
host of men. Whereupon fearyng to be enclosed within the straightes, he passed
the mountain Taurus with all speed possible, in the which haste he ran CCCCC.
furlonges.

When he came to Tarsus, being much delighted with the plesantnes of the
river Cydnus which runs through the mids of the city, he cast of his
harness, and full of duste Alexander ta keth a great (...).
and ^wet as he was, threw him self naked into the cold wa ter, wherwithall
such a nomnesse and stiffness by and by struck through all his finewes, that
he lost his speech, in so much that men thought he should not only never
recover it, but also looked he should have died presently. Only there was one of
his Physicians named Philip, which would take upon him to warrant to make him
whole again. And yet the same Physician was had in great mistrust, by reason of
the letters sent the day before out of Cappadocia from Parmenio. Who knowing
nothing of Alexanders mischaunce, wrote unto him to beware of Philip the
Physician, for he was corrupted by Darius for a great sum of money. Yet
notwithstanding he thought it more for his safeguard to commit himself to the
physician though he more then half suspected him of treason, then to abide the
danger of his disease, whereof there was no way but death. Therefore be took the
drink that the Physician had made him, and delivered him the letter, and as he
drank, he beheld his face steadfastly to se what countenance he would make at the
reding of it When he saw him vnabashed, he was glad of it, and the iiii. day
after recovered his health. Darius therefore with CCC. M. fotemen, and a C. M.
horsemen proceeded into battle. This huge number of his enemies somewhat moved
Alexander The second ^ncounter between Alexander and Darius
when he beheld how few in respect he had him self. But then again he called
to mind, what great enterprises he had atcheued, and how mighty countries he
had sub dued with that small number. Wherefore when hope had ex pulsed fear, he
thought it dangerous to delay the battle. And to thentent his men should not
be discoraged, he rode a bout from band to band, and with sundry orations spoke
unto each kind of people. He encoraged the Illirians and (...), with promise
of richesse and substance. The Grecians he set on fire, with putting the^ in
mind of their batels in time past, and of the continual hatred that they had
with the Persi sians. The Macedones he admonished of Europe by the^ all ready
conquered, and of Asia now challenged, bosting of the^ that there were not y^
like men of power and strength as they were in all y^ world. Of al which their
travels, this battle should be y^ final end, to their high renown and
estimation. As he had said these words, he commanded his battles to stand still
again to thentent ye by this pausing, they might enure the^ selves to behold y^
huge number of their enemies with open eyes. Da rius also was not behind the
hand in ordring of his battles. For whereas it belo^ged to the duty of his
captains to have don it, he went himself in proper person from rank to ra^k,
exhorting the^ al to play the men, putting the in remembrance of thanciet
renown of the Persia^s, and of the perpetual possession of thempire given the^
by the gods immortal. This don both tharmies with great courage buckled
together. In the which battle both kings were wounded, and the victory hu^g in
The (...) of the ^ans.
doutful bala^ce, so long until Darius forsook the field. Then ensued the
slaughter of y^ Persians, there were slain of foteme^ lx. and one M. of horsemen
x. M. and xl. M. were taken prisoners. Of the Macedones were killed a C. and xxx.
fotemen, and a C. and l. horsemen. In the te^ts of the Persians was found much
gold and other riches. Among others, were taken prisoners Dari us mother, his
wife which also was his sister, and ii. of his daughters. Who^ when y^
Alexander came to visit and comfort, when they saw the harnessed men, they
embraced one another, and made great lamentation, as though they should have
died by and by. Then they fell flat at Alexanders fete, beseching him not for
pardon of their lives, but only respite of their deaths for a time, to
thentent they might bury Darius body. Alexander being moved with pity at the
tender The (...) o^ (...)
affection of the women, told the^ that Darius was yet alive and bad them be of
good comfort, for they should not die, commanding that they should be esteemed as
Queen's and so to be called. Furthermore he willed Darius daughters to trust to
him, that he would see them bestowed in marriage, to no persons of baser estate,
then was for their fathers honor. After this when he saw Darius richesse, his
precious orna ments, his jewels and apparel, they were so much that he
Superfluity the cause of disorder.
wondered to behold them Then began he first to make riotous bankets and
sumptuous feasts, then began he for her beauty and favor to fall in love with
one of his prisonners, called Bersine, of whom afterward he begat a son, whom
he named Hercules. Notwithstanding remembringe that Darius was yet a live, he
sent Parmenio to invade the Persian flete, and other of his friends to receive
the Cities of Asia. Which hearing of his great victory, came with their
lieuetenaunts that were appointed by Darius, (who with a great sum of gold
yielded them selves unto the conqueror, and submitted them selves under his
subjection.

Then set he forward into Syria, where he met with many kings of the East with
crowns on their heads. Of whom (as each of them had deserved) some he took
into favor, and some he deposed, setting up kings in their steads. Amongst all
other Abdlominus whom Alexander made king of Sydon, A king of a gardener.
is worthy to be spoken of. Him whereas before time he was wont to be hired to
cast ponds and water gardens, leadyng his life miserably) Alexander created
king: setting aside the noble men, least for their birth and lineage, they might
rather have seemed to challenge it of duty, and not accept it as a fre gift. The
citezens of Tire sent their ambassadoures with a crown of gold of great waighte
unto Alexander, for joy of his good success: who thankfully acceptinge their
present, said he would go to Tire to perform his vows to Hercules.
Thambassadors said he might do that better in old Tire, and in the old temple,
desiring he would not enter into the new Alexander be (...) Tire.
town. Whereat he took so sore displeasure, that he threatened to destroy the
city: and there upon forthwith he brought his army to the Island, whom the
courageous Tyrians, for the trust they had in the Carthaginenses, entertained
with battle. For thexample of Dydo greatly encoraged the Tyrians, who after
that she had builded Carthage, conquered the third part of the world.
Thinkinge that it were a foul shame for them, if their women should have more
hearts in conquering, then they had in defending of their liberty.

Wherefore they sent away all such as were not mete for the wars to Carthage,
and brought succors in their st^ad. Nevertheless ere long time after, they were
surprised and taken by treson. Here upon Alexander received the Rhodes, Egypt,
alexander goes to ^mo in (...).
and Cilicia without any stroke striking. Then took he his iourny to Jupiter
(...), of purpose to enquire of the chance of things to come, and as
concerning his own birthe. For his mother Olympias confessed to Philip her
husband, that she conceived not Alexander by him, but by a Serpente of
wonderful bigness. And Philip him self a little before he died, did openly
report that he was not his son. Upon which cause as though he had known her
to have played the miswoman, he put away Olympias. Alexander therefore be ing
desirous to fetch his pedegre from God, and also to deliver his mother from
slander of the world, sent messengers priuelv before to the priests, to give
them instructions what answer he would have them make. As Soon as he The (...)
of the priests which after was the ^struction of many (...) men.
entered into the temple, the prelates saluted him by ye name of the son of
Hammon. He being glad of this adoption of the God, gave commandment that all
men should take him for his father. Then he demanded whether he had punished
all such as were gilty of the murderinge of his father or no. They made him
answer, that his father could neither be killed nor die, but as for the death
of king Phillip, he had sufficiently punished all the doers thereof. To his
third demand they answered, that he should get the upper hand in all battles,
and should be owner of all the whole world. To such also as attended upon
him they gave charge to honor Alexander as a God, and not as a king.

Hereupon he grew to such an hautinesse, and so wonderful an arrogance was
rooted in his stomach, that the gentleness which he had learned by the
literature of y^ greeks and the enstructions of the Macedones, was quite rased
out of his thought.

As he returned from Ha^mon, he builded Alexa^di^a, and peopled it with
Macedones, ordeining it to be the head city of Egypt The building of alexandria
in Egypt.
Darius being eskaped to Babylon, sent his letters to Alexander, desiring him
of liberty to ransom the women that were his prisoners, and for their raunsom
he proffered him a great sum of money. Howbeit Alexander would not take a piece
of money for their ransom, but the whole kingdom. alexanders an swers to Da
rius letters.
Within a while after came a another letter from Darius to Alexander, wherein he
proferred him one of his daughters in marriage, and a portion of his kingdom.
Alexander wrote unto him again, y^ those things that he offered him were his own
already, wherefore he willed him to come and submit himself, and to put
thordering of his kingdom to the discretion of his so uerain. Then being past
al hope of peace, Darius adressed himself again to the wars, and with 40000:
fotemen, and a 10000. horsemen marched toward Alexander. In his iourny news was
brought him that his wife was departed of de The wife of darius dies
liuerance of a child before her time, and that Alexander wept for her death,
and also followed courteously after her corse to burial: the which thing he had
done, not for that he was in love with her, but only for curtesy and humanities
sake. For he never saw her but ones in all his life, whereas he would oftentimes
visit his mother and his little daughters to comfort them. Then Darius thinking
himself clearly va^qui shed, seeing y^ after so many battles, his enemy had
ouercom him. With kindness also, thought it did him good sithe he could not
get thupper hand, y^ it was his chance to be vanquished The third letter of
Darius to alexander.
of so worthy a conqueror. Wherefore he wrate the iii. letter unto him, giving
him thanks y^ he had not showed any extremity against his prisonners. Offering
him the greater part of his kingdom, even unto the river Eufrales with a another
of his daughters to wife, and for the reast of his prisoners 3000. talents.
Here unto Alexander made answer, alexanders answer.
that thank at his enemies hand was more then neded, and y^ he had not done any
thing to flatter him withal, nor for y^ he sought a defens against thuncertain
end of war, or for articles of peace, but of his own noble heart, which taught
him to contend with the power of his enemies and not with their calamities,
promising to perform all Darius request, if he would take himself as next unto
him, and not as his coequal, for like as the world could not be ruled if there
The (...) ^counter between ^us and alex ander.
wsr ii. sons, so the world cannot without prejudice be go uerned by ii.
souerain kings, therefore either yield him self the same day, or else prepare him
self to battle the next day, and flater not himself with hope of any other
victory, the^ he had tried already. The next day they brought their men into the
field. Suddenly before the battle, Alexander being he ^y with cares fell a sleep.
Al his men being in a readiness to give the charge upon their enemies, the king
was missing. Who being with much a do waked by Parmenio, and being asked how it
chanced y^ he slept so soundly in so dangerus a time, seeing he was wo^t to
sleep but little, even when he was most at his hearts ease, said he was
delivered of a great fear and y^ he slept upon a sudden quietness that came upon
him, because he should encounter withal the whole power of Da rius together:
for he was afraid leasts the war should have been prolonged, if the Persians had
divided their host. Before the battle each army stood in the sight of other.
The Macedones wo^dred to so the great number of their enemies their goodly
personages, and their rich and costli armor. On the other side the Persians were
amassed to think how so few should overcome so many thousands as they had. The
captains went busely about to view their bands, and see every man keep good
order. Darius told his soldiers, that if they were divided, they were mo then
ten to one of their ennemies. Alexander willed the Macedones not to be abashed
at the multitude of their ennemies, at the hugeness of their bodies, nor at
the strangeness of their couloure, only he would have them to remember, that
this was the iii, time they fought with them, and that they should not think
them to be become better men by reason of runnyng away, considering they should
bring into the battle with the, ^o sorrowful a remembrans of their own
discomfitures, and of so much bloodshed as they had gone away with in the ii.
former conflicts. And as Darius had the greater number of men: so had he
himself the greater strength. Wherefore he exhorted them to despise that host y^
glistered so with gold and silver, in the which there was more gain to be
gotten then danger, seeing that victory is not gotten by y^ glistering of
habilments, but by the sharpness of wepons. After this communication the onset
was given. The Macedones laid about them with their wepons, as in disdain of
their ennemy whom they had vanquished so often before. On the contrary part,
the Persians chose rather to die then to be overcome. Which caused so much
bludshed as has not light ly been seen in any battle. Darius when he saw his
me^ put Darius is put to flight.
to the worse, would gladly have died in the field, but that such as were
about him compelled him to fly whether he would or no. Afterward when some
gave him counsel to The ca^e of Darius for the safegarde of his souldioures.
break the bridge over the river Cydnus, to the intent to stop his enemies
from pursuing him any further, he said he set not so much by him self, that
for the sauegard of him self alone, he would cast so many of his company into
their enemies hands: and therefore it should be away for other to eskape, as well
as it had been for him self. Alexander enterprised such things as were most
dangerous, and where he saw his enemies thickest and fighting sharpest,
thither would he ever thrust himself in among them to break the prease,
desirous always to take such things as were most dangerous to himself, and not
to leave the^ to his soldiers. By this battle he took away thempire of all
Asia, the fifth Here begins the Em ^ptre of Mace done.
year after he began to reign. Whose felicity was so great, that no man
hereafter durst rebel, and the Persians them selves after so many years
continuance of their monarchy patiently received the yoke of bondage. When he
had rewarded and refreshed his soldiers, he did nothing xl. dais after, but
take a view of the spoil of his ennemy. He found xl. M. talents locked up in
the city.

Also he wan Persepolis the head city of the kingdom of Persia, a city that had
continued famous and notable many years together, and stuffed with the spoils
of y^ whole world which was not seen before the taking thereof. While these
things were a doing, about viii. C. Greeks came to Alexander, which in the
time of their captiuitye, besides other grievous punishments, had had certain of
their limbs and members of their bodies cut of: requestring him that as he had
revenged Greece, so he would also revenge them of the cruelty of their enemies,
and set them at liberty. When he would have given them license to return home
into their countries, they chose rather to tarry still and take certain lands,
least they should not so much rejoice their friends as make them abhor to look
upon them.

In the mean season to win the conquerors favor withal, Darius is bound in
setters of gold, and wound^ to death to his own (...)
Darius own kinsmen bound him in fetters and chains of gold, in a village of
the Parthians called Taken. I think it was even the ordinance and disposition
of God, that the Monarche of the Persians should take his end in the land of
them that should succeed in the Empire. Alexander also the next morrow following
after upon the spur, had intelligence that Darius was conveyed out by night
in a lyter, whereupon commanding the residue of his host to follow after with
as much speed as they could conuenientlye, he took vii. M. of his horsemen,
and pursued him. In his journey he fought many dangerous battles, and when he
had ridden many a mile, and could hear no inklinge of Darius, as his horses
were a baiting, one of his souldioures going down to a watering thereby, found
Darius in a litter stricken through with many wounds, but as yet a live. Who
calling to him the Souldioure, when he perceived by his speech that he was one
of his own country men, he said The woorde^ of Darius (...) his death.
it was a comfort to him being in the case that he was, that he should speak
to one that could understand him, and not utter his last words in vain.

He had him say unto Alexander in his name, that he died a great dettor of his
without any desert of his own part, for as much as he had found him like a
king, and not like an enemy toward his wife and children, and that it was his
chance to be better entreated of his ennemy, then of his own kin. For whereas
his enemy had given his wife and children life, his kinsfolk to whom he had
given both life and kingdoms, had unnaturally bereft him of his life. For the
which his doings, he rendered him such thanks as he himself having the
victory lists to accept. This only one thing (which lay in his power to do
for him now lyinge at the point of death, would he do for Alexander, as
inrecom pence of his good turns, that is, to pray to the powers celestial,
and the powers infernal, and the Gods of kings, to give him victory and
dominion of the whole world. As for himself he desired nothing, but that it
might be his pleasure to grant him burial, as of right he ought to have
without grudge. And as touching the reuengement of his death, it was now no
part of his care, but for examples sake the common case of all kings, the
which to neglecte as it should be dishonorable to him, so might it turn to
his utter peril. For on the one part, this case concerns his Justice, and on
the other it touches his own vtility and profit. In token whereof as an only
pledge of the faith and honor of a king, he gave his right hand to carry unto
Alexander. At those words he stretched out his hand and gave up the ghost. The
which when Alexander hard of, he came to see his body as he lay dead, and he
wept to behold so worthy an estate, come unto so unworthy a death. Wherefore
he caused his body to be entered with all solempnitye like a king, and his
relics to be conveyed into the Sepulthres of his auncestoures.

The twelfthe Book.
ALexander bestowed great cost in buryinge of his soldiers that were slain
in pursuing Darius, and to the residue of his company he departed with xv. M.
tale^ts. The greater part of his horses was foundred with heat, and such as
remained were able to do no service. The whole sum of the money gotten alate
by this victory, was a hundred and three and fifty thousand talents, whereof
Parmcnio was made treasurer. While these Letters of Antipat^, regent of
Macedone.
things were a doings, letters were brought from Antipater out of Macedone, the
tenor whereof contained y^ wartes of Agis king of the Spartans in Greece, of
Alexander king of Epire in Italy, and of his lieuetenaunt Sopyron in Scithia.
The which made him somewhat to muse. Nevertheless when he had well disgested
the natures of the ii. kings his enuiers, he was more glad of the loss of
them, then sorye for the loss of his army and his captain Sopiryon.

For after that Alexander had taken his journey, almoos^e all Greece fell to
rebellion in hope to recover their liberty, A rebeliy^ in greece.
ensuinge the ensample of the Lacedaemonians, which alonelye forsook the
peace, and despised the orders taken both by Phillip and Alexander. Captain
and ringleader of this Commotion, was Agis king of the Lacedaemonians. The
which tumulte Antipater suppressed with such power as he had raised, even in
the very risinge thereof.

Yet notwithstanding there was great slaughter on both parts. King Agis when
he saw his me^ put to flight, to the intent that all be it he could not have
as good fortune as The valiantness of (...) agis.
Alexander, he might not seem inferioure to him in courage, sent away his
guard and him self alone made such slaughter of his ennemies that sometime he
put to flyghte whole bands at ones. At the last although he were oppressed
by the multitude, yet he wan the glory and renoun from them all

Furthermore Alexander king of Epyre, being set into Italy for to aid the
Tarentines against the Brutianes, took y^ viage Of this Alexander, is men tion
made in the end of the viii. book.
upon him with so good a will, as though the whole world should have been
divided, and that Alexander the son of his sister Olympias should have had
the East for his part, and himself the West: entendinge to have no less a do
in Italy Affrike and Sicil, then the other should have to do in Asia among the
Persians. And besides this, like as the Oracle at Delphos had prophesied unto
great Alexander, that his destruction should be wrought in Macedone, even so the
Oracle of Jupiter of Dodone had told this Alexander, that the city Pandose and
the river acheruse should be his fatal end.

Now for as much as both of them were in Epyre, not knowing that they were in
Italy also, to thentent to avoid the danger of his desteny, he gladly
enterprysed war in a strange land. Therefore when he came into Italye, the
first war that he had was with the Appulians: but when he understood the
destenies of their City, he entered a leage and amity with their king. For at
that time the head City of Appulia was Brunduse, the which was founded by the
The foundati on of Brund^ se in Italy.
Aetolians under the conducte of Dyomedes that famous captain for his renowned
acts at the battle of Troy. But being expulsed by thappulians, they asked
counsel of the Oracles. Where answer was made, that they should possess the
place that they required, for ever. Here upon they required thappulians by
their ambassadors to render their City again, or elsse they threatened to make
sharp war upon them. The Appulians having knowledge of the answer of the
Oracle, slew the ambassadoures and bucied them in the City, there to have
their dwellinge for ever, and so having dispatched the meaning of the Oracle,
they enjoyed the City a great time. The which deed when Alexander of Epyre knew
of, for reverence to the destinies of so long continuance, he made no more
war to the Appulians.

Then made he war with the Brutians and Lucanes, and won many cities of
theirs. Also he concluded a peace and friendship with the Metapontines,
Rutilians and Romans. But the Alexand^ king of (...) is (...) to death
Brutians and Lucanes having gotten hope of their neighbors fiersly renewed the
wars again. There the king near unto the city Pandose and the river
Acheruse was wounded to death, not knowing the name of his fatal place,
besore he was slain, and when he should die, he perceived that in his own
country was no nead for him to fear death, for the which cause he had forsaken
his country. The Tyrians raunsomed his body at the charges of their city and
buried it honorably. While these things were in doing in Italy. Zopyrion The
death of (...) president of ^on tus.
also whom Alexander the great had left president of Pontus, thinking himself
dishonored if he lay still and attempted nothing, raised an army of xxx. M.
soldiers, and made war to the Scythians. Where being ^aine wythal his host,
he suffered due punishment for making war so rashly against an unhurtful kind
of people. When tidinges of these things were brought unto Alexander into
Parthia, he made himself very sorry for the death of his cosen Alexander, and
commanded al his host to morn for him by the space of iii. days. After this,
as though the war had been ended in the death of Darius, when all men looked to
return into their countries, all ready after a sort embrasinge in their
minds their wives and children. Alexander sommoned his soldiers together,
persuading with them that al those battles were to no effect that were paste,
if the barbarous Alexander (...) courageth his soldiers (...) the warre^.
nations of the East should eskape untouched: for he desired not Darius body
but his kingdom, and all such ought to be pursued as forsook their obedience
to the kingdom.

When he had by this oration quickened the minds of his souldioures a new, he
subdued Hyrcanie and the Mede^. In y^ same country met him Thalestris
otherwise named Mynoshaea Thal^tris Queen of the amazones.
the Queen of the Amazones with CCC. M. women, which had come a xxv. days
iourny through the savage countries, and through the mids of her ennemies of
purpose so have issue by Alexander. The sight and coming of whom was wondered
at, both for the strange attire of the women, and also for the request that
they made to company with Alexander and his men. For this occasion were xxx.
dais spent in idleness, and when she thought her self with child, she depar
ted home again. After this Alexander as though he had alexander falls to
the vices of the Per ^ians.
had made himself subject to their laws and customs whom he had vanquished,
tok^ upon him thattire and diadem of the kings of Persia, which thing was
never known among the kings of Macedone before that time. And because they
should not disdain him y^ more for doing these things alone, to thentent he
might counterfeit the Persians as well in excess of apparel as in excess of
fare, he also commanded his friends to wear long robes of cloth of gold and of
skarlet. More over he spent the nights in daliance among the kings co^cubines,
which were women of most excellent beuty, eft with one and eft with another as
their turns came about. And for fear least through want of delitious fare, he
should not be able to hold with his venerus dalia^ces and pastimes, he made
sumptuous feasts and bankets, and thereunto devised princely shows and
pageants, quite forgetting y^ by such means, riches are wont to be consumed
and wasted, and not gotten or preserved. Upon this his doing, arose a great
grudge through all the camp, y^ he held so sore degenerate from his father
Philip, y^ in manner he disdained ones to hear his country named, and should
take upon him the manners and customs of the Persians, who^ for such manners and
customs he had subdued. But for because he would not seem to have yielded him
self a policy of alexander whi ch afterward grew into a custom.
to the vices of them who^e he had subdued by battle alone, he gave his
soldiers licens, (if any of the^ were delited with the company of their
prisoners,) to mary them to their wives thinking that they would have less
mind of home, if they had in their tents as it were an image or representation
of their household gods and dwelling places, and also that they would make les
account of their travel in ye wars for the delight and pleasure they had in
their wives. Besides this he thought y^ Macedone should not need to be spent so
much in sendyng forth soldiers to supply the number of them that were slam. If
the young nouices might succeed the old and expert soldiers their fathers,
learning to play the men of war even in the same trenche that they were born
in. And that they should prove the bolder and hardier, if they were not only
trained up to the Wars, but also brought up from the shel in the camp. The
which custom remained also among the successors of Alexander. Therefore there
was a stipend appointed to find the Children with all, and when they came to
man's estate, they had apparel of house and harness given them, and the
fathers had wages allowed the^ according to the number of their sons. If any
of their fathers died, or were slain, the Orphans nevertheless took their
fathers wages, whose childhode among so many viages was even a very warfare.
For being from their tender years endured and hardened with continual travel
and pearils, they made the host invincible, accompting the camp for noone
other then their country, nor the battle for any other then their assured
victory. The people that were thus begotten, were called Epigones: Afterward
when he had conquered the Parthians, he made ruler ^uer them one of the most
noble men of all Persia named Andragoras, from whom the kings of Parthia did
afterward descend.

In the mean seson Alexander began to outrage with his alexander (...) rages
against his noble men for repreh^ding his ^ces.
own men, not like a king but like an enemy. In especially it displeased him
that some of them told him and rebuked him, for breaking the customs of his
offenses, the ancient father Parmenio next unto the king in estate and dignity,
with his son Ph^otas after inquisition had upon them, were both put to
death. Whervppon all the camp began to be on a rore, bewailinge the mischaunce
of the innocent old man and his son, not letting sometime to say, that it
was not for them to look for any better.

The which things when they came to Alexanders ear, fearing that if the
brute hereof should be blown into Macedone, the glory of his conquests should
be distained with the spot of cruelty, he made as though he were minded to
send certain of his friends into Macedone to bear ho^me tidings of his
conquests, exhorting his soldiers to write to their friends, for it would be
long or they had the like occasion again, because they should make war
further of. The which being done, he caused the packets of letters to be
brought privily unto him, by the which understanding every man's judgment
of him, he put all those together into one band that had any ill opinion of
him: entending either to consume them by battle, or else to distribute them in
to new towns that he purposed to build in the vttermoste parts of the world.
Then he subdued the Dracans, the Euergets, the Parimans, the paropamissadanes,
the Hydaspians, and the other kinds of people that inhabit the foot of
Caneasus.

In the mean time was brought unto him fast bound, (...) is pu nished for
his treason.
Bassus one of Darius friends, who had not only betrayed the king his master,
but also slain him. Whom in reuengement of his traitorous act, he delivered to
Darius brother to punish him as he thought good, accompting not Darius so much
his enemy, as the friend of Darius that had slain his own master. And to
thentent he might leave his name behind him in those countries, he builded a
City upon the river Tanais and named it Alexandria, the wall whereof Alexandria
upon Tanais
being vi miles in compass, he finished within xvii. days, remouinge into it
the people of iii. other cities that Cyrus had builded. Among the Segdians and
Bactrians also he builded xii. cities, destributing into the^ all such as he
knew Read this history, and mark what a vice dronkennes is in a prince.
to be seditious persons in his host. These things thus brought to pass,
upon a certain solemn holy day he bad his friends to a feast, where after the
time they had taken in their cups, mention being made among them as
concerning the acts of king Philip, he began to prefer him self before his
father, extolling the greatness of his own deeds above the skies, where unto
the greater part of his gestes assented. Therefore when Clytus one of the old
men, upon trust of the kings friendship, as one that in that respect was the
chiefest about him, took upon him to defend the fame and renown of Phillip,
standing in the praise of his noble acts, he offended the king so sore, that
he snatched a weapon out of one of his gardes hand, and slew him at the table.

At the which murder trimling, he cast him in the teth as he lay dead with
his defendinge of Phillip, and with the praise and commendation of his fathers
wars. But after his mind being satisfied with the slaughter began to quiet
it self, in stead of anger entered aduisemente, and considering, sometime
whom he had slain, and sometime upon what occasion he slew him, he began to
repent him of that he had done, that he had taken his fathers praises in such
displesure, as he ought not to have taken reproachful words, lamenting that he
should be so much ouersene, as to kill his friend being an old man, and having
not trespassed against him as he was making merry. Thervppon being turned with
like rage to repentance, as he was cue^ now unto anger, he wished himself out
of the world.

First he fell a weping, then he took up the dead body in his arms, searched
his wounds, confessed his madness ^.
to him as if he could have heard him, pulled out the weapon, setting it to
his own heart, and had slain him self if his friends had not wrasted the
weapon out of his hand He continued in this wilfuluesse to die certain days
after. For the more to augment his sorrow and repentans, came to his mind the
remembrance of Clytus sister who was his nourse, of whom (allbeit she was not
there,) yet was he most ashamed in himself, that he had so shamefully rewar
ded her for noursing of him, as now being man grown and a conqueror, to present
her that had borne him in her arms all the time that he was a child, with the
corse of her brother, in recompense of her good turns.

Moreover he thought with himself, what tales and slanders he had raised of
himself in his army, and among the nations that he had conquered, what a fear
and secreat hatred toward himself, he had stricken into the hearts of his other
friends, how bitter and lothsom he had made his own table, being not so terrible
armed in the field, as sitting naked at his meat. Then came to his
remembrance Parmenio and Phylotas, then came Amyntas his Sisters son, then
came his mother in law, and her brothers that were put to death, then came
attalus, Eury^ochus, pansanias, and other noble men of Macedone, whose lives he
had taken away.

Hereupon he obstinatlye forsook his meat iiii. days together, until his
whole host came and intreted him, beseching that he would not so lament the
death of one man, as there by to cast them all away, having brought them to the
vttermoste of the barbarous nations, there to be left destitute among the
mids of their enemies that most hated them, and whom they had stirred
thereunto by battle.

Greatly hereunto profited the intretaunce and persuasion The force of
eloquence.
of the Philosopher Callysthenes, who had been familier with him when they were
both scholars under Aristotle, and as then lately sent for to put his acts in
wrytinge. Therefore when he had set his mind again to the wars, he received
the Chorasmians and Dracans by composition. Afterward to thentent all things
should be more spiteful, the which one point of stateliness taken of the
custom of the Persians, he had hitherto delayed, he gave commandment they
should no more salute him, but adore him. Callysthenes A* good reward of
persuadyng him from despair, read more hereof in the. (...). bake.
was one of them that stood sti^iest against his purpose. The which thing was
the confusion of himself, and of many of the noble men of Macedone. For under
the color of treson they were all put to death. Nevertheless the Macedones
held still their custom of saluting their kings, utterly casting away and
rejecting the manner of adoring. After this he marched toward Inde, to thentent
he might bound his Empire at the Ocean sea, and thuttermost part of the East.
To the which renown, y^ thornaments of his army might be agreeable, he ouerlaid
the trappers of the horses, and tharmor of his soldiers with silver, and after
their silver shieldes, he named his whole host argyraspides. When he came to
the City Nisa, for as much as the men of the town, upon a certain
superstitious confidens that they had in their God Bacchus, who was the founder
thereof made no cou^tenans of resistance, he commanded his men should do no
harm to it: greatly rejoicing, that he had not only followed y^ wars but also
the very fotesteppes of the God. From ^ence he led his host to see the holy
Mount, the which of it own nature Se the (...) of (...) sticion.
was beset with vines and Iuye in such order, as if it had been dressed with
man's hand, and set by conning of workmen. As Soon as his host came at the
mountain being moved through a sudden instinct of the mind to the hollye
howlings of the God, they skattered here and there without any harm taking, to
the great admiration of the king. Whereby he might perceive that in sparing the
town^me^, he did his own army as great pleasure as he did them: The^ went he to
Daedalus hills, and to the kingdom of Queen Cleo phis, who yelding her self
received her kingdom again, paying for the ransom thereof certain nights
lodging The (...)
with Alexander, at whose hand she obtained through her pleasant daliaunce
and enticements, the thing she could never have gotten by force of arms. The
son that she conceived by him she named Alexander, who afterward enjoyed the
kingdom of Inde. Cleophis the Queen for defiling of her chastitye, was ever
after called of the Indians the kings Concubine. When he had traveled
through Inde, he came to a rock os marvelous bigness and rough nesse, into
the which many people were fled, from winning whereof it was told him that
Hercules was prohibited by an earthquake. Being therefore inflamed with desire
to sur mount the doings of Hercules with great labor and peril, he obtained the
rock. Whereupon all the people round about yielded them selves unto him whom he
took unto grace. There was one of the kings of Inde, whose name was Porus, a
man of marvelous strength of body, and of wonderful Thenco^nter between Po^us
and (...).
stoutnesse of stomach, who hearing of the fame of Alexander, prepared for
the War against his coming. Therefore when it came to the encounter, he
willed his men to set upon the Macedones, and to let him alone with their
king, for he would fight hand to hand with him himself. And Alexander made
no tariance to the combat. But at the first encounter his horse being
wounded under him, he fell down headlonge to the ground, nevertheless his
guard stepped about him and saved him.

Porus being ouercharged with many wounds was taken prisoner. Who sorowed so
greatly for his being vanquished, that all be it he found favor at his
enemies hand, yet would he not receive any sustenaunce, nor suffer his
wounds to be dressed, and they had much a do to obtain so much at his hand
as that he would live. Whom Alexander in honor of his valiant courage,
sent home in safetye into his own kingdom again. Then builded he two Cities,
the one he called Nicea, the other after the name of his horse he called
Bucephala.

After that, he conquered by force the Adre^ies, the Strathenes, Alexander^
conquests in Inde.
the Passides, and the Gangarites, and slew all their armies. When he came to
the Enfyts, where his ennemies awaited his coming with two hundred thousand
horsemen, all his whole army being wearied as well with the number of their
victories, as with their continual travels and labors, with weping besought
him at length to make an end of his wars, and remember to return into his
own country again, having regard to the years of his souldioures, which were
(...) able to live so long as while they might return home. One showed his
graye head, another his wounds, another his lean carkase wytheced with age,
another his body full of skarres and maimes.

Saying that they alone were the men that had endured out the continual
wars of two kings, Phillip and Alexander. Wherefore they besoughte him, yet
at length to restore that few that were left, to the graves of their
forefathers, who now fainted, not for want of heart, or for want of good
will, but for want of years. And if he would not regard his souldioures, yet
have a respect to himself, and wearye not his good fortune with taking to
much upon her. Being moved with these just petitions, as it were to wind up
his victories withal, he caused his camp to be furnished more royally then it
was wont to be through the costlinesse whereof he might both put his enemies
in terror, and alfo leave somewhat for them that should come after him to talk
of* His souldioures never did work in all these li^es with better wills.
Therefore when they had ^laine their ennemies, they retired into them again
with great recompense. Alexander went from thence to the river Acesine, and by
the same he sailed to the Ocean, there he took to mercy the Gessones and
Asybanes which w^ fovnded by Hercules.

From thence be sailed to the Ambres and Sycambres, which met him with four
skore thousand footmen, and threskore thousand horsemen, when he had gotten
the upper Alexander (...)* p^aril and go^ fort^e.
hand of them, he led his host against their city, y^ which he finding
destitute of defendants, as he looked from ye wall, the which he first of his men
had skaled up unto, he lept into the plain of the city without any of his guard
about him. When his enemies saw him there alone, they ran at him on all sides
with a great shout and noise, endeavoring them selves if they could, to finish
the wars of y^ whole world in one man's death, and to be revenged upon him
for so many nations. Alexander on the contrary part as manfully withstode them,
and being but one man alone, fought against so many thousands. It is not
almost to be spoken, ye neither the multitude of his ennemies, nor the force
and abundance of their weapons, nor their confused noise as they assailed
him, could make him afraid, and that being but one a^e, he should beat down and
put to flighte so many thousands. But when he perceived himself to be oppressed
with the multitude, he withdrue himself to a block that stood by the wall, by
help whereof standing in sauegarde, he held the^ all tack so long, until his
friends knowing in what peril he stood, leped down unto him. Of the which many
were slain, and the battle ^ong in dout, until the time y^ all his army having
overthrown the walls came to his reskue. In y^ conflict being stricken with an
arrow under the right pappe, when he had bled so sore that he could not stand
for feblenesse, he kneled on his kne, and never left fighting until he had
slain him of whom he was wounded. The heling of the wound was greuouser then
the wound it self. There Alexander sends his host to Babylon.
fore when at the length contrary to all hope and expectation, he had recovered
his health, he sent Polyperchon with his host to Babylon, and he himself with a
noumber of the most picked and chosen soldiers, took shippinge and skoured the
Ocean seas, keeping still upon the coast. When he Alexander is rep^lsed with
^enymous Da^tes.
came at the city of king Ambiger, the townsmen hearing that he could not be
ouercom by no iro^, dipped their shafts in poison, and so with double wound of
death repulsed the enemy from their walls, and ^lue very many of them. When as
among many others Ptolomy was deadlye wounded, and was like to have died out of
hand, an herb was showed to the king in his sleep, that should remedy the
poison. The which being given him in drink, he was forthwith delivered from
thimminent danger, and the most part of his army was by this means preserved.
Afterward when he had won the town by force, he returned into his ships, and
made an offering to ye Ocean, making supplication for safe return into his
country. And as though he had driven his chariot about the mark, and
established the bounds of his Empire, as far as there was any land habitable,
or as far as the sea was able to be sailed, with prosperous wind he entered
into the mouth of the river Indus. There is a momument of his co^ quests, he
builded the city Barce, and set up alters, leuing one of his friends for
lieuetenant of the Indians y^ inhabit the sea coast. From thence intendinge to
journey by land, when he heard say that in his way were dry places, he
Alexanders return unto Bab^on and his doings there.
commanded pits and pondes to be made in places convenient as he should go,
wherein finding great plenty of sweet water, he returned to Babylon. There many
of the nations that he had subdued, accused their rulers, the which Alexander
without respect of friendship or favor, caused to be put to death in the
presence of the ambassadors. After this he took to wife Satir the daughter of
king Darius. Furthermore he chose out the noblest and beutifullest ladies and
gentlewomen of al nations, and gave the to his noble men in marriage: the which
he did to thentent that by a common fact, his own offense should seem the
lighter. Then summoned he his army to a sermon, wherein he promised to pay al
their dets of his own purss, to thentent they might carye home clear their
boties and rewards. This liberality was notable not only for the great sum, but
also in consideration of the fre giving thereof. And it was as tha^kfully
received of the creditors as of the dettors, because it was as hard a matter
for the one to have demanded it, as for the other to have paid it. Three and
twenty thousand talents were bestowed here abouts. Furthermore he cashed the
old soldiers and supplied their roumes with young beginners. But such as were
retained still, grudging at the dismissing of the old soldiers, required to be
cashed the^ selves also, biddinge Alexanders lyber^ (...) his soldiers
him pay the^ their wages and not to tell them of their years for seeing they were
chosen into warfare together, they thought it but right and duty to be
discharged together. And now they came not to him with entretance and humble
suit, as by the way of petition, but with fasing and bracinge. Bidding him
finish his wars alone with his father Hammo^, and then go set light by his
souldioures. On the contrary part, sometime he chastised them, sometime he
admonyshed them with gentle words, that they should not obfuscate and darken
their famous conquests and acts of cheualry, with rebellion at the latter end.

At the length when he saw his words could nothing auail he rose out of his
chair unarmed as he was, and stepte into The ^outnes of Alexander.
them, being all armed, to fetch out thauthors of that rebellion. And no man
durst be so bold as ons to let him of his purpose, but that he pulled out
xiii. of them, and led the^ to execution with his own hands. So great a
pacyence in suffering death did the fear of a king cast upon them, or else the
customable enuringe in the feats of war, gave him boldness to put them to
execution. Then called he the Per sians aside, and spoke to them, praising
their continual faith and obedience, both to him and to their kings in times
past, rehersing his benefits toward them, how he never accounted them as
vanquished but as partakers of his victory, and to be short how he had passed
into their laws and customs, and not they into the customs of his country,
and that by joining affinitye and aliaunce he had made the conquerors and the
conquered a like. And now he said he would betake the custody of his own
person, not only to the Macedones but also unto them. Whereupon he chose a
thousand of their lusty young men into his guard, another sort of them he gave
armor and wepon unto, and dispersed them into his own host, to thentent they
should learn thorder of the wars of Macedone, the which thing the Macedones
took sore to heart, that the king should subrogate in their roumes, weping unto
him, desiring him to satisfy himself with punishing the^ rather then with
puttyng the^ to such reproach. By the which submission they obtained y^ axi.
M. of thold soldiers were discharged, and of his friends were dismissed because
they were old men. Polypercho^ Clytus, Gorgias, Polydamas and Antigonus.
Craterus had the charge of these that were sent away, with Commissyon to
take upon him as regent of Macedone in stead of Antipater. And Antipater was
commanded to come with a noumber of young souldioures to supplye his roume^.
They that returned home had allowance of wages as well as they that followed
still the wars.

While these things were in doing, one of his friends named Ephestion, whom
he loved entirely, first for his excel The death (...) of (...).
lent beuty when he was a boy, and secondlye for his humble obedience deceased.
For whom the king mourned a long time more then stood with his honor to do
being a king, and bestowed xii. M. talents upon a tomb for him. Giving
commandment to honor him now after his death as a God. As he was in his
way returning toward Babylon from the furthest lands that bordered upon the
Ocean, tidinges were brought him that the ambassadors of Carthage, and other
Cities of Affrik, and also of Spain, ^des of (...) and of the west.
Sicil, Fra^nce, Sardinia, and many of Italy did await for his coming at
Babylon. So great a terror had the fame of his name stricken into the hearts of
all the world, that all nations as if they had determined to make him and
acknowledge him for their sovereign Lord and king, were glad to humble them
selves unto him. For this cause therefore as he was making speed to Babylon, as
it were to hold a parliament of the whole world. One of the wisemen told him
that it was not good for him to come there, affirming that it was the place
where he should die. There upon he left Babylon and went to the city Byrse
beyond the river Euphrates which ere whiles lay desolate. There the Philosopher
Anaxarchus through his persuasion compelled him to despise the foresayinges of
the wisemen as false and uncertain, forasmuch as if they were determined by
desteny, men were not priuye to them, or if they were ordained by the law of
nature, it was not possible for a man to break them or avoid them Returninge
therefore to Babylon, when he had spent many days in idleness, the festing and
banketting which he had left of now for a good while, he set up fresh again,
and being altogether given to mirth and pastime, spending day and night in
reuelling and making chere, even immediately upon a banquet, the Physician
Thassalus made a rere supper, and desired the king and alexander is poisoned.
his Lords unto it. Alexander took a cup in his hand, hand, and as he was
in the mids of his draughte, suddenly he gave a great sighe as though he
had been stricken to the heart with a dagger, and being carried from the
banquet half dead, he was tormented with so intolerable pain, that he
desired to have a sword to rid him self out of it wythall, and when any
man touched him, it was as grievous to him as if they had wounded him. His
friends caused it to be noised, that his excessive drunkenness was the cause
of his disease. But in very deed it was the treason of them selves, the
slander whereof was by the power of them that succeeded suppressed.

The authoure of this treason was Antipater, who seeing The author of alexanders
death.
his most entier dear friends murdered, his son in law Alexander of
Lyncestes put to death, and himself after his noble enterprises atcheued in
Greece, not so much accepted for his labor as had in disdain, and there unto
tickled with diverse complaints made by his mother Olympias besides all the
which considering what straight justice and cruel execution was lately before,
done upon the lieuetenaunts of sundry countries, could gather no less by the
circumstauns of the premises, but that he himself also was sent for out of
Macedone, not to attend upon him in his wars, but to be punished as other
had been. Therefore to the intent to prevent the kings purpose, he sent his
son Cassander privily with poison, the which Cassander with Phillip and Iolla
his brothers, were wont to serve the king at his Table. And the force of the
poysonne was so great that there was neither brass, iron nor earthen vessel
that was able to hold it, nor it could not be carried any otherwise then in
the hofe a horse: laying strait charge upon his son that he should not
trust any man saving Thessalus and his brothers.

For this cause therefore was the bankette prepared and dressed in the house of
(...) Philip and (...) which were wont to be the kings cup bearers and his
tasters, had the poison in cold water, the which water they tasted and cast
it upon the drink. The fourth day after Alexander perceiving there was no
way with him but death, The (...).
said he acknowledged the desteny of the house of his (...). For the Aeacides
for the most part dyed (...) they came to xxx. years of age. Then he
appeased his sou^ dioures which began to make an uproar, mistrusting the king
to be killed by treason, and being borne up into the highest and openest place
that could be found in all the city^, and there laid for the upon a couch, he
admitted them all to his presence, and put forth his right hand to them to
kiss as they stood wepinge about him. And whereas all (...) of (...) of (...)*
the company wept to behold him in that case, he not only shed forth never a
tear, but also was without any kind of token ofsorowe or (...): in so much
that he comforted certain of them that made great sorrow and lamentation for
the matter. Unto some he gave commandments and errands to do to their
friends from him. So that like as his heart was invincible toward the enemy, so
was it invincible also against death. When he had sent away his
souldioures, he demanded of his friends as they stood about him, whether they
thought they should find the like king again or no. Every man holding his
peace, he said, that as he knew not that, so he perfectly knew and prophesied,
yea and in manner saw it presently before his eyes, how much blood Macedone
should spend in that quarrel, and with how great slaughter and occision of
men, it should do obsequies for him after his departure. At the last he willed
his body to be buried in the Temple of Hammon. When his friends saw him draw
on, they asked who should be heir of his Empire. He answered the worthiest.
So great was the courage of his heart, that whereas he left behind him his
son Hercules, his brother Arideus, and his wife Roxanes great with child,
for gettinge all (...) and aliaunce, he denounced him to be his heir, that
was worthyest. As though it had not been lawful for any man to succeade a
valiant manne then as valiaunte a man as he, or to leave the richesse of so
great a kingdom to any other, then to such as were tried men with this word,
as though he had blown a trompet among his noble men, or sown the sede of
mischief and delate, every one became enemy to other in his heart, and with
colorable flattery privily sought the good wills and favor of the men of war.
The vi. day when his speech was gone, he took a ringe of his finger, and
delivered it to Perdicas, the which thing appeased the dissension of his
friends all ready beginning to bud. For allbeit he were not pronounced heir by
word by mouth, yet notwithstanding it seemed it was his mind he should be his
heir. Alexander deceased of the age of xxxiii. years and one monthe, a man
endued with stoutnesse of courage above the power of man's frail nature. The
same night that his mother Olympias conceived him, she dreamed she had to do
with a great dragon, neither was she deceived of God in her dream, for The
tolens that (...) at (...) death*
out of all dout, she bare in her womb a piece of work exceeding the
frailnesse of man's nature. And although she were renowned both for the
house of Aeacus from whence by ancient descent of so many C. years, ^he was
lineallye ^xtract, and also because her father, her brother, her husband and
all her ancestors and progenitoures were kings, yet was she in none of all
those respects so much to be esteemed as for her own son. Many wondrous
foretokens of his greatness appeared even at his birth. For the same day that
he was borne, two Egles stood all day upon the top of his fathers house,
representing a token of his dowl Empire of Europe and Asia. And the very same
day also his father had tid^nges brought him of two victories, the one of a
battle against the Illyrians, the other of the gaming at the mountain
Olympus, unto the which he had sent his chariots. The which was a token that
the child should be conqueror of all countries. Duringe his childehode he
^lexanders (...) and prosperity.
was brought up straightly to his learning when he grew toward man's estate,
he increased in knowledge under Aristotle the (...) teacher of al Philosophers.
A^terward when he had taken the kingdom upon him, he proclaimed himself king
of all lands and of the whole world, and so behaved himself among his
soldiers, that if he (...) with them, there was no enemy could make them
afraid although they had bean naked them selves. Therefore he never encountered
with any enemy, but he overcame him, he never besieged city but he wan it, nor
never entered any country but he subdued it. And yet at the last he was
overcome, not by force of the enemy, but by the (...) treason of his own
subjects.

The thirtenthe Book.
ALexander y^ great being dispatched out of the way in the very flower of The
great (...) e that was for the death of (...).
his age and of his conquests, al men were stricken in so heavy dumpes, and in
especially all the city of Babylon. But the nations whom he had subdued could
not give credit to the report: because that as they believed him to be
invincible, so also they thought him to be immortal: calling to remembrance
how often he had been delivered from present death, and how oftentimes when he
had lost his weapon, suddenly he showed himself among his men, not only safe
and sound, but also gettinge the upper hand. But when they were throughlye
persuaded that he was dead in deed, all the barbarous nations whom he had
conquered a little before, mourned for him, not as for an enemy, but as for a
father. Moreover the mother of Darius, whom after the loss of her son,
being her self fallen from the stage of so high estate, it repented not of
her life unto that day, for the great clemency and favor that she found in
^er conqueror, when she hard of Alexa^ders death did rid herself out of this
life: not because she set more by her ennemy then by her own son, but
because she had found the natural love of a son in him, whom she took for
her enemy.

On the other part the Macedones clean contrary mour The vngrati tude of the
^dones.
ned not for him as for their countryman, or as for a king of such a majesty,
but reioysed as if they had lost an enemy, cursing his ouergreat seueritye and
continual ieoperdies that he put them unto by his wars. Besides this, the
princes gaped for the pertition of his kingdoms and provinces, and the common
souldioures for his treasures, and for a great mass of gold as a booty falling
into their mouths unhoped for: the one thinking to succeed him in his Empire,
the other to possess his richesse and moueables. There were in the tresory an
hundred thousand talentes, besides the yearly custom and tribute which
amounted to CCC. thousand. But it was not for nothing that the noble men of
Alexander looked for the kingdom. For they were every The comme^dation of alex
anders noble ^en.
one of them of that prowess, representing such a majesty therwithall, that
ye would have thought them to have been kings euerychone. For they were all
men of such beauty and favor so tall and goodly personages, and of so great
strength and wisdom, that he that had not known them, would not have thought
they had been all of one country, but rather chosen out of all the whole
world. And surely neither Macedone, nor any other country before that time, did
flourish with such a number of noble m^n, whom first of all Philip, and
afterward Alexander with such aduisement selected and picked out, that they
seemed not so much to have been chosen to attend upon him, and serve him in
the wars, as to succeed in him in his kingdom. Who can then meruel that the
world was subdued by such men of service? seeing the army of Macedone was
governed by so many, not Captains but kings, who never should have found
their matches, if they had not fallen at contention between them selves.

And Macedone should have had many Alexanders for one, if fortune upon envy of
their own puissaunce, had not armed them one to destroy another. But after the
time that Alexander was dead, they assembled together into one place, neither
altogether merry nor out of fear one of another. No less mistrustinge the men
of war, whose liberty was now more large and favor uncertain.

And among them selves the equalitye increased their The (...) tion among^
alexanders captains for the goue^ment of the Empire.
discord, no man so far exceeding the rest of his peers, that any of them
would vouchsafe to submit himself unto him. Therefore they assembled in the
palace all in harness, to set an order and stay in matters for the time.
Perdicas thought it good to abide the deliverance of Roxanes, the which had
now gone viii. months with child by Alexander, and would be ready shortly to
lie down, and if she brought forth a son, to substitute him in his fathers
stead.

Meleager replying thereunto said, it was not meet to delay their
determination upon her doubtful deliverance, nor to tarry for a king that was
unborn, since they might take such as were borne all ready.

For if they desired to have a child to their king, there was at Pergamus
Alexanders son by Arsine called Hercules: or if they had rather have a young
man, there was in the camp arideus the brother and companion of Alexander, one
that was well-beloved of all men, not only for his own sake, but also for his
father king Philippes sake. But as for Ro^nes, for as much as she was a
Persian, it was not lawful for the Macedones to take them kings of their
blood whose Empire they had subverted, the which thing he said was no part of
Alexanders thought: for he made no mention at all thereof at his death.
Ptolomy refused to have arideus made king, not only for his mothers baseness,
(for he was begotten of a concubine named Laryssa,) but also for his continual
sickness, which was greater then could well be abiden in that case: least he
should bear the name, and another all the sway.

Wherefore it were better for them to choose certain of those which for their
prowess and virtues were next unto the king, to rule the provinces and to take
charge of y^ wars, rather then under the color of a king, to be at the
commandment of unworthy persons. At length by the consent of them all, the
sentence of Perdicas took place. It was thought good to tarry for the
deliverance of Roxanes, and if she had a manchilde, it was determined that
Leonatus, Perdicas, Craterus, and ^tipater should be protectours, and forth with
^rideus is proclaimed king in a (...).
the rest took their oath to be obedient to those protectors. When the horsemen
had done the like, the fotemen disdaining that they were made preuy to no part
of their doings, proclaimed Arideus the brother of Alexander king, and chose
him a guard of his own kindred, giving him the name of his father king Phillip.
The which things when they were told to the horsemen, they sent to appease
their wrath two ambassadoures of the noble men Attalus and Melenger: who seking
pre-eminence by flatteringe of the comminalty, condescended to the souldioures,
by and by the tumulte increased, when it ones had gotten a head and counsel.

Then of purpose to destroy the men of arms, they armed them selves and rushed
into the palace. The me^ of arms understanding what peril they stood in,
fearfully conveyed The first dis sencion among Alexanders successors.
them selves out of the city, and pitched their camp in the fields, whereat
the fotemen also began to be dismayed. Neither did the hatred of the noble men
cease. Attalus sent to kill Perdicas captain of the adverse part. Unto whom
being armed, when they that were sent to strike him durst not approach,
although of his own courage he provoked them thereunto, Perdicas was of such
boldness, that of his The stouines of P^dicas.
own free will he went to the fotemen, and assembling the^ together, laid to
their charge what a heinous matter they attempted, willing them to have
respect against whom they took wepon in hand, alledginge that they were not
Persians but Macedones, nor enemies but their own cou^trymen, yea and many of
them their kinsmen, or at least wise for the most part their companions in
arms, and partakers of their perils. Wherefore they should make a goodly show
to their ennemies, that they might rejoice to see them kill one another, by
whose puissaunce they lamented them selves to be overcome, and to see them do
sacrifice with their own blud to the ghostes of them that they had slain. When
Perdicas had with his singular eloquence debated these The (...).
matters to the full, he moved the footmen in such wise, that by a common
consent he was chosen captain general of them all. Then the horsemen also
being brought to atonement, consented to take Arideus for king, reserving a
part of the kingdom for the son of Alexander if any should be borne. This did
they, layinge the body of Alerander amongst them, to thentent that his majesty
might be as a witness of their. decrees and ordinances. These things Thor^r
^ken for the government of (...).
being thus set at a stay, Antipater was made regent of Ma cedone and Greece.
Craterus was appointed to be high tresurer. The charge of the camp, the
host, and matters of warfare were committed to Meleager and Perdicas, and
Arideus himself was assigned to convey Alexanders corse to the temple of
Hammon. Then Perdicas being sore displeased with the authors of the sedition,
suddenly without knowledge of his fellow, commanded the next day a search
should be made in the camp for the death of the king.

When he had set all the host in armor in the field by the consent of them
all, he called certain seditious persons out of every band, and caused
them priuelye to be put to death. The which done, he returned again, and
divided the provinces among the princes, to the intent he might send out of
the way, such as were his back friends, and al so make them all to think,
that it was through his goodness that they obtained such authority. First of
all Egypt The (...) of the (...) c^s.
with a part of Affricke and Arabie fell by lot unto Ptolomy, whom Alexander
for his manhood and valia^tnesse had promoted from a rascal souldioure.

And to pntte him in his office, was appointed Cleomenes which builded
Alexandria. The next province adioyninge thereunto which was Syria, was
committed to Laomedo^ of Mytilene, Phylotas and his son took Cylicia and
Sclauonie. Over the greater Media was made ruler Acr^pat, over the lesser,
Alcet the brother of Perdicas. The country of Susa nie was assigned to Syno,
and the greater Phrygia unto Antigonus the son of Philip, Learchus chanced by
lot upon Lycia and Pamphylia, Cassander upon Caria, and Menan der upon Lydia.
Unto Leonatus happened the lesser Phri gia, unto Lysymachus, Thrace, and the
countries bordering upon y^ sea of Pontus. Cappadocia with Paphlagonia were
given unto Emnenes. The marshalship of the camp fortuned to Seleuchus the
son of Antiochus. Cassander the son of Antipater was made captain of the
kings guard. In the further Bactria and in the countries of Indie, the former
lieuetenants were commanded to keep their offices still, saving that Taxilles
had the governance of all y^ lays between the two rivers of Hydaspes and
Indus. And that Phyton the son of Agenar was sent to have the rule of the new
towns that were builded in Indie. Ariarches took upon him the government of
the Parapomenians, people that inhabit the uttermost parts of the mountain
Cancasus. Statener took to govern the Dracans and Argeans, and Amyntas the
Bactrians, Scythens obtained the Sogd^a^s Nicanor the Parthians, Phillip the
Hyrcanians, Phrataphernes the Armenians, Neoptolemus the Persians, Pe^cestes
the Babylonians, Arthius the Pelasgians, and Archesilaus Mesapotamia. This
pertition like as it chanced to every one of them as his fatal charge: so was
it unto ma nigh of them the ground and foundation of their encreasement and
prosperity. For ere it was any long time after, as though they had divided
kingdoms and not lieuetenauntships, so being made kings of lieuetenau^ts, they
not only got great richesse to them selves, but also left them to their
posterity. While these things were a doing in the Ea^te, the Atheniens and the
Aetolians renewed y^ wars in Greece withal the power they were able to make,
which The war^ of the (...) against a lexanders s^ cessours.
they had all ready begone while Alexander was alive. The occasion of this war,
was because that Alexander at his return from Inde, wrote his letters into
Greece, by the which all such as were banished out of their native coun tries,
of what city so ever they were, (such as were attainted of murder only
excepted) were restored to their countries again. The which being openly red
in the presens of all Greece at the mart of Olympus, caused much business:
because that diverse of them were banished, not by order of law, but through
discord and partaking of the princes, fearing y^ if they should be revoked
again, they might bear grea ter sway and authority in the commonwealth the^
they. Whereupon even then many cities murmured, saying opely that it were mete to
set them selves at liberty by the sword. But the chief doers and ringleaders in
this quarrel were the Atheniens and the actolians. Whereof as soon as alexander
had knowledge, he enjoined his confederates to find him a thousand galleys to
make war withal in the West, pur posing by the way to make a rhode against
athens, and to destroy it utterly. The atheniens therefore having raised an
army of thirty thousand soldiers and two hundred ships, made war with
Antipater, to whom the gouernmente of Greece fell by lot, whom for as much as he
durst not give them battle in the field, but kept himself within the walls of
the city Hiraclea they besieged. The very same time De The duty o^ a true
subject to his native country in (...).
mosthenes the orator of athens, who being before banished his country for his
offense in taking a bribe of Harpa lus that fled for fear of alexanders
crueltye, because he had moved the city to war against him, by chance lived
as an outlaw at Megara: hearing that the atheniens had sent Hyperides of
ambassade to move the Pelopomiesians to take their part in these wars,
followed him and with his eloquens persuaded Sycion, argos and Corinthe, and all
the other cities to join them selves with the atheniens.

For the which his doing the Atheniens sent a ship for him, and called him home
out of exile.

In the mean season at the siege of Antipater, Leosthenes captain of the
Atheniens was slain with a Darte thrown at him from the wall as he passed by.
The which thing gave such encouragemente to Antipater, that he burste open
his barriers, and adventure into the Trenche of his enemies. Nevertheless he
was fain to send his messengers to Leonatus for succor. The Atheniens hearing
Leonatus is (...) by the (...).
that he was coming toward them with an host, went to meet him in order of
battle, where among the horsemen, he received so sore a wound that he died
for thwyth. Antipater allbeit he saw his reskowes put to flyghte, yet
notwithstanding he was glad that Leonatus was dead. For by means thereof he
was both rid of a back friend, and also increased in strength by attaininge
of his host. Therefore as soon as he had received his army, being now able to
match with his ennemies in plain field, they raised their siege and he
departed into Macedone. The Grekishe host also having driven the enemy out
of the borders The end of the athenien wars.
of Greece, went home every man to his own city. In the mean while Perdicas
making war against the innocent Ariarathes king of Cappadocia, and gettinge
the The wilful destruction of the Cappaddcians.
upper hand in the field, won nothing thereby but wounds and pearils. For his
enemies retiring out of the battle into the city, slew their wives and
children, and set their houses, and all that ever they had on fire.

Moreover when they had thrown there into all their richesse, they cast them
selves also hedlong after them, to He that hunteth ii. hares at ones catches
none of both.
the intent their enemy having gotten the victory, should enjoy nothing of
theirs, more then the beholding of y^ fire. After this, to thentent that to
thestablishment of his strength, he might get himself thautority of a king, he
intended to mary Cleopatra the sister of great Alexander, and some time the
wife of the other Alexander, not without the con sent of her mother Olympias.
But first of al he coueted to surprise antipater under pretense of ioyninge
aliaunce with him. And therefore he pretended to desire his Daughter in marriage,
to thentent he might the more easly obtain a sup plement of young soldiers out
of Macedone. But by means of antipater, (who smelled out his subteltye,)
while he went about two wives at ones, it came to pass that he attained none
of both.

After this there arose war between antigonus and perdicas. Antigonus was
aided by Craterus and Antipater, who taking The ^yrstwar (...) alexand^
successo^s.
a truce with the Atheniens, made polyperchon regent of Macedone and Greece.
Perdicas perceiving that the world went not on his side, sent for arideus and
great Alexanders son (of both whom the charge was unto him committed,) into
Cappadocia, to have their advise as concerning the order of the wars. Some
were of opinion to remove the war into Macedone, to the very welspring and
head of the kingdom, forasmuch as there was Olymplas Aleranders mother,
which should be no small stay on their side, and also for the favor of the
co^minalty in remembrance of Philip and Alexander. But it was thought most for
the common profit to begin at Egypt, least when they were gone into Mace done,
ptolomy might invade Asia. Emnenes besides the prouin ces he had before, had
delivered unto him, paphlagonia, Caria, Lycia and Phrygia, there he was
commanded to abide the coming of Craterus and Antipater, and to assiste him,
were appointed alcetas the brother of perdicas and Neoptolemus with their
armies. Clytus was made chief admiral of the Fleet Cilicia was taken from
phylotas, and given to phyloxenus and perdicas himself with a great army went
toward Egypt. So Macedone through the discord of the captains dividing them
selves in two parts, set her weapons against her own bowels, tourninge the
habilimentes of war that were appointed for the foraine enemy, to the
slaughter of her own inhabitaunts, after the manner of madmen, entendinge to
cut and mangle the hands and members of her own body.

But P^lomy through his industry and policy got great richesse in Egipte. For
by his singular modestye he both The Commendation of Ptolomy king of Egypt.
wan the hearts of the Egiptians to him, and by his frendlinesse and gentle
behauioure, he compassed the good ^ils of the kings that were his neighbors
and dwelt about him. Furthermore he also enlarged the bounds of his kingdom by
conquering the city Cyrene, by means whereof he was now become a prince of
such power, that he had not so much cause to be afraid of his enemies, as
his enem^es had cause to be a fraid of him. This city Cyrene was builded by
Aristeus, who for because he was tongue tied was The building of Eyrene in
(...).
surnamed Battus. This man's father called Cyrenus, king of the Island There,
when as moved with shame and sorrow that his son being man grown, could not
speak, he came to the Oracle at Delphos to make intercession to God for his
son, he received an answer, whereby his sone Battus was commanded to go into
Affricke, and build the City Cyrene, there to receive the use of speech.

Now because that the answer seemed like a mockerye, by reason of the li^enesse
of the Isle Theramene, out of the which inhabiters were commanded to repair
into Affricke there to build a city in a country so far of, the matter was
left of. Afterward in process of time, for their stubbornness there fell
such a Pestilence among them, that they were compelled to obey the
commandment of the God, whether they would or no, and there was so small and
slender a noumber of them, that they were (...) able to furnishe a ship.

When they came into Affricke, both for the pleasantness of the place, and
for the abundance of water springs that there were, they expulsed the
inhabiters of the mountain Cyra, and planted them selves in the same place:
There their captain Battus had his tongue stringes losed, and began to speak.
The which thing encouraged their hearts to build up the rest of the city, in
as much as the God had all ready performed part of his promises. Therefore when
they had pitched their tents, they solowed the opinion of an old fable. How
that Cyrene a maid of excellent (...) was ravished by Appollo in the mountain
Pelius in (...) saly, and carried from thence to the top of the mou^tain*
Whereas the God begather with child, and when she had gone her time, she was
delivered of iiii. sons, Nomius, Aristeus, (...), and Ageus. And that her
father (...) king of Thessaly, sent out men to seek her, who being allured with
the plesantnesse of the place, abode still with the maid in that country. Of
these children when they came to man's estate, three returned into Thessaly,
and enjoyed the graundfathers kingdom. Aristeus had a large dominion in
Arcadie, and first taught men the use of Bees and honey, of milk and cream,
and first found out y^ times of the year* when the son is at the highest in
Summer, and likewise at the lowest in Winter, together with the courses of the
other stars. Upon which report, Battus learning the name of the maiden by
the Oracles, builded the city Cyrene. Ptolomye therefore being en^ased in
strength by the power of this City, prepared for the war against Perdicas
coming.

But the hatred that Perdicas had gotten through his passinge pride and
stateliness, did him more harm then (...) of princes.
the puissaunce of his enemies. For his own companions hated him so sore, that
they forsook him and fled by heaps with Antipater. Neoptolemus also being left
to aid and assist Emnenes, purposed not only to turn unto the contrary part,
but also to betray the whole host of his co^plices. The which pretense when
Emnenes had espied, he had none other shift but to try the matter by dint of
sword against the traitoure. Neoptolemus being vanquished ^ed to Antipater and
Polyperchon perswadinge with them, that if they would keep on their iournye
without stayinge, they might fall upon Emnenes ere he were ware, being now in
joy and gladness for his late victory, and taking no care by reason they had
put him to flight.

But his purpose was unknown to (...). Therefore the treason turned upon the
traitoures heads. For they which (...) and Neoptolemus are stain by (...).
thought to have surprised him unawares, were met wythall them selves when
they looked least for any such thing, being wearied with travel, and
watchynge all the night. In that encounter polypercbon was slain. Neoptolemus
also fightinge hand to hand, with Emnenes a great while together, after many
wounds given and received, was in the end overcome and slain. emnenes
therefore gettinge the upper hand in two pitched fields together, vpheld and
maintained his side for a while, which was not a little empaired by the
reuoltinge of his adherentes. Nevertheless at the last, when perdicas was ones
slain, both he and phyton, and Illirius, and ale^tas the brother of perdicas,
were proclaimed traitoures by the host of their enemies, and Antigonus was
appointed to make war against them.

The. xiiii. Book.
ENmnenes when he understood y^ (...) dicas was slain, hiself proclaimed trai
tor in Macedone, and that Antigonus (...) doing of (...).
was appointed to make war against him, declared the matter of his own accord
to his souldioures, least the sudden news of it might cause them to take the
matter worse then it was in deed, or the strangeness thereof discourage their
hearts. And also to the intent to try whether their minds were bent any thing
against him or no, ente^ding to take council by thaduise of them all.
Nevertheless boldly protesting among them, that if any man's heart failed
him, he should have license to depart, with the which word he allured them all
to favor his procedings that they all bad him be of good comfort, promisinge
to repeal the decrees of the Macedones by force of arms. Then removed he with
his host into Actolia, where he raised a tax The (...) of (...) name.
of the cities, and such as refused to bestow it upon him, he sacked like an
ennemy. From thence he went to Sardis to Cleopatra the sister of great
Alexander, to the intent that by her words the captains and chief officers
might be the more strengthened to stand in his quarrel. For he was of that
opinion, that the majesty and fortune of the kingdom should turn unto that
side that the sister of Alexander held with. So much reverence was attributed
to the greatness of Alexander, that men sought for the favor of his sacred
and renowned name, even by the fotesteppes of women.

When he was returned into his tente, there were letters Treason wisely (...) and
with standed.
found strawed through all the camp, wherein were promised great rewards to
him that would bring Emnenes ^ed unto Antigonus. Emnenes having knowledge
hereof, sommoned his soldiers before him, and first of all gave them thanks
that there were none of them found, that preferred the hope of a bloody reward
before his faithful oath and fidelity. Afterward he (...) up the matter, saying
that those letters were (...) by himself, to try his soldiers minds withal,
and ^at it lay in all their hands to save him or cast him a way, never
thelesse y^ nether antigouus, nor any other of the captains, coueted to get the
vpperha^d in such sort, as thereby to give wicked ensample to others to do the
like by him. By this deed he both strengthened the wavering minds of h^s
soldiers for the present time, and provided before hand that if the like
chance should happen hereafter, his souldioures should not think them
selves to be corrupted by their enemy, but rather tried what they would do
by their captain. Every man theresore strove who might be most for his
security and safegarde. In the mean season came antigonus against them with
his boste, and reastinge himself in his camp for that night brought forth
his men in battle raye the next morninge. Neither did Em^eties detract the
encounter, who being put Emnenes is put to flight, and beseged by Antigonus
to the worfe, fled into a certain strong hold. Where perceiving that he was
driven to abide thee adventure of the siege, he. dismissed the greater part of
his army, for doubt least by the consent of such a multitude he might be
betrayed to his enemy, or elsse be pestered with the noumber of men, and so
not be able to hold out the siege. Then sent he ambassadoures humbly to
Antipater: who only seemed of power able to match Antigonus. Antigonus hearing
that Antipater had sent to reskue Emnenes, brake up his siege and went his way.

Thus was Emnenes delivered from fear of death for a while, but it was not
for him to hope to continue long in safetye, seeing he had sent away his men
of war. Therefore Emnenes windeth hy^ self into ^auor with the argiraspides.
when he had looked well about him, he thought it best for him, to resort to
the Argiraspides that invincible host of great Alexander glistering with the
renown of so many victories. But the argiraspides, after that Alexander was
ones gone, disdained all captains, thinckinge them selves dishonored to serve
under any other, considering under what a prince they had served so late
before.

Emnenes therefore entreated them with fair words, and spoke gently to every
of them, calling them sometimes his fellows and companions in arms, sometimes
his patrones and defendoures, other whiles his partakers of all dangerous
attemptes and enterprises in the East, and other whiles the only refuge and
stay of his life and safeguard, boastinge that they only were those, by whose
puissaunce the East was subdued, which alonely had surm^un ted the warfare of
liber pater, and the monumentes of Hercules, that by them Alexander was made
great, by them he obtained to divine honors and immortal glory, beseching
them to receive him amongst them, not so much for a captain, as for o^e of
their fellows, and that they would give him leave to be as it were one of their
body. Being upon this condition enterteined, by little and little first with
admonishing every man apart, and afterward with gentle correcting such things
as were done amiss, he usurped authority over them. Nothing could be done in
the camp without him, nothing could be attempted without his advice. At the
length when it was told him that antigonus came against him with an army, he
compelled them to put Em^s (...) vanquish^ again.
them selves in order of battle there whiles they disdained to be ruled by
their captain, by force of their ennemies they were overcome. In that battle
they lost not only all their glory and renown, won in so many battles
before, but also their wives and children, and all the goods they had gotten
in so long continued war so far from home. Emnenes thauthor of this their
loss and discomfiture, having none other comfort or refuge to fly unto, began
to en courage them when they were vanquished, affirming that they were superior
as touching their prowess and puissance: For they had slain five thousand of
their enuemies, and i^ they were minded to stick to it to the vttermooste,
they should see their ennemies be feign to sue to them for peace. As for the
losses and damage whereby they thought them selves so much undone, were but two
thousand women, and a few children and bondmen, the which they might better
recover by getting the victory, then by forsaking the victory for want of
courage: The Argyraspides made answer, they would neither attempt to run away
with the loss of their wives and bedfellowes* nor yet make war against their
own children. And with that they began to revile him, in that after so many
years, when they were returned home with their wages which they had well and
dearlye earned, and with the rewards of so many battles being at rest and
having given over the wars, he had egged them forth to a new warfare and
endless encounters, and leadinge them in manner from their houses and native
country, had deluded them with his vain promises, yea and now also after they
had lost the gains of their prosperous warfare, could not be content to suffer
them being thus vanquished, to lead the rest of their wretched old age in
quietuesse. Here upon without knowledge of their captains, they sent
messengers to antigonus forthwith desiringe restitution Thargiraspi des
conspired to betraye (...).
of their goods. He sent them word again he would restore every whit, so that
they would yield Emnenes into his hands. Emnenes hearing of this practice,
attempted with a few to eskape by flight. But being set back again, seeing no
hope of recovery, as the multitude flocked about him, he made request that he
might yet ones ere he dyed, speak unto his army.

Being willed to say his mind, when ^lence was made, The words of Emnenes to
his soldiers.
and his bonds losed* he stretched forth his hand fettered as he was, and
showed it them, saying. Behold my soldiers the apparel and ornaments of your
captain which none of his enemies has put upon him. For that were a comfort
to him. But even you your selves, you have made me of a conqueror a vanquished
person, you have made me of a captain a captive, four times within this twelve
month, you have sworn to be true to me, but I will let that pass. For it is
not mete for ^en in adversity, to vpbraid others. This only one thing I require
at your hands, that if Antigenus be so fullye bent to take my head from me, as
in whose death al his affairs and purposes should be finished, you will let me
die among you. For I am sure he cares not after what sort, or where I die, so I
be dead, neither do I pass greatly for my life, so I might be delivered from
this slanderous death. If you will grant me this request, I discharge you of
your oath, whereby you have bound your selves so often unto me. Or if ye be
ashamed to slay me your selves, then reach me a weapon, and give me leave to do
that thing for you without conscience of breaking of your oath, which you have
sworn so oftentimes to do for your captain. When he saw he could not obtain
his request, he left intreatance and fell to anger. Now the Gods (quod he) the
just revenger of perjury, look upon you, you false forsworn kaitiues, and
give such ends unto you, as you have given unto your captains. For it is not
long a go, since you polluted your selves with the blood of Perdicas,
practicing to have done the like with Antipater, yea and that that is worst of
all you oftentimes troubled even Alexander himself with your seditions and
mutinies, doing your best to have slain him, if it had been possible for him
to have died of man's hand. And now I last of all which shall be offered as a
sacrifice by you false forsworn wretches, do pray God that these curses may
light upon you, that being beggars and outlawes, you may spend all your life
time in this warfare, like banished people, never to return to your country
again, and your own weapons devour you, with the which you have consumed mo
captains of your own, then of your ennemies. This spoken, in a great rage
and anger he commanded his keners to go before him to Antigonus camp. The
army f^lowed after to betray their own captain, and he being prisoner T^ Argi^
p^des yield ^he^ solues and (...) ^o antigonus.
led as it were a triumph of him self unto the camp of his conqueror.
Delivering up into the conqueroures hands, both them selves, and all the
antesignes of king Alexander, together with the honor and renown of so many
conquestes. And for because there should want no pomp, the Elephantes also
and the suc c^urs of the East followed after. So much more glorious were these
things to Antigonus, then unto Alex ander all the conquests he atcheued, in
that where as Alexander conquered the East, Antigonus overcame them by whom the
East was conque red. Antigonus therefore dispersed those conquerours of the
world into his host, making restitution unto them of such things as he had
taken ^m them at the time of their over throw. And for because he had in times
past had familyer acquaintance and friendship with Emnenes, he would not for
shame suffer him to come in his sight, but assigned him. ii. kepers. In the
mean season, Eurydice the wife of king aride us understanding that Polyperchon
was retourninge out of (...) ^tye of her husband Arideus (...).
Greece into Macedone, and that he had set for Olympias, being thereupon stricken
with womanly malice, and abusyng y^ weakness of her husband, whose office and
authority she took upon her, wrate to Polypercbon in the kings name, that he
should deliver up the host to Cassander, as into whose hand the king had put
the whole order and government of the Empire. The like commandment she sent
also to antigonus into asia. By which benefit Cassander being bound unto her,
did every thing after her rash and vna^ uised co^ma^nde meant. Then went he into
Greece, and made war against ma ny cities, at the* destruction of which as of a
fire near at hand the spartan^s being afraid, both contrary to the aunswers of
the oracles, and contrary to (...) renown of their ancestors, distrusting their
own chiualry, enclosed (...) Lae^demonions enclose the city (...) a ^ll.
their city with a strong wall, the which ever before that time, they had been
wont to defend by force of arms, and not by strength of walls. So much were they
degenerated from their a^cestors, y^ whereas many. C. years before the prowess
of the citezens was the wall of the city, now they thought they might not live
in safety, unless they might hide their heds within walls. While these things
were a doing, the estate of Macedone was so troubled, y^ Gassander was fain to
return thither out of Greece. For when Olym pias the mother of king Alexander
the great, came out o^ Epyre into Macedone, accompanied with acacida king o^
the Molosses, and that Eurydice and arideus the king went about to prohibit her
from entering into the realm, the Macedones, whether it were for remembrance of
her husband king Phillip, or in respect of the greatness of her son
Alexander, or that they were moved at the unworthy demeanor, gathered them
selves unto Olympias, at whose commandment Eurydice and the king were both
slain, Arideu^ (...) his wi^ we^ both sl^ine.
when he had reigned. vi. years after Alexander* But Olympias her self reigned
not long. For when she pr^ceaded to make slaughter of her noble men and peers,
more like a tirant then like a Queen, she turned her favor into hatred. Such
(...) as ye me^* shall be mes^ to you (...)*
Therefore when she hard of Cassanders coming, putting distrust in the
Macedones, with Roxane her daughter in law and Hercules her nephew, she
conveyed her self into the city Pictua. She had also in her train deida^ia
the daughter of king aeacid^, and her daughter in law Thessalonice, a Lady
much set by for her father Philips sake, with many other noble men's wives, a
company more gorgious the profitable. When these things were reported to
Cassander, immediately he came in all have to Pictua, and environed the town with
a strong siege. Olympias being constrained with sword and famine, and weary of the
long continuance of the siege, yielded her self the lives of her and hers only
saved. But Cassander A (...).
assembling the people together, to ask their advise what they wo^d have don
with Olympias, privily suborned y^ parents of such as she had put to death, who
putting on mo^ ning apparel, should come and complain of her great cruelty by
whom the Macedones were so incensed, that wyth^ute respect of her former estate,
they gave sentence she should be put to death, quite forgetting that under her
son and her hushand, they had not only lived in safety and out of danger of
their neighbors, but also had gotten so great richesse, and the dominion of
the whole world. But Olimpias when she saw the armed men coming fiercely
toward An example of wonderful ^outnes in a ^oman.
her to kill her, of her own accord apparelled like a Queen, and leaninge upon
two of her gentlewomen, she went to mete them. At the which sight they that
should have killed her being astonished, for the majesty which she before time
had represented, and then openly showed, and remembering so many of their
kings, who even then after a sort appeared in her person, paused and stood
still, until such time as Cassander sent others to thrust her through. Who
neither fled back when she saw the sword, neither refused her deaths
wound, nor yet shriked out like a woman, but after the manner of the most
valiant men, auaunced her self forward to the death for the glory of her
ancient stock and progeny, so that a man might have beheld even Alexander
himself in his mothers dyinge. Furthermore when she was even geuyng up her An
example of wom^anhod
ghost, it is reported that she covered her feet with her garments, and with
the hear of her head, least they that stood about her might have seen any
uncomely sight in her body. After this, Cassander took to wife Thessalonice
the daughter of king Aride^s, and put Alexanders son with his mother in
prison in the toure of Amphipoles.

The. xv. Book.
PE^dicas and h^s brother Alceta, ^mnenes and Polypercbon with the residue A^
(...) on betw^ (...) of (...)
of the captains of the adverse part being slain, it was to be thought that
the contention among the successors of great Alexander had been clearlye
extinguished, when suddenly the conqueroures fell at variaunce among them
selves. For when that Ptolomy Cassander and Lysimachus, required to hau^ the
monye that was gotten and made of the voties and the provinces divided among
them, Antigonus denied to admit any partners of the gain and boties of that
war, the danger and brunt whereof he sustained himself alone. And to thentent
he might seem to have an honest quarrel to make war upon his fellows, he
caused it to be noysed, that he would revenge the death of O^ympias whom
Cassander had slain, and deliver his master king Alexanders son and his
mother out of amphipolis, where they were kept as prisoners. When this was
known, Ptolomy and Cassander entringe in league with Lysimachus and Seleuchus,
made great preparation for the wars both by sea and by land, Ptolomy held
Egypt with the mo^e part of affricke and Cyprus and Phenice: Cassander ruled
Macedone and Greece: antigonus had gotten asia, and part of the East: Whose
son Demetrius in the first conflict of An ex^ of magn^ty.
these wars was vanquished by Ptolomy at Calama. In the which battle the
renown of Ptolomies modesty was much greater then his victory. For he both let
go Demetrius friends, not only with their own private substans but also
honorablye rewarded, and moreover restored all Demetrius private substance and
household stuff: se^ding him word like a royal prince, that he made war,
not for desire of the gain, but for to attain honor and renoun and that it
grieved him that Antigonus when he had overcome the Captains of the adverse
part, should take to (...) are driven out of their country with inyce and
frogs.
himself alone, the reward of the victory that apertained to the^ all. while
these things were in doing, Cassander retur ning from Apollonia, chanced to
light upon the abderites, which for the excessive swarms of Frogs and myse
were fain to forsake their own native country, and seek them a new dwelling
place. Fearing therefore least they should invade Macedone, he made a covenant
with them, and received them into league to be his friends, assigning them lands
to inhabit in thvttermost borders of Macedone Afterward for fear least Hercules
the son of Alexander, Thoutragyous cruelty of Cassa^der.
who as then was going out of the. xiiii. year of his age, for good will and
favor that men bare to his father, should be called to the kingdom of
Macedone, he caused both him and his mother Barsine to be put secreatlye to
death, and their bodies to be buried in the ground, least if they should be
buried openly or according to their estate, their death might come to light.
And yet not so content, as though he had but smally trespassed, first in king
Alerander himself, secondly in Olympias his mother, and thirdlye in his son,
he also killed his other son with his mother Roxane by like treason: as
though it had not been possible to attain to the kingdom of Macedone whi
che he so sore longed for, otherwise then by fraud and treson. In the mean
time, Ptolomy encountered again with Demetrius upon the sea, and having lost
his ships, and One good turn requi^ another.
being clearly vanquished, retired into Egypt. Demetrius being provoked with
the like good turn before, set home into Egypt Leuticke Ptolomies son and
Menelaus his bro there (...) all their private goods and household stuff. And
for because it might appear that they were enflamed with desire of honor and
praise, rather then with malice and hatred, they sent presents and gifts one
to another even in the chiefest time of all their war. So much more honestly
did men in those days make war, then they do now maintain friendship.
antigonus being puffed up with pride for this victory, proclaimed himself
king and his (...) captain^ pro cla^me them selves king^
son Demetrius also. Ptolomy likewise because he would not be had in less
estimation among his subjects, was proclaimed king by his men of war.
Cassander and Lysimachus hearing thereof, took upon them the name and title of
kings also. All they abstained from usurping the honor of this name, as long
as any of the sons of their master king Alexander were alive. So great
modestye was in them, that all be it every one of them had the richesse and
power of a king, yet they could well find in their hearts to forbear the names
and titles of kings, so long as Alexander had any rightful heir a live. But
Ptolomy and Cassander and the other captains of their part, perceiving y^ whiles
each of them drue a part by himself to make war alone and laid not their
power together, each refusing to help other, as though it were but one man's
victory, and not the common use of them all, antigonus licked them up one after
another, sent letters of encouragement one to another, apoynting a time and
place of meting and enteruew, and so laid all their powers together for the
war. Where at forasmuch as Cassander could not be present himself, by reason of
the wars that he had with his neighbors, he sent Lysimachus with a great
host to the ay^ of his confederates. This Lysimachus was borne of a noble house
in Macedone, but his prowess, virtue and knighthode passed Of (...).
all nobleness of birth. The which were so planted in his person, that in
hautinesse of courage, in knowledge of Philosophy, and in strength of body, he
far excelled all them by whom the East was conquered. For when Of the
Philosopher (...) al lyst^enes vns wo^hy punishment.
Alexander the great being very fore moved to anger against Callysthenes the
Philosopher, for speaking against the adoring of him after the manner of the
Persians, had appeached the said Callysthenes of treason, and there upon
cruelly mangled him, by cuttinge of his ears, his nose and his li^pes, that
all men pitied and lamented to behold how miserablye he was handled, and
moreover carried him about with him, shut up with a dog in a cage, to the
terrible ensample of all other. Then Lysimachus who was wont ever before to
hear Callysthenes, and to receive enstructions of virtue at his hand, taking
pity and compassion to see so worthy a man punished, not for any fault, but
for vsinge his liberty in speakinge, gave him poison to rid him out of his
calamities. Wherewith Alexander was so sore agreued, that he commanded him to
be cast unto a fierce Lion. But when the Lion at the first sight of him, came
running with open mouth upon The constancy of Lysimachus.
him, Lysimachus wineding his arm in a Towell, thruste his hand into the Lions
mouth, and pulling out his tongue killed the beast. The which thing when it was
declared to the king, he thought it such a wonder, that he was appeased
toward him, and ever after set more store by him for his so great
steadfastness in virtue. Lysimachus also with a noble courage, took the
despite that the king had done to him as mekely, as if it had been done by
his In example of an obedient and faithful sub^ct.
own father. Finally putting quite out of his mind the rememberaunce of this
displeasure. Afterward in Inde as the king pursued certain of his ennemies
that were dispersed, when he had through the swiftness of his horse lost
the company of all his guard. This Lysimachus alone ran foot by foot with
him, and kept him company by his horse side, through unmeasurable fields of
dry sand. The which thing his brother Philippe attempting before to have
done, died between the Kings hands. But as Alexander alyghted from his
horse, he wounded Lysimachus so sore in the fooreheade with the point of his
spear, that the blood could not otherwise be stopped, but that to bind up
the wound wythall, the king was fain to take the Drademe from his own head; and
set it upon his, the which was then first of all a fortunate fortoken that
Lysimachus should after aspire to the estate of a king.

And after the death of Alexander, when the provinces were divided among his
successoures, the cruellest natyons were assigned to Lysimachus, as to the
valiantest person of all others: for far did he by the consent of al men,
excede all the residue in manhood and prowess. Before the battle should be
fought between Ptolomy and his adherentes, against Ant^onus, Seleuchus
departing suddenly out of the greater Asia, became a new enemy unto antigonus.
This man's prowess also was notable and his begetting wonderful. For his
mother Laodice being married to Antiochus a noble manne among the captains Of
(...) and of his beg^inge.
of king Philip, dreamed in her sleep that she conceived, and was great with
child by apollo: and that in recom pence for lying with him, the God gave her
a King, in the stone whereof was engraued the likeness of an A^ker,
commaundinge her to give it to her son, whom she should bring forth. This
vision was wonderful, both for the ringe of the same engrauinge that was feunde
in her bed the next morning, and for the figure of the anchor which was found
in the thighe of Seleuchus being a little Babe, when he was newly borne, and
so continued and grew with him. Wherefore Laodice, when Seleucus should go with
great Alexander to the warfare against the Persians, enforming him of the
manner of his begetting, gave him the ringe. Whereas after the death of
Alexander, obtaining the Empire of the East, he builded a City, and there
consecrated the memorial of the original of the stone. For he both called the
City Antioche, after the name of his father, and also dedicated the fields
about the city to Apollo. The token of his begettinge remained also with his
posterity. For his children and childrens children had an Anchor in their thigh
as a natural mark of their lineage. He made many battles in the Eastafter The
(...).
the division of the kingdom of Macedone among the pieres of the realm.
First he took Babylon by force, then being increase din power by reason of that
victory, he conquered the Bactrians. Afterward he made an enteraunce into
Inde, which after the death of Alexander, having as it were cast of the yoke
of bondage from their necks, had slain all his lieuetenauntes. The author of
this liberty was one Sondrocotte, but after the victory he The (...) ^ebel
from the m^narchy of m^cedone.
turned this pretense of liberty into servitude. For by usurping upon him the
kingdom, he oppressed with his own tyranny, the people whom he had delivered
from foraine subjection. This man was borne of low^degree, but driven to take
the kingdom upon him, by the present aid of God: For when he had upon a time
offended Alexander with his malapertnesse, and that the king had com G^ a man
good fortune, and throwhym into the sea.
maunded him to be put to death, he saved his life by swift nesse of his fete.
After the which being very wearye, and lying fast a sleep. A Lion of marvelous
hugeness came to him as he slept* and with his tongue licked of the swet that
issued from him, and when he awaked went gentlye away. B^ing by this wonderful
foretoken first moved to h^pe of the kingdom, he gathered together ano^ber of
robbers, and stirred the Indians* to rebellyon. Afterward as he was making
preparation for the wars against* Alexanders lieuetenaunts, a wild Elephant
of marvelous bigness, offered himself to him, of his own accord, and as
though he had been tame, mekely received him upon his back* and he became a
valiant captain and a notable warryo^re. Sandrocotte having thus gotten the
kingdom, the very same time that Seleucus laid the foundation of the
greatness that he after grew unto, held all Inde* with whom Seleucus
entery^ge a league, and having set his affairs at a stay in the East, came to
the wars set against Antigonus. The armies therefore of the confederates
being assembled together, there was a field fought. In the which Antigonus
was slain* and his son Demetrius put to flyghte. But the confederates after
they had by battle dispatched their* (...) is slain.
enemies, fell together by the ears again among them selves, and for because
they could not agree in parting of (...) the (...).
the pray, they sundred them selves into two parts. Seleucus joined himself
with Demetrius, and Ptolomy with Lisimachus. Cassander being deceased, his
son Philippe succeeded him. And so new wars sprung up a fresh again in
Macedone.

The. xvi. Book.
AFter the death of Cassander and his son Philip, one immediately (...)
murder.
ensuinge the other, Thessalonice the Queen and wife of Cassander, ere it was
long time after, entreatynge for her life (even by she wynge her breasts to
move him to pitye) was crue^ly slain by her son antipater. The cause of the
murder was this, by reason that after the death of her husband, when the
kingdom should be divided, she seemed to be more fa uourable to Alexander. The
which act apeared so much the more heinous in all men's eyes, by reason the
mother meant no deceipte in the matter. And yet to say the truth, there can
be no cause alleged justly, to excuse one for killing their father or their
mother. Alexander therefore upon this occasyon, entendynge to make war (...)
be^ene the children of Cas^der.
upon his brother, to revenge his mothers death, desired healpe of Demetrius.
And Demetrius was easy to entreat, in hope to invade the kingdom of Macedone.
Of whose coming Lysimachus being afraid, persuaded his son in law Ant^pater,
to fall to agreement with his brother rather then to suffer his fathers enemy to
enter into Macedone, Demetrius perceiving that a reconcilement was entreted
upon between the. ii. brethren, slew Alexander through great treson, and
inuading the kingdom of Macedone, The child is punished for the fathers
o^ence.
to the intent to excuse himself of the murder before his men of war, he called
them together. There he aledged y^ Alexander had lien in wait for him before,
and that he had not committed, but only prevented the treason. Saying it was
more reason he himself should be king, then the other, both for because of his
years he was of more discretion and experiens, and also for other
consyderations. For his father had accompanied both king Phillip and great
Alexander in all their wars, and afterward had served Alexander as a captain
in pursuing the rebels. Where as on the contrary part, Antipater the
graundfather of these yongmen, was always a more roughe gouernoure of the
kingdom, then the kings them selves. And Cassander the father of them, the
roter up of the kings house, spared neither women nor children, nor never
ceased, until he had utterly destroyed all the offspring of the kings
posteritye. The reuengement of these milcheues for because he could not execute
it upon Cassander him self, he said was transferred unto his children.
Wherefore both Phillip and Alexander (if the dead have any perseueraunce)
would not that the roters out of them and their issue, but rather the
punishers of those traitors, should enjoy the kingdom of Macedone. The people
being by this means mitigated, proclaimed him king of Macedone. Lysimachus
also being entangled (...) proclaimed king of Macedone.
with the wars of Dromychet, king of ^hrace, to y^ intent he would not be
constrained to have battle the self same time with Demetrius also, yielded to
him the other part of Macedone that fell to the lot of his son in law
Antipater, and made peace with him, Demetrius therefore being furnished with the
whole power of all Macedone, when as he was mineded to conquer Asia. Ptolomy,
Seleuchus and Lysimachus having tried by the former conflict, what a strength
concord was of, entered in league again, and joining their hastes together,
removed the wars into Europe against Demetrius, Pyrrhus king of Epyre,
hoopinge that Demetrius This same i^ he that made war (...) Romans.
might as easly and lightly forgoo Macedone, as he came by it, joined him self
with them as a fellow and companion in their war. And his hope deceived him
not. For he found the means to corrupt his army with rewards, whereby he put
him to flight and seized the kingdom of Macedone into his own hands. While
these things were a doing, The poster^y of (...) is vtt^ye ^ted ou^.
Lysimachus put his son in law Antipater to death, because he repined and
(...) that the kingdom of Macedone his* rightful inheritance was taken from
him through the falshod of his father in law. And because his daughter
eurydice took her husbands part in making like exclamatio^, he put her in
prison. And so all the house of Cassa^der, part ly by murder, and partly by
execution suffered due punishment in the behalf of great Alexander, whether it
were for working of his death, or for destroying of his issue and posterity.
Demetrius also being ouercharged with so many (...) self prisoner to (...)
hosts, whereas he might have died honorablye, chose rather to yield himself to
Seleuchus shamefully. When these wars were ended, Ptolomy with great renown
of his acts and enterprises died. He contrary to the common law of all
nations, somewhat before he fell sick, had resigned the kingdom to the
youngest of his sons, and of his so doing he rendered a reason to the people,
who favored the son no less for receiving the kingdom, then the father for
delivering of it, Among other examples of natural love and affection showed
on both parts between the father ^n example of fatherly love.
and the son* this thing wan the hearts of the comminalty to the yo^g man,
that the father after the time he had openly surrendered the kingdom unto him,
executed the office of one of the guard, and served the king as an other
private person: saying it was far more honorable for a man to be father to a
king, then to be a king him self. But discord the continual mischief among
pieres, stirred up strife between Lysimachus and Pyrrhus, a little be fore
fellows and confederates against Demetrius, Lysimachus Lightly (...) and
(...) for gone.
getting the upper hand, drove Pyrrhus out of Macedone, and took it into his
own hand. After this, he made war against Thrace, and then against the city
Heraclea, The building of Heraclea in Poathus.
y^ original, and end of which city were wonderful both of the^. For upon a time
when the Beo^ans were afflicted with a sore plage, answer was given them at
thoracle of delphos y^ they should build a city in the country of Pontus, and
dedicate it unto Hercules. Now when as for fear of the long and perilous
sailing, (desiring al to die in their own country, rather then to enterprise so
long a iourny, the matter was omitted, y^ Phocenses made war against the^. By
who^ being diverse times put to Ye worse, they ran to the oracle again for
counsel. Answsr was made them y^ the same thing y^ should remedy ^he pestilens,
should remedy y^ war. Where upon gathering a little number of men, they sailed
into Metapont and builded the city Heraclea. And forasmuch as these had been
brought thither by thordinance of god, wtin short space after they grew to
great wealth. In process of time, this city had many battles with their
neighbors, and much mischefe among the^ selves, through civil dissetio^. Among
other honorable deeds, this in especially is worthy to be remembered. At such
time as the Atheniens bare the souerainty, (...) example of (...) in alians
(...).
and having vanquished the Persians, had raised a tax both in Greece and Asia
for the maintenance of their flete, whereas all other to save the^ selves
harmless, gladly gave the^ their asking, only the Heracliens for the favor
they bare to the kings of Persia, refused to be co^tributary to y^ tax.
Malachus therefore being sent from Athens with an army, to take perforce the
thing y^ was denied, whiles he went abroad to wast and (...) y^ fields of
Heraclea, lost his ships y^ he left at rhode, with the greater part of his army,
by force of a sudden tempest y^ put them al to wrack. Therefore An (...) of
(...).
when he could not return by sea having lost his ships, nor durst return by
la^d with so slender a company, through so many savage nations, the Heracliens
thinking it more honor to use this occasion to showing ge^tlenes then to re
uengeme^t, furnished the^ with victels, and safe condited the^ home, making
account y^ the wasting oftheir country was well bestowed. if they might thereby
win their enemies to be their friends. Among many other evils they suffered also
tirannye. For when the common people upon ^ wilfulness outragiously and
importunately exacted to have all The ^ble (...)*
dettes clearly released, and the lands of the richmen par ted among them, the
matter hanging long time in question in the (...) and comm^n judgment place,
and after that of Epaminondas captain of Thebes against the comminalty, that
were grown to such a welthines through over much ease and idleness. But
having denial at both their hands, they were feign to fly for succor to
Clearche, whom they them selves had banished before. So great an ertremity
did their calamities drive them unto, that whom they had erewhile forbidden
his country, eue^ him were they feign to call again to the defense of the
same. But Glearche being by his banishmente made more A wicked (...) tor.
wicked then he was before, and taking the dissension of his country men, as a
mete accasion for him to usurp and make himself king, first of all commoned
priuelye with Mythridates the enemy of his Citezens, and entringe in league
with him, compounded that when he were called again into his country, he
should betray the city to him, and he to be made chief ruler of it for his
labor Yet afterward the treason that he had purposed against his country,
he turned upon Mythridates him self. For when he was returned out of erile,
to be as an indifferent judge for the determination of civil controversies, the
same time that he had appointed to betray the town unto Mythridates, he took
him and his ^rendes, and for a great sum of money let him go again. And like
as toward him he made him self, of a friend a sudden enemy, even so of a
defendour of thestate of the senate he suddenly became a protector of the
comminalty, and against the authors of his power and pre-eminence, by whom he
had been revoked into his country, by whom he had been placed in the toure of
his royalty, he not only incens^d the commons, but also exercised all kind of
most unspeakable tyranny and crueltye. For he sommoned the people together and
told them that he would not any more assist the senators, using them selves
so rigorously against the comminaltye, but that he would rather be a mean
betwixt them if they continued in their accustomed tyranny, and if they thought
them selves able to make their party good against the crueltye of the
senatoures, he would depart with his men of war, and not entermedle himself
in their civil discordes. But if they distrusted their own strength, they
should not w^t his help, for that that he was able to do for them. And
therefore advise them selves, whether they were better to bid him goo his way,
or to tarry as a partaker and supporter ofthe quarrel of the commons. The
comminaltye being stirred with this talk, made him their chief governor, and
so while they were offended at the authority of the senate, they yielded them
selves with their wives and children in bondage under the subi^ction of a
Lordlye tiraunt. Clearche therefore apprehended. lx. of the senators, (for all
the ^est were fled) and cast them in prison. The people reioysed to see the
Senate destroyed, and that in espetially by the captain of the Senators, and
that contrary to all likelihode, their help was turned to their utter
confusion. Upon whom, by threatening death to them all in general, he set the
hier price. For Clearche receiving The (...) of (...).
a great sum of money of them (as who should say he intended privily to
deliver them from the peoples displeasure,) when he had robbed them of all
their goods, he spoiled them also of their lives. Afterward understanding that
those that were fled, having moved the cities of pity and compassion to help
them, prepared war against him, he set their bondmen at liberty. And to the
intent there should want no kind of misery in those honorable houses, and that
he might make the slaves more faithful to himself, and more enemies to their
masters, he compel led the wives and daughters of those noble men, to marry
with their slaves, upon pain of death if they refused so to do. But those
sorrowful weddinges were greuouser then sudden death to the honorable Ladies.
And therefore Death is (...) be preferred before ^nesty.
many of them before their marriage, and many in the very time of their marriage,
killing first their new husbands slew them selves, and by the virtue of their
natural womanhode and shamefastness, was a field sought, in the which the
Tiranne gettinge the upper hand, drew the senatoures as prisoners in manner
of triumph through the face of the city. After his return into the city,
some he cast in bonds, some he racked, and some he put to death and no place of
the city was fre from the cruelnesse of the tiran. With this outragiousnesse he
became proud, and with his crueltye ^e became arrogante, for through his
Prosperitye ma^eth men forget them selves.
continual good success in prosperity, he would sometime forget himself to be
a man: and sometime be w^ulde call himself Iubiters son. When he went abroad,
he would have an Eagle of gold borne before him as a token of his begetting. He
used to wear robes of purple and to go^ in buskens after the manner of kings in
tragedies, with a crown of gold upon his head^. Moreover to the intent to
scorn the gods as well in ^ames as in counterfeit gesture and abominable
leasings, he named his son Ceraunos. Two noble yongmen called Chio^ and
Leonides disdaining to se him do these things, and entending to set their
country at liberty, conspired to kill the Tiran. These men were the disciples of
the Philosopher Plato, who couetinge to bestow upon their country, the virtue
unto the which they The valiante prow^ise of Chion and Leonides.
were furthered by the most perfect instructions of their master, laid in an
ambush fifty of their kinsmen, whom they had got^en to be of their retinew.
They them selves counterfetting to be at defiaunce against another, made
toward the Castie to the Tiran, as to their king ye should decide the^r
contro^ersies: and being there admitted to his presence, (as they that were well
known,) ^hyles the tirant gave autentiue ear to the first man's tale, the
other stepped within him and killed him. But by reason their company was not quick
enough in coming to their rescue, they were slain by the guard. By means
whereof it came to pass, that the Tiran was slain, but yet the coun try not
delivered. For Satir the brother of Clearche, after the same sort took upon him
the tyranny, and the Heracleans many years after, by degree of descent were
under subjection of Tirannes.

The. xvii. Book.
ABout the same time well nie, there happened a marvelous great earthquake An
^rryble earthquake.
in the countries of H^llespont and Chemesosus, and the City Lylimachia being
builded by Ly^imachus not past a two and twenty years before, was overthrown,
the which wonder betookened horrible misfortune to Lysimachus and his offspring,
with the decay of his kingdom, and the destruction of those countries that
were vered therwyth. And look as was betokened thereby, so came it to pas. For
The destruction of Lysimachus ^nage.
within a short time after, Lysimachus conceiving a deadly hatred, not only
beyond the course of a natural father, but also beyond all manhood and
humanity, against his son Agathocles, whom he had proclaimed heir apparent of
his kingdom, and by whom he had atcheued many battles prosperously, by the mean
and working of his stepmother A^syrice he poisoned. This was the first sore, of
the mischief that was toward him, this was the beginning of y^ ruin that hung
^uer his head. For after the murdering of his own son, he fell to killinge of
his noble men, whom he executed for none other o^fence, then because they
bewa^ led the death of his son. By means whereof such as were chief officers in
his camp, revolted by plumpes unto S^leucus, whom being of himself prone
thereunto, vpo^disda^ and envy at the other man's glory, they compelled to make
war against Lysimacbus. This was the last contention between ^
them that had served Alexander in the wars, and as it were a match reserved
by fortune for examples sake. Lysimachus was. lxxiiii. years old, and
Seleueus* lxxvii. but in this age, there was none of them both but he had a
young man's ^art, and an i^satiable desire of dominion. For when as they two
alone held the whole world between them, yet they thought them selves
enclosed in a There is no measure in ^ition.
straight, measuring the term of their life, not by the length of their years,
but by the bounds of their Empire. In that battle Lysimachus having lost
before, by diverse chances. xv. children, now dying manfully, lastly made
himself the full and final decay of his own house. Seleucus The death of
Lysimach^s
reioys^ng in so great a victory, and that which he thought to be a greater
matter then the victory, that he only of Alexanders retinew remained, and
became conqueror of the conquerors, bosted that it was not the work of man, but
the very gift of God, being v^terly ignoraunte that it should not be long
after, ere he himself should become an He was the kings brother of Egypt
example of the frailty of man. For about. vii. months after, by the pollicye
of Ptolomy, who had taken the sister of Ly^machus in marriage, he was surprised
and sla^ne, and so with his life lost the kingdom of Macedone that he had
taken from Lysimachus. Ptolomy therefore being very diligent The ^eathe of
Seleucus.
to curry favor with the comminalty, in remembrance of his father Ptolomy the
Great, and for reueng^g y^ death of Lysimachus: first of all determined to win
the sons of Note the treachery and deceit of Ptol^meus Ceraunicus, reed more
hereof in the. xxiiii. book.
Lysimachus unto him: and thervpo^ made suit to their mother Arsinoe his
sister, to have her to his wife, promisinge to adopt the (...), to thentent
that when he had succeeded in their room, what for reverence to their mother,
or for the name of father, they should not be so bold as to attempt any thing
against him. Moreover he earnestlye sued by his letters to have the favor of
his brother ye king of Egypt, protestinge that he bare him no displeasure, for
taking his fathers kingdom from him, and y^ he would not any more s^ke the
thing at his brothers hand, which he had with more honor gotten at the hand of
his fathers enemy. Furthermore he sought all the means he could devise, to
wind him self into favor with Emn^nes and Antigonus the sons of Demetrius,
and with antiochus the son of Seleucus, with the which he was like to ^aue
war, to ^ntent he would not have to do with iii. enemies at ones. Nether
omitted he P^rrhus king of Epyre, as one that was like to be no small
furtheraunce to what part so ever he inclined himself, who also coveting to
set them all beside the sadle, made fair countenance, and set himself as it
were to sale to them al. Therefore when as he was about Pyr^hus ^deth the (...)
against the (...)*
to aid the Tarentines against the Romans, he desired of antigonus to lend
him ships to convey over his army, of antiochus who was better furnished
with richesse, then with men of war, he requested to borow a piece of money, of
Ptolomy he demanded to send to his aid a crewe of the souldioures of Macedone.
But Ptolomy who by reason of his own weakness, was not able to bear with him
long lent him five thousand footmen, four thousand horsemen, and fifty
Elephantes, for no longer time then. ii. years. In consideration whereof, taking
the daughter of Ptolomy in marriage* Pyrrhus left him for protectoure of his
kingdom. But forasmuch as we fall in remembrance of Epyre, I think good to
entreat a little of the original of A disco^ to the dom^ of Epy^.
the same. First of all the Molosses reigned in that region. Afterward Pyrrhus
the son of achilles, having lost his fathers kingdom by being absent at
the battle of Troy, reasted in the same country, which after his name were
first called Pyrrhides, and after Epyrotes. But Pyrrhus when He was ^so called
(...).
he came into the Temple of Jupiter of Dodone to ask counsel, ravished there
anasa the nece of Hercules, by whom afterward taking her to wife, he begat.
viii. children.

Of the which some of them being very gentle and beutifull young Ladies,
he married to the kings that were his neighbors, by means of which
aliaunces he purchased great power and richesse. And so (leauyng the kingdom
of the Chaonians with andromache the wife of Hector, (which in the division of
the boty at the winnynge of Troy fell to his lot to be his wife, unto Helenus
the son of king Pri^mus for his singular knowledge in Prophecy,) within a
while after by the treason of Orestes the son of Agamemnon, he was slain at
Delphos even before the aultare of the God. After him succeeded his son
Pylates. At length by order of succession the kingdom descended to Arymba.
Over whom because he was fatherless, An example of a learned Prince.
and that there were no moo alive of that noble race but he, of very earnest
desire that the whole realm had to preserve him and bring him up, there were
certain protectoures appointed by the common consent of the realm to have the
over sight and governance of him. Furthermore he was sent to Athens to
school, and look how much he was better learned then hi^ predecessoures so
much also was he better beloved among his subjects.

For he was the first that made laws, ordained a counsel, appointed yearly
officers, and established the estate of the common weal. And like as Pyrrhus
first gave the people their dwelling. so Arymba brought them first to the
trade of civil ordinance and living. This man's son was Neoptolemus, who
did beget Olympias the Olympias.
mother of great Alexander, and Alexander that after his decease enjoyed the
kingdom of Cpyre, and dyed in the wars of Italy, among the Brutians.

After his departure his brother Aeacides succeaded in the kingdom, who by
wearying his subjects with daily and continual war against the Macedones,
gate ^uche a displesure among them, that they banished him ye rea^me, leaving
behind him in the kingdom a child of (...). years old called Pyrrhus, who
being sought for also by the people to be put to death for y^ hatred they bare
to his father, was privily conveyed away and borne into Illyria, and delivered
unto Beroe the wife of king Glaucia to be kept up, the which Beroe also was
extract of the house of Aeacus. There the king, whether it were that he pityed
his misfortune, or that he we^ allured with his childish flateringes, did
defend him a great while against Cassander king of Macedone, demanding him
with great threats, that he would make sharp wars upon him unless he
delivered him, and besides this protection of him, he also adopted him to be
his son. With the which things the Cpyrotes being moved, tourninge their
hatred into compassyon, called him into the realm again being of the age of
eleven years, appoynting protectoures to have the oversight and government of
him and his kingdom, until he came to man's estate. Afterward when he was
ones past childhode, he sought many battles, and he began to be counted of
such power wisdom and pollicye, that men thought no man able to maintain the
Tarentines against the Romans, but only him.

The. xviii. Book.
PIrrhus king of Epyre therefore, when The wars of Pyr^hus in Italy.
as the Tarentines had sent their ambassadors to him the second time, and that
the Samuits and Lucanes, who al so had then neade of aid against the
Romans, made earnest suit and request unto him for succor not so much moved
with the entretance of his suitors as induced with hope to invade the Empire of
Italy promised to come with an army. Unto the which thing after that his
mind was ones inclined, the examples of his auncestoures drove him hedlonges
forwards, to the intent he would not seem inferior to his uncle Alexander, who
had defended the said Tarentines against the Brutians, or to be of less
courage then great Alexander, who had made war so sarre from his own
country and subdued the East.

Where upon leauinge his son Ptolomy of the age of. xv. years as regent of
his kingdom, he landed his army in the haven of Tarent, leadynge with him his
two younger sons Helen and Alexander, to bear him company in his far
expedition.

Of whose arrival the Roman consul Valerius Leunius hearing, making haste
to encounter with him before the aides of his confederates were assembled,
brought his men into the field: neither did the king, (although he had nothing
so many men of war as his ennemies) detracte the encounter. But where as the
Romans had gotten Pyrrhus overcome the Romans.
the upper hand, and were at the point to have put him to flight, he
constrained them at the vglye shape of the Elephants first to stand as amassed,
and by and by after to forsake the field, and so the strange monsters of
Macedone suddenly vanquished them, having all ready gotten the victory.
Nevertheless he obtained not the victory without much bloodshed. For Pyrrhus
himself was sore woun ded, and a great part of his Souldioures slain, so that
he gate by that victory, more honor then cause to rejoice. Many cities
following the fortune of this battle, yielded them selves to pyrrhus. Amongst
others also the Locrines The magnifi cence of Pyrrhus.
betraying the Roman garrison revolted to pyrrhus. Of that pray Pyrrhus sent
home two hundred Roman souldioures scotfree to Rome, to the entente that as
the Romans had known of his puissaunce, so they might also know of his
liberalitye. Within a few days after, when the hosts of his confederates were
come, he fought an other battle with the Romans, in the which the fortune
Pyrrhus va^ quishe the Romans a gain.
was like unto the former battle.

In the mean season, Mago captain of Carthage, being sent to the aid of the
Romans with a hundred and twenty ships, came before the Senate, saying it
greatly grieved the Carthaginenses, that a foraine king should be suffered to
make war in Italy. For which consideration he was sent, that for as much as
they were assailed by a foraine ennemy, they might be rescued by for rain
succoures. The Senate gave the Carthaginenses hartye thanks, and sent away
their succoures again. But Mago according to the nature of a man of affricke,
within a few days after, as though he meant to procure peace for the (...),
went secreatly to pyrrbus entending to feel his mind, and to learn what he
purposed as concerning Sicill, whether it was reported he was sent for. For the
Carthaginenses sent aid to the Romans. For noone other occasion, but that
Pyrrhus might have so much to do with the Romans in Italy, that he might
have no leisure to pass into Sicill. While these things were in doing,
Fabritius Lucinus being sent ambassadoure from the Senate of Rome, concluded a
peace with Pirrhus, for the confirmation whereof, Cyneas being sent from
Pirrhus with great gifts and rewards, could find no man that would ones open
his door to receive a reward. Another example like unto this continency of the
Romans, happened almost the very same time. For the Senate sent ambassadoures
Example (...)
into Egipte, to whom Ptelomy the king sent rich presents, the which they
utterly refused, with in a day or twain after, they were bidden to supper, and
crowns of goulde sent them, the which at that time they received for honor of
the king, and the next day after they set them upon the kings Images. Cyneas
therefore when he had brought word how the peace with the Romans was infringed
by ^ppius Claudius, being demau^ ded of Pyrrhus what manner of thing Rome was,
he answered, that it seemed to him to be a City of kings. After (...) is made
(...) Sicill, (...) hereof more in the. (...). (...).
this, came unto him the ambassadoures of the Sicilians rendering into his
hands the right and (...) of the whole Island, which was then vexed with the
continual wars of the Carthaginenses. Therefore leaving his son Alexander
at Lorres, and having well manned the other Cities with strong garrisone, he
wasted over his army into Sicill. And for as much as we be come A (...) to
(...) o^ the (...) and (...).
to entreat of the Carthaginenses, I must speak a (...) as concerning their
original, repeting somewhat what deper the deeds of the Tyrians, whose
chances also were much to be lamented.

The nation of the Tyrians was founded by the Phenicians, who being troubled
with an earthquake, forsaking their native soil, inhabited first the lake of
Assyria, and anon after the ne^te ^ea coaste, buildinge in the same place a
City, which of the abundance of Fyshe they Sydon.
named Sydon. For the Phenicians call a Fyshe Sydon. Many years after being
subdued by the king of the Ascalonites, they took shippinge and arr^ued in the
same place where they builded Tire, which was done the yore before the
destruction of Troy. There they were oftentimes and diversely assa^ed with
wars by the Persyans, but ever they had the upper hand. An example of cruelty
of bondmen.


But when their power was once wasted, their bondmen aboundinge in multitude
and noumber, dealt out ^giouslye and cruellye with them. For they made a
conspiracye among them selves, and killed all the fre borne people with their
masters also, and so having the city at will, they entered possessyon in
their masters houses, they invaded the common weal, they married wives, and
that which they them selves never were), they begatte free children. There
was one among so many thousand slaves, who being of a meke and honest nature,
for pity of the fortune of thold man his master and his young son, did not of
beastly cruelty murder them, but of merciful compassion, and manhood saved
them. Wherefore when as he had hid them out of the way, (as if they had been
slain,) and that the bondmen consulting upon the estate of the common weal,
thought it good to create them a king of their own corporation, and him in
especially to be the person as a man most acceptable to the Gods, that first
should see the sun rising: he declared the matter secreatly to his master
Strato (for y^ was his name) where The differe^s between the wit of a
gentleman, and the wit of a (...).
he lay hid in a corner. Being by him sufficientlye instructed what to dod,
when they were all assembled into the field by midnight, whiles all the reast
stood gapynge into the East, he only alone looked advisedly into the west.

At the (...) all the resydue thought it a madness, to look for the rysinge
of the Sun into the West. But as soon as the day began to break, and the East
began to glister upon the highest tops and pynnacles of the toures and
temples of the City, while all the other gased for to see the Globe of the
Sun he (...) of all syewed unto them all the brightness of the Sun shyn^ge
upon the top of the City, this seemed to be done of a greater reason then
was in a s^aues head. Whereupon they enqutred who gave him the counsel, and
be co^essed as touching his master.

Then it was perceived what difference there is between the wit of a slave, and
the wit of a gentleman, and that (...) excel in maltce but not in wisdom.
Therefore the old man and his son were pardoned, and forasmuch as they
tho^ght them to be preserved by the divine (...) of God, they created Strato
king. After whose decease the kingdom descended to his son, and so forth to
his posteritye. This was a notable a^ of the slames and a terr^le example to
the whole world. Wherefore Alera^ he great, when as a long time after he made
war in the East, as a revenger of the common M^ (...).
tranquillity, having won the^ City perforce, al of them that remained after
the battle (in remembrance of the murder done in old time by their
predecessors, he crucified. Only the kindred of St^, he preserved unviolated,
and restored the kingdom to his of spryng making new inhabitauntes that were
free (...) and undefiled with the like offense in the Island, to the (...) that
the servile seed and slyppe being utterly roted out, the offspring of the
City might be as it were planted of new again. The Tyrians therefore being in
this wise by the means of Alexander new founded, through they own sparing
and travel in getting, grew st^o^g again within a short space. Before the
siaughter of the masters when they abounded (...) in richesse and in noumber of
men, they sent a company of youth into Affricke and ^ded Ut^a, when as in the
mean while the king of The ^dlge of ^a in (...).
Tire deceased, ordayninge for his heirs his son Pygmalion, and his daughter
Elisa a maid of very excellent beauty. But the people delivered the kingdom
to Pygmalion The wicked nesse of Pygmalion.
being a very child, Elisa also was married to her uncle Sycheus the priest
of Hercules, the which Rome is of greatest honor next unto the king. This
manne had great richesse, but no man knew where they were, and for fear
of the king, he had hidden his gold, not in houses but in the ground.

The which thing though men knew not of certaintye, yet it was commonly so
reported, with the which brute Pygmalion being incensed, forgetting all bond
of nature and humanity, without any respect of godliness, killed his uncle
being also his brother in l^e. (...) d^sting The pollicye of Dido to ^ape from
her brother.
her brother a great while after for doing of this wicked act, at the last
dissemblinge her inward hatred, and bearinge a fair countenance toward him
for the time, practiced privily to fly away, and taking into her company
certain of the noble men, whom she knew to bear like hatred to the king, and
to have like desire of flyinge away: she came to her brother with a pollicye,
she fained that she would remove out of her own house, and come dwell with
him, to the intent the sight of her husbands house, should not continually
renew her sorrow and mourninge for him which she coueted to forget, and to
the intent the bitter remembrance of him should not any more ware before her
eyes. Pygmalion was well contented to hear his sister say those words, because
he thought she would bring her husband Sycheus gold with her. But Elisa caused
the kings servant that were lent her to help to remove her stuff, to goo
into ships and car* her richesse with them in the shutting in of the evening,
and when she had them a good way from the shore, she compelled them to throw
certain bags and cofers full of sand into the sea, making them believe it was
monye. Then she her self weping with piteous veyce, besought her husband
Sycheus willingly to receive his own richesse which he had left behind him,
and that he would take them for an offeringe, like as they had been the cause
of his death. Which done she turned her self to the kings servants*
saying: the time was come that she herself should receive the death that she
so sore had long before desired, and that they should abide bitter torments
and grievous punishments, because they had made away the richesse of her
husband Sycheus, for covetousness of the which the king committed murder,
that he might not have them to satisfy his gredy appetite wythal. When she
had put them all in this fear, they were contented to bear her company in
her flighte, and to goo away with her. Moreover a great number of the
nobility, being in readiness for the same purpose, set forth with her, and so
having made sacrifice again unto Hercules, whose Priest Sycheus was, they
forsook their country to get the^ a new dwelling place. The first land that
they arrived at, was the Isle of Cyprus, where as the priest of ^piter with his
wife and children by the commandment of the God, offered himself to Elisa as
a companion and partaker of all her fortune, making a covenant with her, that
he and his posterity should for evermore enjoy the honor of the priesthode.
The condition was accepted as a manifest token The (...) custom of (...) Cy^.
of good luck. It was the manner of the Cy^ans to send their maidens before
they should be married to the seas side, there to earne their marriage money
certain dais with the abuse of their bodies, and to make offeringes to Venus
for the preservation of their cha^ all their lives after. Of these sort of
women, Elisa commanded her me^ to rauishe toureskore or there aboutes that were
virgins, and to put them in the ships, to the intent her young (...) might
have wi^es, and the city ^ase of issue.

While these things were a dooinge, (...) knowing of the flying away of his
sister, when as he went about to pursue her wickedly with battle, he was hardly
persuaded by the entretance of his mother, and the threatenings of the Gods to
be in quiet. To who^ the Prophets being enspired with the spirit of prophesy,
declared y^ he should not ^skape unpunished, if he went about to hinder the
advancement of a City so fortunate, as the like was skarse to be found again
in all the world. By means whereof they that sled had sufficient leisure and
time to eskape. (...) Elisa therefore arriuinge in the coasts of Affricke,
moved to friendship the inhabitauntes of the place, reioysinge at the coming
and intercourse of marchaundise of strangers. Afterward purchasing a piece of
ground* as much as might be compassed about with an Ox hide, wherein she
might refresh her company, weary of their long journey, until she should take
her journey again, she caused the hide to beicut into long and slender (...),
by means where of she had a greater piece of ground then she demanded, where
upon ever after the place was* calle^ Byrsa. Afterward by the (...) of the
neighbors of the places there aboutes, which for covetousness of gain brought
many things to sell to the strangers, and builded them houses to dwell among
them, at length there was such a resort of men thither, that it was even as
good as a city. Moreover the ambassadoures of Vtica, brought pre sents to them
as to their kinsfolk, encouraging them to build a City in the self same
place where they had purchased a dwelling, the afres also were desirous to
detayne the strangers still. Wherefore by the good consent of all The building
of Carthage.
parties, Carthage was builded, paying a yearly rent for the ground that the
city stands upon.

In the first foundation digginge, was found an Ox head, the which was a
signifycation, that it should be a very fruitful and plentiful land, but
that the City should be always laboring and always in bondage? Where upon
the City was removed to another place. There they found a horse head, which
signified that the people should be warlicke and of great power, and so in
that place they builded the City with good luck. Then shortly after by the
concourse of the Countries there ^boutes, resorting thither for the good
opinion they had of the new city, it became a great and populous town. At
such time as Carthage was most flouryshing (...) of (...) (...)*
in estate and richesse, Hiarbas king of Mauritane, calling to him ten of
the Princes of the Afres, commanded them to fetch Elisa to be his wife, an^
to tell ^er that if she refused so to do he would compel her by force. The
which message the ambassadoures being afraid to do to the Queen, went to
work with her craftily after the nature ^f Afres, declaringe that their king
demanded some person, that could learn him and his Afres more civil
manners and trade of living, but he could find none that would vouchsafe to
forsake his own kinsfolk, to go among such barbarous people that lived after
the manner of brute beasts.

Then being rebuked of the Queen, that they would shonne any hard kind of
living, for the save guard of their Country, for the which even the very
life it self ought to be spent, if neade should so require, they uttered the
king their masters commandment, saying that (...) in (...) own (...)*
she must do the self same things her self that she taught others to do,
if she des^red the safetye of her City. Being surprised by this (...), after
the time she had a great while together called v^pon the name of her husband
Sycheus, with many tears and lamentable com plaint, at the last she answered
she would go^ whether as her own destiny, and the destiny of her (...) called
her. Upon this matter taking iii. months respit, she caused a great f^re to
be made in the uttermost part of the city as (...)*
it had been to pacify the ghost of her first husband, and to do sacrifice
to him before she should marrye again. Wh^re after the (...) of many
beasts, taking a sword in her hand, she went up to the top of the (...) that
was set on (...), and so loking toward the people, she said she would go to her
husband according to the kings commandment, and w th that word she thruste
the sword to her heart. As long as Carthage* was unvanquished, she was
worshipped for a Goddess. This City was builded threscore and twelve years
before Rome, whose pu^ssans as it was notable in the wars, so in the time of
peace the state was distroubled with sundry misfortunes and civil debate.
Furthermore when that among other mischeues, they were sore vexed with the
plague, for the remedy thereof, they used a bloody kind of religion and
abominable ^ickednesse. For they offered men in sacrifyce, and An abhomi^ kind
of religion.
they killed upon the aultares, the innocent younglynges (which age is wont to
provoke even the enemy to pitye) seking to paci^y the Gods with the blood of
them for whose life the Gods are wont most of all to be prayed unto.
Therefore the Gods being worthelye wrath, and turned from them for ^o great w
ckednesse, when they had made war a long time in Sicill to their utter
destruction and thereupon translated the war into (...), there hau ng lost the
greater part of their host, they were vanquished in a sore fought battle. For
the which occasion they banished with the few that remained of his army, their
captain Machaeus, under whose guidance they had conq^ered A captain and his
army banyshed for (...).
part of Sicill, and (...) many great adventures against the afres. The which
thing the men of war taking in great displeasure, sent ambassadors to
carthage, first entreating for return into their country, and for pardon of
their unfortunate warrefare, and yet to t^l the^ nevertheless* that if they
might not obtain (...) ^equest by entretaunce, they would win it by the
sword^. When the Ambassadoures could get nothing, neither by fair means nor
by foul, within a few days after, they took shipping, and came to the City
all in (...).

There they protested before God and man, that their coming was not to offer
any force to their country, but only Carthage (...) besieged (...) their own^
(...)*
to recover it, and that they would show their country men, that they wa^ted
not courage in the former wars, but good fortune. Hereupon* they kept the
City in such wise from victuals, and besieged it so narowlye that they brought
the Carthaginenses to utter despair. In the mean^ time Cartalo the son of
the banished captain Mac^eus, as he passed by his fathers camp from Tire,
whether as he had been sent by the Carthaginenses, to carye unto Hercules the
tenthes of the booty that his father had taken in Sicil, being sent for by his
father, answered he would first accomplish his duty in the public religion,
ere he would do any private duty to father or mother. The which thing
allbeit his father were much offended with, yet he durst not as then use any
violence toward him, for reverence of the religion. Within a day or two
after, desiring safeconduit of the people, when he was returned to his father,
and that he vaunted himself openly before all men's eyes, decked in his
purple robes and his myter, according to the degree of priesthode, his father
leadynge A terrible (...) ample for (...)* obediens to the father*
him a side into a secreat place said to him. Thou wicked barlet durst thou be
so bold as thus bedect with skarlet and bedashte with gold, to come into the
open face of so many of thy wretched citezens, and to enter into this sorrowful
and mourning camp, swimming in these tokens of quiet prosperity, like as if
thou should triumph over us? Could thou find none other persons to brag
thy self before, but us? could thou find no place ^o meet as the penury of
thy father and the calamities of his unhappy banishment? Do thou remember
that being the other day called, thou proudlye disdained, I say not thy
father, but certesse the captain of thine own countrymen* And I pray thee what
elsse representest thou in this thy purple robe and these crowns of gold,
then the titles of victories. For as much therefore as thou acknowledgest thy
father for no better then a banished man, I also will show my self as a
graund captain, then as a father toward thee, and I will make thee example to
all men here after, not to be so bold as to laughe and skorne at the
unfortunate miseries of their fathers. Immediately here upon he caused him to be
nailed to a very high cross in the sight of the city in his apparel and attire
as he went. Within a few days after he took Carthage, and sommoning the
Carth^ge is (...).
people before him, he complained of his wrongful banish meant, excusing the war
which he was compelled to take in hand full sore against his will, by reason his
conquestes were despised, wherefore in as much as he had punished thoppressors
of his miserable countrymen, he said he was content to pardon all the rest for
his wrongful banishment. And so having put ten of the senators to death, he
restored the city to her laws again. Not long after he was ac cused to have
gone about to make himself king. Whervp on he suffered double punishment, both
for working treason against his country, and for murtheringe his own son.
After him succeaded in the captainshippe Mago, by whose industry, both the
richesse, the bounds of the Empire, and the renown of the cheualrye of
Carthage was greatly increased.

The. xix. Book.
MAgo graund captain of the Carthaginenses, (...) of the histories of Car^.
when first of al he had by ordaininge the laws of arms, founded the Empire
of the Afres and established the strength of his city, no less by his policy
and discipline in the wars then by puissaunce, deceased, leauyng behind him
two sons, Hasoruball and Hamilcar, who running in the footesteppes of their
fathers virtue, as they succeeded him in lineage, so succeaded they him also in
worthiness. Under these captains war was made in Sardinia. Moreover a
field was fought against the Afres, demanding tribute of many years for the
rent of the s^yle, whereon the city stands. But as the Afres had the inster
quarrel, so had they the better fortune, by means whereof the wars were
ended with them, by payment of money and not by dinte of sword. In Sardinia also
Hasor^hall being sor^ wounded, surrendered the government to his brother
Hamilcar and died, whose death was honorable both for the mourning of the whole
City, and for because he had been a leven times dictator, and had had four
triumphs. The ennemy also began to take heart a grace, as though that with the
captain, the strength of the Carthaginenses had decayed. For the Sicilta^s
being oppressed by the Carthaginenses with daily injuries, revolted to Leonida
the brother of the king of Lacedemon. Where upon arose sore wars, in the
which there was many encounters and fields fought, sometime to the gain, and
sometime to y^ loss of either part. While these things were a doing, ambassa
dors came from Darius king of the Persians to Carthage, The ambassade of P^rsia.
having in charge to command the Carthaginenses to leave offering of men in
sacrifice, and to leave eating of dogs flesh. Moreover the king commanded
them rather to burn their dead men, then to bury them in the ground requesting
them of aid against the Greeks, unto ^ home Darius was about to make war as
then out of hand. But the Carthaginenses denying him aid, by reason of the
continual wars they had with their neighbors, to thentent they would not
seem disobedient in all things, willingly obeyed all the rest. In the mean
season Hamilcar was slain in the wars in Sicil, leaving behind him iii.
sons, Amilco, Hanno and Gisgo. Hasdrubal had also like noumber of sons,
H^ibal, Hasdrubal, and Sappho.

By these men were the affairs of Carthage ruled in those days. Therefore
war was made against the Moors, fields were fought against the
Numidians, and the Afres were compelled to release unto the Carthaginenses for
ever, the rent that they were wont to pay for the soil of their City.
Afterward when such a noumber of the graundecaptaines became as a burden to
the City, which before time had been wont to be free, in that they did aland
judged all together as they listed them selves, there were a hundred of the
Senatoures chosen to be judges, which when the captains returned from the
wars, should take an account of their doings, to the intent that there by
they might be kept in awe, so to behave them selves in executing their
auctority in the wars, as that they had nevertheless respect to do Justice
according to the laws of their country. In Sicill in the stead of Hamilear,
Hamilco was made graundcaptaine, who having prosperous success (...) pe^.
and fortune both in battle on the sea, and in battle on the land, suddenly
by the influence of a pestilente planet, lost all his men of war. Whereof
when tidings came to Carthage, the City was stricken in heaviness, and
^amentable description of the estate of Carthage.
all was full of houling and yelling as if the city had been taken by the
enemy. Every man's doors were shut up, the temples of the Gods were shut up,
all ceremonies were omitted, all private duty was laid aside, they went out
all to the gate, and made inquisition for their friends, of those few that
remained from the plague as they came out of the ships, after the time they
perceived what was become of them, (for until then, they hung between hope and
feate, not knowing of certaintye whether their friends were all dead or no)
then a man might have hard over all the coast the sorow^ull sighs and sobbes
of such as lamented, the pitiful howling and shriking of the unhappy
mothers, and the lamentable outcries of all men on all sides. Among these
things comes out of his ship the poor captain Hamilco, in a filthy and
beggerlye cloak girte about him, at the sight of whom the mourners as they
stood in ranks clustered about him. He him self also holding up his hands to
heaven, bewailed eft his own misfortune, and eft the misfortune of his
country, sometime he cried out upon the Gods which had taken from him so
great honor attained by his wars, and so great ornaments of his victories,
which they them selves had given him, which after the winning of so many
Cities, and after the vanquishing of so many ennemies so oftentimes, both by
sea and by land, had destroyed that victoryous army, not by battle but by
pestilens. Wherein yet not withstanding he said he brought no small (...)
countrymen, in that their enemies (...) vaunt them selves of their calamities.
For the (...) able to say, that they that were dead were ^lain by them, nor
that they that were returned were put to flyghte by them. As for the pray
that they found in their desolate camp, and carried away, it was no such that
they might bost of it, as of the spoil taken from the vanquished ennemy, but
as of things falling into their mouths unlooked for, which they entered upon,
having none owner by the sudden deaths of the right owners. In respect of the
enemy, they had come away conquerors, in respect of the pestilence, they were
come away vanquished. And yet nothing grieved him more, then that he might not
die among those most valiant men, and that he had been reserved, not to live
plesantly, but to be as a g^sing stock for his calamities. How beit as soon as
he had conveyed home the remnaunt of his wretched h^ste unto Carthage, he would
also folo^ his fellows that were gone before. Whereby his coun^ry should
perceive that he had not lived to that day, because he was desirous of life,
but to the intent he wou^d not by his death betray those few that the
unspeakable pestilens had spared, by leaving them without a guide, as besieged
in the mids of the hosts of their enemies. Entering into y^ city with such an
outcry, ^one as he came home to his (...).
own house, he dismissed the multitude as the last time that ever he purposed
to speak to them, and barringe in the doors to him, suffering no man to come at
him, no not so much as his own sons, he killed himself.

The. xxi. Book.
DEnnis having expulsed the Carthaginenses A discourse of the acts of the
(...).
out of Sicill, and taken the government of all the whole Island into his hand,
thinking it both a burden to the realm, to keep so many men idle, and also a
dangerous matter to suffer so great an army to lie still slouthfully and do
nothing, conveyed his host into Italy, partly of purpose to quicken the
strength The wars of the elder Dennis in Italy.
of his souldioures by continual labor, and also to enlarge the bounds of
his Empire. The first war that he had, was against the Greeks that inhabited
the next sea cos^e of Italy. The which being subdued, he assailed ever the
next unto them, and finally he proclaimed open war against all that bare the
name of Greeks dwelling in Italy, the whi che sort of people held not one part,
but almost al Italy at that time. And there be many cities which after so long
co^tinuaunce, do yet at this day show manifest tokens of the Grekish cu^ome.
For the people of Thuscane which possess A digressyon to the ^ounda tions of
the Cities of Italy.
the coast of the nether sea, came out of Lydia. And yt Uenetians, who as we se
are inhabiters of the upper sea, came under Antenor from Troy, after the taking
and destruction thereof, Adria also which is next to the Illyrian sea, and
which gave the name to the Adriatic sea is a greek city, so is Apros the which
Diomedes builded after the overthrow of Troy, being cast up in the same p^ace
by ship wrack. Moreover Pise in Lumbardy had Greeks to their founders And among
y^ Thuscanes, the Tarquines fetch their beginuing from the Thessalians and
Spinambres. And the Perusines from the Acheans? What shall I say of the city
Cere? what shall I speak of the latin people, which seem to be founded by
Eneas? Now the Falisces, the Iapygians, the Nolanes, the Abelanes, were they not
sometime enhabiters of Chalcis? what is all the coaste of Campanie? what are the
Brutians and Sabines? what are the Sabines? what are the Tarentines, who (as it
is left in wrytinge) came from Lacedemon, and were called bastardes? They say
that Phil^ctetes builded the city of the Thurines, whose tomb is to be seen
there at this day, and the shafts of Hercules in the temple of Apollo which were
the destiny of Tro^e. The Metapont^es also have yet to show in the people of
Minerua, the iron tools of Epeus their first founder, wherewith he made the
horse that destroyed Troy. For the which cause all that part of Italy is
called the greater Greece. But in the beginning of these foundations, the
Metapontines with the Sybarites and Crotoniens were determined to drive all
the other Greeks out of Italy. As Soon as they had taken the city Siris, in y^
winning thereof, they killed before the very aultare of Minerua fifty yongmen
embracing her image and her priest veiled in thattire accustomed in her
ceremonies. Hereupon being ^exed with pestilens and civil sedition, the
Crotonienses (...) o^ religion.
went first to thorac^e of D^lphos. Answer was made to them, that the mischief
should cease, if they had ones appeased Minerua for working so wickedly
against her Godhed, and the ghostes of them that they had sla^n. Therefore when
they had begone to carue images to set up to the yongmen of the same bigness
that they were being alive, and in especially unto Minerua. The Metapo^tines
knowing of the Oracle of the Gods, thinkinge it good to work spedely in the
pacifying of their ghostes, and in pacifying of the gods, set up little images
of stone to the yo^g men, and appeasedthe Gods with bread sacrifices. And so
while the one part striued in costlinesse, and the other part in swiftness,
the pestilence was ceased on both parties. The Crotoniens having recovered
health, abode not long in quiet. Therefore taking displesure that in the siege
(...) in (...).
of Siris the Locrines came to fight against them, they entered upon them by
force of arms.

The Locrines being stricken with fear, resorted to the Spartanes, desiring
them humbly of succor. The Spartanes being loath to enter into war so far of,
bad them ask help of Castor and Pollux. Neither did the ambassadors of their
fellow city despise their counsel, and therefore departing Mark the
superstition of the hethen.
into the next temple, and there making sacrifice, they cried upon the Gods for
help. When they had offered their sacrifices, and obtained the thing that they
came for (as they thought,) being as merry as if they should have carried the
Gods them selves with them, they made them shrines in their ships, and with
lucky journey in stead of succor, they brought their country me^ home comfort.
This being known, the Crotoniens also sent ambassadors to the Oracle at
Delphos, praying for victory and prosperous end of the war. It was answered
that they must overcome their enemies by vowing, or ever they could overcome
them by battle. Whervppon when they had vowed unto Apollo the tenthe of the
pray, the Locrines having knowledge both of the vow of their en^mies, and of
the answer of the Gods, vowed the ninth, and kept y^ thing secret to them
selves, for fear least they should be ouercom by vowing. Therefore when they were
come into the field, and that there stood in the battle of the Crotoniens an C.
and. xx. thousand fighting men in harness, the Locrines beholding their own
slender noumber, (for they had no mo but xv. M. sould^oures) cast away all hope
of victory, and bent them selves obstinately to die in the field. Now by
means of this despair, every man took such a heart unto him, that they
thought them selves to have gotten Despair ge^ courage.
the victory, if they might revenge their deaths manfully. But while they
sought to die honestlye, they gate the upper hand more luckelye. Neither can
it be thought that there should be any other cause of their victory, then
that they fell in despair. All the while the Locrines were fighting, there was
an Eagle that never departed from the^e battles, nor never left houeringe
about them until they had gotten the upper hand. Moreover two young men in
strange armor, unlike the one to the other, o^ excellent personage, upon white
horses, and in skarlet clokes were seen sigh ting in the wings of the battle,
the which ass^ne as the battle was ended, vanished out ^f sight. The
incredyble swiftness of fame increased the wonderme^t of the thing. (...) of
(...).
For the same day that the battle was fought in Italy, the victory was
^eported at Corynthe, Athens, and Lacedemon. After this the Crotoniens did
never pass to exercise them selves in cheua^ ye nor in feats of arms. For
they hated them, because they had so vnluckelye attempted them. And they had
changed their (...) into riot and idleness, if the Philosopher Pythagoras had
not been. This man being the son of a rich merchaunte man of Of (...).
Sames called Demaratus, and being brought up in the studies of wisdom,
wherein he greatly increased, taking his ^akyng first into Egypt, and afterward
to Bab^o^, to learn perfect^y the mouiug of the planets, and to search out
the beginning of the world, whereof it was made, attained to marvelous exquis^te
knowledge. As he ret^urned from thence, he went to Can^ye, and Lacedemon, to
study the laws of Minos and Lycurgus which were famous and notable at that
time. In all the which being^ perfectly instructed and furnished, he came to
Croton, and by his authority revoked the people to ^rugalitye, latelye before
fallen into excess and riot. Dailye he commended virtue, and dispraised ^he
vice of riot, reciting the miserable ch^u^ces of cities, that had decayed
through that (...) whereby he so stirred the multitude to the savor of
frug^lity, that some of them which were utterly drowned in riot, were
contrary to all hope and exp^ctation, brought again to good thrift. Moreover
he gave the wives instructions a part from their husbands, and the children
oftentimes a part from their parents. He taught the women chastitye,
shamefastness, womanhoode, and obedi^nce to their husbands. The men children
modestye, sobr^sse, good nourtour and learning, and among these things, ^e
enterlaced frugality as the mother of all virtues.

Finally he did so much with his continual disputations, that the noble women
laid a side their garments of cloth of gold and other the jewels and ornaments
apertaining to their estates, as thinstruments of excess and superfluity, and
brought al such things into Iunos temple, and consecrated them to the Gods:
persuading with the^ that the true ornaments The true ornaments of Ladies.
of ladies and gentle women, was chastity and not gorgious raiment or strange
attire. How much he was able to way with the other youth of the city, the
bridling and ouercoming of the stobern and ^roward stomakes of the women does
well declare. But there were iii. C young men which gathering them selves on a
rout, bound the^ selves with an oath to live together like sworn brothers from
the residue of the citizens, by which their doing as though they had made an
unlawful assemble to conspire against the city, they brought all the whole
city in their necks. And as they were all assembled into one house, the City
would have burnt them up. In the which hurlyburly, almost. lx. of them were
slain, and the residue were banished. When Pythagoras had dwelled full. xx.
years at Croton, he removed to Metapont and there deceased. Whom they had in
such estimation, that of his house they made a temple, and honored him for a
God. Therefore Dennis the Tiran who^ He returns to the doings of Dennis.
we declared before to have passed his army into Italye, and to have made war
against the Greeks, after he had won Locres by force, assailed the Crotoniens
having yet skars ly after so long respit, recovered their strength decayed by
the slaughter of the foresaid war. And yet they now with their few, more
valiantly resisted his so populous army, then they could with so many
thousands, make resistens before against the small number of the Locrines. So
great force has poverty against proud richesse, and so much more certain
sometime is the victory unhoped for then the victory that is made account of
before hand. While Den nis was making this war, thambassadors of the french
Dennis ente reth in leage (...) the
men which a few months before had burned Rome came unto him, desiring to enter
in league and friendship with (...). Alleging that their country was situate
among the mids of his enemies, wherefore they might stand him in (...) that
burned Rome*
good stead, whether it were to aid him in the battle, o^ to set upon them
behind, whiles they were fighting with him before. Dennis liked this ambassade
well. And so entering in league with them, and being increased in power by their
aid, he began his war as it were new again. The cause why these Frenchmen
came into Italy to seek them a new dwelling place, was the civil discord and
continual debate that they had at home among them selves. Cities (...) in Italy
by the (...) men.
For wearines whereof coming out of Italy, they drove the Thuscanes out of
house and home, and builded the ci ties of Millain, Come, Brixia, Uerone,
Bergome. Trident, and Uincent. The Thuscanes also with their captain Rhetus
having los^e their own country, took the Alps, and after the name of their
captain, founded the nation of the Rhetians. But Dennis by means of the
tomming of the Carthaginenses into Sicil, was driven to retu^ne home, for they
had repaired their army, and with a greater power renewed the wars which they
had broken up by constrainte of the pestilence. The captain of this war was
Hanno of Carthage, whose enemy Suniator a man at that time of the greatest
power one of them in all Affricke, in despyte of him, wrate familierly in Greek
un to Dennis, aduertising him of the coming of the army, and of the cowardice
of the captain, but his letters were Treson (...) and (...)
taken by the way, whereupon he was condemned of treason, and an act of
Parliament was made, that no man of Carthage should here after learn Greek
letters or study the Greek tongue to the intent he should not talk with the
ennemy, or write unto him without an interpretor, and ere it was long after,
Dennis whom a little before, neither Sicilie nor Italye were able to hold,
being overcome with continual wars in battle, The death (...) Dennis.
and brought low, at last was slain by the treson of his own subjects.

The. xxi. Book.
AFter the time that ^he Tiran De^(...) The younger (...).
was s^aine in Sicill, the men of war placed in his room his eldest son
named Dennis also, both because he was a man grown, and also because they
thought the kingdom should be the stronger, if it remained still inone man's
hand, rather then if it should be divided among his sons in many portions. But
Dennys in the beginning of his raygne, coueted sore to have put to death his
brothers uncles as enuiers of his estate, and prouokers of the children to
demand a partition of the kingdom.

Where upon he dissembled his desire a while, setting his mind to procure the
favor of his commons, thincking to do it with less blame, if all men^e
sh^ulde first conceive good opinyon of his doings. And therefore he let three
hundred offenders out of prysonne, and released the people three years
subsidy, alluringe their minds by all kind of counterfeit gentleness that he
was hable to devise. Then going in hand with the mischief he had so long
purposed, he slew not only his brothers kynsfolke, The crueltye of Dennis.
but also his brothers them selves, in so much hat whom he ought of right to
have made partners of his kingdom, he suffered not to be partakers of life and
breath beginning to execute his tyranny upon his own kindred, ere he proceeded to
work it against strangers.

When he had dispatched his brothers, of whom as of his enemies he stood in
fear, he fell to slouthfulnes, and through excessive ^edynge he became fat
and coarsye, and gate such a disease in his eyes, that he was not able to
abide the Sun, nor the dust, nor finally the glistering of any light. For the
which causes believing himself to be had in disdain of all men, he executed
most extreme cruelty, not filling the gails with prisoners as his father did,
but replenishing the city with slaughters, for the whychthinges he was not so
much disdained, as hated of al me^. Therefore when he perceived that the
Syracusanes were mineded to rebel against him and bid him battle, he was in
doubt a great while whether it were better to depose him self, or to
withstand them by force, but his men of war in hope to have the spoil and
sacking of the city, compelled him to stand to the trial of it by battle,
where being vanquished, and attemptinge fortune the second time with like
success, he sent ambassadoures to the Syra^, promising to depose himself from
his tirannye, if they would send their commissioners unto him, authorysed The
(...) Dennis.
to conclude an agreement with him. They sent y^ chief men of their City for the
same purpose, whom be put in custody, and so suddenly ere any man (...)
thereof, or feared that he meant any such mischief against them, he sent his
army to destroy the city. Whervppon ensued a sore and doubtful encounter even
within the very City, but by D^nnis (...) into Italy
reason the towns men were far mo in noumber, Dennis and his men were put
back. Who fearing to be beseged if he abode in the Castle, privily fled into
Italy with all his princely apparel, treasure and household stuff, being in
his banishmente received by his confederates the That which is bred by the bone
will not out of the flesh.
Locrines, as though he had been their rightful king, he took their
fortress, and there exercised his accustomed cruelty. He commanded the noble
men's wi^es to be brought from their husbands perforce, that he might have
his pleasure of them, the maidens when they should be married, he fetched away,
and when he had abused the^ sent them to their spouses again. The richest and
welthiest persons, either he drove out of the City, or elsse caused them to
be put to death, and seized their goods. And when he saw there was no more
for him to catch conveniently, he compassed all the whole city by a subtle
invention. At such time as the Locrines were oppressed with the wars of
Leophron king of Rhegi^n, they made a vow The vn^ayth ^uines of De^ ^is toward
the Locrines
that if they wan the upper hand, they would upon a feastfull day of Venus, set
their virgins in the open stews for all men to abuse. The which vow being left
unperformed, and having unfortunate wars with the Lucanes, Dennis called
them together before him, and there exhorted them to send their wives and
daughters, as gorgeously apparelled and decked as they could into the temple of
Venus, out of the which there should be a hundred drawn by lot to perform the
common vow, the which for religions sake should stand in the stews for the
space of one month all their husbands being before sworn, not to have to do
with any of them. And to thentent the maidens thus per forming the common vow,
should not be hindered thereby, they should make a decre that none other maid
should be ensured to any husband before those other were married. This counsel
was well allowed, as in the which provision seemed to be made, both for the
performans of their superstitious vow, and allo for the preservation of the
chastity o^ their virgins. Whereupon all the women assembled into the temple of
Venus so gorgeously and costly attired, as who might be best, among whom Dennis
sent his men of war, and stripped them every one, conuertinge their jewels and
sumptuous ornaments to his own gain and pro^it, some of their hus bands being
very welthy men, he killed, and some of the women he put to the torture to make
the confess where their husbands money lay. When he had with these and such
Dennis is ex ^uised, (...) recou^reth (...).
like suttle^ies reigned by the space of. vi. years, the Locrines conspired
against him, and drove him out of the city, from whence he returned into Sicil,
and there by treson (no man mistrusting any thing after so long continuauns o^
peace) recovered the city Syracuse. While these things were a do^ng in Sicil,
in the mean time in Affricke, Hanno prince of Carthage, began to employe his
richesse, (by Hann^s (...) spiracies against Ca^ thage.
the which he surmounted the power of the common weal, about compassing of the
souerainty, entendynge to have slain the Senate, and to have made himself king.

To the perfourming of the which mischeuous enterprise, he had chosen a
certain day, in the which he should marry his daughter solempnly? to the
intent that under the color of perfourming his vows, he might the easyer
work his wickedness, and the (...) bring his mischeuous devises to effect
unespied. And therefore he prepared a feast for the people in the open porches
and galleries of the City, and for the Senate in his own house. To the intent
that having covertly and without witnesses killed the Senatoures with poyson^d
drinks, he might with the more ease usurp upon the common weal, being
destitute of her patrones and defendoures. The which thing being by the
servants bewrayed to the Magistrates, the mischief was avoided but not
punished: least in a man of so great power, the matter being known might put
them to more trouble, then being but only surmised. Being therefore contented
to have restrained him of his purpose, they made a decree, wherein was limited
what cost should be bestowed upon marriages, straightly charging and
commaundinge the same to be observed, not of any one man, but of all men in
general, to the intent the person should not seem to be noted, but the vices
rebuked. Being by this d^uise prevented, he stirred the bondmen to rebellion,
and having appointed a day again for the slaughter, when he saw himself the
second time bewrayed, fearing to be arraigned of treson, he took a certain
strong hold with twentye thousand bondmen well armed.

There whiles he solicited the Afres and the king of Hanno is take and punish^
Mauritane, he was taken, and being sore whipped, and his ^yes pulled out,
and his arms and legs broken, as th^ughe every member were severally
punished, he was put to death in the open sight of the people, and his body
being torn with whippinge, was hanged upon a gibbet. Moreover his sons and
kinsmen euerychone of them, (were they never so giltlesse,) were all put to
execution, to thentent there should not of so wicked a stock remain any impe,
either to ensue his example in doing the like mischief, or to revenge his
death. In the mean time Dennis being received Syracuse, persisting every day
more cruel then other toward the City, they conspired against him again, and
besieged him. Then saying no remedy, he deposed himself, and yealded to the
Syracusanes Dennis dep^ seth him self.
both his hold and his host, and receiuinge no more but his own private
stuff, went his way as a banished man to Corynthe. There thinkinge the basest
to be the surest estate, he fell to a most filthy and loathsome trade of living.
The vile and loathsome life of Dennis.
For he thought it not enough to loyter up and down the streates, unless he
were bibbing in every tippling house, nor to be seen in Tauernes and houses, but
to sytte still in them all day from morning to night. Moreover he would braule
with every rascal and varlet for moon shine in the water, goo all to ragged
and slouenlye, provoke men to laughter rather then laugh himself, stand gaping
and gasing in the shambles, devouring with his eyes the things he could not
bye with his monye, skolde with baudes before the Wardens, and in fine do all
things in such wise, that he might some rather to be despised the^ feared.
Dennis pro^esseth him self a schole master.
Last of all he professed himself a scholemaster, and taught children in a
threwaylet, to thentent he might either be openly seen of them that feared him,
or else might the easier bring himself in contempt of them that feared him not.
For all be it he always abounded in tirannous vices, yet notwithstanding this
was but a counterfetting of vices, and no natural disposition: and he did
these things of a pollicye, then for that he had forgotten his royal and
princely behavior, because he knew by proof how hateful the name of a Tyran
is, yea though they have no ^chesse nor power at all. And therefore he labored
to take a way the envy of things past, by bringing himself in contempt for his
present demeanor, having not so much regard what was for his honor, as what
was for the sauegard of his life. Yet notwithstanding among al these cou^terfet
dissimulations and policies, he was thrice accused to have sought means to
make himself king again, and nothing auailed so much to his acquitall, as that
all men had him in disdain. In the time that these things were a doing, the
Carthaginenses being afraid at the prosperous (...) to note the do ings of
great Alexander.
success of great Alexanders affairs, for doubt least having conquered the
kingdom of the Persians, he would also adioyne Affricke there unto, to f^le how
he was mineded, Hamil^ar surnamed Rhodanus a man far passing all others in
wit and eloquence. For it increased their f^ar* because they saw their mother
city Tyrus, the authoure of their beginning was taken, and the city alexandria
an enemy to the estate of Carthage builded in the bound^s of Affricke and
Egypt, and also the fortunate felicity of the king himself, of whose
covetousness and good fortune, they thought there would never be none and,
Hamilcor therefore attaining to the speech of Alexander, by the help of
Parmenio, fained him self to be driven out of his country, and that he was
fled to the king for succor, off^ryng him self to serve him as a soldier in
his wars, by the which policy having perfect intelligence of the king^s
intent and purpose, he advertised his country men thereof in tables of wood,
covered over with plain wax. But The (...) of the (...).
the Carthaginenses after the death of the king, when he returned into his
country, not only rewarded him not, but also most cruelly put him to death, as
though he had gone about to challenge the City to the king.

The. xxii. Book.
AGathocles the Tiranne of Sicill, which succeaded in the estate of ^
Dennis last before him, clymbed from a low and base degree, to the majesty
of the kingdom. For he was a potters son of Sicill, and there was no more
honesty in his childhode, then there was honor in the stock of his auncestry.
For being of favor and personage exceeding beautiful, he lived a great while in
sufferance of most filthy bugge^y, when he was ones paste boys estate, he
turned his lecherous lust from men unto women. After this being disfamed with
both kinds, he changed that trade of living, and fell to robberye. In
process of time when he came to Syracuse, and was taken into the city as
among others inhabiters, he was a great while without credit or estimation.
Because he seemed not to have any good to loose, nor any honesty to distaine. In
fine obtaining the room of a rascal soldier, look how dishonest he was in
his living before, even as seditious was he in his doings then, and most
ready and forward to do all kind of mischief. For he was counted strong of
hand, and in talking to the people very eloquent. Therefore within short space
he was made captain of a hundred men, and anon after The first risyng of
Agathocles unto estimation.
marshall of the host. In the first battle, which was against the Aetnea^s,
he gave the Syracusanes great proof of his towardness. In the next followinge
against the Campaines, he made all men conc^iue so good opinion of him, that
he was substituted in the room of the graunde captain Damasco deceased, whose
wife (with whom he had committed aduoutry in the life of her husband,) afte^
his decease,) he took in marriage. And being not content that of a beggar he
was suddenly made rich; he exercysed rouing on the sea against his own
country. But it was his chance to be saved, because when his mates were taken,
and put to the torture, they confessed nothing of him. Twice he went about
to usurp the Empire of Sy^acuse, and twice he was banished for his labor.
The Murgantines among whom he lived in the time of his exile, for hatred they
bare to the Syracusanes, created him first their Praetor, and afterward their
captain. In that war he both took the city of the Leontines, and (...)
^racuse.
besieged the city of Syracuse. To the r^ue whereof Hamilcar captain of the
Carthaginenses being requested to come, laying a side all emnity and hatred
sent thither a crew of souldioures.

And so at one time and instant, the City Syracuse was defended lovingly and
friendly by the enemy, and ^ye assailed by her own Citizen. But Agathocles when
he saw that the town was more manfullye defended then assaulted, he sent a
pursiuant to Hamilcar, desiringe him to do so much for him, as to take up the
matter between him and the Syracusanes, and to be as an indifferente judge for
the determination of some peace betwixt them, promisyng to do the best that
lay in him to recompense his gentleness.

Where upon Hamilcar being fulfilled with hoope and partly fearinge his
power, entered a league of frendshippe A (...) on (...) Ha^ ^ Agatho^*
with him, upon condition that look how much he furthered Agathocles in
strength against the Syracusanes, so much should Agathocles recompense him
withal again to the furtheraunce of his advancement, at home in his own
native country.

By means of this composition, Agathocles was not only reconciled and brought
to atonement with the Syracusanes, but also he was made Praetor of the City.
Then the holy fire and the tapers were brought forth, whereupon agathocles
laying his hand, swear before Hamilcar to become true subjects to the
Carthaginenses. Hereupon (...) is sworn to the Carthagiuenses.
receiving of him five thousand afres, he put to death all the noble men that
were of greatest power and authority, and so as it were to thentent to refourme
the state of the commonwealth, he commanded the people to assemble His
extreme (...) aga^t the (...).
before him in the Theater, gathering the Senators into the counsel house, as
though he mineded to make some ordinance or decree before. When he had
brought his matters to this point, he sent his soldiers to besiege the people,
and he him self slew the senators, the which slaughter being finished, he put
to death also all such of the commons, as were the welthiest and forwardest
persons. These things being thus compassed, he mustered soldiers, and
raised an army: with the which being strengthened, he suddenly invaded the
next cities, lokyng He ^eth the confederates of the Cartha ^ses.
for no hostility. Furthermore by the sufferance of Hamilcar, he wrongfully
entreated and shamefully handled the confederates of the Carthaginenses. For
the which cause they made complainte to the Senate Carthage, not so much of
agathocles, as of hamilcar, accusinge the one as a The complaint of the confede
^tes.
Lordly Tirant, and the other as a traytoure, by whom they were sold by
composition and bargain between the^ two, to the uttermost enemy of their
estate, to whom at the beginning in confirmation of the said composition and
agreement, was delivered Syracuse, the city that had ever been most enemy to the
Afres, and an enuier of the Carthaginenses, always contending with them for
the Empire of Sicil: and now moreover were betrayed to ye same person, the
cities of their confederates, under a counter^aite pretense of peace. Wherefore
they gave them warning, that if they looked not to these matters in time, with
in a while they would light upon their own heads, and soon after they
should feel what damage they should bring, as well upon their own country of
Affricke, as up (...) the pore Island of Sicil. By means of these complaints,
the Senate was sore moved to displesure against Hamilcar. But forasmuch as he
was in Office, they gave their Hamilcar (...) condemned (...) treson s^ lie.
judgment secretly upon him, commaundinge their verdits before they should be
red to be cast into a pot together, and there ^o be sealed up, until the
other Hamilcar the son of Gysgo, were returned out of Sicil. But the death of
Hamilcar prevented the subtle devises and unknown verdites of the
Carthaginenses, and he was delivered by He (...).
the benefit of death, whom his own countrymen had wrongfully condemned
without hearing of his answer. The which thing gave Agathocles occasion to move
war against the Carthaginenses. The first encounter that he Agath^ is overcome
twice, and (...) b^eged.
had, was against Hamilcar the son of Gisgo. Of who^e being vanquished, he
retired to Syracuse to raise a great power, and to renew the battle again. But
he had like for tune in the second encounter as he had in the first. Therefore
when the Carthagin^nses having the upper hand, had besieged Syracuse, and that
Agathocles perceived he The (...) Agath^s*
was neither of power to encounter them, nor sufficiently furnished to endure
out the ^iege, and that moreover his own confederates being offended with his
crueltye, had forsaken him, he determined to transfer the wars into Affricke.
I assure you it was a wonderful audacitye, that he should enterprise to make
war against the City of them, whom he was not able to match in the soil
of his own city, and that being not able to defend his own, he should give
the adventure upon other men's, and that being vanquished, he should proudly
vaunt him self over the conqueroures. The keeping secret of this enterprise,
was as wonderful as was the devise thereof, for the people could learn
nothing at his hand, but that he had found away to get the victory.
Willing them to do no more but take good hearts to them to abide the siege
which should not be long: or elsse if there were any that had ^ot the heart
to abide the adventure of the present estate, he gave him fre liberty to go his
way whether he would. Whereupon when he had discharged a thousand and sy^
hundred, he furnished the reast that remained with vietuall, artillerye, and
wages, according as the estate of the siege required. He took with him no
more but fifty Talents toward his charges to spend at that time, thinking it
better to get the reast, (if neade should require more) of his ennemies then
of his subjects. Then he set at liberty all the bondmen that were of years mete
for the wars, and took an oath of them, and put them with the most part of
his other soldiers into his ships, thinking that forasmuch as he had made
them all one in estate and degree, there would be strife among them who might
behave himself most manfully. All the reast he left to the defense Agathocles
sa^leth into ^ricke.
of his country. This done the seventh year of his reign, having in his
company his two sons Archagathus and Heraclida, noone of his souldioures
knowinge whether he would go, he directed his course into Afric, where as all
his men supposed they should have gone a forraging, either into Italy, or elsse
into the Isle of Sardinia, he never made them privy where about he went, until
he had set his host a land in Affricke, and then he told them all what he was
mineded to do. He showed them in what The effect of Agathocles oration to
his sold youres.
case Syracuse stood, for the help whereof there remained none other mean, but
to do to their enemy as he had don to them. For wars were to be handled
otherwise at home then abroad. At home a man could have none other help, then
his country is able to auorde him: abroad the enemy might be vanquished by his
own power, by reason the adherents and partakers being weary of their long
continued Empire would commonly fail them, and look for the help of forayne
Princes And to the furtheraunce hereof, the cities and castles of Affricke were
not environed with walls, nor situatein mountains, but set upon the plain
ground in open and champion fields without any munition or defense, all the
which for fear of being destroyed, would easily be entreated to take their
part in the war. Wherefore the Carthaginenses should have whotter wars at
their own doors out of Afric, then out of Sic^l, and aid would assemble
from all parts against that one city, gr^ater in name then in power, where fore
he should find the strength there, which he brought not with him. Moreover
the sudden fear of the Carthaginenses should be no small furtheraunce to his
victory, which being amazed at the wonderful audacitye of their enemies, would
tremble and quake for fear. Besides this to thencrease of the same, they
should behold the burning of their villages, the beatinge down of their
castles and holds, the sacking of the stoburne cities, and finallye the
besiegement of Carthage it self, by all the which things they should well
feel, that they them selves, lay as open to the wars of other men, as other
men lay open to the wars of them. By the which means not only the
Carthaginenses might be vanquished, but also Sicill be set at liberty. For
their ennemies would not lie still at the siege there, when they should hear
that their own were in ieoperdy. Wherefore they could not have devised where to
have found a more easy warfare, nor a more rich and (...) pray. For had they
ones taken Carthage, the conqueroures should have all Affricke and Sicill in
reward for their labor. And the glory and renown of so honorable a warfare
should be so great, as that it might never be forg^tten while the world stands,
so that it should be said, that they only hade been the men, which had
turned the war upon their enemies heads, which they could not out stand at
home in their own country, which of their own accord had perased and pursued
upon their conqueroures, and which had besieged the besiege^s of their city.

Therefore they ought all with val^aunte and cheerful hearts enterprise that
^atre, then the which there could a neither any greater reward be given them
if they wan the victory, nor more honorable monument if they were overcome.
With these and such like enforcementes, the hearts of his soldiers were
greatly encoraged. But the sight of a wonder that happened, troubled their
minds, because that as they sailed, the Sun was Eclipsed. Of the which thing
the king was as careful to give them a In Eclipse of the Sun, with thynter
pretatio^ there of.
due reason, as of the war: affirmynge that if it had happened before their
setting forth, it might have been thought that the wonder had manased them that
were to set forth. But now for as much as it chanced after they were com forth,
it threatened them against whom they went. Furthermore the Eclipsing of the
natural Planets, did always alter the present estate of things. Wherefore
there was none other thing mente, but that the estate of Carthage florishinge
in wealth and richesse, and his estate oppressed with aduersitye, must suffer
an alteration and exchange. When he had thus comforted his soldiers
Agathocles sets his ships on fire.
by the consent of his army he set all his ships on fire, to thentent they
might all know, that saying there was no help in running away, they must
either win or elsse dye. Afterward when that they bare down all that came in
their way which way so ever they went, settinge towns and castles on fire,
Hanno captain of Carthage met the^ with thirty thousand Afres, in the which
encounter was A slaughter of the Ca^tha ginenses.
slain of the Sicilians two, and of the Carthaginenses iii. M and the captain
him self, through his victory, the hearts of the Sicilians were strengthened,
and the hearts of the Carthaginenses discouraged. Agathocles having vanqui shed
his enemies, wan cities and holds, took great booties and prays, and slew
many thousand of his enemies. Then he pitched his camp about v. miles of from
Carthage, to thentent they might behold from the v^ry walls of the city, the
loss of their dearest things, with the wasting of their fields, and the
burning of their villages. In the mean time there went a great brute over all
Affricke, of the overthrow and slaughter of the Carthaginien army, and of the
cities that were won. Whereat every man was amassed and wondered how so great an
Empire, should have so sudden an overthrow, in espetially by an enemy all ready
vanquished. This wonderment turned by little and little into disdain of the
Carthaginenses. For ere it was long after not only Affricke, but also the
chefest cities there aboutes following this sudden alteration, The cities o^
A^icke, reuolte to Agathocles.
revolted to Agathocles, and aided him both with victual and monye. Besides
these adversities of the Carthaginenses, to the augmentation of their miserable
cala mities, it happened that their captain withal his army was utterly destroyed
in Sicil. For after the departure of Agathocles A slaughter of the Carth^
ginenses in Sic^.
out of Sicill, the Carthaginenses became more siouthful and negligent in
their siege at Syracuse, which thing Antander the brother of king Agathocles
espyinge, issued out upon them, and s^ue them utterly euerychone, whereof
sorrowful tidinges were brought to Carthage. Therefore for as much as the
Carthaginenses had like misfortune abroad as at home, here upon not only the
tributary cities, but also the kings that were in league and amity with them,
waying freship by fortune, and not by faithfulness revolted from them. Among
others there was one Ophellas king of Cyrene, who upon a wicked hope gapinge
for the dominion of all Affricke, entered in The king Cyrene Cyrene (...) teth
to Agathocles.
league with Agathocles by his ambassadoures, and bad conditioned with him,
that when the Carthaginenses were ones overcome, Agathocles should take
thempire of Sicil, and he thempire of Afric. Therefore when Tphel las was come
with a great host to aid him in the wars, Agathocles entertaining him with
fair words and counterfeit curtesy, very lowly and humbly, because Ophellas had
adopted him his son, after they had many times and often dined and supped
together, he slew him unawares, and entering upon his army, in an other sore
encounter, vanquished the Carthaginenses now coming to the field withal the
power and furniture they were hable to Another great slaug^ ter of the (...)
thaginienses.
make, not without great slaughter and bludshed on both parts. Through the
discomfiture of this overthrow, the Carthaginenses were brought to such an after
deal, that if there had not risen a mutiny in Agathocles camp, Bomilcar the
captain of the Carthaginenses had with his army revolted unto him.

For the which offense the Carthagi. nailed him upon a cross in the mids of
the market place: to thentent that the The punishment of Bomilcar.
same place might be a monument and remembrance of his punishment, which had
before times been an advancement of his honor. But Bomilcar took very stoutlye
the cruelty of his country, in so much that from the top of The words of
Bomilcar upon the (...).
the cross, as if it had been from the judgment seat, he preched against
the wickedness of his citizens, obiectynge to them, sometime their unrightful
entrapping of Hanno upon malice and envy, falsely surmising that he went about
to make himself king, someitme the banishment of innocent Gysgo without cause
why, sometime their seacrete verdits against his uncle Hamilcar, because he
sought to make Agathocles their friend rather then their enemy. When he had
vttred these things with a loud voice in a great audiens of people, he gave up
the ghost. In the Agatho^les returns into Sicil, and rais^th the siege of
Syracuse.
mean season Agathocles having put his enemies to the worse in Affricke,
delivering the charge of his host to his son Archagathus, returned himself
with speed into Sicill, thincking that all that ever he had done in A^ricke
was to no purpose, if Syracuse were still be^ieged. For after that Hamilcar the
son of G^go was slain, the Carthaginenses sent thither a new host of men.

Therefore as soon as Agathocles was come into Sicil, all the cities hearing of
his doings in Aff^icke, yielded them selves to him, who might yield fas^est: by
means whereof ha^ing driven the Carthaginenses out of Sicill, he took upon him
as kingdom of all the whole Island. When he came into Afric again, his
soldiers welcomed him with a mutiny. For his son had delayed y^ payment A
mutiny.
of their wages, until the coming of his father. Wherefore he called them
before him, and entreted them with gentle words, saying they ought not to
demand wa ges at his hand, but to seek it at their ennemies hand, for as the
victory should extend to them al so the pray should be common to them all in
likewise. Desiringe them to play the men and take pain a little while, until
the remnant of the wars were dispatched, considering they knew well enough, y^
if Carthage were ones taken, it were able to satisfy al their desires, with more
then they could ^ope for. Ha uing thus appeased the vprour in his ca^pe, within
a few Agatho^es takes a (...) by (...)*
days after he led his army to the camp of his ennemies. There by setting upon
them unadvisedly, be lost the grea ter part of his army. Being therefore retired
into his ca^pe, when he perceived how his sou^diers grudged and maligued at
him for aduenturing so rashly and v^aduisedlye, fearing moreover thold
displesure for nonpaime^t o^ their wa ges* in the dead of the night, he fled
out of the camp, taking no mo with him but only his son Archagathus. The
which thing when his soldiers understood, they qua Agathocles steal^th from
his (...)
ked for fear, as if they had been taken prisoners by their enemies, crying out
that their king had now twice forsaken the^ in the mids of their enemies, and
that he had left the^ in danger of their lives, whom he ought not to have left
unburied. As they would have pursued the king, they were stopped by the
Minidians, and so returned into their ca^p^ having taken archagathus, who had
lost his father by reason of the darkness of the night. agathocles in the same
ships that he came in out of Sicil, with such as he had left in them to keep
them, was transported unto Syracuse: a singular example of wickedness, a king
to be a forsaker of his own army, and a father to be a betrayer of his own
children. In the mean time in affrike, after the flying away of the king, his
soldiers falling to composition with their ennemies, slew agathocles sons,
and yielded the^ selves to the Carthaginenses, archagathus when Agathocl^s sonns
are (...) to death.
he should be put to death by arces^laus one that before time had been his
fathers friend, asked him what he thought agathocles would do to his children,
by whom he was made childelesse? Then he answered it was inough^ for him, that
he knew they were a live after the children of Agathocl^ takes (...) with the
C^ thaginenses.
agathocles: after this the Carthaginenies sent captains into Sicil to pursue
the remnaunt of the war, with who^e agathocles made peace upon indifferent
articles.

The. xxiii. Book.
AGathocles king of Sicil, having made peace with the Carthaginienses, subdued
certain of the Cities, which upon trust of their own strength rebelled
against him. Here upon as though he had been enclosed in a straight within
Agathocles makes war in Italy.
the Island, (of the Empire where of at the first beginning he looked not for
any part at all) he passed in to Italye, following the ensample of Dennis which
subdued many cities of Italy. The first therefore whom he proclaimed his
enemies, were the Brutians. which seemed to be both of most puissaunce and
of most wealth, and also rediest to do their neighbors wrong. For they had
erpulsed many cities of the Greek descent out of Italye. Furthermore they had
also v^nquished the^r own founders the Lucanes and made peace with them upon
equal conditions. So cruel hearted were they, that they spared not even their
own first founders. The Lucranes did bring up their children after the same
mane^ that the Lacedaemonians are wont to do. For from the very first time
they began to grow past children, they were kept in the country among shepherdes
and grasiers, without attendans or service, without garments to put on their
backs, or bed to lie upon, to thentent yt from their tender The manner of the
educati on of the Lucanes.
years they might enure the^ selves without help of ye city, to away with
hardness and sparinge. Their meat was such as they could get by huntinge,
their drink was either methe, milcke, or elsse fair water of the spring, so
were they hardened to endure the pains of warrefare, of this sort of people,
fifty at the first being wont to steal cattle out of their neighbors ground,
and afterward The (...) of the Bru^ans.
growing to a greater noumber, by the resort of such persons as were allured to
live upon the spoil, made the country so hot, that no man almost durst
stir abroad. Dennis therefore king of Sicil, being in manner wearyed with the
continual complaints of his confederates, sent ^.
over sire hundred Afres to suppress them, whose castle by the treason of a
woman called Brutia they won, and there builded a city which was soon peopled
by the confluens of the shepheardes, resorting thither upon hope of the new
city, and they called them selves Brutians after the name of the woman. The
first war that they had, was with the Lucanes the authors of their
beginning. The war^ of ^he Brut^ans.
With the which victory being encouraged, and having concluded an equal and
indi^erent peace with the^, they conquered their other neighbors by the sword,
and they gat so great richesse and power within a while, that they seemed
pernicious and able to do displeasure even unto kings. Finally A lerander
king of Epire coming into Italy with a great host to the aid of the Greek
Cities, was wythall his army by them utterly destroyed. Where upon their
cruelnesse being enflamed with contynuall success of prosperity, became
terrible to their neighbors a long time after. At the last Agathocles being
called to help, in hope to enlarge his kingdom, passed out of Sicilie
Agathocle^ arrived in (...)* taly.
into Italy. As he was coming toward them, for fear of his puissaunce, they
sent their ambassadoures to him, requesting him of peace and friendship. Whom
Agathocles biddinge to supper, to the intent they should not see the shippinge
of his army, appointed to common with them the next day, and so in the mean
while took ship privily, and stale over from them. But the end of this
fraud was not to be reio^sed at. For within a few days after, he was
constrained to return into Sicill, by the Agathocles falls syck^.
force of a disease, wherewith he was taken over all his body* the pestilent
humor spreding it self through every sinew and joint, as thaugh that every
member had been at civil war one against another. Of the which no hope of
recovery appering, there arose war between his sone and his nephew, each of
them chalenging the kingdom, as if he had been dead all ready, in the which his
son was slain, and his nephew usurped the kingdom. Agathocles therefore when he
saw the grief of his disease, and the thought of his mind still greuouser and
greuouser, each encreasyng by the furtherance of the other, being utterly in
despair, caused his wife Theogen to take his two little sons that he had
begotten of her, withal his treasure, household, household stuff and princelye
furniture appertaining unto him, of which no king was better stored then he
was, and to sail into Egipte from whence he took her to his wife, for fear
least his nephewe who had robbed him of his kingdom, should also play the enemy
with them. How be it his wife entreted him earnestly a great while, that A
fay^hful and loving wife.
she might not be drawn from him in his sickness, least her departure might
be worthily likened to the murder done by his nephew, and men might report
that she had as cruelly abandoned her husband, as he had supplanted his
graundfather: saying, that when she was married to him, he took her not to be
his companion and partaker of prosperitye only, but of all other fortune what
so ever should happen. Wherefore it should not grieve her to loose her life, so
she might tarry with her husband to the last gasp, and according to her
duty, as she was bound of love and womanhode to do, see him honorably entered,
which thing were she ones gone, no man would take upon him A descriptyon of a
lamentable departure
to do. When the little ones should goo away, they embraced their father and
held him about the neck, weeping and crying out: on the other side the wife,
as she that never looked to se her husband more, had never done kissyng him. And
it was a lamentable thing to se how pit^ouslye thold man wept: the children
bewailing the father ready to die, and the father moning his banished children.
The one sorowing to leave their sick and diseased old father all alone as
desolate, the other lamentinge to leave his sons in penury, whom he had
begotten to inherit his kingdom. Moreover all the palace range with the noise
of such as stood about weping and sorowing to se ^o cruel The death (...)
Agatho^s.
a deuorce and departure. At the length the necessitye of their forced
departing, was the end of their weeping, and the death of the king ensued
immediately upon the departure of the children. While these things were a
doing, the Carthaginenses having intelligence how the world went in Sicil,
thincking good occasion to be given the^ of recovering the whole Island, sailed
thither with a great power, and subdued many cities. The same time, Pyrrhus
The (...) ^uade (...).
made war against the Romans, who (as is said before) being desired to come
to the aid of the Sicilians, when he came to Syracuse and had subdued many
Cities: he was proclaimed king of Sicil like as he was of Epyre. In the
prosperous success of which things greatly rejoicing, He (...) to the (...) of
Pyrrhus mentioned (...) the. xviii. book.
he appointed that his son Heleu should be king of Sicil, as in the right of
his graundfather (for he was begotten of king Agathocles daughter) and his
son Alexander should be king of Italy. After this he fought many prosperous
battles with the Carthaginenses. Within a while after, there came ambassadors
from his con^ederates in Italy, bringing him word that it was not possible to
make resistens against the Romans, but that they must needs yield, unless he
reseued them. Being troubled with so doutful a danger, and not knowing what to
do, or which of them he might rescue first, he took spedy advice as concerning
both. For the one side the Carthaginises assailed him, and on the other side
the Romans, so that it seemed a dangerous matter not to pass his army into
Italy, and yet more dangerous to lead his host (...) of Sicil, least the one
should be lost for want of succoure, or the other by withdrawing his help from
them.

In this rage of dangers, the sure^ haven of all other counsels, and aduises
seemed to be, first with all his power to try the matter in Sicil, and then
having vanquished y^ Carthaginenses, to transport his victorious army into
Italy. Therefore all be it he gate the upper hand in that battle, yet
notwithstanding for as much as he went his Pyrrhus lo^eth the king dome of
Sicill.
way out of Sicil, he was accounted to run away as a vanquished person, and
therefore his alies and confederates revolted from him. By means whereof he
lost the kingdom as lightly, as he came by it easly. Furthermore finding no
better success in Italye then he had in Sicill, be retired into Epire. The
wonderful chance of both, is to be noted for ensample. For even as before
through prosperous fortune, all things flowing beyond his desire and
expectation, he had gotten the Empire of Italye and A notable example of the
variableness of fortune.
Sicill with so many victories against the Romans: so now when fortune had
changed her copy, as it were to make a show of the frailty of man, throwinge
down the things she had builded, besides the loss of Sicil she paid him home
with shipwreck on the sea, with a shameful overthrow against the Romans,
and with a dishonorable departure out of Italye. After the departure of Pyrthus
out of Sicil, Hiero was created chief officer, who was a man of such modesty,
that by the favorable consent Of the educa tion, and preferment of Hiero.
of all the Cities, he was first made captain against the Carthaginenses, and
afterward king. Of this royal estate to come, his bringing up when he was a
very babe, was as it were a foreteller. For he was begotten of a noble man
called Hieroclytus, whose pedegre was fet from Gelus an ancient king of Sicil.
But by his mothers side he was borne of a base and very dishonorable stock,
for he was be gotten of a bondwoman, and therefore cast away by his father as
a dishonor and reproach to his stock. But the Bees fineding the little babe
without healpe of man, wroughte their combs about him, and nouryshed him with
honny many days together.

Upon which occasion his father at the^ warning of the southsayers, which
told him that the child should be a king, took the child to him, and
brought him up wythall diligence in hoope of the state that was be highte him.
As the same child sat at his book in the schole among other of his fellows,
suddenly there came in a wolf among the^ and snatched the book out of his
hand. Moreover being a yongman when he went first to the wars, an Eagie
came and ^ate upon his target, and an Owl upon his spear. The which wonder
betokened that he should be advised in council, and ready of hand, and also
that he should be a king. Finally he fought hand to hand against many
chalengers; and ever went away with the victory. King Pyrrhus rewarded him with
many rewards of ch^alry. He was of personage exceeding beautiful, of strength
wonderful as might be in a man, gentle to talk unto, just in his dealinges,
in his government vprighte and indifferent, so that nothing in the world wanted
in him appertaining to a king, save only a kingdom.

The. xxiiii. Book
WHile these things were a doing in H (...) l^ft the xvi. (...).
Sicil, in the mean time in Greece, through the dissension and wars of
Ptolomeus Ceraunicus, Antiochus, and Antigonus among them s^lues, almoost all
Greece at the instigatyon of the Spartanes the ringe leaders Ant^chus the son
of (...), and An^gonus the son of (...)
thereof, encouraged with hope of liberty, as if occasion had been given to pull
their necks out of the yoke of bondage, sendynge ambassadoures one to
another, to knit them selves togetogether, in aliance and society, fell to
rebellyon. And least they might seem to have taken wepon in hand against The
Greeks rebeil against them^yre.
Antigonus, under whose governance they were, they assailed the Aetolians his
confederates, pretendynge the cause of their war to be, for that the said
Aetolians had entered and held by force the feld Cyreus, which by y^ whole
consent of Greece was consecrated to Apollo. As captain of this war, they chose
one Aran. Who assemblynge his whole power together, spoiled the towns and
foraged the The Greeks are ^ut to ^ght by the ^lian ^heardes.
corn that was situate and growinge in the forenamed fields: and such as they
could not carye away with them, he set on fire. The which thing the shepherds
of the Aetolians beholding out of the mountains, gathered them selves to the
number of five hundred, and fell upon their enemies as they were skattered,
(and not knowinge how many there were of them, by reason that the sudden fear
together with the smoke of the fyres, had taken their sight from them,) and
having slain nine thousand of them; put the residue of the foragers to
flighte. Aft^rwarde when the Lacedaemonians went about to renew the wars
again, many cities denied them aid, because they thought He pursues the
treachery and deceit of Ptolomy, ^e^ ^oned in the xvi. book.
they sought the souerainty, and not the liberty of Greece. In the mean season
the war was ^yshed among the kings. For Ptolomy having expulsed Antigonus,
and seized the whole kingdom of Macedone into his hand, took a truse with
Antiochus, and joined aliaunce with Py^hus by giving him his daughter in
marriage. Afterward being rid of outward fear, he turned his ungodly and wicked
mind to devising mischief against his own house* imagining treson against his
sister* (...), to the intent to deprive her children of their lives, and her of
the possession of the city Cassanoria. The first ^ynte of his crafty
conuey^nce, was under the pretense of cou^terfet love, to desire his (...) in
marriage. For otherwise then under color of concord, he could not compass to
get her children into his hands, whose kingdom be had wrongefully taken
front them. But his ^ister knew his wicked intent well mough. Whereupon
perceiuinge that she trusted him not, he sent her word that he would make her
chil dren fellows in Empire with him. Against whom he had made war, not
because he was minded to take the king dome from them, but because he desired
that they should have it of his free gift and mere liberty. For the more
assurance whereof, he willed her to send some trusty friend of hers to receive
an oath of him, and he wo^ld in the presence of the party, before the Gods of
his country, bind himself with what oath or curse she would desire in all the
world. Arsinoe being in doubt what she were best to do, (for if she sent she
knew she should be deceived by forsweringe of himself, and if she sent not,
she was a frayde she should provoke her cruel brother to rage,) and taking more
care for her children then for herself, whom she partlye hoped to save by
mean of this marriage, sent one of her friends called Dyon. Whom Ptolomy
brought into the most holy temple of Jupiter the aunc^test place of religion
and of greatest reu^rence in all Macedone, and there laying his hands upon the
aultares, and touching the very images of the godd^s as they stood in their
shrines, swear before him with such terrible oaths and extreme curses as never
were hard of, that he desired his sisters marriage with out any fraud, craft,
deceit, or dissimulation, and that he would proclaim her Duene, not purposinge
to take any other wife to spite her withal, or to have any other children then
her sons. Arsinoe after the time she was thus fulfilled with hope, and
delivered from fear, came and commoned with her brother her self. Whose
smilinge l^s and flattering countenance, pretending as much good ^ayth as he
promised by his oath, brought her into such a fools paradise, that she
consented to marrye with her brother, contrary to the mind of Ptolomye her
son, who ever told her there was deceit in the matter. The marriage (...)
ryeth his owne^ (...).
was solempnised with great sumptuousness and joy.

Furthermore he sommoned all his host before him, an^ there himself setting
the crown upon his sisters head proclaimed her Duene. Whereupon ar^noe being
exceadynge glad and joyful, for as much as she had recovered y^ which she had
lost by the death of her first husband Ly^chus, of her own accord and fre will
desired her husband into her city Gassandria, for covetousness of which
city, all this craft and deceit was wroughte. She went thither before him, and
proclaimed that the day of his coming should be kept holy day through all the
city, geuinge commandment that the houses, the temples, and all other places
should be decked and garnished, and that altares and sacrifices should be set
forth orderly in a read^esse. Moreo^er she caused her two sons Lysimachus of
xvi. years, and Philip three years younger then he, both children of excellent
beuty and favor, to goo meet him with crowns on their heads. Whom Ptolomy
to cloak his de^ with all, desirously and beyond all measure of true love and
affection, (...) Judas (...).
enbrased and kissed a great while together. But as soon as he came within the
gate, he com^aunded his men of war to take the hold of the town, and to
kill the children. Who flying to their mother for help, were slain even in
her bosom as they hong kissing about her neck. Arsinoe cried out and asked
what she had done, or wherein she had trespassed, eitherin her marriage or a^er
her marriage, whereby she should des^rue to be dealt with so cruelly. Oftentimes
she put herself between y^ sword and her children offering to die for them,
oft^times she embraced and covered her childre^es bodies with her own body, and
would gladly have received the wounds that they should have. At the last
being not suffered so much as to have the burial of her children, she was
thruste out of the town with two ^untes in a torn ^ne, and her hear about her
ears, and so went as a The natural affectyon of amother.
(...) person to Samothorace, so much the more miserable, in that she might
not be suffered to die with her children, offeringe to dye for them, oftentimes
she embraced and covered her childrens bodies with her own body, and would
gladlye have received the wounds that they should have. At the (...) being
not suffered so much as to have the burial of her children, she was thru^e
out of The (...) crucity of P^o (...) toward his sister.
the town with two servants in a torn gown, and her hear abeute her
ears, and so went as a banishedde person to Samothorace, so much the more
miserable, in that she mygh^e not be suffered to die with her children. But
Ptolomye eskaped not with his wickedness unpunished. Murd^ (...) peth not
(...) pun^.
For within short time after through the vengeance of the Gods immortal,
for so many wilful periuries and so many cruel murders, he was berefte of his
kingdom by the french men and being taken prysonner, as he worthelye
deserved, his head was stricken from his shoulders.

For the french men aboundinge in multitude, in so Of the ^ges of the (...).
much that the country where they were bred was not hable to find them, sent
forth three hundred thousand men as it were on pilgrimage to seek them a new
dwelling place. Of the which one part rested in Italy, which also took the
c^ye of Rome and burnte it. Another part followinge the flighte of birds (for
the frenchmen are above all other nations coming in birdspillinge) with much
slaughter of the barbarous nations, pearsed unto the cost of Sclauonie, and
reasted in Pannonie. A kind of people fierce, hardy, warly, which first after
Hercules (who by doing the same before, purchased himself an immortal fame
of his prowess) climbed over the high tops and unmerciful cold places of
the Aipes. There having (...) the Pan^onians, they made war with their
neighbors many years together, sometime to their gain, and sometime to their
loss. Afterward being provoked by their fortunate success, they raised two
armies, whereof the one went toward Greece, the other toward Macedone, putting al
to the sword that came in their danger. By means whereof the names of the
French men was so terrible and so redouted, that even kings before they were
assailed, were glad and faien to give them great (...) of money, that they
might live in rest by the^. Only Ptolomy king of Macedone made light of the
matter, The (...) hardynesse of Ptolomy.
when he hard of the coming of the frenchmen. And eue^ as if it had been as
easy a matter with him, to dispatche wars as to do mischief, being pricked
forward there to with the furious remorse of his conscience, obiectinge before
his eyes the rememberaunce of his wicked murders, be met them with a few* and
those out of order. Furthermore he took skorne of the friendly offer made by the
ambassadoures of Dardanie, which was to send him twenty thousand men well
armed to help him, geuinge them moreover this taunt for their labor, saying
that the good days of Macedone were far spent, if after the time they had of
their own puissance alone, conquered all the East, they should have nead of the
Dardanians to defend their own country.

For he had in his ^oste the sons of them that had served under great
Alexander, and had subdi^ed the whole world. The which things when they were
reporsed to the king of Dardanie, he said that the famous and renowned Empire
of Macedone, would shortly decay through the rashness of an unadvised and
hastye young man. The french men therefore by the advice of (...) captain
Belgius* to the intent to try how the Macedones were mineded; sent
ambassadors to Ptolomye offering him peace, if so be it he would by it. But
Ptolomy (...) among his men, that the French men desired peace for fear of
him, no less vauntinge himself before the ambassadoures* then he had done
among his own friends* Denying to grant them peace any otherwise, the^ if they
gave him their noble men for hostages, and delivered (...) ^heyr armor and
weapons, so (...) would not trust them onless^ they were disarmed. When the
ambassadors had reported this answer, the frenchmen laughed (...) it, crying
out on every side that he should shortly feel (...) they offered him peace to
his own behofe or to theirs within a few days after, the matter came to hand
strokes, and the Macedones being vanquished were slain rygh^e down. Ptolomy
being very sore wounded in diverse (...), was The (...) of (...)
taken prisoner, his head was stricken of, and being put up on a spears point,
was carried up and down all the host, to the terroure of their ennemies. Few of
the Macedones eskaped by flight, the rest were either slain or taken
prisoners. When news hereof was spread through Macedone, they shut in the
gates of their citi^s and all was full The ^ful (...) of (...).
of sorrow and mourninge. One while they bewailed the loss of their sons,
another while they feared the besieging of their cities, at another time they
called upon the names of Philip and Alexander their kings, as if they had been
Gods, for help, casting in their minds, how that under them they had not
only lived in safety, but as conqueroures of the whole world. Beseechinge
them to defend their country, which through the (...) of their chiualrye
they had advanced to the (...), and to help them now in their aduersitye,
whom the wilful rage and rashness of Ptolomy, their king had well nie
destroyed. (...) the (...)
All men standinge thus in despair* (...) one of the princes of Macedone,
perceiving it auailed not to trust to praying only, raised a noumber of lusty
young men, and both assuaged the courages of the French men then in their
ruff for their late victory, and defended Maced^ne from wasting and
destroying by the enemy.

In recompense of which his valiant deed, whereas in any noble men sued to have
the kingdom of (...), he being no noble man born, was (...) them all. The
(...) of (...)
And at such time as his men of war (...) him king, he compelled them to
swear to him* not by the name of king, but by the name of captain.

In the mean season Brennus captain of that portion The (...) men invade
^gayne.
of the French men that bent them selves into Grecehearinge of the victory
of his country men, which had vanquished the Macedones under the conducte of
Belgius, freatynge for anger that so fat a booty, and so laden with the
spoils of the East was so lightly forgone after they had gotten the upper
hand, raised an hoo^t of a hundred and fiftye thousand footmen, and fiftene
thousand horsemen, and invaded Macedone again. When Sosthenes saw how they
wasted the country and the villages, he met them with his ho^te of Macedones
well appointed and in good order of battle. But by reason they were few, and
their enemies many, they half discouraged, and the other strong and lustye,
they were sone put to the worser. Wherefore while the Macedones being beaten,
kept them selves within the walls of their cities, Brennus like a conqueror,
against whom no man durst show his head to make resistance, forraged all the
fields of Macedone. From thence, as though those boties and spoils seemed to
base and simple in his eye, he turned his mind to the The malap^r te scoffyng
of Brennus.
temples of the Gods immortal, malapertlye scoffing that the Gods were
rich, and ought to depart liberally to men. Thervppon immediately he took his
journey toward Delphos, setting more by the gain of the gold that had been
offered to the Gods, then by their displesure, whom he affirmed to have no
neade of richesse, as they that are wont to bestow them upon men. The temple
of Apollo at Delphos, is situate in the mount Parnasus, up on a cliffe on
every side fallinge stepe down. There the The situatio^ of the temple of
Delphos.
confluens of men (which upon trust and confidens in the majesty of that God
resorting thither from diverse places, builded them houses in that rock) has
made a populous city. And moreover both the temple and the town are enclosed,
not with walls, but with the stepenesse of y^ rock neither are they defended
with fortifications made by man's hand, but with fortifications grown by
nature. So that there is no man in the world able to say, whether the strength
of the place, or the majesty of the god be more to be wondered at. The middle
part of the rock inward is in fashion like a Theater. By means where of when
men make any shoutinge or hallowinge, or when any trompet is blown, the
sound beats and reboundeth in such wise upon the stones from one to
another, that the Echo is hard double and treble, and the noise resoundeth
far louder and greater then it went forth. The which thing causes the
simple and ignorant folk to stand in more fear, thincking it to be the
presence of the godhead, and oftentimes makes them to stand wonderinge at it,
as if they were straught. In this wineding of the rock, almost midway to the
top of the hill, there is a little plain, The description of the place, where the
(...) are given.
and in the same a deep hole into the ground, which serves to give Oracles.
Out of the which a ce^tayne cold breath, driven up as it were in a certain
wind, ascendyng upward, stirs the minds of the Prophets into a madness,
and so having filled them with the spirit of the god, compels them to give
answer to such as come for counsel. In the same place therefore there are to be
seen many and rich gifts of kings and peoples, which by their cost and
sumptuousness, do well declare the thankfulness of such as received aunswers,
in performing of their vows. Wherefore when Brennus came within the view of the
temple, he was in doubt with him self a great while, whether he were better
to attempt the matter forthwith, or give his soldiers that nights respite to
rest them and gather their strength to them. Euridanus and Thessalonus, who for
covetousness of the pray, had joined them The ^of Euridanus and (...) salonus.
selves with him, willed to cut of all delay, while their enemies were
unprovided, and no dout but their sudden approach should be a great terror
unto them. Where as by geuinge them that nights respite, their enemies
should perchance get both courage and succoure, and the ways that now lay
open might be stopped up. But the common soldiers of the frenchmen, when as
after long penury and skarsity, they then found a country replenyshed with
wine and all other kind of victualles, being as glad and joyful of the
abundance as of a victory, they dispersed them selves in the fields, and
leuyng their standerd ran abroad, making havoc of all things like
conqueroures, the which thing was a mean that the Delphians had respite to
lay for them selves. For at such time as it was first reported that the
Frenchmen were coming thither, the husband men and men of the country The
Oracle before the (...) the (...)
were prohibited by the Greek oracles, to convey their corn and wines out of
the villages. The wholesome meaning of which commandment was not understood,
before that the abundance of wine and other victualles being cast as a stop
in the french men's ways, the succoures of their neighbors had leisure to
resort thither together. The Delphians therefore had manned and strengthened
the town by the help of their neighbors, or ever the french men, (who were
as greadye of the wine as of a bootye, could be called from the wine fat to
their standard. Brenne had three skore and five thousand chosen footmen of
the best in all his host, whereas the Delphians and their aiders were in all
but four thousand fighting men. In disdain of which f^al handful, Bren to
the intent to sharpen the minds of his men, showed them all what a rich
and plentiful pray they should have, affirminge that the Images with the
chariottes, (where of they might behold great store a far of,) were made all
of massye gold, wherefore the booty should be better in the hand then it
seemed to the eye. The french men being by this vouching of their captain, or
rather by The french men assalte the city of Delphos.
their own beholding stirred up, and also wounded with the wine they had
poured in the day before, without respect of any danger, ran (...) to the
encounter. On the contrary part the Delphians putting more trust in God then
in their own strength, resisted their ennemies even with a contempt, and what
with stones, and what with their wepons, threw the frenchmen as they skaled,
headlong from the top of the mountain. While the two parties were thus striving
one with a another, suddenly the prtestes note the ilusi on of y^ (...)
of all the temples and the Prophets them selves also, with their hear about
their ears, with the relics in their hands, and their miters on their heds,
like men straught and out of their wits, came running forth and preased into
the forefront of the battle, crying out that God was come among them, and that
they had seen him leap down into the temple at the open rofe top. Moreover
while they ^er all making their humble supplications to God forayde, they said
they met a young man of beauty and personage far excelling any mortal
creature, and in his company with him. ii. virgins in armor, which came unto
him out of the. ii. temples of Diane and Minerua thereby, y^ which thing: they
not only had perfectlye scene with their eyes, but also more over had hard
the clatteringe of their harness and the sound of their bows. Wherefore they
earnestly and heartily besought them, seeing the Gods the^ selves did guard their
standerd, they should not stick to dispatche their ennemies, and to join them
selves as partakers with the Gods of the victory. With which words being greatly
encouraged, they preased forth wh^ might be formoste in the flight. And there
withal they forthwith perceived The french men are put to the (...) and
oppressed with lyght^ and (...).
that God was present on their side. For both a piece of the mountain being
broken of by a sudden earthquake, overwhelmed the French host, and the
thi^st of their enemies not without great slaughter were (...) and put to
^ight. In the neck whereof there ensued a tempest, with hail, thonder and
lightning, consumed as many as were any thing sore wounded. The captain Brenne
himself (...).
being not able to abide the smarte of his wounds, took a ^word and killed
himself. Another of the captains, when he saw how grievously thautors of the
war had been punished, with x. M. of his retinue departed in post have out of
Greece. But they sped never the better for their flying a The (...) of the (...)
^ men (...)
way. For they were so afraid that they durst never lie a night in any house,
they passed no day without (...).

Moreover continual rain, frost and snow, hunger and of Greece, and the utter
destrucryon of them.
weariness, and thereunto continual watching worse then all the rest, consumed
and brought to nothing the wretched remnaunt of this unfortunate war. The
people al so and the nations through which they traveled, lycked them up as
they s^attered abroad, as a pray. Where by it came to pass, that of that so
huge and populous army, which lately before upon trust of their own strength,
did despise even the very gods, there was not so much as one man left, that
might say hereafter he had been at that slaughter and eskaped.

The. xxv. Book.
PEace being established between the Here follows the storye (...) in the
beginning of the last book.
ii. kings Antigonus and Antiochus, as soon as Antigonus returned into
Macedone, suddenly there arose a new enemy against him. For the French men whom
Brenne at his setting forth into Greece, had left at home for the defense of
his country, to thente^t The French men invade Macedone the thyrd^ time.
they only would not seem to sytte at home like cowardes, armed fiftene
thousand foot men, and three thousand horse men, and having chased the hosts
of the Getes and Tribols, when they approached nere unto Macedone, sent
ambassadors to the king, partly to offer him peaceto sale, and partly to view
the order and demeanor of his ^ampe. Whom Antigonus like a royal prince,
invited the same night to a sumptuous banquet. But the frenchmen wondering at
the great plenty of plate, both of gold and silver that was set before them,
and there wythall being entised with the richness of the pray, returned more
his ennemies then they came to him.

Furthermore the king to (...) to put them in fear, as at the sight of so ugly
shapes where with the barbareus people were not acquainted, commanded his men to
show them his elephants, and his ships laden with ^tuall and artillery, not
knowing that they, whom by (...) and setting forth his power and richesse he
would have discouraged, were thereby the rather encouraged as (...) a (...). The
ambassadors therefore when they came again to their company, did set out all
things to the vttermoste, and made more of them then they were in deed.
Declarynge both the kings richesse and his negligence, how his camp was stuffed
with gold and si^uer, and n^ther for (...) with diche nor trenche and that even
as thoug^ their (...) were a sufficient defice for them, they kept nether watch
nor ward* nor any other warlike order, as if they had no need at all of help
of the sword, because they wallowedin gold. This report was enough to stir up
the minds of the couet^s frenchmen to the pray. Besides that, they took example
(...) Belgius, who not long time before, had (...) the host of Macedone and the
king also. Therefore with Antigonus po licy to (...) himself and his.
one assent they assailed the kings camp in the night: who foreseing the great
mischief that was like to ensue, had given his men warning the day before, to
convey away all their stuff, and to aid them covertly in the wode by. For
there was none other mean for them to save their camp, but only by forsaking
it. The frenchmen ^ineding all things void, and not only without defenders,
but also without kepers, mistrusting that they were not fled, but rather
withdrawn, or that they kept them selves close for some policy, durst not a
good while enter (...) at y^ gates At the last leauinge all the fortifications
whole and untouched, they entered the camp rather searchinge then A slaught^
of the french men.
riffling. And having taken such as they found, turned them selves to the sea
side. There as they (...) ^sedly riffeling of the ships* the watermen and
part of the army that were fled thither with (...) wiu^s and children,
^odainly fell upon them and flue them or they feared any such matter. And there
was made such a slaughter of the Frenchmen, that the fame of this victory
purchased Antigonus peace, not only of the Frenchmen, but also of the fierce
and savage people that bordered on his kingdom. How be it the french men
multiplied so sore at that time, that they spread over Asia, as it had been a
swarm of Bees. In so much that the kings of the East The great encreaseof
the frenchmen, and their redouted prow (...).
made not any wars, but they hired the French men to serve them, nor if they
were put from their kingdoms, they resorted not to any other then the french
men for help. So sore was the name of the french men redoubted, or rather
they had continuallye so prosperous success in their wars, that the kings
thought them selves not able to maintain their estate, or to recover it being
ones lost, without the prowess and aid of the French men.

Therefore being called to the help of the king of Bythinia, The original of
the French greeks in Asia the less.
after the time they had gotten the victory, they parted his kingdom with
him, and named the (...) french greek. While these things were a doing in
Asia, in the mean season being vanquished in Sicill by the Carthaginenses
Look the xxiii. book.
in a battle on the sea, sent his ambassadoures to Antigonus king of Macedone
for a fresh crewe of souldioures, sending him word, that if he sent them not,
he should be constrained to retire into his kingdom, and to seek to make
that conquest upon him, which he was about to make upon the Romans. When
his ambassadoures brought him word he should none have, he fained an excuse and
suddenly departed from thence. Wylling his confederates to lay for the wars in
the mean season, and he betoke the keeping of the castle of Tarent to his son
Hele^ and his friend Milo. As Soon as he was returned into Pyr^hus con quereth
Man.
Epyre, forth with he (...) the borders of Macedone with whom Antigonus met
with an hoaste of men, and being put to the worse was feign to (...). And so
all Macedone yielded unto Pyrrhus.

Whereupon as if he had reco^pensed the los of Sicil and Italy with the gain of
Macedon, he sent for his son Heleu and his fre^d Milo, that he had left at
Tarent. Antigonus wh^ was fled with a few of his horsemen, being suddenly bereft
of al thornaments of fortune, to thentent to mark what would become of his
kingdom y^ he had lost, conveyed himself into the city Thessalonica, that if
occasion served, he might hire the french soldiers, and renew the war from
thence. But being utterly vanquished again by Ptolomy (...) is (...) again.
the son of king Pyrrhus, and eskaping with no mo, but only vii. of his
retinue, he never hoped to recover his kingdom, but sought caves and
wildernesses where to save his life. Pyrrhus therefore being enstalled in the
siege royal of so great a kingdom, and not content to have attained to that
that he could scarsly have wished for, began to practice how to win thempire of
Greece and Asia. Neither took he any more pleasure of his Empire, then of his
wars, neither The doinge^ of Pyrrhus.
was there any manable to withstand the force of Pyrrhus who^ he once assailed.
But as he had no pier in co^quering of kingdoms, so did he as lightly for go
them when he had ones won them and gotten them. So much did he more study and
endeavor to win kingdoms, then to keep them. There fore when he had transported
his army over from Chersonesus, there received him thambassadors of th Athenies,
the Acheans, and the Messenians: Yea and all the Greeks (for the renoun of his
name, and for that they were astonished at his noble deeds against the Romans and
Carthagine^ses) awaited his coming there. The first war y^ he had, was with
the Lacedaemonians, where he was received with greater valiantness of the
women, then of the me^. There he lost his son Ptolomy, and the strongest part ^f
all his army. For when he assaulted the town, such a sort of women came running
to the defense of the city, that he was not more valiantly vanquished, the^
shamefully driven to retire. Furthermore his son Ptolomy is reported to have
been so courageous, and so stout a man of his hands, that with lx. men he took
the city Corcyra by force. And also in a batel upon the sea, out of a cock bote
he lepte with. vii. of his men into a gally and won it. And last of all in
thassault of Sparta, he brake with his horse into the mids of the city, and
there was ouerpressed with the number of his enemies and slain. Whose body when
it was brought to his father Pyrrhus, it is reported he should say that he was
slain somewhat later then he looked for, or then his own folishe hardiness
deserved. Pyrrhus when he had taken the repulse at Sparta, went to Argos. There
whiles he endeu^ red to get Antigonus into his hands, whom he had besieged in
the city, as he fought most valiantlye among the thickest, he was slain with a
stone thrown from the wall. His head was cut of and brought to Antigonus, who
using the victory gentilly, sent home his son Helen with his Epyrotes which
were yielded vnt ohim, into his kingdom without ransom, and delivered him his
fathers body y^ lay unburied, to carry home with him into his country. It is a
constant report amongste all authors, that there was not any king, either in
those days or in the latter times before, worthy to be compared unto Pyrrhus,
and that it was a hard matter to find any, not only among kings, but also
among other famous men, either of more holy living, or of more tried and
approved justice, and as for know ledge in cheualry and feats of arms, there
was so much in him, that whereas he had continual wars with Lystmachus,
Demetrius, and Antigonus kings of so greats power and puissaunce, yet was he
never overcome by any of the^, neither was he ever brought to so low an ebb,
but that he was able to match the Illyrians, Sicilians, Romans and
Carthaginenses at all times, yea and some times to get the upper hand of them.
By means whereof through the fame of his noble acts, and the renown^ of his
name, he made his country famous and renoumed over all the world, being of it
self before his time both small and of no reputation*

The. xxvi. Book.
AFter the death of Pyrrhus, there arose very great and troublesome wars, not
only in Macedone, but also in Asia and Greece. For the Peloponnesians being
betrayed unto Antigonus, and according as men were either stricken in fear, or
else provoked to gladness, like as every city hoped for succor at Pyrrhus
hand, or stood in dread of him, even in like case either they entered in
leage with Antigonus, or else upon malice and hatred, fell together by the
ears among them selves. In the time that the The (...) raygne of ^he tirant
(...).
provinces were in this turmoyle, Arystotimus a noble man of the realm, took
perforce the chief city of the Epyrotes, and made himself king, who after
that he had put many of the head men to death, and driven (...) of them
into exile, when as the Aetolians required by their ambassadors, that he should
restore unto the banished me^ their wives and children, at the first he denied
to do it. Afterward as though he had repented him, he gave all the Ladies and
gentlewomen leave to goo to their husbands, and appointed a day when they
should take their iourny. The Ladies as they that thought to live all their
lives in exile with their husbands, took all the preciousest jewels and best
things that they had with them. But as soon as they were all come to the gate,
of purpose to go in one company together, he spoiled them of all that ever they
had, slew the little children in their mothers bosoms threw the mothers them
selves into prison, and rauyshed the maidens. All men being amassed at this
his cruel (...), a noble manne of the realm named Helemate, being an old man
and without children, as one that in respect The prudent devise of Helemat in
suppressyng the Tyrant.
of his years, and in that he was childlesse was void of al fear, called home
to his house certain of his most trusty friends, and exhorted them to the
deliverance of their country from bondage. When he perceived how they stoke to
put them selves in danger for the sauegard of the whole realm, and that they
demanded leisure to take aduysement in the matter, he called his servant to
him, commanding them to lock in the doors, and to bear word to the Tirant,
that he should send immediately to his house to apprehend traitors that had
co^spired against him, threatening unto each of them, that seeing he could not be
the author of deliverance of his country, he would at least wise find the
means to be revenged upon them for wythdrawing their help from it. Then they
being circum^ted with the doutful danger, chu^ing the hone^er way of both,
swear the death of the Tyrant, and so Aristotimus was dispatched the fifth
month after he had usurped the The poli^yke celerity of An tigonus in
suppressyng his enemies.
kingdom. In the mean season Antigonus being wrapped in many wars at ones,
both of king Ptolomy, and the Spartanes, besides the host of the French
greeks, which newly became his enemies, left a few souldioures in his camp for
a show against the other two, and went himself with his whole power against the
French men. The French men hearing thereof, made them selves ready to the
battle, and slew sacrifice for thobtaining of good success in that encounter.
By the inwardes of the which beasts, perceiving that there was toward them a
great slaughter, and the utter destruction of them all, they were there upon
turned not into fear, but into madness. For in hope to pacify the wrath of
the Gods, by the bloodshed The furious cruelty of the frenthmen toward their
own wives and children.
of their own people, they killed their wives and children beginning to
perform through their own slaughter, the evil luck that was manased them by
ye wars. So extreme a madness was entered into their cruel hearts, that they
spared not the young children whom even the enemy would have spared, but that
they made deadly and mortal war with their children, and the mothers of
them, in defense of whom men are wont to make wars. Therefore as though
they had by their unspeakable wickedness, purchased them selves both life
and victory, bloody as they were after the fresh slaughter of their wives and
children, they proceeded into battle with as good success as foretoken.

For as they were fighting, the remorse of their own consciences for their
unspeakable slaughter, (the ghostes of the^ that they had murdered wauing
before their ^ies,) The (...) slaughter of the (...)
first and foremost discouraged them ere they were oppressed by the enemy, and
so they were ^aine every mothers chiid. There was made so great a slaughter,
that it should seem the Gods had conspired with men, to the vtt^r
destruction of those murderers. After the good and fortunate chance of this
battle, Ptolomy and the Spartanes eschuing the victorious army of their ennemy
Antigonus, retired into places of save guard and defense, Antigonus when he saw
they were retired, while his me^ were yet fresh and courageous by reason of
their late victory, made war to the A^heniens. Now whiles he was occupied in
the same, in the mean time Alexander king of The (...) full (...) of fortune.
Epire, coveting to revenge the death of his father king Pyrrhus, invaded the
borders of Macedone. Against whom when Antigonus was returned out of Greece,
all his souldioures revolted from him, and so he lost both the kingdom of
Ma^done and his army. His son Demetrius being a very child, leuyinge a
power in the absence of his father, not only recovered Macedone that his father
had lost, but also berest Alexander of his kingdom of Epire. So great was
either the unsteadfastness of the soldiers, or elsse the (...) of fortune,
that kings by course even now banished men, and anene kings again.

Alexander therefore being fled to the arcadians, was as well by the favor of
the Epyrotes, as by the healpe of his Read more of the stories of Epyre in the.
xxviii. book.
confederates, restored into his kingdom again. About the same time deceased
agas king of Cyrene, who before his last infirmity, to the intent to cease and
end all strife with his brother Ptolomy, betrouthed his only daughter Beronice
to his son. But after the death of king Argas. Arsinoe the mother of the
maid, to thentent to break A gas king of ^yrene.
the marriage that was contracted against her will, sent for Demetrius the
brother of king Antigonus out of Macedone, to take upon him the marriage of the
maid and the kingdom of Cyrene, who also was begotten of one of Ptolomies
daughters. And Demetrius made no taryaunce. Therefore when as through prosperous
wind, he was spedely arrived at Cyrene, upon trust of his beauty, through
which he began to like his mother in law to well by and by after his coming, he
bare himself very proud ly and outragiously in the court, and against the men
of war, and he cast his desire of pleasing from the daughter to the mother.
The which thing being espted was ill taken, first of the maid and also of the
common people and of the great noumber of the souldioures. Where upon all
men's minds were turned to the son of Ptolomy, and the death of Demetrius
was conspired. For as he was in bed with his mother in law, men were sent in
to kill him. But Arsinoe (when she hard the voice of her ^uoutry re ^enged.
daughter standing at the chamber door, and geuinge the^ charge to spare her
mother, covered and defended her peramour a while with her own body.
Nevertheless he was slain, and so Beronice with safetye of her natural love
and duty, did both revenge the dishonorable aduoutry committed with her
mother, and also followed the determination of her father, in taking of her
husband.

The. xxvii. Book
AFter the decese of Antiochus king (...).
of Syria, his son Seleucus succeding in his room, (by the in^igation of his
mother Laodice whi che ought to have with held him from doing any such
thing,) began his reign with murder. For he put to death his mother in law
Beronice the sister of Ptolomye king of Egypt, with his little brother begotten
upon her. By doing of the which wickedness, he both brought him self in a
foul slander and infamye, and also entangled himself in the wars of
Ptolomye. Furthermore when (...) is (...), (...) by (...) and put to death.
Beronice understood that men were sent to kill her, she kept herself close in
a pleasant manor of her fathers called Daphn^. When the cities of Asia hard
that she and her little son were there besieged, in remembrance of the
dignity of her father and of her ancestors, and for pitye to se her so
unworthily entreated, they sent aid unto her. Her brother Ptolomy also being
stirred with the pearil of his sister, left his own kingdom and came in all
haste to her reskue, withal the power he was able to make. But Beronice before
her rescowes came at her, where as she could not be taken by force, was
surprised by pollicye and put to death. It seemed a cruel and horrible act to
all men. Wherefore when all the cities that made iniurrectyon had The (...) from
(...).
made a great navy, suddenly being put in great fear at the contemplation of
his excessive cruelty, and to revenge the death of her whom they purposed to
have defended, they yielded them selves to Ptolo^y. Who doutlesse subdued all
the kingdom of (...), if he had not ben driven to retire home to suppress an
insurrection in Egypt. So great hatred did that wicked and abominable
murdering of his own brother purchase the one party, and the unworthy death of
his s^ster so cruelly killed, purchase favor to the other party. After the
departure of Ptolomy, Seleucus having gathered together a great flete against
the cities that had revolted, so^enly (as it were by the vengeans of the Gods
for his horrible murder) by means of a great tempest, lost all his flete by
(...). And of all The fortuna^e mischa^s of Seleucus.
that great furniture for the wars, fortune left him not any thing at all,
more then his naked body and his life, and a few companions eskapinge with him
from shippewracke. It was surely a miserable case, but yet such a one as
Seleucus could not have wished the like for his own behofe. For the cities
which for hatred y^ they bare toward him had revolted unto Ptolomy, as though
they had been satisfied with the punishmente that the Gods as indifferent
judges had laid upon him, through a sudden mutation of* their minds, being
moved to pity him by reason of his shipwreck, submitted them selves under his
dominion again Where upon ^ eioysinge in his happy adversity, and being made
richer by his losses, as one now able to match him in power and strength, he
made war against Ptolomy. But as if he had been borne for (...) is
vanquished by (...) king of Egypt.
none other purpose, but for fortune to make her laughing stock of him, or as
if he had recovered so great wealth and power of the kingdom, for none other
intent then to lose them again, he was vanquished in battle, and eskapynge from
the field, not much better accompanied then after his shipwreck, fearfully
conveyed himself into antioche. From thence he directed letters to his brother
Antiochus. wherein he besought him of his help, offeringe him in reeompence of
his pains, all Asia that (...) within the precinct of the mountain Taurus.
Antiochus being of the age of. xiiii. years, but yet covetous of d^minion
above his The wicked and ambitious ^urde of Antiochus.
years, took thoccasion ere it came to the ground, not with so friendly heart as
it was offered. For the boy coveting like a thief to berene his brother of
all his whole kyngedome, was as bold and hardy in executinge his w^ckednesse,
as if he h^d been a man. Wh^vpon he was (...) named (...), because he spente
his life in taking other men's goods away wrongfully, not after the manner
of a man, but after the manner of a Gosse ^auke. In the (...).
mean time Ptolomye hearing that Antiochus came to reskew Seleucus, to (...)
he (...) not have war with two at once, took a truce (...). r. years. But the
peace that was given by his enemy, was broken by his brother. ^ho hiring an
host of the french souldioures, in stead of help vrought war and in stead
of a (...) and (...) brother (...).
brother, showed himself an ennemy. ^n that battle through the puissaunce of
the french men* Antiochus gate the upper hand. But the frenchmen supposing tha^
Seleucus ha^ been slain in the bat^ell turned their weapons against (...)
himself, thincking to waste the country of Asia the more freely without fear
or check, if they might utterly destroy the blood royal. which thing
when Antiochus ones perceived, he was feign to ransom himself for monye, as
if it had been from r^bbers, and entered in league of society with his hired
soldiers. In the mean season Emnenes king of Bythi^a, perceiu^ng (...)
vanquished by Emne^s king of Bythi^a.
the brothers to be consumed and dispersed through intestiue ^cord among them
selu^s, intending to invade the wanderinge possession ^f (...), assailed the
conqueror antiochus and his frenchmen, and by reason that they were yet sore and
wearye of their late conflicte, and his men Asia the (...) mon pray^ (...)
kings.
strong and lusty, he easily put them to the worse. For at that time all the
wars thatwere made, tended ever to the destruction of asia, every manne that
could make him self strongest, (...) upon asia as his pray.

The. ii. brothers eleurus and antiochus made war for asia. Ptolomye king of
Egipte, under pretense of reuengynge his sisters death, gaped for asia. On the
one sode Emnenes king of Bythinia, and on the other side the french men the
common hire lynges, wasted asia, but among so many robbers, there was none to
be found that would once set in his foot to defend Asia. After that Antiochus
was vanquished, and that Emnenes had seysed into his hands the most part of
Asia, the brothers could not yet agree, for all y^ the pray was lost, for
which they striued so sore, but leaving the forain ennemy, they renewed the
war one to destroy another. In the which Antiochus being again vanquished,
and wearyed with Antiochus is overcome of Se^cus.
flying many days together, at length came to his father in law Artamenes
king of Cappadocia. Of whom at the fyr^e he was gently entertained. But
within a few days after, understanding that he went about to entrap him, for
the sauegarde of his life, he fled again from thence. Therefore when he saw
he could not rest in safetye in no place, he was feign to resort for succoure
to his ennemy Ptolomy, whose faith he thought to be more steadfast then his
brothers, considering either what ^e would ^aue done to his brother, or what he
had deserved at his brothers hand. But Ptolomye by this his yealdynge and
submission, made not so much his friend as his enemy, commanded him to be
kept in straighte prisonne. From thence also antiochus eskaped by the healpe of
a certain (...) is slain by thieves.
harlot, with whom he had had familiare company, but having eskaped from his
kepers, as he fled, thieves met him and killed him Seleucus well nie about the
same instant, having lost his kingdom, fell of his horse and brake (...) his
(...).
his neck. So both the brothers, as it were by like miffortune, like
outlawes, after the loss of their kingdoms, suffered due punyshements for
their ungracious doings.

The. xxviii Book.
OLympias the daughter of Pyrrhus (...) history of ^ (...) the (...)* (...).
king of the Epyrotes, having lost her husband alexander, which was also her
owen brother, when she had taken upon her the bringyng up and keepinge of
Pyrrhus and Ptolomy the sons whom he had begotten by her, and the government
of the realm: she was compelled by the aetolians, (which went about to take
perforce from her, a part of acaruania, which she being mother and protector
of the children, had received to help to maintain the wars withal,) to
resort for succoure to He was the soune of (...) ^pussed by (...).
Demetrius king of Macedone, and unto him having a wife all ready the sister
of antie chus king of Syria, she gave her daughter Phithia in marriage, to the
intent she might get the help at his hand by right of affinity, which she could
not get for pity and compassion. The marryage therefore was solempnised, whereby
the new wedded wife fell in great favor, and the old wife in displeasure. For
the first wife as though she had been deuorced of her own accord, departed
to her brother antiochus, and provoked him to war upon her husband. The
acarnanians also distrusting the Epyrotes and thereupon ^equiring healpe of the
Romans, obtained of the Senate of Rome, that ambassadors were sent to
command the aetolians to withdraw their garrisons from the cities of
acarnania, and to suffer them to live ^ree out of bondage, which all only in
old time sent no help to the Greeks against the Troianes thautors of their
beginning. But the Aetolians hard the ambassade of the Romans proudly and
disdainfully.

Casting them in the tethe with the Carthaginenses and the frenchmen, by whom
they had been so aff^cted in so many The good an swer of the Ae^yans to the
ambassadoures of Rome.
battles and so oftentimes utterly slain, saying it was me^e for the^ first to
open their gates against the ^thaginenses which they had shut up for fear of y^
warr^s of afric, ere they took upon them to make wars in Greece. Moreover
they bad them remember whom they manased, for they were not able to defend
their own city against ^he frenchmen, but y^ when it was taken, they were
feign to redeem it with money* and not recover it by the sword. The which
nation entering into Greece with a another manner of host, they them (...) had not
only without the aid of any other forain power, but also not so much as helped
with their own houses, utterly destroyed, and made their realm a place for
their bur^ which they had determined to make the ^eat and key of their
kingdom. Whereas on the contrary part Italye (the Ro^es yet still trembling
for fear of the la^e burning of their city) was well (...) whollye subdued by
the frenchmen. Wherefore it was (...) ^or the^ first to drive the frenchmen out
of Italye, ere they presumed to manase the aetolians, and first to defend their
own, ere they took in hand to defend other men's. And what manner of men were
the Romans? in good faith no better but a sort of ragged shepherdes, y^
rongfully held a piece of ground taken from the right owners by robery, which
being not able to get the^ wives for the dishonesty of their beginning, were
fain to ravish them by open force, and to be short which bui^ded their city
with most cruel and unnatural (...), and bestained the foundations of the^r
walls with brothers blood. But the Aetolians were ever the princes of Greece,
and (...) as they passed all (...) in estate and worthiness, so they excelled
them in ^owesse and actiuity, and they were the men alone which had ever
despised the Macedones florishinge in thempire of all the whole world, which
feared not king Philip, which disdained to obey the laws of alexander the
great, after he had subdued the Persians and Indians, when all other men did
most fear and dread his name. Wherefore they counseled the Romans to hold
(...) with their present estate and not to pro^ke these weapons against them,
through which they saw bo^he the french men slain, and also the Macedones
despised. When they The A^ly* ans invade Acar^.
they had in this wise dismissed the Romain ambassadors, to the intent they
would not seem to have talcked more boldly then they would do in deed: they
forrayed all the borders of the kingdom of Acaruania. By this time had
Olympias delivered the kingdom to her sons, and in stead of his brother
Pyrrhus deceased, Ptolomy succe^ed in the whole kingdom. Who geynge with an
^ooste of The (...) cay of the ^loud royal in Epyre.
men well furnyshed against his ennemies, as by the way taken with a disease
and died. Olympias also ere it was long time after, being wounded with sorrow
for the death of her two sons, skarse able to draw her painful breathe,
lived a small while after her children. There remained of the blood royal no
moo but ^nlye a young maid called Nereis and her sister Laodamia. Nereis was
married unto Gelo son of the king of Sicil. And Laodamia flying for her
sauegard to the aultare The ^aunce of God for (...) murd^.
of Diana, was there by the concourse of the people sla^. The which offense
the Gods immortal revenged and punished with continual slaughters of that
natyon, and well near wy^h the utter d^structyon of all the whole realm.

For first and foremost being punished with dearth and hunger, and being (...)
with civil discord, last of all they were in manner quite consu^ed by the
wars of foraine nations, and Milo who killed Laodamia falling out of his
wits, so mangled his body sometime with iron, sometime with stones, and in
fine so rent and tare his own bowels with his teethe, that within. xii. days
he died most miserably. While these things were a doing in Epyre, Demetrius
dyed in Macedone, leaving a little son called Phillip to be his heir. Over
whom Antigonus being made protector, took the chyldes mother to his wife,
and went about to make himself king. The policy of Antigonus in retaynyng the
kingdom of Macedone.
Within a while after, when as the Macedones making insurrection against him,
threatninge to kill him, had besieged him in his own palace, he came forth to
them with out any guard, and casting among them his crown and his purple robe
of estate, bade them bestow those things upon some other person, which either
knew how to rule the^, or to whom they could find in their hearts to obey:
for as for him he had not hitherto (during the time he had the government of
that odious kingdom), felt or tasted of any plesures, but of labor, of travel,
of peril and of leoperdy. Then he rehearsed what he had done for them, how he
had punished such of their confederates as had revolted, how he had assuaged
the courage of the Dardanians and Thessalians triumphing at the death of
Demetrius; and finally how he had not only maintained, but also augme^ted
thestate of thempire of Macedone. Of the which things if so be it they
repented them, he was content to depose himself, and to surrender his office
into their hands, and let them seek them a king whom they might rule as they
list them selves. When the people being strycken with shame, willed him to
take his kingdom upon him again, he refused it utterly, so long, until the
authors of the rebellion were yielded unto him to punish them at his pleasure.
After this he made war against the Spartanes which all only despised the wars
of Philip and Alexander, and the Empire of the Macedones, with the knyghthode
and chiualry so sore redoubted over all the world. War between the Spartanes
and the Macedones.
The war was prepared for withal the furniture and power that could be made
on both parts, between these two noble and famous nations. The one fighting
for the ancient renown of Macedone, the other not only for the maintenance
of their untouched liberty never before un lated, but also for their common
sauegarde. The Lacedaemonians being vanquished, not only they them selves, but
also their wives and children, took their misfortune with very stout courage.

For there was not any man that spared his life in the battle, there was not
any woman that wept for the loss of her husband. The old men commended the
death of their sons, and the sons reioysed that their fathers were slain
in the field. Every man lamented his own chance, that they had not died for
the liberty of their country. The fathers and mothers received into their
houses all such as were wounded, healed such as were wounded, healed such as
were hurt, and recomforted such as were stricken down. And in all this
business there was not in the city any outcry, or any wringyng of hands,
there was not any trembling for fear, every man bewailed more the common
misfortune, then his own private case. While these things were in doing,
Cleomenes their king after he had made a great slaughter of The couragy
ousnesse of (...) king of the Lacedaemonians.
his enemies, being all on a gore blood, as well with his own wounds, as
with the blood of his enemies, came among them, and ^hen he was entered the
city, he sat not down to rest him, he called not for meat nor drink, no nor
ones put of his harness, but leaninge his back to a wall, when he saw there
remained no mo but only iiii. thousand of his men from the battle, he exhorted
them to reserve themselves to some other time, when they might be able to do
their country better service. And then with his wife and children. He went his
way into Egypt to king Ptolomy, of whom he was honorably entertained, and
lived a long time in great favor and estimatyon with him like a king. But at
the last after the decease of Ptolomy, he and all his household were slain by
his son. Antigonus having made so great a slaughter of the Lacedaemonians,
took pity of the misfortune of so worthy a The (...) of Antigonus having got^
the victory.
city, and therefore would not suffer his soldiers to sack it, but pardoned
all that remained alive, prot^stynge that he made the war against Cleomenes,
and not against the Lacedaemonians, whom for as much as he had dyscomfited and
put to flight, all his wrath was at an end. wherefore he thought it should
stand more with his honor to save their city, then to destroy it. Now seeing
there remained no mento show his mercy upon, he said he would show it upon the
soil of the City, and upon the houses. It was not long after but that
Antigonus dyed, and left The son of Demetrius.
his kingdom to Phillip a child of. xiiii. years of age.

The. xxix. Book.
ABout the very same season, there An alteration of kingdoms by the successi
on of young kings.
happened an alteration almost in all the kingdoms of the world, by the
succession of young kings. For in Macedone Philippe, after the decease of his
protector Antigonus, who also was his father in law, took the kingdom upon him
being but. xiiii. years old. In Asia Seleucus being slain, Antiochus as yet
under the age of. xiiii. years was made king.

The kingdom of Cappadocia was surrendered by his father to Ariarathes being a
very child. Ptolomy who for the wickedness of his offense was in derision
surnamed Philopater, slew his father and mother, and usurped the kingdom of
Egypt. But the Lacedaemonians in stead of Cleomenes subrogated Lycurgus. And for
because there should be store of alterations in those times, Hannibal being as
yet skarse manne grown, was made captain of Carthage, not because there was
skarsity of men of more years and experience, but for the natural hatred that
was known to be rooted in him against the Romans even from his very
childhode, born to the utter destruction, not so much of the Romans as of
his own country of affricke. Now allbeit these children kings, had no
ancient and grave protectors appointed to have the (...) of them, ^et
notwithstanding every one of them so ententiuely pursued the steps of their
ancestors, that there was great likelihode of prowess and actiuity in them.
Only Brolomy as he was wicked in usurping the kingdom, so was he also ^outhful
and negliget in gouerninge of the same. The Dardanians and other people that
were borderers, who ^are as it were an immortal hatred to the kings of (...),
disdaining Phillip by reason he was so young, troubled him continuallye. On the
contrary part, Phillip when he had put his enemies to flight, being not content
to have defeded his own, purposed to make war against the aetolians. As he was
imagining and deuisinge how to enterprise the matter, Demetrius king of
Iliyria being lately vanquished by Paul The occas^on of the wars between the
Rom^es and the Macedones.
c^nsul of Rome, came to him as an humble suter, making complaint of the wrong
that the Romans had done unto him, who being not content to keep them sclues
within the bounds of Italy, (but of a wicked desire coveting thempire of the
whole world,) made war withal kings. Alleging that for the like covetousness
of the Empire of Sicil, of Sardinia, of Spain and consequently of all affricke,
they had entered into war with Hannibal and the Carthaginenses: and that they
had made war upon him also for none other occasion, but only y^ he was next
neigh bor unto Italy, as though it were not lawful for any king to dwell near
the borders of their Empire. Wherefore it was good for antiochus to take
ensample how to beware by other men, whose kingdom the nobler and nearer it
was to the Romans, so much should he find them his fiercer enemies.
Moreover he professed, that he was contented to surrender his right and title
to him of the king dome which the Romans had by force taken from him
Saying it should less grieve him, and that he could better find in his heart
to se his neighbor and his friend, rather then his enemy enjoy the possession
of his kingdom, With this and such other like talk he persuaded Phillip to
leave the aetolians, and to turn the brunte of the war against the
Romans, so much the rather, because he thought they should be the less able
to resist him, by reason (as he hard say) they had lately before been vanqui
shed by Hannibal at the lake of Thrasymenus. Therefore Philip persuades the
Greeks to peace and tranquilitye.
because he would not be charged with many wars at ones, he made peace with
the aetolians, not as that they should think he did it, to the intent to
make war in another place, but as though it had been for some great regard
that he had of the quietness of all Greece, ye which he affirmed was never in
the like pearill and ieoperdye, by means of the new Empires of the Romans
and Carthaginenses latelye risen up in the west, which had none other let or
stop to keep them out of Greece and Asia, but only this, while they were trying
by the sword; which of them should bear the soueraintye. For which party so
ever gate the upper hand, the same would imme diatlye upon the victory pass
directly into the East.

Therefore he saw such a cloud of cruel and bloudye war rising out of Italy,
he saw such a roaring and thundering storm coming out of the west, that into
what part of the world so ever the violent force of the victory should drive
the tempest thereof, it was like to wash all things with a terrible and bloody
shour. He said that Greece had oftentimes before suffered great trouble by the
war^es, sometime of the Persians, sometime of the frenchmen, and sometime of the
Macedones: but they should find that all that ever is paste was but a sport.
If those armies which now were fighting in Italye, should once spread them
selves into Greece. For he saw well inoughe, how cruel and bloody both with
puissaunce of hosts and policye of captains, those two peoples made war one
against another. The which rage certainly could not be ended, in the only
destruction of one of the parties, with out the ruin and decay of such as
were next neighbors. Wherefore Greece had more cause a great deal to be afraid
of the cruelty of whether party so ever gate the upper hand, then Macedone,
both because Macedone is further of from them, and of more strength to defend
it self. And yet he knew for a certaintye that those that encountered now with
so great puissaunce, would not be conten ted to end their conquest so, but that
he himself should have cause to sear, least he be driven to have to do with
them that should get the upper hand. Having under this pretense broke up his
^age against the Aetolians, minding nothing save the wars of the
Carthag^enses and Romans, he waied with himself the power and abilities of
them both. Neither were the Romans, (all be it the Carthaginenses and
Hannibal were then in manner rea die to light upon their neck,) void of fear
of war out of Macedone also. For they stood in dread of it, both for the
ancient prowess and actiuitye of the Macedones, and for renown of their
conquestes in the East, and also for Philip himself, who was enflamed with an
earnest desire, to become equal to Alexander in knighthoode and cheualry, and
whom they knew to be forward and active in feats of arms. Phillip therefore
when he understood that the Carthaginenses had vanquished the Romans again,
sent his open defiaunce unto them, and began Philip (...) defianc^ to the
Romans.
to build a fleet wherein to transport his army into Italy. Furthermore he
sent an ambassador with letters to Hanniball, to conclude a league and society
with him. Who being taken by the way and brought before the senate, was sent
away without any harm or displeasure done unto him, not for any good will
they bare to the king his master, but to thentent that of a suspected friend
they would not make him an open enemy. But afterward when it was reported
that Philip was transporting his army into Italye, they sent the Praetor
Leuinus with a nauye well decked and furnished, to stop him of his passage.
Who after he was arrived in Greece, with his fair and large promises, compelled
the Aetolians to take war in hand against Phillip. And on the other side,
Phillip did The Romans and Phil ^ip solicit the Ac^olians the one against the
other.
what he could to persuade the Aetolians to make war against the Romans. In
the mean time the Dardanians began to waste the borders of Macedone, and having
led away. xx. M. prisoners* constrained Philip to retire home from inuading the
Romans, to the defense of his own kingdom. While those things were a
doing, the Praetor The Darbanians invade Macedone.
Leuinus entering in league with king Attalus, wasted the country of Greece.
With the which loss and destruction, the cities being stricken in fear, sent
diverse am bassades to Philip, desiring aid of him: The king of Illyria Phillip
is ^exed with the complaints of his confederates.
also his next neighbor, bordering upon the one side of Macedone, made
incessant suit that he should perform his promise. Besides the Macedones
called upon him instantly to revenge the wasting of his own country. with the
which so many and so waightye matters, he was sore environed, and as it were
besieged at ones, that he wyste not which to remeady first. Yet notwithstanding
he promised to se^d succors to eury one of them ere it wer-lo^g. But because he
was hable to perform as much as he promised, but to thentent that by putting
them in hope of comfort, he might keep them his friends still. But y^ first
viage that he took in hand was against the Dardanians, who watchinge the time
to find him from home, determined to take their aduau^tage, and to invade
Macedone with a greater puissaunce in his absence. Also he made peace with the
Romans, and so being contented to have delayed the Roman wars against
Macedone for the Phillip t^keth truse with the To maines.
time, he laid wait to entrap Philopemenes Duke of the Acheans, who as it was
reported to him, stirred the Romans and the minds of his confederates
against him.

But the Philopemenes having knowledge thereof, and so avoiding the danger of
the same, compelled the Acheans by his authority to rebelle against him.

The. xxx. Book.
DUringe the time that Phillippe was earnestly occupied about great and
^aightye affair^s in Macedone, Ptolomy behaved himself clean contrary wise in
Egypt. For after he had obtained the kingdom by murtheryng of both his
parents, and that he had moreover killed his own brother, as though he had
afchieued all things prosperously, he gave him self to riot. And all the
realm followed the Sea what the evil ensample (...) a prince dot^*
steps of their king. By means whereof not only his noble men and Officers,
but also all his men of war, laying a side the exercise of cheualry and
feats of armed utterly wasted and spoiled them selves with slouthe and
idleness. Antiochus king of Syria, who thereof being prince, through a
certain old grudge between those two, raised a power suddenly, and wan many
cities from him, and entered forceably into Egipte, Ptolomy trembled for fear,
and besought Antiochus by his ambassadors, that he would respite him but so
long as he might raise a power. Afterward having hired a great host out of
Greece, he fought a prosperous battle, and he had utterly berefte God sende^
fortune to fools.
Antiochus of his kingdom, if he had any thing furthered his good fortune,
wisdom and audacity. But he was content with the recovery of the Cities that
he* had lost, and so concluding a peace, desirously took the occasion of
quietness when it was offered him, and so wallowinge The (...) and abheminable
(...) of P^olomy Ph^. pat^r.
again into his old accustomed ^outhfulnesse, he sl^we his wife Eurydice,
being his own sister, (through the enticementes of a harlot called
Agathoclea) with whom he was taken in love.

And so forgetting quite the renoume of his navy, and the majesty of his
kingdom, he spent the nights in lechery, and the days in feastinge and
bankettinge. Besides this the more to increase and inflame his lecherous
appetite withal, he had at his feasts musical drincking and dansing. Neither
could the king now content himself to behold and hear others, but also like
a master of naughtiness, would play upon instruments and dance to the same.
These were the first plagues and preuy maladies, which afterward were the ruin
and decay of the kings house. For within a while after, they grew to such a
licentious liberty, and the harlot waxed so bold that the walls of the court
were not able to hold her. Whom being of herself proud and arrogant enough,
thvnspekeable lechery that the king used daily with her brother Agathocles, a
strompet of more beauty then was requisite in a man, made yet more stately and
arrogant. And to the encreasemente thereof, made also her mother Euanthe,
which with her daliaunce and enticementes had so allured the kings heart unto
her, that he had begotten two children of her. By means whereof being not
content with the king, now they held the kingdom also, now they must come
abroad to be seen in the open face of all the world, now they must be saluted,
now they must be waited upon. Agathocles sitting cheke by cheke with the
king, ruled the city at his own pleasure. The women disposed marshalships of
the host, lieuetenan^ ships of provinces, and captainships as pleased them
so that there was no man in all his realm, that could do less then the king
him self.

At the length he died, leaving a son behind him of The death of Prolomy and
the banyshment of his strumpets.
five years old by his sister Eurydice. But whiles the women went about to
spoil the treasure, and made confede racy with the wickeddest personens that
could be picked out, to the intent to deprive the right heir of his kingdom,
his death was kept secret a great while after he was dead. Nevertheless
as soon as y^ matter came to light, the people ran upon Agath^cles and s^ue him,
and the women in reuengement of Eury^ice, were hanged up upon gibets. The
notorious in^amy of the realm, being thus purged and put away by the death of
the king and the punishment of the harlots, the men of Alexandria sent
ambassadors The Rom^nes are (...) Egypt.
to the Romans, desiring them to take upon them the protection of their
Orpha^ king, and the government of the kingdom of Egypt the which they
avouched that Philip and and had already bought and sold between them selves,
entending to part it betwixt them. The Romans were v^ry glad of that
ambassade, as they that sought occasion of war against Phillip to be r^uenged
for his lying ^n wait to do them displesure in the time of their wars with
the Carthagi^enses. Besides this, after the time they had subdued the
Carthaginenses, and driven away Hanniball, they fe^red no man's p^ssans more
then Phillips r^counting with (...) selves what a stir ^yrrhus had kept in
^taly with so small a handful of Macedones, and how great adu^ntures and
enterprises ye Macedones had atchi^ued in the East. Her^vpon ambassadors were
sent to Antiochus and Phillip, willing them not to meddle with the kingdom of
Egypt. Furthermore M. Lepidus was sent into Egypt to take upon him the
protection of the child, and thadministration of the realm. While these
things were a doing* the ambass^doures of Complaint^ (...) a^st Phil^ a^ (...)
made agay^ him by (...).
Attalus king^ of Perga^us, and the ambassadors of the Rhodians came to Rome to
complain of the wrongs that king Philip had don unto them. The which thing
caused the Senate to goo in hand with the wars of Macedone forthwith. For
under pretense of aiding their co^federates war was decreed against Phillip,
and a consul was sent with an army into Macedone. And ere it was long after,
all Greece upon trust of the Romans rose against Phillip, in hope to recover
their ^uncient liberty, and made war upon him. By means whereof the king was so
assaulted on every side, that he was constrained to desire peace.

When the articles of peace should be propounded by the Romans, both Attalus
and the Rhodians and the Acheans, and the Aetolians demanded restitution of
that that had been theirs. On the other side, Philip granted y^ he could find in
his heart to be ruled by the Romans, but he said, it was an unseemly matter,
that the Greeks being vanquished by his predecessors Philip and Alexander, and
subdued under the yoke of the Empire of Macedone, should like conquerors
prescribe him articles of peace, and not rather be driven to a strait account
for their disobediens, or ever they ought to challenge any liberty.
Nevertheless at length by much intretaunce, they granted him truce for ii.
months. In the which time the peace y^ could not be agreed upon in Macedone,
might be requested of the Senate at Rome. The same year, between the Islands of
Theramene and Therasia, in the mid way between both shores, there An earthquake.
was a great earthquake in the sea. By means of y^ which (to the great
admiration of such as sailed that way) suddenly out of the deep, floted up an
Island with hot waters. And in Asia the very same day another earthquake shaked
the Rhodes and many other cities, throwing down the houses and buildings,
whereof some were swalowed up whole. At the which wonder all men were sore afraid,
and the sout^ sayers prophesied, that the Romain Empire then beginning to
spring up, should devour thold Empire of the greeks and Macedones. In the mean
season, the peace was rejected by the senate, whereupon Phillip solicited the
tyrant Nauis to take his part against the Romans: and so Phillip encourages
the Macedones a against the Romans.
when he had brought his host into the field, his enemies standing in order of
battle against him, he began to encorage his men, rehersing how the Macedones
had conquered and subdued the Persians, the Bactrians, the India^s, and to be
short all Asia even to the vttermooste border of the East. Saying that so
much more force and courage ought to be showed in this battle, then in the
other, as liberty is a thing of greater price then dominion.

Flaminius also the Roman Consul, in like manner encouraged his men to the
encounter, by puttinge them in (...) the (...)
rememberaunce of the things achieved latelye before. Showing them how on the
one side Carthage and Sicil were conquered, and on the other side Italy and
Spain recovered by the prowess and puissance of the Romans, and that
Hanniball was nothing inferioure to great Alexander, who being ones driven
out of Italye, they had subdued Affricke the third part of the world. And yet
the Macedones were not to be esteamed by the ancient renow^e of their
predecessoures, but according to the power and strength that they were of at
that present. For they should not encounter with great Alexander who was
reported to be invincible, nor with his army that conquered all the East, but
with Philip a child yet skarce come to years of discretion, who had much a do
to defend his kingdom against his nerte neighbors, and with those Macedones
which but even the other day almooste, were spoiled and led away prisoners by the
Dardanians, who were able to talk of nothing save the renoumed acts of their
ancestors, whereas the Romans might worthily report the deeds done by them
selves and their soldiers. For it was none other host that had subdued
Hannibal and the Carthagine^ses, and almost all the West, then the very same
soldiers whom he had there standing in battle ray, with these encouragements
the minds of both armies being enflamed, ran fierslye to the encounter, the
one part glorying in the Empire of the East, the other in thempire of the West,
the one bringing into the battle with them the ancient and forworne renoume of
their predecessors, the other the fresh and fragrant flour of their late tried
knighthode and cheualry. But the Romans had the fort^ne to vanquish the
Macedones. Phillip Phillip (...) ^ (...)*
being utterly discouraged by this battle, and d^siring peace of the Consul
Flaminius, retained still the name of king, but he was bereste of all the
Cities of Gre^, as it were the members of his kingdom, which were situate
without the bounds of the ancient inheritance, and so he had no more left
him, but only the country of Macedones. And yet the Aetolians being offended
that at their pleasure Mace^one also was not taken from him and given to them in
reward of their pains taken in the war, sent ambassadoures to Anti^chus,
who by flattering him in ad^uncing his puissaunce and cheualry, might enforce
him to make war against the Romans, in hope that all Greece would take his
part.

The. xxxi Book.
PTolomy Philopater being dead, Antiochus king of Syria disdaimng his Antiochus
inuadeth the Empire of Egypt.
little son because he was so young, (who being the onl^e hope of the
posteritye of the Ptolomtes, left to enherite the kingdom, was even as a pray
to his own subjects, purposed to conquer Egypt. Whereupon when he had
invaded Phenice, and the other cities situate in Syria, but under the dominion
of Egipte, the Senate of Rome sent an ambassade unto him, willinge him to
abstain from the Orphans kingdom, which was committed to their charge, by
the last bequest that his father made. The which being sent away with a (...)
answer, within a while after came another ambassade, which leaving the
person of their pupil, commanded him to make restitution with full amends
and satisfaction, of the cities that by the law of arms appertayned of right
to the Romans.

Upon his refusal they made their defiaunce, the which as he lightly received,
so he as unfortunately performed. The same time the Tirant Nabis subdued many
cities in G^ece. The Senate therefore least the power of the Romans King of
the Lacedaemonians.
should be entangled in two wars at one instaunte, wrate unto Flamminius,
that like as he had delivered Macedone from the bondage of Phillippe, so (if he
thought it good) he should deliver Greece from the bondage of Nabis. In
consideration whereof his authorit^e was proroged. For the name of that
Hanniball made the wars of Antiochus terrible, whom his envious adversaries
had accused to the Romans of secreate conspiracye with Antiochus,
alledginge that his heart would not serve him to live vnde^ a law, being
accustomed to bear rule, and being accustomed to the over licentyous liberty
of the camp, and that he was so weary of the rest and quietness of the city,
that he ever more sought to pick some quarrel, to thentent to have occasyon
again of some new wars. The which things all be it they were report^d
upon malice contrary to the truth yet not withstandinge among them that stood
in dread of him, they were b^leued for a truth. For the ^enate being
strycken with f^are, sent Seruilius of ambassade into An ambassa^ sent into
^fricke to surprise (...).
Affricke, to note the demeanor of Hanniball, giving him secreatelye in charge,
that if it were possible, he should find the means to kill him by some of
his adversaries, and so deliver the Romans from the dreadful fear of his
hateful name. But this secreate working could not be long kept from
Hanniball, being a wise and expert person in foreseing and auoidynge of
dangers, and such as looked as well for aduersitye in the time of prosperity,
as for prosperity in the time of aduer^ye.

Therefore when he had showed himself all day long before the eyes of the
noble men, and of the Rom^in ambassadoure Hanniball pr^uenteth the deuyses of
the Romans.
in the face of the court, even to the (...), in the shutting in of the
euenyng, he took horseback, and rode to a manor that he had in the subburbes
near unto the sea side, not making any of his servants preuye where about
he went, but willed them to wait at the gate til he came again. He had at the
said manor ships and mariners hidden for the nones in a noke of the sea.
Moreover he had there a great sum of monye in a readiness in the same piece of
ground, to thentent that if he were driven to such necessity, he would not be
let of his journey for want of ships or for want of money. There upon with a
company of his most picked servants (the noumber of whom was incresed with
Italian prisoners,) he took ship ping and directed his course toward Antiochus.
The next day the city waited in the judgment hal for their prince, and the
same time their Consul. When they hard that he was gone, they trembled for
fear, as if the City had been taken by the enemy, mistrusting that his
departure would turn to their utter destruction. And the Roman ambassador,
(as though Hanniball had even then made war again upon Italy), made no more a
do, but returned to Rome, and brought y^ sorrowful tidinges thereof with him.
In the mean time Flaminius having made confederacy with certain Cities in
Greece, vanquished Nabis in two Nabis is o^ercome.
pitched fields one after a another, by means whereof having brought him to
allow ebb, he left him in his kingdom lyhe a man without life or soul. But
after that he had withdrawn his garrisons out of the cities, and co^ueied Nabis
renu^th the wars (...)*
his host again into Italy, Nabis being entised again, for as much as he saw
no man to keep possessyon against him, raised a power and suddenly invaded
many Cities. Wherewith the acheans being put in fear, for doubt least the
mischief wherewith their neighbors were entangled should crepe upon them,
determined to make war against Nabis. Of the which wars they made lieuetenant
general their Praetor Philopemenes a man of excellent actiuity, The (...) of
Philopemenes.
who behaved himself so valiantly in that war, that by all men's judgment, he
was to be compared to Flaminius the graundcaptaine of the Romans. The same
time Hanniball when he was come to Antiochus, was entertained and wellcomed as
a gift sent from God: and the king took such a courage to him upon his
coming, (...) with Antiochus.
that he seemed not so careful for the war, as how he might reward him for
getting the victory, he thought himself so sure of it.

But Hanniball who knew by proof the prowess and He that ^kens with out his
host, must (...) twice.
puissaunce of the Romans, denied that it was possible to overcome them but
in Italy: to the performans where of, he willed him to deliver him an hundr^d
ships, with ten thousand footmen and three thousand horsemen, promisinge
to make as hot wars in Italye with that little band, as ever he had done
before, so that his majesty Hannibals counsel to An tiochus against the
Romans.
sitting in quiet in asia, he would either bring him home victory and
conquest, or elsse indifferent articles of sinall peace and atonement. For
both the Spaniyards were desirous to renew the wars if they had a captain
to set them a work, and he himself was better acquaynted with Italy now,
then he had been in foretimes. Moreover he knew that Carthage would not sit
at reast, but adi^yn herself as partaker of his enterprises out of hand. The
king lyked the counsel well, and there upon one of A messenger is sent to
Carthage from ^ball.
Hanniballes retinue was sent unto Carthage, to stir them to the war
being of them selves all ready desirous there of, declarynge unto them that
Haniball would shortly come thither with an army.

Nevertheless he was charged to say nothing to the factions, but only that
the Carthaginenses wanted heart, for asia should find them both men and money.
When The (...) ger is apprehended.
news hereof came to Carthage, the messenger was apprehended by the enemies of
Hanibal, and being brought into the Senate, and there examined to whom he was
sent, he answered like a subtle afre, that he was sent to the whole Senate.
In as much as this matter was not the peculier case of any one of them, but
appertained in general to them all.

While they were debating of the matter in counsel many days together, whether
it were best for dischargynge of their own consciences to send him to Rome,
there to make The messanger eskapeth and returns to Hannibal.
his purgation or no, he took ship privily, and returned to Hannibal. Whereupon
the Carthagi. immediately sent an ambassador to Rome. The Romans also sent
ambassadors to antiochus, the which under the color of ambassade, An ambassad
sent from Rome to Antiochus.
should both mark and note the kings furnyture for the wars, and also
either reconcyle Hannibal to the Romans, or elsse through their daily and
continual co^moning with him, bring him in suspision and hatred with the king.
Thambassadors therefore when they were come before ye king antiochus at Ephesus,
de^yuered him the^r commission from the Senate. Duringe the time they lay
Flatterye.
there, giving attendaunce for their answer, day by day they were ever in
hand with Hannibal, saying that there was no cause why he should have fled so
fearfullye out of his country* seeing the Romans withal faithfulness observed
the peace concluded, not so much with the body of the common weal of
Carthage, as with him: co^sideryng they knew he had made war against the
Romans, not so much for ill will he bare toward them, as for the love he
bare toward them, as for the love he bare toward his own country, in the
which quarrel every good man ought to spend his life. For the occasyon of
those wars, grew upon the displesure that the one country bare openly against
the other, and not upon any private quarrel of the captains among them
selves. Hereupon they too^e occasyon to commend his noble acts. the which
communication so greatly delighted him that he was desirous to talk with the
ambassadors oftener, not foreseinge that for the familiarity he had with the
Romans, he should purchase himself the kings displesure. For antiochus upon
Antiochus is displeased (...) Haniball for keeping compani with the Romans.
this ^is daily communication, thinking him to be reconciled and fallen in favor
with the Romans, would not ask his devise as he was wont to do, nor make him
preuy to any part of his doings, but hated him as an ennemy, and abhorred him
as a traytoure.

The which thing laid a water all that great furniture for the wars after
the time that the policy of the grau^d captain was thus dashed out of
countenance. Theffect of the commissyon, was to command Antiochus in the name
of the Senate, to be content with the bounds of The effect of the Romayne
ambassade, and the answer of Antiochus.
Asia, unless he would drive them to enter into asia whether they would or no.
Antiochus making light there of, answered how he was fullye resolved before,
not to receive war at their hands, but to make war upon them. When he had
oftentimes debated with his counsel Consultation concerning the wars of the
(...) nes.
and his captains as concerning this war, not making Hannibal preuy there
to, at the last he sent for him, not to thentent to do any thing after his
devise, but to thentent he would not seem to have utterly despised him, and
there upon when every man had said his mind, lastly he asked him ^is advise.
The which thing Hanniball understanding well enough, said that he perceived he
was called, not because the king thought himself to have need of his counsel,
but only to supply the noumber of sentences. Nevertheless for the hatred he
bare to the Romans Hannibals adusye as concerning the maintenance of the wars
with the Romans.
and for the good will he bare to the king, as in whose court only he had
had safe refuge in the time of his banishment, he would discuss what way he
were best to enterprise his wars. Thereupon he desired pardon in that he
should speak so largely: for he said he liked no part of their counsels nor
opinions in that behalf, as that Greece should be appointed the place of the
war, seeing that Italye was better for the maintenance of the same. For the
Romans might not be vanquished, but by their own weapons, nor Italye otherwise
be subdued then by her own power. For those kind of people were of a clean
contrary nature from all other men, and therefore the wars were to be
ordered far otherwise against them then against all other men. In other
wars it is wont to be a great furtheraunce and healpe for a man to have
taken some advantage of the place, or of the time, to have wasted the fields,
or to have won some Cities. But with the Romain whether ye have gotten any
advantage before, or whether ye have overcome him, ye must be feign even then
to wrestle with him, when he is vanquished and lies at your foot. Wher^ore if
a man assail them in Italy, he might overcome them with their own weapons,
their own richesse, and their own power, like as ^e himself had done. But
if any man shall suffer them to enjoy Italye as the well spring of their
strength, he shall be as sore deceived of his purpose, as if a man would goo
about to drive back a river against the stream, or to dry it up, not
beginning to stop it at the head, but at such place as the waters were
deep^st and most increased. This he said was his opi^yon in himself,
whereupon he was mineded to have offered his service and advise unrequested, the
which he now had uttered in the presence of al his friends, to thentent they
might all understand how to make wars with the Romans, who out of their
own country were invincible, and at home at their own doors weak and easy to
be overcome. In so much that it was an easyer matter to set them beside Rome,
then beside their Empire, and to drive them out of Italy, then out of their
provinces. For their city had been sacked by the frenchmen, and they them
selves almost utterly destroyed by him, and yet he never vanquished before he
departed out of their country. But as soon as he was returned to Carthage,
immediatlye with the place, was also aultered the fortune of the wars* The
kings council held as much against this advise as The nature of (...) and
(...)*
could be, not waying the vtility of the matter, but for fear least if his
counsel should be allowed) he should be more in favor with the king the any of
them. Antiochus misliked not so much the counsel as the author thereof, least
the glory of the victory should redound to Hannibal, and not to him. Thus
through assentation and flatterye all was marde, and nothing was done by
counsel or reason. The king all the winter time geuinge himself to riot and
pastime, was every day making of new marriages. On the contrary part, attilius
the Roman Consul, who was sent to these wars, withal diligence prepared
men and armor, withal other munitions, artillery and habilimentes for the war,
confirmed and strengthened the cities y^ were in confederacy, allured such as
were neuters, and in conclusion according as either part laid before hand for
their furniture, so did they speed in the war. In the first encounter when the
king saw his men give back, he did (...) is (...) flygh^*
not releue them with fresh succors, but offered himself captain of such as
first ran away, and left his camp replenished withal richesse to his enemy.
When he had eskaped by flight into asia, while the Romans were occupied in
gathering the spoil, he began to repent him that Hannibal is taken into (...)
uor again*
he had rejected Hanniballes counsel, and there upon taking him into favor
again, he said he would do all things by his aduisemente. In the mean
season it was told him that Liuius (...) a Roman captain, appointed admiral
of the sea by the Senate, was coming toward him with four (...) ships of
war, the which tidinges put him in good comfort to receuer his misfortune.
Therefore he determined to encounter with him by the way, before that the Cities
which as yet held their aliance with him, were revolted to the Romans, hoping
to abolish the dishonor of the (...) taken in Greece by a new victory. And
thervppon Hanniball was sent to Hannibal being made admiral of (...) is (...)
by the Romans*
the sea with the kings flete. But neither were the men of asia able to match
the Romans, nor their ships of like force as were the Roman galleis,
whose (...) were armed with brass. Yet notwithstanding the slaughter was the
less, by means of the policy of the captain. The fame of the victory was
not yet reported at Rome, and therefore the city stayed the creating of their
consuls. But who was better to be made captain against Hannibal, then the
brother of affricanus? seeing it was the peculier work of the Scipions, to
vanquish the Carthaginenses. Lucius Scipio was created consul, and his brother
affricanus was given him to be his lieuetenaunt, to thentent Antiochus should
understand that they had as much confidence in their conqueror Scipio, as he
had in his vanquished Hanniball. As the Scipios were conueying over their
hooste into asia, word was brought them, that the war in both places was
all redye brought paste the worste, and so they found antiochus vanquished in
battle on the land, and Hannibal overcome up on the sea. At their first
arrival antiochus sent his ambassadoures unto them for peace, sendinge
moreover by Antiochus ^esyreth peace.
them as a peculiare present unto affricanus, his son whom the king had
taken passing over in a little bark. But affricanus answered that there was
great difference between benefits done to any one person priuatelye, The
consta^te and vncorupt mind of Affricanus toward his country.
and the benefits that were done to the publyke weal of a whole country, and
that the person of a father was one thing, and the person of a common weal
was another, which ought in deed to be preferred, not o^lye before children,
but also before the very life it self, wherefore he thancked the king withal
his heart for his honorable present, promising to requite his b^unteous
liberalitye, by some good turn that lay in his own pryuate power to do. But
as touching war and peace, he answered that he could show him no favor,
neither that he would do more or less then was of right meet and requi^ite
to the behoufe of his country. For he never entreated for the raunsominge of
his son, nor suffered the Senate to go about it, but as appertained to his
honor, he said always he would recover him by force of arms. After this,
were articles of peace propounded, the content whereof was that he should
depart out of asia, suffering Articles of (...)
the Romans to enjoy it peaceablye, deliver them their prisonners and
runnagates, withal their ships, and make (...) of all charges and expenses
that the Romans had been put to in those wars. Antiochus having
intelligence thereof, answered that he was not as yet so utterly vanquished,
that he should suffer himself to be spoiled of his kingdom, saying that it
was the next way to provoke him to war, rather then to allure him to peace.
In the mean time that the war was in preparing on both sides. The Romans
enteringe into Asia The (...).
came to Troy where was great reioycement between the (...) and the Romans,
the Troianes declarynge how Eneas and the other captains came from them, and the
Romans vaunti^ge them selves to be descended of them. And there was as great
reioycement between both parts, as there is wont to be at the meting of the
parents and their children, after long being a sonder. It did the Troianes
good, that their lineage having conquered the west and subdued Affricke, did
now challenge thempire of Asia also, as their ancient inheritance and the
rightful possession of their forefathers, saying it was good fortune to Troy.
that it was destroyed, considering how luckelye it had risen again? On the
other side, the Romans had an unmeasurable desire, to see the houses of their
auncestry, and the places where their forefathers were bred and borne, with the
Temples and Images of their Gods. When the Romans were departed from Troy,
king Emnenes met them with a number of men to aid them. And ere it was long
after, a field was fought against Antiochus, in the which when as a legion
of the right A battle between (...) and the (...).
wing of the Roman* battle, being put out of array fled to the camp with more
shame then danger, Marcus Aemylius marshal of the host, being left behind
for the defense of the camp, commanded his soldiers to arm them selves,
and to go out of the trenche, and with their swords drawn to manace such as
fled away, saying they should die for it euerychone, if they returned not
into the battle again, and that they should find their own camp hotter for
them, then the battle of their enuemies. The legion being astonished at so great
danger accompanied with their fellows that stopped them of their flight,
returned into the field, and there making a great slaughter upon their enemies,
were the beginning of the victory. There were of the enemies fifty thousand
slain, and a ri. M. taken prisoners. Yet notwithstanding when Antiochus desired
peace, nothing was added to the former articles. The magnam^ty of the Romain^s.
For Affricanus said, it was not the custom of the Romans, to be discouraged
for a loss, nor to be proud by reason of prosperity. The cities that they had
taken, they divided among their confederates* iudginge it a greater reward to
the Romans to have honor and renowue, then possessions gotten by force. For
he said, it was mete for a Roman to challenge glory and fame, and to leave
the superflouity of richesse to his partakers.

The xxxii. Book*
THe Aetolians which had provoked Antiochus to war against the Romans,
after the time that he was onercome, The Aetolians are subdued by the Romans.
remained all only against the Romans, both (...) to match them in strength,
and also destitute of all healpe and comfort. By means where of within a
(...) after, they were vanquished and lost their liberty, the which they all
only among so many cities of Greece had retained untouched, against the
dominion of the Atheniens and Lacedaemonians. The which estate of bondage was so
much the bitterer unto them, as it was later or it came* r^oltynge with them
selves those times, in the which with the only power of their own country,
they had withstoode and burn out the great force and power of the Pers^ans,
in the which they had repressed the violence of the (...) men, so terrible to
Asia and Italye in the bat^ell at Delphos, the glor^ous remembrance of which
things kindled in them a (...) desire of liberty. While these things The (...)
ou (...) the ^ans and the Achca^s*
were a doing, in the mean time the Messenians and the Acheans f^ll first at
conte^ion, and anon after to plain sighting for the s^raigntye.

In that battle Philopenienes the noble graund captain of the Acheans was taken
prisoner, not through his own defaulte, because he (...) not fight for saving
of his life, but as he was about to bring his men in array that were
s^attered, in the leapinge of a ditche his (...) overthrew, and so his enemies
clustered about him, and took him ere he could r^couer up again. And yet the
Messenians when they fo^nd him overthrown, whether it were for f^are o^ his
prowess^, or for reverence of his estate, durst not kill him. Therefore as
though by taking of him they had finished all the war, they led him like a
prisonner about all the city in manner of a triumph, the people ruuninge out
by heaps to meet hun, as if their own captain, and not the captain of their
enemies had been coming. And I believe the Acheans would not have been more
desirous to have seen him if he had gotten the upper hand then were the
Messenians his enemies, to behold him being a prisonner. For they led him into
a Theater, to the entente they might all behold him, whom they thought an
incredible and vnposs^ble m^tter to be taken. From thence they couueyed him to
pryso^, where for shame The (...) ble courage of Philopemenes a^hys death.
of the villainy they had offered to such a worthy estate, they gave him poison:
the which he drancke with as mearye a cheer as if he had won the victory.
Demaundyng first of all whether Lycortas the lieuetenante of the Acheane (whom
he knew to be the manne of best knowledge in feats of arms nerte unto
himself,) had eskaped in safetye or no.

When he understood that he was eskaped, he said, the world goes not
altogether against the Acheans, and with that word he gave up the ghost. But
ere it was long after, the war was renewed, in which the Messenians being
vanquished, suffered worthy punishment for putting Philopemenes to death. In
the mean season Antiochus The death of Antiochus.
king of Syria, being sore ouercharged with the tribute that he should pay to
the Romans, and saying himself vanquished and burdened, whether it were that
he were compelled for want of money, or that he were allured with covetousness,
because he hoped that under pretense of the necessity (the which he was put to
for the payment of the tribute,)he should be held the better excused if he
committed sacrilege, he assembled an army, and in the night time assaulted
the temple of Jupiter of Dodon, the which attempt was bewrayed, and he withal
his hooste was slain by the inhabitauntes of the country that resorted to the
reskue. At Rome, when many cities of Greece were The modesty of D^metrius with
the fruit thereof.
come thither, to complain of the injuries that Phillyppe king of Macedone
had d^one unto them, and that there was great contention in words in the
senate house, between Demetrius the son of Phillippe sent thither by his
father to make satisfaction as the Senate should think right, and the
ambassadoures of the Cities: the young man being confounded with the noise and
exclamatyon of the appellantes, suddenly held his peace. Then the Senate being
moved with his modest shamefastness, for the which he had been well beloved
of all men before times when he lay in hostage at Rome, gave judgment on his
side. And so Demetrius obtained pardone for his father, not by defending his
right, but by the help of his modesty and shamefastness. The which thing
was signified unto him by the decree of the senate, to thentent it should
appear, that the king was not acquitted as giltlesse, but ^rtue pro^ ^nuy.
rather pardoned for his sons sake, the which thing purchased unto
Demetrius, not thank for his behavior in that ambassade, but hatred through
the maliciousness of backebyters. For with his brother Perses, who sought by all means to surprise him,)it procured him envy, and with his father (when he
knew the occasion of his acquitall)it procured him displeasure, disdaininge
that ^he person of his son should be of more force or strength with the
Senate, then the authority of the father, or the estimation of his estate being
a king. Perses therefore per Wh^e (...) a man (...) worse neighbor (...)
brings (...) home.
ceiuing his fathers disease, made complaints daily unto him of his brother
Demetrius, and first he brought him in mistrust with him, and shortly in utter
displeasure, obiecting against him that he sought the freudshippe of the
Romans to betray his father.

At the last he surmised that he went about tr^ason, for the prouse where of he
brought in record, and suborned false witnesses to uphold ^he crime that he
charged him wythall. By means whereof he compelled his father to murder his
own son, and brought all the court in sorrow and heaviness. After Demetrius
was thus put to death, the party being dispatched out of the way, whom he
feared as his enemy, Perses began to be not only more slack in doing his
duty, but also more stubborn against his father, behauing himself, not like
an heir but like a king. Phillip being sore offended with his misdemenor,
bewailed the death of Demetrius very impatiently from day to day. Where
upon mistrustynge him self to be deceived by cautele and treason, he put the
witnesses and record bearers to torture. Through which having boulted out
their treason, he was vexed as much with the wickedness of Perses, as with the
undeserved death of Demetrius. And he had punished him for his labor, had
not death prevented him of his purpese. For shortly after, through very sorrow
and pensiveness The death of Phil^yp king of (...).
of heart, he fell sick and died, leaving behind him great furniture for the
wars against the Romans, the which Perses afterward used.

Moreover he had allured the Frenchmen, called Rascians, to take his part, and
was minded to have made grievous What natyons Perses procured to take his part
against the Romans.
wars upon the Romans, if he had not dyed. For the Frenchmen after the
unfortunate battle at Delphos, (in the which the wrath of God, did them more
displeasure then the puissance of their enemies) having lost their Captain
Brenne, fled like owtlawes, some into Asia, some into Thrace: From thence they
retired into their native country, by the very same way they came out. A
certain of them rested at the metyng of the ryuers of Danow and Say, and called
themselves Rascians. The people of Languedocke, being returned into their The
punyshmente of Sa^ledge.
old country of Tolouse, and there stryken with a Pestilent murreyne, could
not recover their health, until such time as by thadmonishment of their
Southsayers, they had thrown into the lake of Toulouse, all the gold and
Silver that they had gotten in the wars, by the robbyng and spoilyng of
Temples. All the which, Cipio the Romayn Consul, long time after took away
every penny. There was of gold, a hundred and ten thousand pound weight, of
silver fifty hundred thousand pound weight: the which sacrilege was afterward
the confusion of Cipio and his host. Furthermore, there followed anon after
the war of the Cymbrians agnynst the Romans, as it were to punish them for
taking away of the holly money. A great number of the people of Languedock,
being enticed with the swetenes of the pray, (as men wont to live altogether
upon the spoil) went into Illyria, and there having syoyled the Istrians,
rested in P^nnonie. It is reported that the nation of the Istrians, descended
from the men of Colchos, that were sent by King Aetis, to pursew the
Argonantes, and Jason that led away his daughter by force, who enteryng out
of the Sea of Pontus, into the river of Istre, and so directly The original of
the Istrians.
into the river Say, followyng the Argonantes, at the hard heles, carried their
^ippes upon their shoulders, over the tops o^ the mountains, ^uen unto the
shore of the Adriatike sea, the which thing they understood, that the
Argonantes for the length of th^ire ship, had done before them. But when the
men of Colchos could not synde them, whether it were for fear of the king, or
for tediousness of the long sailing, they setteled them selfs nere unto the
City Aquiuerlera, and called them selves Istria^s, after the name of the
river, into the which they first entered out of the sea. The Daces also, are
the issue of the Getes: who with Dlor their king, being van Cowardice punysh^d
with r^proch.
quished in battle by the Bastarnes, were put to this penance for their
cowardyse, that when they should take their sleep, they should lay their
headdes, where their fete should lie, and serve their wives in such sort, as
their wives were wont to serve them, the which penalty laid upon them by
the commandment of their king, they should not be so bold to infringe,
before they had by their manhood and prowess, put away the schlaunder and
ignominy, purchased by their former siouts, and cowardyse. Perses therefore,
being crowned king in his father Philyppes stead, styrred all these nations, to
take his part against the Romans. In the m^ane while, War between Prusias
as and Eumenes
there arose war between Prusias (unto whom Hanniball was fled, after that
peace was concluded between Antiochus and the Romans) and Eumenes: the which
war, Prusias (breakyng the league upon trust that he had in Hanniball) did
first move. For when as the Romans among other articles of peace, put in the
deliverance of Hanniball for one: the king gave him warnyng of it, and he fled
into Candie.

In the* which I Will, when he had lived quiet^ie a long time, and saw that men
repyned and grudged at him, The (...) of (...).
for his great wealth and richesse, he filled pottes with leadde, and set them
in the Temple of Diana, as (...) for the preseruacion of his life and very
goo^ (...): By means where of the City having no fear nor infstruste of his
dooinges, in as much as they believed that they had his richesse for a pledge,
he went to Prusias, carrying all his gold with him, poured into Images of
timber, least if his richesse should be espied, he might happen to be put in
ieoperdy of his life for them.

Afterward when Emnenes had overcome Prusias in battle upon the land, and
that Prusias would try the Ha^ibals ^tageme.
adventure of the sea, Hannibail by a new devise was the occasion that he gate
the victory. For he caused of all kinds of Serpents to be put into earthen
pots, the which in the mids of the battle, were cast into the enemies
ships. This stratageme seemed at the first to the men of Pontus, to be but a
mockerye to leave weapones and fight with earthen pottes. But when the
Serpents began to swarm about them in the ships, they were so troubled with
the doubtful danger, that they wist not what to do, and so they gave their
enemy the upper hand. When fidinges hereof came to Rome, the Senate sent
ambassadoures to cease the strife between both the kings, and to demand to
have Hannibal yielded unto them. But Hanniball having knowledge of the matter,
poisoned him self, and dyed ere the ambassador could come The death of
Hanniball.
by him.

This year was notable for the deaths of three of the most puissaunte
captains in all the whole world, that is to say, of Hanniball, Philopemenes,
and Scipio Affricanus. Of the which it is well known, that Hanniball, The
commen dation of Ha^niball.
neither in the time that al Italy quaked to see him thunderinge like a tempest
in the Roman Empire, nor when he was returned to Carthage and held the
soueraintye, did ever sytte down to his meat, or drink above a pint and a
half of wine at a meal. And as for chastitye he kept it so immaculate and
undefiled among so many prisonners as he had, that a man would swear he
had never been borne in Affricke.

Certesse he was of that mod^stye and gouernmente, that all be it had sundry
kinds of people to rule in his host, yet his souldioures never went about
to betraye him, neither could he be entrapped by any policye, both the which
things his ennemies full often attempted against him.

The. xxxii. Book.
THe Romans accomplished the wars of Macedone, with far less trouble The
preparat^on of the To mains, and of Philip one against another.
the they did the wars of Carthage* but the war was so much the more
honorable, as the Macedones excelled the Cart^aginenses in reno^ne and
estimation. For they were furthered partly with the glory of the conquest of
the East, and inespecially with the aid and help of all kings. And therefore
the Romans made for the a greater noumber of men of war, and also sent for
succ^ur to Masinissa king of Mundie, and to all other their confedecates.
Furthermore they charged Emnenes king of Bythinia, to help them with all the
power he was able to make. Perses besides his host of Macedones, who by the
opinion of all men were accounted invincible, had in his treasury and in his
store houses where with all to mainetaine ten years war, prepared before
hand by his father. By means whereof, being puff^d up with pride, and
forgetting what chance his father had before him, he willed his men to
consider the ancient renoune of Alexander. The first encounter was of horsemen,
in the which Perses getting the upper hand, procured himself the favor of all
men, which before stood in doubt what way to incline, because they wist not
which way the world would go. Nevertheless he sent Ambassadors to the Romain Con
sull to request peace, as they had before granted to his father, being
vanquished, promisyng to pay the charges of the war, as if he had been
ouercomme. But the Consul Sulpitius, propounded as sore conditions, as if he
had been vanquished in deed. While these things were a doing, the Romans for
dread of so dangerous a war, created Aemilius Paulus, Consul, and made him
extraordinarily Lieuetenaunt of the wars in Macedone. Who as soon as he came
to the army, made no long delay, ere he encountered with his enemies. The
night before the battle should be fought, the Moon was Eclypsed. The Eclipse
of the moon.
All men judged it to be a sorrowful for token to Perses, as the which
signified that Thempyre of Macedone drew fast to an end.

In that conflict, M. Cato, the son of Cato the Drator, as he was feightyng
among the thickest of his enemies, The baliant nesse of M. Cato.
fell of his horse, and was feign to feight a foot: for when he was down, a
band of his enemies enclosed him about, with an horrible n^yse, to have killed
him as he lay on the ground. But he recovered himself quicklye, and made a
great slaughter among them: the while his enemies came clusteryng about him on
all sides to oppress him, being but one man alone: as he struck at one of
their noble men, his sword flew out of his hand into the mids of his enemies,
to recover the which, he covered himself with his target, and in thopen sight
of both the armies, thrust himself in among his enemies weapons, and having
recovered his sword, with the receipte of many wounds, returned to his own
fellows, with a great showte of all the whole field. The residewe of his
compa^e ensewyng his bold example, wan the victory. King Perses fled out of
the field, and with ten thousand Talentes Perses flies and is taken
prysonner with his chil dren.
sailed to Samothrace: Whom Cneus D^auius, being sent by the Consul, to
pursewe him, took him with his two sons, Alexander and Philippe, and brought
them ners to the Consul. Macedone, from the time of Caranus, who first reigned
there, unto Perses who was the last, had thirty kings, under whose
governance it con ti^ued, by the space of nine hundred twenty and three
years: but it held the Sovereign Monarchy, no longer then a hundred, (...)
and twelve years. When it The (...) the monarchy of (...).
was once brought in subjection to the Romans: Officers were appointed in
every City, and it was set at liberty, receyuyng of Paul the Laws, which
they use at this day. The Senetours of all the cities of Aetoly with their
wives and children, which hitherto had remained as neuters, were sent to Rome,
and there they were deteyned a long time, to thentent they should not work
any alteracion in their country, until at length after many years
entreatans, by often Ambassades sent from the Cities to the Senate of Rome,
every man was dismissed into his own country.

The. xxxiiii. Book.
THe Carthaginenses and Macedones, The (...) of the Roman nes against the (...).
being subdued, and the power of the Aetolians weakened by the captivity of
their noblemen, the Acheans only of all Greece, seemed as yet to the Romans to
be at that time of to much power and authority, not for the over great wealth
of every city by themself, but for the earnest agreement of them all together.
For although the Acheans be divided by Cities, as it were into members, yet
they have one Corporacion, and one kind of government, and if any wrong be
offered to anyone city, straight ways all the (...) make all power they can,
to redress it.

Therefore as the Romans sought to find some quarrel to make war against
them, by fortune a co^plainte was brought against them in due season by the
Lacedemonia^s whose fields (for a mutual hatred between the two peoples,)the
Acheans had forraged. The Senate made answer to the Lacedaemonians, that they
would send ambassadors into Greece, to se how their confederates were dealt
wythall, and to defend them from taking any wrong. But thambassadors had
privily in charge besides, to dissolve the agreeable consent of the Acheans, and
to set every city fre from other, to thentent they might the easlier be brought
in subjection: and if any cities showed them selves so stout that they would
not, they should be compelled by force. The ambassadoures therefore calling the
princes of all the cities before them to Corynthe, recyted the decree of the
Senate, declaryuge what they would counsel them to do. They said it was
expedient for them all, that every City should be gyuerned by their own
laws, and by their own customs. When this was ones notifiee to them all,
they were in such a rage, that like mad men, they killed all the foreign
people within the real^e. Yea and they had doene as much to the Roman
Ambassadors them selves also, if they had not had intelligens of the hurlye
burly, and shyfted for them selves by flight. As Soon as tydinges her of came to
Rome forth with the Senate appointed Mnmmius the Consul to make war against
the Acheans. Who without further delay, conueyinge thither his army, and
having vigilantly puided for all things before hand, offered his enemies
battle. But the Acheans, as though they had take a matter of no importans in
hand by making war (...) ^o (...) before (...) net.
against the Romans, so they looked and cared for nothing at all, for they were
so myndfull of the pray, and so careless for the battle y^ they brought chariots
and wagous wit^ them to lade home with the spoil of their enemies, and set
their wives and children in y^ mou^tains to behold ye conflict. But when they
came to hand strokes, they were slain right down before their friends
faces, where by they gave them a sorowfvll sight, the rememberaunce whereof
might grieve them all the days of their life after. Their wives and children
also being of lookers on made captives, were a pray to the enemy. The chief
city Corinth Corynthe is beaten down.
was beaten down. All the people were sold by the drum, to the intent that by
the ensample thereof, the other cities might be a fraid to make any trouble or
insurrection. While these things were a doing, Antiochus king of Syria made
war upon Ptolomy the elder, his syslers Antiochus makes war upon Ptol^my
king of Egypt.
son king of Egypt, given all together to slouthe, and so feeble and unlusty
through daily and continual riot, that he not only committed all things
appertaining to the estate and office of a king, but also by means of over
much pamperinge up of him self, was in manner void of that reason which
ought to be in man. Being therefore driven out of his kingdom, he fled to
Alexandria, to Ptolomye his younger brother, with whom he parted his kingdom,
and so they sent ambassadoures ioyntlye together to the Senate of Rome,
requestinge healpe by the right of the league in the which they were bound
in alyauns with them. The Senate being moved at the suit of the brethren there
upon sent Pub. Popilius ambassador to Antiochus to will him to abstain from
Egypt, or if he were all ready An example of an uncorrupted mind and of great^
severity.
entered to void thence. When he had found him in Egypt, and that the king
offered to kiss him, (for at such time as Antiochus lay in hostage at Rome,
among others he had Popilius iu great estimation and reverence) Popilius willed
him to let cease all private friendship, until he had executed the
commandment of his country, or while matters concerning his country were in
hand, and there withal drawinge forth the decre of the senate, and
deliueringe it unto him, when he saw him pause at the matter, askinge leisure
to consulte thereon with his friends, there Popilius with a wand that he had in
his hand, (...) a (...) circle about him, willing him to call his friends to
counsel to him and not to set foot ou^e of the place before he had given the
Senate a direct answer, whether he would have peace or warr^ with the
Romans. This rigorousnesse so ^uche abated the kings courage, that he made
answer he was content to be ruled by the Senate. Antiochus after his return
into his kingdom deceased* leauinge his heir a (...) babe. Whom The death of
An^ochus.
the realm assigned to the governance of certain Protectoures. Here upon
his uncle Demetrius, who lay in hostage at Rome, hearing of the ^eath of his
brother an^iochus, went unto the Senate, saying that he came thither for an
hostage duringe his brothers life, after whose decease he knew not for whom
he should lie any longer in hostage. Wherefore he ought of right to be
discharged, that he might go and challenge the kingdom, the which (as by the
universal law of all nations,) it appertayned ^o his elder brother, so now of
reason, it was due to him, because he was of more y^res of discretion then the
babe. When he perceived the Senate would not license him to Demetrius steals
from Rome* and obtains the kingdom of Syria.
goo, (in as much as they were persuaded in their own judgments, that the
kingdom should remayn in more safetye and quietness in the childs hand then
in his,) under pretense of ri^ing a hunting, he stale to D^ia, and there with a
few of his retinue that were preuye to his doings, he priuelye took
shipping. As Soon as he was arrived in Syria, he was received with great joy
and favor of all men, and the Protectours killing their ward did put him in
possessyon of the kin^dom. The same time almost, Pru^as king of Bythinia,
went about secreatly Prusias diggeth a pit for his son, and falls there in
him self.
to kill his own son (...), for none other occasion, but only to anaunce
his younger sons that he had begotten upon his second wife which lay in
hostage at Rome. But the matter was be wrayed to the young man by them that
should have done the deed, and they counseled him, that for as much as his
father by his cruelty had provoked him thereto, he should preuente the
conspiracye, and turn the mischief upon the deuysers head. It was no hard
matter to persuade him. Therefore as soon as he was by their enticemente entered
into his fathers realm, he proclaimed himself king. Prusias being deposed
from his own son from his royal estate, to the degree of a private person,
was forsaken even of his own servants. And as he lay hidden in a secreat
place, his son as cruelly slew him, as he had wicked lie commanded his son
to be put to death before.

The. xxxv. Book.
Demetrius the usurper of the kingdom of Syria, supposinge it to be a
dangerous matter, if upon his new aduauncemente he should give him self to
idleness, determined to enlarge the borders of his kingdom, and to augmente
his richesse by subduing his neighbors. Whereupon for displeasure he bare to
Ariarathes king of Cappadocia for refusing his sister in marriage, he main
tained against him his brother Holofernes, who being An example of singular
in gratitude.
wrongfully driven out of the realm, resorted to him for succoure, and for joy
that he had so honest a title to make war, he purposed to set him in
possession of the kingdom again. But Holofernes being of a cankered and
malicious nature, (entering in league with the Antiochiens, being at that time
offended with Demetrius,) took counsel how to deprive him of his kingdom,
that went about to restore him into his kingdom. Demetrius having knowledge
there of, spared his life because ariarathes should not be delivered from the
fear of his brothers war. Nevertheless he caused him to be apprehended and
put him in prisone in the city Seleucia. Yet notwithstanding the antiochiens
were not so discouraged by the detection of their conspiracye, that they would
cease from their rebellion. Therefore by the help of Ptolomye king of Egypt,
attalus king of asia, and ariarathes king The hatred of diverse kings against
Demetrius.
of Cappadocia, all the which Demetrius had by his wars stirred against
him, they suborned one Prompalus a man of the basest sort, to challenge the
kingdom by force of arms, as though it had been his by right of inheritance,
and to the intent there should want nothing to spite Demetrius withal, they
proclaimed him by the name of Ale^ander, and reported him to be the son of
Antiochus. So sore hatred was Demetrius amongste all men, that by an universal
consent, they not only gave his aduersarye the power of a king, but also
attributed unto him nobility of birth and lignage. Alexander therefore by means
of this wonderful exchange of things, forgetting his own old villainage,
being accompanied with the power almost of all the whole Cast, made war
against Demetrius, whom he vanquished and depryued both of life and
kingdom. How be it Demetrius wanted The (...) nes and (...) of (...)
no courage to withstand the brunt of the wars. For at the first encounter he
put his enemy to flight, and when the king renewed the battle again, he slew
many thousand of their men in the field, and yet at the last being of an
invincible courage, he was slain fighting most valiantlye among the thickest
of his enemies. In the beginning of the wars, Demetrius had committed to the
charge of his host of Guydus in Lycia, his two sons and a great sum of
gold, to the intent they should be both out of ^operdye of the war, and
also if it should so happen be preserved to revenge their fathers death. The
elder of them named Deme^rius, being past childs age, hearing D^etrius the
son of (...) recou^reth his fathers kingdom.
of the riotous demeanor of Alexander, (who for the joy he had in his richesse
unhoped for, and in the ornaments of a another man's felicity, kept himself
like a cowardlye carpet knight at home in his palaice among a company of
concubines and brothels,) by the help of the Caudiens, assailed him careless
as he was, and fearing no hostility at all. The Antiochiens also to make amends
with their new benefits, for the old displeasure done to his father, yielded
them selves unto him. Moreover his fathers souldioures, being inflamed with
favor toward the young Prince, and preferringe the conscience of their oath
made to his father, before their promise made to the new proud king, revolted
withal their banners and antesignes to Demetrius. And so Alexander being with
like rage of for (...) overthrown as he was lifted up, was in the first
battle vanquished and slain: suffryng due punishment, both in the behalf of
Demetrius whom he had slain, and in the behalf of Antiochus, whose ^ock he
had most shamefullie slaundered.

The xxxvi. Book.
Demetrius having recovered his Fathers kingdom, was himself also cor rupted,
through the prosperous success in all his affairs, and through the
inclinacion to vice, that is commonly wont to be in youth, he fell to sloth
and (...)* by means whereof, he purchased himself, as much hatred at all
men's hands for his cowardnesse, as his father had gotten for his
statelynesse: whervppon perceyuyng how the cities every where began to
withdraw their obedience, to thentent he might wype out the spot of
cowardyse, Demetrius makes war against the Parthi^ns.
he determined to make war upon the parthians. Whose coming the people of
the East were not a little glad to behold, both, by reason of the cruelty of
Arsaces king of the Parthians, and also because the countries, being enured
with the gentle entreatans of the ancient dominion of the Macedones, could
not well away with the pride of the new Empire of the Parth^ans. By means
whereof, being aided with the power of the Per sians, Emylians, and Bactrians,
he vanquished the Par ^sans in many battles. Nevertheless at the last, being
deceived under a counterfeit color of peace, he was taken Demetrius is taken
prisoner, and kept like a king.
prisoner, and ^rawen through thopen face of the cities, that had revolted and
showed in meckage to the people, that had rebelled, as who should say, they
should see what a one he was, whom they had so highly favored.

Afterward he was sent into (...), and there courteou^ly enterteyned,
according as belongs to his for mer estate.

While these things were in doing, in the mean time (...), who through suit
to the body of the Realm had obtained to be admitted Protector, over Antiochus
(...).
son in law to Demetrius: killed the child, and usurped the kingdom of
Syria, the which he enjoyed a great while: but at the length, when the ^our
that men bare him, being newly made king, began to wear out. Antiochus the
brother of Demetrius, who at that time was (...) of (...)*
brought up in Asia, being but a very child, overcame him in battle, and so
the kingdom of Syria was redu^ed again to the stock of Demetrius. An^iochus
therefore remembryng, that both his father was hated for his pride, and his
brother despised for his slouthfulnes: because he would not fall into the same
vices himself, after he had taken in marriage Cleopatra his brothers (...), he
with all diligence pursuwed the Cy^es that had reuloted from his brother, at
the beginn^g of his Reygne, and having subdued them, brought the^ again to
(...) of thempyre. Also he subdued the Jews, who in the time of his father
Demetrius taking weapon in hand, had pulled their necks from subjection of
Thempyre of Macedone, and set themselfes at liberty. And they grew to such
strength, that after this man was once dead, there (...) as no king of Macedone
^ble to keep them in obedience, but that they made a Ruler among themselfes,
and di^roubled all Syria with their wars. The original of the The (...) of
the (...).
Jews, was Damasco, which is the noblest city of all Syria, from whence the
kings of Syria also (fetchyng their pedegre from Semyramis) descended. The
City had her name of a King called Damascus, in honor of whom, the Syrians
worshipped the Sepulcher of his wife Arates for a Temple, and reverenced her
with much devotion and superstitions Ceremonies for a Goddess. After Damascus,
(...) Abraham, Israel and (...), as kings: But Israel was more notable the^ his
ance^ors by reason of the (...) increase of his ten sons. Therefore he divided
his people into ten kingdoms, and delivered it to his sons, calling the^ all
Jews after the name of Judah, which deceased anon after the division, the
remembrance of whom he commanded that all the rest should have in reverence
and veneration. His portion was the head of all the other. The youngest of the
brothers was Joseph, of whose excellent wit his brothers being afraid, The
history of Ios^phe in (...).
^ais wait for him preuely, and sold him to merchants strangers, by whom
he was carried into Egipte: where through the sharpness of his wit, he so
pro^d in the magical arts, that within a short space, he became in great
favor with the king. For he was both a very witty diuinor of wonders and
foretokens, and also he was the first that invented the interpretation of
dreams. Yea there was nothing appertaininge either to God or man, wherein he
seemed not to have had exact knowledge. In so much that he foresaw the
barrenness of the land, many years before it came, and all Egypt had pearished
for hun ger, if the king through his counsel had not given (...) commandment,
to lay up in store the corn and fruit of many years before hand. Finally he
was so well tried that his answers seemed not to be given by man, but by God.
His son was Moises, who besides the inheritans of his fathers knowledge, was
also commended for his An (...) of Moses, and of the going of the (...) out of
Egypt.
excellent beuty and personage. But the Egiptians being stricken with a great
itch and skabbednesse, to the intent that the contagion should infect no mo, by
the warning of an Oracle, drove him and all the infected out of the borders
of Egypt. Moses therefore being made captain of the banished people, stale
away the sacrifices of the Egiptians: the which the Egiptians entending to
recover by force, were compelled by Tempests to retire home again. Moses
e^ones resortnig to Damasco the natyue The ^inge of the sa^ day.
country of his ancestors, went up into the mountain Synai, in the which, (for
as much as he first rested there after seven days ^asting and travel of himself
and his people through the deserts of Arabie) he hallowed the seventh day, and
called it after the manner and usage of the country, the Sabbath day,
commaundyng it to be kept. Fastyngday for ever after to the worlds end,
because that that day had made an end of all their travel and hunger. And
forasmuch as they remembered how they were driven out of Egypt, for fear of
infection, they made a law, never after to communicate with stravngers, the
which thing rising at the first upon good cause and con syderacion, by little
and little grew into custom and superstition. After Moses, his brother Aaron
was consecrated (...).
first Priest of the Ceremonies of Israel, and anon after created king. And
ever after it remained as a custom among the Jews, that they that were their
priests were also their kings: through whose Justice and uprightness joined
with (...), it is an incredible thing, how greatly they increased. The
enryching of the Jews Of ^growing only in (...).
came by the revenues of Balm, which grows no where, but only in their
country. For there is a certain valey, enclosed round about with continual
hills, as it were walls, like unto gardines. The place containing two hundred
thousand Acres, is named Jericho. In the same vale there is a wood, notable,
both for the frutefulnesse The ^tion of the country of Jericho.
and for the pleasantness thereof. For it is beset with date trees and balm
trees. The Balm trees are like in making and grows unto pytche trees, saving
that they be much lower, and are dressed as vines are. These at certain times
of the year do sweet out balm: But the place is not so much to be wondered
at for the frutefulnesse, as for the colenesse thereof. For whereas throughout
all the Clymate of that Country, the sun is excedyng hot, there is in that
place, as it were a natural warmenesse, and a continual shadow.

In that country is a lake, which for the greatness thereof, (...)*
and for the immovable standing of the water, is called the dead sea. For
neither is it moved with y^ wyndes, by reason, the bytumen resists the force
of them, where with all the water is made to stand immouable: neither can it be
sailed upon, because that all things wantyng life, synke down to the bottom,
and it will not bear any substance, unless it be ouerlayed with Alume.
Xerxes Who first subdued the Jews.
king of Persia first subdued the Jews. Afterward they and the Persians also,
were brought in subjection by great Alexander, and continued a long time under
the governance of the Empire of Macedone. Lastely rebellyng against Demetrius,
by sekyng the frendshyppe and Aliance of the Romans, who at that time did cut
large thonges of other men's lether, they were the first of all the Nations of
the East, that requested liberty. During the same time that there was such
alteracio^ of the kingdom of Syria among the new kings: Attalus king of Asia,
distayned his most florishyng kingdom which he The doyngs of Attalus. king of
Asia the less.
had received of his uncle Eumenes, with the slaughter of his friends, and
thexecucion of his kynsfolke, false lie surmisyng one while, that the old lady
his mother, another while, that his own spouse Beronice were by their sorcery
and enchauntmentes killed. After the committyng of this wicked and outrageous
cruelty, he put on The sorowe^ul repentans of Attalus.
fylthie apparel, he let his head and his beard grow long, like as offenders
are wont to do in person, he would not come abroad, he would not show
himself to the people he would not make any myrthe or good chere in his house
no nor pretend any token at all, of a man that is in his right wits, so
that it was not to be thought, but that he punished himself, to pacifye the
Ghostes of such as he had wrongfullie put to death. There upon leauyng the
government of the kingdom, he gave himself to making of gardynes, and sowed
seeds, setting herbs an^ wedes myngled together, all the which he would stepe
in venomous liquors, and send as a special present to his friends. Furthermore
he gave himself to the study of Smyths craft, and to founding of metalles,
maruelously delightyng in meltyng and casting of brass. Finally entendyng to
make his mother a Tumbe, as he was earnestly The dea^ of A^alus*
occupied about the same, he caught a Surfett^ by the heat of the sun, of
the which he dyed within seven days after. By his last will he made the people
of Rome his h^ire. But there was one Aristonicus the son of (...)*
Eumenes, not begotten in lawful wedlock, but borne of a single woman of
Ephesus, the daughter of a certain Mynstrell, who after the death of Attalus,
took upon ^im the kingdom of Asia, as if it had been his by right of
inheritance. When he had fought many prosp^rous battelles, against such of
the Cities as would not yield themselfes unto him for fear of the Romans,
and thervppon seemed now to be righfull king in deed. Licinius The (...) of
cou^ousnesse.
Crassus the Consul, was appointed to have the charge of Asia: who having more
mind of Attalus riches, then of the war, (by adventure in the later end of
the winter, for want of good order and governance in the fyelde) was
ouercomme, and with the loss of his life, suffered due punishment for his
unadvised rashenesse and covetousness. In his room was sent the Consul
Perpenna, who in the first encounter vanquished Aristonicus, and took him
prisoner, and also shipped all the riches of Attalus, belongyng to the Romans,
by force of Legacy, and conveyed them to Rome. The which his successor, Marcus
Aquilius the Consul, taking sore to heart, made all the have and speed he could
devise, to take Arystonicus perforce out of Perpennas hand, as who should say,
that he himself ought rather to have the honor of Triumph for vanquishyng him.
But the death of Perpenna brake the strife of the Consulles: and so Asia being
made the right of the Romans, with her richesse, sent also her vices unto Rome.

The. xxxvii. Book.
AFter that Arostonicus was taken prisoner, the Massilias sent Ambassadors to
Rome, humblye requestyng pardon for the Phocenses their fou^ders, whose City,
Senate, yea and name, the Romans had given sentence, should be utterly rooted
out, because that both, at that time and before times, when they had wars
with Antiochus, the same like deadly enemies had ever furthered the war
against them, the which request with much suit the Massilians obtained. The
Romans reward their partakers.
This done, they rewarded the kings that had aided them against Aristonicus:
unto Mythridates king of Pontus, they gave the lesser Syria, and unto the
sons of Ariarathes king of Cappadocia, who lost his life in the same battle,
they gave Licaonia and Cilicia. And the people of Rome dealt more faithfully
with the sons of their confederates, then the mother did deal with her own
children. For by the one the child had his kingdom enlarged, by the other, he was
bereft of his life. For Laodice, of six sons that Ariarathes had begotten by
her, (for fear, least by continual succession in the government The
unnatural cruelty of a mother.
of the kingdom, some of them might happen to come to man's estate) killed
five of them. One of the youngest by the help of his kynred, was saved from his
mothers cruelty, who after the death of the said Laodice (for the people had
put her to death for her cruelty) Not without de^ert.
enjoyed the kingdom alone. Mythridates also, being surprised by sudden
death, left a son behynd him of his own name, who afterward grew so great,
that he surmounted Mythridates the great, and of his birth, educatyon,
success, pearyls and adventures.
in estate, not only the kings of his time, but also all the kings that had been before him, and held wars with the Romans six and fowerty years
together, sometime with conqueste and sometime with loss. Whom the most
expert and valiant Captains, Sylla and Lucullus, with diverse others, and in
fine, ^us Pem peius overcame in such sort, that he still rose with greater
force and prowess to renew the battle, and by his losses seemed ever to be
made more terrible to them. Finally at the length, he was not vanquished as an
enemy, but in his oldeage, leauyng his (...) to be his heir, he dispatched
himself by wilful death, in his own king dome, where his auncesters had
raygned of long continuance. The very wonders of heaven did prognosticate what
a great man he should be: for both, the same yet* A Com^*
that he was borne, and the same year he first began his reygne, there appeared
by the space of threskore and ten days, at both times such a blasyng
star, that all the sky seemed to be on fire: For it was so bygge, that it
occupied a quarter of the heaven, it was so brighte, that it blemished the
light of the Sun, and when it rose or went down, it consumed four hours at
each time. When he was a child, his own Governors went about to destroy
him, setting him upon a rough horse, and compellyng him to lern to ride, and
to torney. The which attempt followyng not their minds as they would have
had, (the young Prince Mythridates, rulyng the horse better then was looked for
in one of his age,) they assayed him with poison. The which, he standing in
doubt of before, drunk tryacle oftentimes: by means whereof, he so stayed his
body, with tried and exquisite medicines, that when he was old, he would have
poisoned himself and could not. After this, fearyng least his enemies would
compass the thing by weapon, which they could not do by venim, he
cou^terfeyted a desire of huntyng: whervppon by the space of four years, he
came not under any roof, either of house in the City, or cotage in the
country, but wandered up and down the forestes and woods, and rested the
night time in the mountayns, sometime one where, and sometime another, no man
knowing where was his haunt, enuryng himself either to chase or to pursue the
wild beasts on foot, and with some of them to encounter with plain force.
By means whereof he both avoided all treason, and also hardened his body to
abide all kind of travel and exercise. Afterward when he came to take the
k^gdome upon him, immediately he set his mind, not so much of gouernyng as
of enlargyng the same. Therefore he marvelous fortunately subdewed Mythridates
subdueth the so^thsayers.
and brought in subjection, the S^ythians, who before that day were never
conquered, which had utterly destroyed Zopyron the Captain of great
Alexander, with thirty thousand armed men, which had slain Cyrus king of
Persia, with two hundred thousand men of war, and which had put to flight
Philyp king of Macedones: Being thus increased in strength, he conquered
Pontus, and consequently Cappadocia. Then with certain of his friends, he went
secretly disguysed out of his own kingdom, without knowledge of any man, and
wanderyng through Asia, vewed the situacion of all the Cities and Prouynces of
the same. From thence he trauayled over Bythinia, and as though he had been
already Lord of Asia, he devised all things that might help to f^rther him
toward his conquest. After this, when all men believed he had been dead, he
returned home into his own Realm: where he found a little son, whom Laodice
his sister and wife, had brought him forth in his absence. But in the mids of
the joy, that was made for The wife of Mythridates put teth him in danger of
his life.
his return, and for the birth of his child, he was in daun ger to be
poisoned. For his sister Laodice, beleuyng him to be dead, and therevppon
abusyng her body with his friends, as though the might have hydden her offense
by committyng of a greater crime, prepared a cup with poison to welcome him
home withal: Whereof Mythridates having intelligence by a Damsel, punished
the offense upon the deuisers thereof.

After, when winter drew nigh, he spent not the time in feastyng, but in f^ates
of arms, not in (...), but in ^he (...) of (...) tes (...) the winter (...).
exercise, not among carpet knights, but either in yo^sting and tournying, in
runnyng on foot or on horseback, or else in wrestlyng and trial of strength
among his p^res. Also he daily enured his men of war by ly^e exercise, to
abide labor and travel as well as himself, by mean^s whereof as he was
i^incible himself, so made he his host invincible also. Then he entered in
league with Nicomedes He conquereth Paph^gonia.
and invaded Paphlagonia, the which he conquered, and parted it with his
companyon. When word was brought to the Senate, that these kings had subdued
the country, they sent Ambassadors to them both, co^maun dyng them to set it
in the like estate as they found it. My The Romain a^bassae to Mythrodat^ and
his answer there unto.
thridates thinkyng himself now able enough to match the puissaunce of the
Romans, answered proudelie that the kingdom was his fathers by inheritance,
and that he maruayled, they should make alteration with him for it, having not
done, the like to his father. Moreover he set so light by their Manaces, that
he invaded Galatia also. Nicomedes for as much as he was not able to make his
party good by any title, answered he would surrender it to the rightful
king: and so chaungyng the name of his own son, he called him Phylomenes, by
the name of the kings of Paphlagonia, by which conueyance under a counterfect
name, he held still the kingdom, as though he had restored it to the right
heir. The Romayne Ambassadoures being thus had in derision, returned to Rome
with a mock.

Morrouer, he sent his wife Laodice to Rome, to testifye that she have t^ree
sons by Ariarathes. The which thing when Mithridates knew of, he also with
like impudent unshamefastness, sent Gordius unto Rome, to auouche before the
Senate, that the child, to whom he had deluded the kingdom of Cappadocia,
was the son of the same Ariarathes, which in the quarrel of the Romans was
slain, in the battle against Aristouicus. But the Senate understanding the
meaning and endeavor Thorder taken by the senate.
of both the kings, would not gene other men's kingdoms to usurpers, that took
wrong names upon them. Whereupon they took Cappadocia from Mithrydates, and
to comfort him withal, they took Paphlagonia from Nicomedes. And to thentent
it should not seem they would take any things from the kings in despite of
them, to bestow it upon others, both the Nations were se^at at free
liberty. But the Cappadocians refusyng the gift Ariobarzanes is made king of
Cap padocta.
of ly^ertie, said that their country could not live without a king: Whervppon
Ariobarzanes was appointed by the Senate to be their king. There was at the
same time, one Tygranes king of Armenia kept in hostage not long before by the
Parth^a^s, and now lately remitted by them into his fathers kingdom: Him did
Mithridates covet, to allure to take his part in the wars, that he had of
long time purposed against the Romans. Wherefore by the means of Gordius he
pers^ded him (as one that knew not what it was to displease the Romans) to
make war upon Ariobarzanes who was a very cowarde. And to thentent it should
not seem, be did it for any cautele or policy, he gave him his daughter
Cleopatra in marriage. At the first coming of Tygranes, Ariobarzanes conueying
Mithridatis recouereth Cappadacia.
away all his stuff, gat him straight to Rome: and so by y^ means of Tygranes
Cappadocia was again under y^ dominion of Mithridates: The Same time died
Nicomedes whose son named Nicomedes also, was driven out of his kingdom by
Mithridates: who resorted to Rome for succor upon whose humble suit, it was
decreed by ye Senate, y^ both be and Ariobarzanes should be set in possession
of their kingdoms again. For the perfourmaunce whereof, Aquilius Manlius, and
Malthinius, were sent to be Lieuetenauntes of the war. Mythridates having
knowledge hereof, and ente^dyng to make war with the Romans: alied himself
with Tygranes. And it was couenaunted (...).
betwixt them, that Mythridates should have for his part the cities and
lands, and Tygranes should have for his share, the men and cattle, and
whatsoeu^r else was moveable. After this, Mithridates (...) what a war he had
taken in hand, sent out his Ambassadors, some to the Cymbrians, some to the
Frenchegrekes, some to the Sarmatians, and some to the Bastarnes, to request
them of their aid and help. For all these Nations had he (...) nations (...)
up (...).
allured a good while before, by showing them ^endshyp and pleasure diverse
ways, ever since he first purposed war against the Romans. Moreover he
raised an host of men in Scythia, and armed all the East against the Romans.
It was no great matter for him therefore, to overcome Aquilius and Malthyne,
having none but the men of Asia about them: after the discomfiture of whom and
of Nicomedes, all the cities were glad to seek his favor. There he found great
plenty of gold and silver, laid up in store by the kings in times past, and
much furniture for the wars, the which for as much as they made greatly to
his furtherance, he released the cities all their dettes, as well public as
private, and exempted them frelie from all charges, as well of the wars, as
of trybutes and taxes for five years space. Then assembled he his soldiers
before him, and encouraged them with ^iuers exhortacions to the wars of ye
Romans, otherwise called the wars of Asia. The copi of which Oracion I have
thought worthy to be put into this word (albeit I co^et to be short) in the
same manner, as Po^peius ^rogus has indirectly set it forth: because he fyndeth
fault with ^iuie and Salust, for putting Oracions in their works directly as
they were spoken, and so doing exceded y^ bounds of an history, He said he
would gladly have wished, that he might have consulted upon this point, whether
it were better to have The oratyon of Mythridates to his captains and men of
war
war or peace with the Romans: but now there was no remedy but to go
through with the matter, and not to fear them, yea though there were no hope
of victory at all. For all men would draw their wepons upon thieves, though
they were not able to defend them selves, yet to revenge their deaths. But
for as much as he purposed not to debate, whether it were mete to be in quiet,
(considering they were not only ennemies in heart, but also had encountered like
enemies in open field,) he would feign know by what means, and upon what
hope, they should maintain the wars that they had begone. Nevertheless he
had good hope of the victory, if so be it they had good hearts. That the
Romans might be overcome, his soldiers that vanquished Aquilius in Bythinia
and Mal thinius in Cappadocia, knew as well as he. But if he thought the
examples of other men could move them more, then their own trial and
experiens, ^e hard say that Pyrrhus king of Epyre, having no mo but five thou
sand Macedones in his host, vanquished the Romans in three pitched fields. He
heard say that Hanniball by the space of. xvi. years abode in Italy like a
conqueroure, and ^ad taken the city of Rome it self had not the preuy malice
and envy of his own country men, ben a greater hinderaunce to him, then the
power of the Romans. He hard say that the Frenchmen inhabiting on the other
side of the Alps, entered into Italye, and there placed them selves in most
of the welthiest cities of all the country, seisynge into their possession
somewhat a larger piece of ground every way, then that which they had gotten in
Asia, for all it is counted so weak and cowardly. Moreover that the said
French men had not only vanquished the Romans, but also taken their city,
in so much that they left the^no more in all the world, but one hill from
whens whence they were saine to remove their enemy, not by battle, but by
ransom.

The which Frenchemen (whose name had alwa^es ben so terrible to the Romans)
he had to strenghten him in his host. For there was no difference between the
Frenchmen that inhabit Asia, and the Frenchmen that inhabit Italy, but only
the distance of their dwellyngs asunder. As for their original, their
prowess, and their manner of feightyng was all one, saving that these in Asia
mus^ needs be of so much more policy and wit, as they have comme a wore
long and ^edious you^ney through Sclauany and Thrace, being a far paynfuller
matter to make themselves way through those countries, then to place
themselves where they now inhabit.

Furthermore he heard say that Italy it self was never yet well pleased with
Rome, since it was first builded: but that continually from year to year,
incessant war had been made, by some for their liberty, and by other s^m for
the right right of thempyre: insomuch that (by report) many cities of Italy,
had utterly destroyed the Romain Armies by the sword, and some with a new
kind of reproach had compelled them shamefullye to crepe under a yoke. And
forbycause he should not seem to make long tarians in matters of old time, even
the very same present, all Italy was risen to war jointly together with the
marses, not to demand liberty, but Society in Thempyre, and in the City
itself. Neither was the City oppressed more by the wars of their neighbors
in Italy, then by the partakyng of her own noblemen at home: so that the
Civil wars were far more dangerous, then the foreign wars of Italy:
besides that, the Cymbrians that unmeasurable, and most fyltierable of savage
and unmerciful rascalles, were swarmed out of Germany, and overwhelmed all
Italy like a storm. Of all the which forenamed nations, although the Romans
might perchance be able to withstand the brunt, one after an other, yet by
all at once, they must needs be oppressed: and that so sone, that they should
have no leasur at al, to think upon his wars: wherefore occasion ought to be
taken, when i^ was offered, and good hold ought to be laid, with speed upon
the iucreasment of their strength, least if they now sat still, whiles the other
were busy and had their hands full, anon after they have might have more a
do with them when they were in quiet, and had nothing else to do. For it was
not in question, whether war ought to be made or no, but whether it ought to
be done to their own behofe, or to the behofe of the Romans. For the wars
were begone between him and them, from the time that they took from him in his
nonage, the lesser Phryg^a, with they had given unto his father, in reward, for
aydyng them in the battle against Aristonicus: the which country Seleucus
Callenicus also had given in dourie with his daughter to his great graundfa
there Mythridates: what should a man say to that they commanded him to depart
out of Paphlagonia, was it not an other kind of defyaunce? The which realm
fell to his father, not by force of arms, nor by conquest, but by adoption and
Legacy of last will and testament, but by the death of the rightful kings,
and so consequenlie by lawefull inheritance: whereas nevertheless, all his hum
ble obedience to their bitter decrees, could not one whit mitigate them, but
rather was an occasion that they bare themselfes more cruelly against him: for
what submission could they devise, but he used it toward them: did be not let
go Phrygia and Paphlagonia? did he not with draw his son out of Cappadocia,
which he had conque red, and therefore was his by the law of arms? and yet
his conquest was taken out of his hand, by them which ^aue nothing of their
own, but that which they hold by the sword? did he not for their pleasure
kill Creston, king of Bythinia, against whom the Senate had proclaimed war?
and yet notwithstanding what so ever Gordius or Tygranes has done, was imputed
altogyther to him. Moreover in despite of him, the Senate had of their own
voluntary will, set Cappadocia at lyberty, which thing they themselfes had
taken from other Nations. Afterward when the people of Cappadoria, thankyng
the^ for their liberty, sued to have Gordius to their king, it might not be
granted, and that for none other occasion, but because he was counted his
friend. Nicomedes at their commandment, made war upon him, and because he
could not be revenged upon him as he would, they themselfes had taken the
matter in hand: Whereupon partly grew thoccasion of his wars with them,
namely because he would not sytte still like a cowarde, and suffer that
dauncyng Damoselles son Nycomedes, to tear him in pieces at his pleasur: For
it was not the faults of kings, that they were offended with, or sought to
redress: but with their power and Maiestic (...) they sought to suppress. The
which cautel and pol licy they did not use against him only, but against all
other kings. After the same manner, his graundtfather Pharnar, by right of
kynred, appointed as heir and su^ cessor to Eumenes king of Pergamus: and
again, Eumenes himself, in whose ships they were first brought over into
Asia, by the help of whose men of war, more then by their own puissaunce:
First they conquered the great Antiochus, and the Frenchmen in Asia, and anon
after king Perses in Macedone, they uttered as an ennemie, forbiddyng him to
come within Italye: and (which they thought they might not do to him for
shame) made war upon his son Aristonicus. There was never none that
deserved more at their hand, or that had done more for them, the^ Massinissa
king of Numidie. To him they imputed the ouercommyng of Hannyball, him they
thanked for the taking of Syphax, to him they imputed the destroying of
Carthage, him they registered among the two Affricanes, as the third preserver
of their City: and yet with the same man's nephew, they even this other day had
made war in Affricke, so deadlye cruel, that after they had vanquished him,
they could not find in their hearts for their graundfathers sake to pardon
him, but that they emprysoned him, and led him through the City in manner of
Triumph, and made him a gazyng stock to all the world. Thus had they made a
law to themselves, to bear continual hatred against all kings, verelie,
because they had such kings themselfes, whom they may be ashamed to hear
spoken of, that is to say, either sheep herdes of Thaborigines, or soothsayers
of the Sabynes, or outlawes of Corynthe, or else (which is the honorablest name
that ever was among them) proved men, and (as they themselves report) such
founders as a wolf gave suck to: which may well be, in that all the ofspryng
of that people have wolves hearts, insatiable of blood, gredie of Dominion, and
raueners of riches: whereas himself for his own person (if comparison should
be made be twene him and the^, as touching nobility) was of a more famous
lynage, then that ragged heap of rascalles, for he did fetch his pedegre on
the fathers side, from Cyrus and Darius the first founders of the Monarchy of
the Persians, and on the mothers side from great Alexander, from Nicanor and
Selencus the first founders of them pyre of Macedone: or if he should compare
his people with theirs, he said he was ruler of those Nations, which not only
are able to match the Romayne Empire, but had also withstood the Empire of
Macedone. For there was none of the nations, of whom he was Ruler, that had been subdued under forreyne Princes, or that ever submitted themselfes to any
king, but if he were of their own country, chose whether they would name
Cappadocia or Paphlagonia, again Pontus or Bythinia, Armenia the greater, or
Armenia the less, of the which countries, ney there Alexander (even he that
conquered all Asia,) nor any of his successors or posterity ever touched any:
as for Scithia, there were never but two kings before him, name lie Darius and
Philyppe, that durst so much as enter into it, who being not able to make any
conquest, had much a do to wind himself out again with their lives, from
whence he had a great part of his strength against the Romaynis: wherefore he
had more cause to be afraid and mistrustfull, when he entered into the wars
of Pontus, at such time as he himself was but a young nouice and a fresh water
soldier. Nor the Scythians, besides that they be well harnessed, and well
hearted, they are also fen sed, either with deserts and wast grounds, or else
with cold, which bydde the soldier look for great travel and peril:
among the which distresses, there was not almost any hope of reward to be
gotten of the wa^dering enemy, having not only no money, but also not so much
as a house, to hyde his head in. But now he was entered into a far other
kind of warrefare: For neither was the air more temperate in all the world
then in Asia, nor the soil more fertyle, nor more plenty of fair and
pleasant Cities, so that they should spend a great part of the ^yme, not as
in warfare, but as in feastyng: and it was to be doubted, whether the war
should be more easy or profitable, whether they would adventure upon the
riches of the kingdom of Attalus next unto them, or upon Lydia and Ionia, so
greatly renoumed for their richesse in old time, the which they should not need
to go to fight for, but to go to take possession of. For Asia was so desirous
of their coming, that she called and cried to them a loud to make speade. So
great a hatreded toward the Romans, had the greadie rauenousnesse of their
Proconsultes, the pollyng and shauing of their toll gatherers, the wrongful
delyng in suits, and controuer lies of the law of their officers, rooted in
the hearts of them all. Wherefore he willed them to do no more, but follow
him manfully, and ponder with themselfes what so great an army might be able to
do, having such a Captain as he was whom they themselfes had seen, without
the help of any of his soldiers, by his own industry only, slay the king of
Cappadocia, and seyze his kingdom who only of all the men that ever lived,
conquered all the countries borderyng upon the sea of Pontus, and Scythia
also, the which before his time no man could travel through, no nor go unto in
sauftie. As for his own Justice and lyberalitie; he would not refuse that his
soldiers which had had sufficient trial and experience of them, should bear
witness to the same, as of the which these were manifest tokens, that he only
of all kings enjoyed, not only the kingdoms that his father possessed before
him, but also for his bounty and magnificence, was adopted to be heir of
other forreyne Realms, as Colchos, Paphlagonia, and Bosphorus, which he now
peaceably held* When he had thus encouraged his soldiers, He returns to
the stories of Egypt.
after the. xxiii. year of his reygne, he entered into war agayn^ the
Romans. At that time in Egypt, after the death of P^olomy king of Cyrene,
both, the kingdom and the Queen Cle^patra his sister to be his wy^e* ^lomy was
glad in that he had recoured his brothers king dome without battle, the which,
he knew his mother Cleopatra and certain of the noble men went preuelye about
to assure unto his brothers son. But as soon as b^ The crueltye of Ptolomy.
came unto Alexandria, to the great displeasure of all the City, he caused all
such as favored the child, to be put to death. The child himself also, he
slew in his mothers arms, the very same day that he married her, in the myd des
of all the feastyng and solemn ceremonies of wed^cke. And so he went to bed
with his sister, all bestayned with the blood of her son. After the which
deed he became even as meke to his other countrymen, that had called him to
the kingdom. For he gave his soldiers (which were strangers) leave to kill
whom they would, so that daily all places were on a gore blood, and he put
away his sister, and took to wife her daughter a fair young maiden, having
first ravished her per force: with the which things the people were so
dysmayed, that they shronke away, so^e one whether and some another, forsakyng
their native country like banished folk, for dread of death.

Ptolomy being left alone with his souldioures, in so great a City, when he
saw how he was a King of empty houses and not of men, made proclamacion
that strangers should come and inhabit the City, after whose resor thither,
he went forth to mete the Romayn Ambassadors, Scipio Affricanus, Spurius
Mumius, and Lucius Metellus, which came to see how the Realms of their
confederates were ordered. But look how cruel he was to all his own
countriemenne, so much was he a laughyng stock to the Roma^ns. For he was ill
visaged, Ptelomy is had in deris^ by the Romain ambassade.
a dwarf of stature, and he had such a fat paunche, that he seemed more like a
beast then a man: the which fouldnesse and deformity, his small shyrle voice,
and his thin garments did more increase, as though of set purpose he had set
out the things to be seen, which he that had any regard of shame, ought
with all care and study to have hydden most secretly.

After the departure of Thambadoures (of the which Affricanus, whiles he
beheld, the City was himself a spectacle to the Alexandrians:) Ptolomy being
now hated even of his Alientes also, fled preuely out of the Realm with
his son, whom he had begotten of his sister, and with his wife, her own
mothers paramour, for fear of treason: and having gotten an host of hired
soldiers, he made war, both against his sister, and against his own
country. Afterward he sent for his eldest The vnnat^ ral cru^sse of Ptolomy
toward his own children
son from Cyrene, and for because the Alexandrians should not make him king
against him, he put him to death.

Then the people in despyght of him, brake down his images, and tare down his
pictures. The which thing, thynkyng to be done by the procuremente of his
sister he slew the son, whom he had begotten upon her, and then cuttyng
his body in gobbettes, closed it up in a Casket, and sent it for a present to
the mother, as she was making feast and great chere upon the day of her birth.
The which was a bitter and sorrowful sight, not only to the Queen herself,
but also to all the whole City, and it cast such a grief upon that joyful
feast, that sodaynlie in all the Court was nothing but mournyng and lamentyng.
The noble men therefore, turnyng themselfes from feastyng to funeralles, showed
to the people the mangled body, declaryng what hope they ought to have of
their king, who had so cruelly murdered his own child. Cleopatra after that
the sorrow for loss of her son was ceased, perceyuyng herself to be sore
infested by her brothers war: Demanded help of Demetrius King of Syria by
his Ambassadors, whose chances were strange and worthy to be spoken of. For
Demetrius (as it is showed He returns to the story of Demetrius, taken prison
net by the Parthiens in the. xxxvi. book.
before) making war against the Parthians, and gettyng the victory in many
encounters, was sodaynlie sur prised by policy, and besides the loss of his
army, was also himself taken prisoner. Whom Arsaces king of the Parthians,
sent into Hyrcanie, and of his noble and Royal courage, not only gave him
enterteynement like a king, but also gave him his daughter in marriage,
promisyng moreover to restore him the kingdom of Syria, which Tryfo had
usurped in his absence. After whose death, Demetrius being past hope of
returnyng into his kingdom, and being not able to away with captivity, being
weary of his private life, though he lived never so welthelie, assayed a
faithful friend to steal home A faithful fre^d.
into his own kingdom. His counseler and companyon in this enterprise was a
friend of his, called Callimander, who after his Masters captivity, hyryng
guydes for mo ny, himself disguysed in Parthian apparel, came out of Syria
through the deserts of Arabie unto Babylon. But Phrahartes, which succeeded
Arsaces, sent out post horses after him, who made such speed by gayner ways,
that they ouertoke him, and brought him back again. When An example of clemency
in in a barbarus prince.
he came before the king, Callimander was not only par doned, but also highly
rewarded for his faithfulness toward his Master. But Demetrius with a great
rebuke was sent again to his wife into Hyrcanie, and there kept more straightly
then he was before. In process of time when it was to be thought, he would
have tarried for his chyldrens sake, that he had by his wife, accompanied with
his foresaid friend, he stale away again. But even with Demetrius is taken
flying the (...) time, and brought (...) agay^e.
like infelicitie as before, he was apprehended, nere unto the lymites of his
own kingdom, and being brought back again unto the king, was commanded out
of his presence in great displeasure. Nevertheless being then also granted
his wife and children, he was sent again into Hyrcanie his old place of
penance, and was rewar ded with a pair of dyce of gold, in exprobration of
his chyldishe lightness. But this so gentle and favorable demeanor of the
Parthians toward Demetrius, proceeded not of any mercy naturally engraffed in
that nation, or in respect of Aliance and affynitie, but because they coueted
the kingdom of Syria, entending to use Demetrius as an instrument against his
brother Antiochus, according as either the matter, the time, or the chance of
war should require. Antiochus hearing thereof, thought it wisdom to prevent
the war, and there upon led Antiochus (...) death an host a gaynste the
Parthiens.
his his host (which he had hardened through many viages and battelles
against his neighbors) against the Parthians. But he made preparacion as
much for riot, as for war. For whereas he had eight hundred thousand men of
war, there were besides, three hundred thousand others that followed the host,
of the which the most part were Cokes, bakers and mynstrels, and players of
enterludes. Surely of gold and silver there was so great abundance, that even
the common soldiers ware their hosen enbroydered with gold, and trod under
their fete the metal, for love of which other people were wont to fight and
kill one another: Moreover all the furniture of kytchens were of clean silver,
as though they had gone to banqueting and not to battle. At Antiochus first
coming, many kings of the East met him, and yielded themselfes and their
kingdoms unto him, utterly detestyng the pride of the Parthians. It was not
long ere it came to thencounter. Antiochus (...) the (...)
Antiochus gettyng thupper hand in three fought fields, and thervppon winnyng
Babylon by force, began to be counted great. By means whereof all countries
revolted so fast unto him, that the Parthians had nothing left them, more then
the bare soil of their own Realm of Parthia. Then Prahartes sent Demetrius
into Syria, with an host of Parthians, to invade the kingdom, to the intent that
by that policy, Antiochus might be enforced (...) is let go into Syria.
to withdraw himself out of Parthia, to the defense of his own Realm. In the
mean while, because he could not ouercom Antiochus by force, he sought means
to surprise him by policy. Antiochus by reason he had such a multitude,
dispersed all his army into the Cities, during the winter season, the which
thing was his utter vnd^yng. For the Cities felyng themselfes grieved with
victailyng of hiis host, and also with the injurious demeanor A (...)
conspiracy against (...).
of the soldiers, revolted again to the Parthians, and on a day appointed for
the nones, all at one time by traiterous conspiracy set upon the host, as it
was divided among them seuerllie, to thentent they should not be able to
rescowe one another: when tydinges hereof came to Antiochus, he assembled such
as wyntered with him, and went to rescow them that were nerest. But in his way,
he met with the king of Parthians, against whom he fought more valiantly
himself, then did his host. Notwithstanding at the last (forasmuch his
ennemies The death of (...).
were of more force and courage) his men for fear forsook him, and so he was
slain. For whom, Phrahartes made a royal herce, and did exequies after the
manner of Princes, and moreover being taken in love with the daughter of
Demetrius, whom Antiochus had brought with him, he took her to wife. Then it
repented him, that he had let go Demetrius, and he sent out men in post
after him to fetch him back. But Demetrius, dreadyng the same thing before
hand, had made such speed, that they found him in his own kingdom, and so
being frustrate of their travel and expectation, they returned to the king.

The. xxxix. Book.
AFter that Antiochus with all hs army was thus destroyed in Parthia, his
brother Demetrius, being delivered from captsuitie of the Parthians, and
restored to his kingdom, (when as all Syria as yet mourned for the loss of
the army) as though the wars that he and his brother made in Parthia, in the
which the one was taken prisoner, and the other slain, had had prosperous
success, he purposed to make war in Egypt at the request of Cleopatra his
wifes mother, who promised to give him the kingdom of Egypt, in recompense,
if he would help to support her against her brother. But whiles he went about
to get that, that was another man's, he lost his own, by means of a sudden
(...) is hated of his sub^ects for his pride.
insurrection in Syria. For first the Cytizens of An tioche, through the
instigacion of their Captain Tryfo, (...) the kings pride (which by his
conversation, among the cruel Parthians was becomme intoierable,) and anon
after the Apameniens, with all the rest of the Cities, followyng their
ensample, took occasion upon the kings absence, and rebelled against him.

Ptolomy also king of Egypt, against whom the said Demetrius made war, when
he understood that his sister Cleopatra had shypped all hhr goods and treasur,
and An (...) is (...) king against (...).
was sled into Syria to her daughter and her (...) in law Demetrius, he
suborned a certain young men of Egypt, the son of Merchantman called
Protarchus, to challenge the kingdom of Syria by b^ttell, forging a pedegre, as
though Antiochus had adopted him into the blood royal. And the Syrians cared
not who were their king, so they might be delivered from the pride of Demetrius.
So the young man was proclaimed by the name of Alexander, and great succor was
set to him out of Egypt. In the mean while the body of Antiochus slain by
the king of Parthia, was sent into Syria in a coffyn of silver to be buried the
which was received with great reverence by all the Cities, but chiefly by
Alexander himself, to thentent to make men oredyte the tale, that he was
adopted to be his heir. The which his doing, wann him much favor of the
commonaltie, all men thinkyng no less, but that he meant good faith without
dissimulacion, in his sorrowful mournyng. Demetrius, being vanquished by
Alexander, and being enuyroned on all sides with unavoidable dangers was at
the last forsaken of his own wife and children, being therefore left desolate
saving a few servant, as he was purposed to have fled to the temple of
Tyrus, there to re gistre himself as a sanctuarieman, if percheunce the reave
rence of the place might save his life, when he went out to land, he was
slain by the commandment of the Ma The due reward of sacri ledge and usurped
autho ritye.
ster of the ship. The one of his sons, whose name was Seleucus, because he
crowned himself king, without his mothers conset, was by her slain. The Other of
his sons, who for the greatness of his nose was surnamed Grypho, was created
king by his mother upon this condition, that he should bear the name, but she
herself have all the power and authority of the whole Empire. But The desire
of souerainty.
Alexander the usurper of the kingdom of Syria, being puffed up with
contynuall success in his affairs, began of great pride and insolency to
mock and despise Ptolomie himself, by whom he was put in and invested in
that kingdom.

Ptolomy therefore reconcyling to his sister, endeavored by all the means he
could devise, to depose Alexander from his Royalty, the which he had obtained
by his help for hatred that he bare toward Demetrius. Whereupon he sent aid
to Grypho into Greece, and his daughter Gryphin also to be his wise, to thentent
he might procure the people to help his nephew, not only by confederacy, but
also by alsance of affinity. And the matter came so to pass in deed. For
after the time they perceived, that Grypho was supported with the power of
Egypt, they began by little and little to revolt, euerychone from Alexander.
Afterward there was a battle fought between The (...) an king is put to
flight.
them, in the which Alexander being put to the worse, fled unto Antioche. There
for want of money, having not where with to pay his soldiers their wages, he
commanded a sign of victory of Massy gold to be taken out of the Temple of
Jupiter, coloryng his sacryledge with a pleasant skoffe: For he said that
Iuppiter had lent him victory. Within a (...) days after, when he had give
commandment preuely, to pull out of the temple the Image of Jupiter made all
of clean gold, of an unknown weight, and that being taken in doing of the
deed, he was put to flight by the multitude that came to the reskowe, he was
oppressed by the violence of a tempest, and forsaken of his own men, and taken
by thieves, and brought unto Grypho, and there put to death. Furthermore Gripho
having recovered his fathers kingdom, and being delivered from The (...) ^warde
o^ sacryledge and vsurp^d authority.
owtwarde dangers, was assaulted by the treason of his own mother: who being
inflamed with desire of Soueraintie, after she had betrayed her husband
Demetrius, and killed her other son, for spite and malice that her
authority and estimacion should be diminished by the victory The desire of
Souerainty.
of this other son, offered him a cup of poison, as he came from his pastyme.
But Grypho having intel ^ge^ce of his mothers treason, (as though he had
stryued with her for courtesy) desired her to drink to him, the which upon
her refusal, he requested more earnestly. At the length bringyng forth the
author of the report, he laid the matter to her charge, affirming he would
admit none other excuse to defend her offense with all, but if she would drink
the same herself that she had proffered to him. The Queen being by this means
convicted of her mischeuous The death of the Queen.
intent, by receiving the poison herself that she had prepared for her son,
was depryued of her ^yfe. Grypho having thus brought his Realm in quietness,
not only lived himself at hearts ease, but also governed his kingdom in
tranquillity, by the space of eight years after: the which term being
expyred, there arose an enemy to his kingdom, namely his own brother
Cyricenus, borne of his own mother, but begotten by his uncle. Antiochus Whom
whiles he went about to ride out of the way by poysonyng, he styrred him the
sooner to contend with him by force for the kingdom. Among these parrycidiall
discordes of the Realm of Syria, dyed Ptolomy king of Egypt, The death of
Ptolomy king of egypt
leauyng the kingdom to his wife and one of his sons, which so ever she
would chose, as though the state of Egypt should be in better quiet then the
realm of Syria, when the mother by chosyng the one of her sons, should make
the other her enemy. Therefore whereas she was of herself more enclyned to the
younger son, the peo ple compelled her to chose the elder. From whom (before
An unequal dealinge of a mother.
she gave him the kingdom) she took away his wife and having compelled him to
forgo his most dear beloved sister Cleopatra, she caused him to marry his
younger sister Seleuce. Wherein she dealt not like a mother betwixt her
daughters, co^syderyng she took her husband from the one and gave him to
the other. Cleopatra being not so much put away by her husband, as by violent
divorce separated from him hy means of her mother, was married to Cyricenus in
Syria: and to the intent she would not seem to have brought nothing else unto
him more then the bare name of wife, she raised an host of men in Cyprus, and
brought it to her husband for her doury.

Cyricenus being now made as strong as his brother, encountered with him in open
fyelde, where being vanquished and put to flight, he came unto Antioche. Then
Grypho beseged Antioche, where Cleopatra the wife of War between Gryphus and
his brother (...).
Cyricenus lay. At the taking whereof, Gryphin the wife of Grypho, took care
for nothing so much, as to find out her sister Cleopatra: not to thyntent to
help save her out of captivity, but to thyntent she should not escape the
mi^eries A cruel sister.
of captivity: Because (as she thought) in disdanye of her estate, she had
entered forciblie into that kingdom inespeciallie, and by marying herself to
her s^sters ennemie, had made herself an ennemie to her. Alledgyng against her
moreover, that she had raised forreyn powers against her brother, she had
married herself against her mothers will, out of the Realm of Egypt. On the
con trarie part, Grypho besought her, that she would not constreyne him to
commit so shameful an act. For it ^he ^syon of Gryph^s from that cruelty.
was never heard, that any of his ancestors, among so many civil, and so
many outward wars, did after the victory extend cruelty against women,
the which for thymbecilliti of their nature, had ever ben accustomed to be
exempted, both from the dangers of the wars, and also from the cruelty of
the conquerors.

A now in this case besides the law of arms, there was also the bound of
aliaunce, to withhold him from doing such a wickedness. For on the one side,
she was her own sister, whose blood she sought so cruelly, and on the other
side, she was his cousyne Germane, yea and moreover, she was aunte to the
children of them both. Moreover besides all those bounds of kynred and great
aliaunce, he (...) alleged, that it was not right or lawefull for to suffer to
violate the Temple, in the which she had hyd her self, and the which she
had taken for saufegard of her life, but that the Gods with so much the
more humility and devotion ought to be re^erenced on his part, as by their
great mercy and favor, be had gotten the victory at that time over hy^
^nnemyes.

For neither by killyng her, could he any thing abate the strength of
Cyricenus, neither by preseruyng their life, any thing increase his power. But
the more unwilling that Grypho was, the more was she of womanly wilfulness
incensed against her sister, supposyng him to speak these words, not of pytie
and compassion, but of love. Whervppon calling to her the soldiers, she sent
certain of them herself, to thrust her sister through. Who enteryng Gryphin sen
death to kill her sister Cle o^atra.
into the temple, when they could not pull her out, they cut of her hands, as
she had clasped them about the Image of the Goddess. Then Cleopatra cursyng
those wicked murderers, and besechyng the Gods (whose sanctuary they had
defiled) to revenge her upon them, dyed. It was not long after, but Cyricenus
encountered again The death of Cleopatra.
with his brother, where gettyng ^hupper hand, he took Gryphin the wife of
Grypho prisoner, which lately had put her sister to death: with execucion of
whom, he did Such mesure as she did mete, is ^ten to her.
obsequies to his wives Ghost. But in Egypt, Cleopatra being grieved that her
son Ptolomy, should be partener with her in the kingdom, incensed the people
against The Queen of Egypt deposes one of ^er sons, and sets up an (...).
him, and having taken his wife Seleuce away from him, (which was so much to
more grief to him, because he had begotten two sons by her) bannished him
the Realm: sendyng for her younger son Alexander, whom she crowned king in
his brothers stead. And yet being contented to have banished her son, she
pursued him with battle, where he kept as a bannished man in Cyprus. When she
had driven him from thence also, she put the Capitayn of her host to death,
because he had suffered him to escape alive out of his hands. Albeit to say
the truth: Ptolomy departed out of the Island, rather because he was ashamed
to fight with his mother, then that he was not of power able to encounter her.
Alexander therefore, dreadyng this his mothers cruelty, departed his way, and
left her alone, desyring rather to live Life is dearer then a ^yngdome.
meanly in quiet and saufegarde, then to reygne as a king, always in danger
of his life. Cleopatra fearyng least Cyricenus should help her elder son
Ptolomy to recover the kingdom of Egypt, sent great aid to Grypho, and her
daughter Seleuce to be his wife, to thentent, he should persyst enemy to her
first husband, as he had been before, and also sent Ambassadors to her son
Alexander to call him to the kingdom again. Against whom The death of the
Queen of Egyp^e.
as she was practisyng of mischief to bring him to destruction, she was by him
prevented and put to death, and so she ended her life, not by natural
destynie, but by deserved murder. Surely she was well worthy of such a
slanderous death, which had defiled her own mothers bed, and put her beside
her husband, which had made two of her daughters so oftentimes wydowes, by
choppyng and chaungyng of their husbands, which had banished the one of her
sons pursewyng him with battle when she had done, and having wrested the
kingdom from the other, had practiced also to bring him to his end through
treason. Nevertheless Alexander himself escaped not altogyther unpunished, for
committyng so abominable a murder. Alexander (...).
For as soon as it was known, that the mother was slain by the wickedness of
her son, the people rose against him, and drove him into exyle, and calling
home Ptolomy again, set him in possession of the kingdom, who was of that
modesty, that he would neither make war against his mother, nor yet
challenge that of his brother by force, which was his before by right of
inheritance. While these things were a doing, a bastard brother Cyrene (...)
to the Romans The original
of his, to whom his father had by his last will bequeathed the kingdom of
Cyrene, deceased, and left the people of Rome to be his heir. For by this
time the fortune of Rome was such* that being not content with the bounds of
Italy, it began to stretche itself to the kingdoms of the East. By means
whereof, that part of Lybie, was at that time made a prouynce, and shortly
after Candy and Cilicia being subdued in the wars against the Pirates, were
brought in likewise, in order of prouynces. By the which deed both the
kingdoms of Syria and Egypt, were straightened by the neyboured of the
Romans, and whereas before times they were wont to increase their Dominion,
by warryng upon their borderers, now being abridged of their liberty to roue
wh^r they list, they turned their power to their own confusion. In so much,
that being consumed through continual feightyng, they were had in despite of
their next neighbors, and were as a pray to the Arabians, which before that
time were never known to be men of war. Whose king Herotymus, upon trust
that he had in his syx hun dred sons, which he had begotten of his
concubynes,) Herotymus, great number ^f sons.
with sundry Armies made rodes, sometimes into Egypt, and sometime into Syria:
by means whereof within a while, through the weakness and feblenesse of his
neighbors, he made the name of the Arabians famous and redoubted.

The. xl. Book.
THe king and kingdom of Syria, being consumed through the natural hatred of
the brothers, and through the deadly enmytie of their children, succedyng in
their fathers steps, one after an other, with so mortal war as never could
be appeased, the people resorted to strangers for refuge, and began to look
about them for some forreyn king. Therefore when as some thought it good to
send for Mithridates, king of Pontus, and some for Ptolomy king of Egypt, and
that it came to their remembrance, that Mithridates on the one side was
entangled with the wars of the Romans, and that Ptolomy on the other side,
had ever ben an enemy to the kingdom of Syria, they consented Tygranes is
made king of Syria.
all upon Tygranes king of Armenia: who besides the power of his own
country, was also supported by confederacy, with the Parthians, and by
aliance with Mythridates. Being therefore crowned king of Syria, he enjoyed the
kingdom excedyng quietly, by the space of eyghtene years, having no need at
all, either to assail others him self, or to repulse others that assailed
him. But as Syria An (...) earthquake.
was in sauftie from forreyne (...), ^o was it greatly wasted with an
erthquake, in the which there perisshed an hundred threskore and ten thousand
men besides the ruin of many cities. The which wonder the soothesayers
interpreted to betoken a great alteracion of things. For when Lucullus had
overcome Tygranes, he proclaimed (...) o^ Tygranes, and makes (...).
Antiochus the son of Cyricenus king. But that which Lucullus had given,
Pompeius afterward took away, who told him that he would not have made him
king of Syria, no though he had sewed for it, and much less put it in his
mouth without chalengyng it. Consyderyng that during the eyghtene years that
Tygranes held Syria, he had lain lurkyng in a corner of Sylicia, but as soon as
the Romans had overcome the said Tygranes, he put himself forth to sue for
the reward of other men's travel. Therefore like as if he had had the kingdom
before, he would not have taken it from him, even so, seeing he could find in
his heart, to suffer Tygranes to enjoy it peaceably so long, he would not
bestow the thing upon him, which he knew not how to defend: for doubt lest
he might be an occasion, that the Jews and Arabia^s should enterprise to rob
and spoil the country of Syria Syria is (...) ^e a prouynce of the (...)
again. So he brought Syrie into the form of a Prouynce, and by little and
little, through the discord of the blood Royal, the East came in subjection
to the Romans.

The. xli. Book.
THe Parthianes, in whose hand, (the whole world, being as it were denided
between them and the Romans) Thempyre of the East as than was, of the Parthe^s
with their encreasement and battles.
were banished men of Scythia: The which thing the very name of them
bewrays: for in the Scythian language, bannished men are called Parthians.
These in the time of Thassyrian and Median Empyres, were of all the peoples of
the East most base. After ward also, when Thempyre was translated from the
Medes to the Persians, they were as a sort of Rascalles without name, and a
continual pray to the Conquerors. Lastely when the Macedones ruled the East,
like triumphant conquerors, they were in subieccion unto them, in so much that
there is no man, but would wonder to see, how by their prowess and
actiuitie, they should aspyre to so great felicity, as to have dominion, even
over those kings and kingdoms* under whose Empire they served sometime as
rascal slaves. Furthermore, being assailed of the Romans, in three battles
by Capytaynes of great experience and actiuitie, in the chefest time of their
prosperity, when they flourished most in the renown of only, they only of
all Nations were able, not only to match them, but also to conquer the^.
Although in deed it may be counted a greater glory, that they could rise and
put up their head from among those Empyres of Assyria, Media and Persia, that
were so renoumed in times past, and also from under that most rich and
wealthy Empire of Bactria, that had a thousand cities under it, then to have
vanquished the force of traungers so far from them. Furthermore while the
Scythians were sore vexed with the continual wars of their neighbors, and
in manner oppressed with the continuance of dangerous encounters, these
Parthians, being through domestical dissension expulsed out of Scythia, took
by ^telth the deserts between Hyrcanie and the Daces, and the Areans, and the
Spartanes, and the Maianes. In continuance of The situacio^ of Par^hia.
time, first without let or interrupcion of their neighbors, and afterward
maugre their headdes, do the best and worst they could, they dilated the
borders of their country so far, that they posfessed not only the wide
fyeldes and bottomes of all the champion country, but also the cragged
clyffes, and the the tops of the high mountains, whereby it comes to
pass, that most places within the coast of Pa^a are either excessinely who^e,
or extremely cold: by reason that the (...) are commonly infested with snow,
and the open ^yelds with The^e of y^ common weal of Parthia.
the heat of the sun. After the decay of the^pyre of Macedone, the country
was governed by kings. Next unto the Mayestie of the king, is the state of the
commonaltie: for out of it are chosen Capitaynes in time of war, and Their
language.
magistrates in time of peace. Their language is a mean between the Scythian
and Median, mixed indifferently of them both. They had sometime a fashion of
apparel Their Apparel.
peculiar by them selfs, but after the time they grew rich, it became fine,
and full of clothe after the manner of the Medes. They keep the same order in
their wars and in feightyng, as do the Scythians their ancestors. The order
of their wars
Their army is not as other nations be of free men, but for the more part of
bondmen. The which sort of people (forasmuch as it is not lawful for any man
to set any of The briging up of their bondmen.
them at liberty, and therevppon all are bondeme^ borne) daily multiplieth
and increases, enstructing them with great diligence to ride horses and to
shote. According as every man is of welthe, so fyndeth he the king mo horsemen
to the wars. Finally when Antonie made war against the Parthians, of fyftie
thousand horsemen, that met him in the fyelde, there were but eight hundred of
them that were fre borne. They cannot skyll of feighting at hand in the
battle, nor of wynnyng Cities by siege. ^horder of their wars
They feight either runnyng right forth with their horses, or else retiryng
back, oftentimes also they will make as though they sled, to thentent their
enemy pursewyng them unadvisedly, may ly more open to receive a wonde of
the^, when they shall join battle, they use not to sound a trumpet, but a
Tympane, neither can they endure to feight any long while. But if they were of
like force and as good in continuance as they are at the first brunt, no Nation
in the world were able to abide them. For the mo^e part, even in the whotest
of the skyrmysh they forsake the fyelde, and anon after they turn again, and
begin the battle a fresh, in so much, that when a man thynkes himself
most sure of the victory, then stands Their Armoure.
he in most hasarde of discomfyture. Their armor as well for themselfes as
for their horses, are made all of plates of stele, ouerlayd with fathers,
wherwithall both of them are keuered from top to toe. Gold and silver they
occupye not, but in their Armor. Every man (for de Their severity ^ keptng
their wives.
light y^ they have in sensuality) has many wives a piece, and yet they
chastire no offense so sore as aduoutrie and whoredom. Whereupon they
utterly forbid women, not only the conuerfacion with men, but also
co^municacion for once to look upon a man. They eat no flesh unless Their
diet.
they catch it in huntyng. They are carried on horseback at al times: On
horseback they feight with the enemy, Their continual rydyng
on hrsebacke they feast, on horseback they execute all affairs, as well
public as private: on horseback they gooe from place to place, on horseback
they bye and fell, and on horseback they talk one with an other. Finally this
is the difference between a gentleman and The differen ce between their
gentlemen and their slaves.
a slave, that the slave never rydeth, nor the genleman never goes on foot.
Their common buryall is either to be de^oured with dogs, or to be eaten with
birds, and when the bones are left bare, they to burye them in the Their burial
earth. They are all a like marvelous superstitious in doing honor and
reverence to the Gods. The nature of Their (...).
the people is arrogant, seditious, deceitful, and malapart. For they think
that boysterousnesse is mete for men, and meekness mete for women. They are
ever unquiet, Their natural disposicion.
given to quarrel, either with strangers, or else among themselfes, of nature
close and secret, more ready to do then to talk: and therefore, whether they
speed well or ill, they make no boaste of. They obey their rulers for fear more
then for shame, to sensuality they are altogyther prone and enclyned, and yet
they are but small feders. There is no trust to be given to their words, for
they will keep promise no further, then is for their own profit. Un^er who^
the Parthians served.
After the death of great Alexander, when the kingdoms of the east were
divided amongst his successou^s, There was none of the Macedones, that would
vouchesafe to take upon him the kingdom of Parthia. By means whereof it was
committed to Satagenor a stranger, that had served Alexander in his wars.
These afterward, when the Macedones fell to civil war, with the other nations
of thupper Asia, took part with Emnenes, after whose discomfiture they
submitted themselfes to Antigonus: after Antigonus, Nicanor, Seleucus,
Antiochus When the Parthians first rebelled.
and his successors kept them in obedience, from whose graundchylde Seleucus,
they first of all revolted, in the first war that was between the Romans and
the Carthaginenses, L. Manlius Piso, and M. Attilius Regu lus being Consuls.
The occasion that they escaped clear with this their rebellion, was the
discord between the two brothers, king Seleucus aad king Antiochus: who were
so earnest to pluck the kingdom one from another, that they had no leasur
to pursewe the rebels.

The same time also rebelled one, called Theodotus, the which was the
Lieuetenaunt of the thousand Cities of the Bactrians, and proclaimed himself
King. Whose ensample all the other resydewe of the people of the East
ensewyng, revolted from the Macedones. There was at the same time one Arsaces,
as of unknown lynage, Arsaces the first king of Parthia.
so of approved actiuitie. This man being wont to live by rauyne and robbery,
hearing say that the Frenchmen had vanquished Seleucus in Asia, being out of
fear of his Prince, entered into Parthia with a band of robbers, and ^ewe
their Lieuetenaunt Andragoras, and after he had dispatched him out of the way,
usurped the dominion of the country. It was not long after, but he con^uered
the kingdom of Hyrcanie also, and so being esta blished in the Empire of two
Realms, he levied an huge host for fear of Seleucus and Theodotus king of
the Bactrians. But he was sone delivered from fear of Theodotus, for he dyed*
with whose son called Theodotus also* he concluded a league and continual
peace. And within a while after, he enconntred with Seleucus that came to
subdewe the rebels, and overcame him. The which day the Parthians have ever
sythens kept holy, with much solemnity, as the beginning of their liberty.
Afterward when Seleucus was through new Insurreccions called back into Asia,
Arsaces having thereby re^pite Arsaces refor meth the common weal of (...)*
and opportunity, set order in the public weal of Parthia, mustered
soldiers, builded for tresses and strong holds, strengthened cities, and
also edified a City new out of the ground in the mountayn Thabortene, which
he named Dara. The situacion of which place is such, that there cannot be any
devised, either more strong and The bu^ding and situacion of the city D^a.
defensible, or more pleasant and delectable. For it is so enuyroned round
about with stepe rocks, that the place of it self is able to hold out the
enemy, though there were no body to defend it. And the soil thereaboutes is
so fer tile and fruitful, that it is able to suffice the whole city without
help of any other place. Besides this, there is such abundaunce of sprynges
and woodde, that besides the commodity of the water, wherewith it is most
plen tifullie moystured: they may also have the pleasur of haukyng and huntyng
when they list. Arsaces having in The (...) of Arsaces.
this wise both gotten and established his kingdom at once, dyed an old man
as greatly renoumed among the Parthians, as was Cyrus among the Persians,
Alexander among the Macedones, or Romulus among the Romans. In remembrance of
whom, the Parthians attributed this honor, that they called all their kings
by the name of Arsaces ever after. This man's son and heir The second
Emperor of Parthia.
named Arsaces also, having an army of an hundred thou sand sootemen and
twenty thousand horsemenne, fought very valiantly against Antiochus the
son of Seleucus, and at length was received by him into aliance and
frendshippe. The third king of the Parthians was Pam The third Empeour
Pampatius.
patius, likewise surnamed Arsaces, (for as I told you before) they called all
their kings by that name, like as the Romans call theirs by the name of
Caesar and Augustus. This man having reigned twelve years, deceased leauyng two
sons, Mythridates and Pharnax. Of the which The fourth Emperor*
Pharnax the elder, inherityng the kingdom according to the custom of their
country, conquered a stout kind of people called the Mardes, and within a
while after deceased, leauyng many sons behind him, the which he made no
account of in that case, but left the kingdom An example of love toward a
man's country.
to his brother Mythridates, a man of excellent prowess and actiuitie,
thinkyng that the kingdom was more to be regarded, then the name of father,
and that he ought The fyfthe (...).
rather to provide for his native country* then for his chil dren. The same
time like as Mythridates in Parthia, so Eucratid^s in Bactria, both of them
notable Princes, began their raygnes at once. But the Parthians had the
Euera^des king of ^tria.
happier fortune. For through the pollitique governance of their king, they
aspyred to the Sovereign preh^minence of thempyre. Whereas the Bactrians being
tossed to and fro with the uncertain fortune of the wars, lost not only
their kingdom, but also their liberty. For after the time they had wearied
themselfs with the continual wars of the S^gdianes, Dranganitanes, and
Indians, last of all as when half dead, and without of heart, they were subdued
by the Parthians, which were weaker The valiant prow^s of Eucratides.
then they. Yet notwithstadyng Encratides atcheued many battles with great
prowess, through the which being brought low, when as Demetrius king of Inde
had beseged him, he having no mo but three hundred soldiers about him, by his
continual yssuyng out preuelye, vanquished threscore thousand of his enemies.
Whereupon being after five months siege enlarged again, he brought Inde
under his subjection. From whence as he An unnatural and abho minable mur there.
was returnyng homewarde, he was slain in his journey by his own son, whom
he had made fellow in Them pyre. Who nothing dissemblyng the unnatural murder
but rather reioyc^ng, as though he had killed his enemy, and not his father,
drove his chariot through his blood, and commanded his body to be thrown
away unburied. While these things were a doing among the Bactrians, in the
mean space there arose war between the Parthians The conque^tes of
Mythridates y^* iiii. king of Parthia.
and the Medes, in the which after diverse adventures of both nations, at
length the Parthians gate the upper hand. Mythridates being increased in
strength by their power, made one Bachasus Regent of Media, and himself went
into Hyrcania. At his return from whence he made war upon the king of the
Elymeans, whom he overcame, and adnexed that Realm also to his kingdom. And
there upon receiuyng many contries by com posicion, he dylated thempyre of
Parthia from the montayn Cancasus, even unto the river of Euphrates. Finally
being taken with a sickness, he dyed honorably in his old age, of no less
fame and renoume, then his greatgraunfather Arsaces.

The. xlii. Book.
AFter the decease of Mythridates king of the Parthians, his son Phrahartes
was The. i. ^peroure of Parthia, and of his doings*
crowned king. Who being fully purposed to war upon Syria, to be revenged
upon Antiochus for attemptyng the kingdom of Parthia, was by (...) of the
Scythians revoked to the defense of his own. For the Scythians being solicited
upon promise of wages, to aid the Parthians against Antiochus king of Syria,
when as the war was fynished ere they came, and they in reproach of their
late coming were defrauded of their hyre, being grieved to have travailed so
far for nothing when as they demanded either their wages for their pains
taking, or else some other ennemie to fight with, such a skornefull answer was
given them, that they being offended therewith, began to waste the borders of
Parthia.

Phrahartes therefore, when he should take his journey against the Scythians,
left to gouuerne his Realm in his absence one Hym^rus, highly in favor with
him, for thabuse of him in the florisshing prime of his childhod. It is (...)
trusting them to whom a man has d^ displeasure.
Who forgettyng both, his own former life, and whose person he represented,
through his tyrannous cruelty, vexed importunatlie, both, Babylon and man^e
other ci ties. And Phrahartes himself led to the wars with him, the
Grekysh host, the which he had taken in the wars of Antiochus, and had
entreated cruelly and proudelie quite forgetting that their captivity had
not mitigated their enemielyke minds so much, but y^ his wrongful demeanor
toward the, had more styrred the to displeasur against him. Therefore when
they espied that the Parthien battle began to have the worse end of the sta^ffe
they turned themselfes and took part with the enemy, The sixthe Emperonr of
Parthia.
and so with the bloody slaughter of the Partbien host, and of the king
Phrahartes himself, they executed the reuengement of their wrongful
captivity, which they had so long time desired. In stead of him, at his uncle
Artabanus was created king. And the Scythians, being con tented with the
victory, after that they had wasted Parthia, The seventh Emperor and of his
doings.
returned into their own countrih. But Artabanus dyed immediately, of a wound
in his arm that he received in a battle against the Colchatarians. After him
suc ceded his son Mythridates, who for his noble acts was surnamed the
Great. For being enflamed with desire to excel in prowess, he behaved
himself so nobly, that in magnanimity he surmounted al his famous
progenitors. Therefore he accomplished many wars against his neighbors
with great prowess, and subdewed many nations, under the Dominion of
Parthia. Moreover he fought diverse times to his advantage, against the
Scythians, and revenged the displeasur done to his predecessors, At the
last, he made war against artoadistes, king of the Armenians. But forasmuch
as we be The original of the Armentans.
passing into Armenie, I think it necessary to repete thoriginall thereof
somewhat deper. For me thynkes, it is not lawful to pass over so great a
kingdom with silence, co^syderyng that next unto Parthia, it surmounteth al
other kingdoms in greatness. For armenia is in length The situacio^ of Armenie.
from Cappadocia unto the Caspian sea, eleven hundred miles, and in bredthe
seven hundred miles. It was foun ded by Armenius one of the companyons of Jason
the Thessalien. whom king Pelias couetyng to destroy for his notable prowes,
which seemed dangerous to his kingdom The viage for the golden (...).
for fear, least he should depose him, told him what a noble viage there was
for him into Colchos, persuading him to take thenterprise upon him, and to
fetch the golden fliece, y^ was so famous and notably talked of (...) y^
world. Hopyng that either through so long and per^llous a saylyng, or eis by
feightyng against so sau^age and Barbarous a people, he might br^ng the
aduenturous knight t^ confusion. Jason therefore when he had made proclamacion
of so notable a voyage, and that therevppon the noble young men almost of all
the whole world resorted in great number unto him, he assembled an army of
most valiant knights, which were all called by the name of Argonantes.
Whom when after thaccomplishement of his aduenturous enterprises, he had
brought home again in sauftie, he was expulsed again out of Thessaly by the
sons of Pelias. Whereupon with a great multitude (which for the renown of
his prowess, daily resorted to him out of all Realms, having in his
company, his wife Medea (whom after his late diuorcement for pytie of her
exilement, he had received again) with her son Medeus (begotten by Egeus king
of Athenes) he went The (...) Jason.
again to Colchos, and restored his father in law to his kingdom, from which
he was deposed. After that, he made many battles with his neighbors, and
their Cities which he had taken, he partly annexed to the kingdom of his
father in law (to thentent to abolishe the reproach of his former warfare,
wherein he had, both led away his daughter Medea, and (...) slain his son
Aegialus, and partly gave them to the (...) that he brought with him to
inhabyte. By report he was the first of all men next after Hercules and Liber
(which as the same goes were kings of the East) that conquered that clymate
The original of the Alban^s in As^a.
of the world. Over some Nations he assygned captains, Phrygius and
Ansystratus the wageners of Castor and Pollur. He made a league with the
Albanes, which as it is reported) followed Hercules out of Italy, from the
mountayn Albanus, when after the slaying of Gerion, he drove his cattle
through Italy: who also bearyng in mind that they came out of Italy,
saluted the army of The great (...).
Pompeius by the name of broth^rs, when he warred with Mythridates. By means
whereof all the whole (...) almost, builded Temples and did divine honors to
Jason, as to their first founder. The which Parmenion, one of the Capitaynes
of great Alexander, many years after commanded to be beaten down, to thentent
that no man's name should be had in more honor in the East, then the name of
Alexander: after the death of Jason, Medus being (...) of (...).
an earnest follower of his virtues, in honor of his mother Medea, builded the
city M^dea, and established the kingdom of the Medes, calling it after his
own name, which in continuance of time grew to that estate, that all the Cast
was in subieccion to thempyre thereof. The Albans are next neighbors to the
Amazones, whose Queen Tha lestres, many authors have reported to ^aue desired
the carnal company of Alexander. Armenius being also a Thoriginal of the
Armeni^.
Thessalien, and one of the number of Iasons Capitains, having gathered
together the multitude, (which after the death of Jason their king, wandered up
and down every where,) founded the town of Armenie in the mountains, whereof
springs the river Tygris, which at the The head of the river Tygris.
first is a very small stream. Then a good way from the head, it falls into
the ground, and a five and twenty miles beyond, it ryseth up a great (...)
in the contrie Sophone, and so is received into the lakes of Eufrates.
Therefore Mythridates king of the Parthians (after his He returne^h to the
story of the (...)
war in Armenie) was for his cruelty deposed from the kingdom by the
counsel of the Realm. His brother Ho rodes inuadyng the Royal sea being
vacant, beseged Ba bylon a great while, because his brother Myth idates The
viii king of (...).
was fledds thither, so long until he (...) them for famyn to yield up the
town.

Mythridates upon trust and confidence in that he was so ners of his kynne,
willynglie submitted himself to his brother Horodes. But Horodes taking him
rather for an The (...) of Horodes to wards his brother.
enemy then for a brother, commanded him to be cruelly slain before his
face. After this he made war with the Romans, and utterly destroyed their
graund capytay^ The death of (...).
Crassus, with his son and all the Romayne host. His son Pa^orus being
sent to pursewe the remnaunte of the Romayne battle, after that he had
atcheued many hault enterpryses in Syria, was called home again, as
mistrusted of his father. During whose absence, the host of the Parthians that
he left behynd him in Syrta, was A (...) of the (...).
with all the Captains thereof utterly slain by Cassius Lieuetenaunt of
Crassus. These things thus done, not The (...) wars between (...) and Pomp^y.
long time after arose the Civil wars between Caesar and Pompey: in the which
the Parth^ans took part with Pompey, both for the frendshyp that was between
them and Pompey in his wars against Mythridates, and also for the death of
Crassus, whose son they heard say, held with Caesar, whom they knew well
enough, would revenge his fathers death, if Caesar should chance to get thupper
hand. Therefore after that Pompey and his adhe rentes had taken the foil, they
both ministered aid to Cassius and Brutus, against Augustus and Antonie, and
also after thend of the war, enteryng in leage with Labienus, under the
conduct of Pacorus, they wasted Siria and Asia, and moreover gave a proud
assault upon the camp of Uentidius, who after Cassius in the absence of
Pacorus had given the Parthien army an overthrow.

But Uentidius pretending a counterfeact fear, kept The (...).
himself in a good while, and suffered the Parthians for a time to vaunte
(...). At the length he sent out part of his host, upon them as they were merry
and careless^, with whose sudden asfaulte, the Parthians being dismayde,
fled hither and thither to ^aue themselfes. Pacor^s supposing that his men
which were ^led, had withdrawn all the Romayne Legions after them, assailed
in haste the Camp of Uentidius, in hope, that he should have found it
without defendantes. Then Uentidius, A great (...) ter of the Pa^ thians (...)
the kings (...).
sendyng quickly out the residue of his Legions, slew all the whole band of
the Parthians with the king Pacorus himself also.

Neither did the Parthians at any time receive a greater loss. When tydinges
hereof was brought into Parthia, Horodes the father of Pacorus, which lately
before (hearing that the Parthians had wasted Syria, and invaded Asia) had
boasted that his son Pacorus, was a Horodes falls beside him self for
sorrow.
conqueror of the Romayne*) when he ones heard of his death and of the
slaughter of his army, sodaynlie for sorrow he fell m^dde. Many days after,
he would not talk to any man, he would not take any sustenaunce, he would not
speak any one word, in so much that a man would have thought he had been
domme. After that many days were expyred, when sorrow had losened his tongue, he
spoke of nothing but Pacorus, he thought he saw Pacorus he thought he heard
Pacorus, he would talk as though he had been with him, he would stand still
as though he had stood with him, and anon he would lamentably bewail the
loss of him. When he had mourned thus a long season, an other heaviness came
upon the miserable old man, namely, which of his thyrtie sons he should
ordeyne king in Pacorus stead. He had many concubynes, of whom he begat all that youth, of the which every one making suit for her own child, did as it
were besiege the old man's mind. But it was the destiny of Parthia, The nynthe
Emperor of Parthia.
(in the which it is an ordinary custom, to have unnatural murderers to
their kings) that the wickedest and un graciousest of them al, whose name was
Phrahartes was substituted king. Therefore as though it seemed his father (...)
is killed by his son Phrohartes.
would not dye naturally, he forthwith killed him, and put his thirty
brothers to death. Neither ceased he his slagh ter in the children. For when he
perceived that the noble men hated him for his outrageous cruelti, and
continual workyng of mischief, and that there was none that might be nominated
king, he commanded his own son, who was man grown, to be put to death.
Against this man, Antonie with syxtene of his strongest Legions, made war,
for ministeryng, aid against himself and Caesar. But he was so sore afflicted in
many battles, that he was feign to fly back out of Parthia. Through the
which victory Phrahartes being made more proud and insole^t, (...) is
deposed, and restored by y^ Scythians.
when as he (...) to deal cruelly in many things, he was driven into exil^,
by his own subjects. Whereupon after long and earnest suit made unto the
countries, borde^yng upon Parthia, at the length by much intreatans, he so
persuaded the Scythians, that through their aid he was restored to his
kingdom again. In the time of his absence, the Parthians had constituted
one Tyridates king, who hearing of the coming of the Scythians, fled with a
great band of his friends to Caesar The tent^ Emperor of Parthia.
Augustus, making war at that time in Spayn, bryngyng with him to Themperor,
the youngest son of Phra ^artes for a pledge, whom through the negligence of
such as were put in trust with the keeping of him, he had stolen away. Upon
knowledge whereof, Phrahartes forth Phrahar^es sendes Ambassadors to Rome.
with sent his Ambassadors to Caesar, requiryng him to send him home his
servant Tyridates, and his son with him. The Emperor when he had heard
thambassadours of Phrahartes, and understood well the requests of Tyridates
(for he also desired to be set in possession of his kingdom again, assuryng
that Parthia should ever after be at the commandment of the Romans, y^ it
would please him to bestow the kingdom upon him) answered how he would
neither deliver Tyridates into the hands of the Parthians, nor yet minister
aid to Tyridates against them.

Nevertheless because it should not seem, that they had The (...) ans submit
them s^lues to Augustus
obtained no part of their demand at Themperours hand he sent Phrahartes his
son without ransom, and allowed Tyridates ^onorable enterteynement to find
him with as long as he lysted to abide with the Romans. After this having
fynished his wars in Spayn, when he came into Syria to set a stay in affairs
of the East, he put Phrahartes in such a fear, that to thentent he should not
make war upon Parthia, all the Captives and pri soners that were in the
Realm, either of y^ army of Crassus, or of tharmie of Antonie, were gathered
together, and with all the baners and Antesygnes taken at those times, sent
again to Augustus. Moreover Phrahartes gave to Augustus his sons and nephews
in hostage, and Them peror did more with the only Majesty of his name, then
any other Emperor could have done by force of Arms.

The. xliii. Book.
T^ogus Po^peius having made a long discourse of the doings of the Parthians,
ofy^ East, and well nigh of all the whole world, returns as it were after a
long pylgrimage, home to the fondacion of the City of Rome: thinkyng it the
part of an unthankful cytizen, if when he had painted out the acts of all
nations, he should speak nothing at all of his own native country. Therefore
he touches briefly the beginning of the Romayne Empire, so that he neither
excedeth the bounds which he propounded to himself in his work, nor yet
passes over with silence the fondacion of that City, which out of doubt is
head of all the world. The first inhabiters of Italye, were the Aborigines,
The first inhabiters of Italy.
whose king Saturn is reported to have been of such Justice and uprightness,
that during his ^eygne, there was not any slave or bondsman, nor any man that had
ought The Justice and equity in the time of Saturn.
private to himself, but all things were common and undivided to all men a
like, as though it had benne one Patrymonie, and one Inheritance, equally
belongyng to all men.

In remembrance of the which example, it is enacted, that in the feast of
S^turne, no man should be more set by then another, but that the bondemen
should sit down to their meal fellowelyke with their Masters eueryewher.
The (...) of Saturn^.
Furthermore Italy was called Saturnia after the name of the foresaid king: The
Hill also where he dwelled was called Saturn, on the which at this day,
(Jupiter The (...)
having, as it were removed Saturn out of his place) stands the Capitol.
After him in the third place by report, reigned Faunus, in whose time Euander
with a small company of his countrymen, came from Palantener, The coming of
Euand^r into Italy.
a city of Arcadie into Italy: to whom Faunus of gentleness and courtesy,
assigned lands to live upon, and the mountain which afterward he called
Pala^tine. In the foot of this hill, he builded a Temple to Lycens, whom the
Greeks call Pan, and the Romans Lupercus. The Image of the God being
otherwise naked, is clade in a goats skin, in the which manner o^ attire,
men are yet wont to run up and down the streets of Rom^, in the
celebracion of the feasts kept unto Pan. Faunus had a wife named Fatua,
which being continually ravished with a holy spirit, as it were in a fury
Prophesied of things to comme: whervppon such as are The ^tynge of L^tinus.
wont to be so inspyred, are said to play fatua unto this day. Of the
daughter of Faunus and Hercules (who the same time having killed Gerion drove
his cattle which he had gotten in reward of his victory, through Italy) was
unlawful begotten Latinus. During whose raygne, Aeneas after that Troy was
destroyed by the Greeks* The coming of Eneas into Italy.
came from thence into Italy. Where at his first arrival he was bydden
battle.

But when he had brought his men into the field, before thencounter they
fell to communicacion. In the which he brought Latinus in such admiracion of
him, that he was content to make him Compartener of his kingdom, and also made
him his son in law, by geuyng him his daughter Lauinia in marriage.

After this they made war (...) against Turnus king of the Rutilians, who
challenged them for defraudyng him of Lauinia, that by promis should have been
his The building of (...).
wife. In the which both Turuus and Latinus were slain. Aeneas therefore
obteynyng both the nations by the law of arms, builded a city and gave it
the name of his wife. Afterward he made war against Mezentius king of the
Hetruscians, in the which he was slain, and his son Ascanius succeeded in his
stead. Who leaving Lauinium, builded Alba longa, the which for the space of
three hundred years together, was the head of the kingdom. After The building of
long Alba.
many kings of this City, at length raygned Numitor and Amulius. But Amulius
having wrongfully deposed his elder brother Numitor, to thentente none issue
male should rise of the stock of Numitor to chaleng the croune, thrust his
daughter Rhea into a nonrie, there to lead all her life in vow^d virginity,
clokyng his injury with an honorable color, that men might suppose she was not
put there as a condemned person, but rather made chief prio resse of the place
by election. Being therefore as a recluse The birth of Romulus and Remus, with
their educacion.
in the Grove, consecrated to Mars, she was delivered of two sons, whether
she conceived them by aduouterye, or by Mars, no man is able to say of a
truth. Amulius upon knowledge hereof, being in more fear then ever he was,
by reason of the birth of the two children, co^man ded them to be cast away,
and laid their mother in prison, through distress whereof she dyed. But fortune
providing before hand for thoriginall of the Romans, sent a shewolfe to
nource the children, the which having lost her whelps, for desire to have
her dugges drawn, that were payned with fullness of milk, offered herself to
be nourice to the children. As ^he came and went oftentimes to the children,
like as if they had been her whelps A shepeherde named Faustulus, perceived the
matter, and stealyng them from the wolf, brought them up like shepeherdes
among his Cattle. Now whether it were for that they were borne in the Grove of
Mars, or for that they were nourished by a wolf, which is in the tuicion of
Mars it was believed to be as a manifest proof that they were the sons of
Mars. The one of the^ was named Remus, and the other Romulus: When they were men
grown, they accustomed to try Maystries daily, one with an other, whereby
they increased as well in strength as in agilitie and swyftnes. Therefore when
they had oftentimes man fully and pollitiquely chased away the thefes from
stealyng R^mus is (...) ke^ and brought to the king*
of the cattle, Remus was taken by the said thefes, and as though he had been
the same himself, which he had prohibited thothers to do, was brought before
the king, and there accused for a stealer of Numitors cattle. Whervppon the
king delivered him to Numitor, to punish as he thought good. But Numitor having
pity of the young man, had half a mistrust that he should be one of his
nephews that were cast away, by reason he resembled his daughter so much in
favor and making, and by reason, that the time of her deliverance was agr^able
unto his years. As he was in this doubtful perplexity with himself Faustulus
came sodaynlie in with Romulus, by whom being further instructed of the birth
and bringyng up of Romulus and Remus make a conspyracie against Numitor.
the children, they made a conspiracy, and took weapon in hand, the young men
to revenge their mothers death, and Numitor to recover the kingdom wrongfully
witholde^ from him Amulius was slain, and Numitor restored to the crown.
Anon after the yongmen builded the city of Rome. The which being finished,
there was ordained a Senate of an hundred elders, which were called fathers.
Then because the neighbors disdeyned to marry their daughters to shepeherdes,
they ravished the maidens The building of Rome.
of the Sabines, and having subdued the people that were next about them, first
they gate thempore of Italy, and anon after thempyre of the whole world. At
those days, as yet the kings in stead of Diademes had maces, which the
Greeks call Scepters. For even from the first beginning of things, men in old
time did worship maces for Gods. In remembrance of which Religion, the
images of the Gods are yet still ^ade with Maces in their hands. In the time
of king Tarquine, a company of the Phocenses coming out of Asia, entered the
mouth of Tyber, and joined amity with the Romans. From thence they went by
water to thuttermoste coast The buiding of (...).
of France, and there among the Liguriens, and the cruel Frenchmen (...)
builded the city Marsielles, and did many noble acts, both in defendyng
themselfes by the sword against the savage Frenchmen, and also in assailyng
those that had assailed them before. For the Phocen^es by reason of the barrei
esse and sterilitie of their contrie, were compelled to set their minds more
earnestly upon the water, then upon the land, and so they lived by fishyng,
by traffike of mercha^dyse, and oftentimes by rob bing on the sea, which in
those days was co^ted for a praise. By means whereof they adue^tured to
thuttermoste border of Thocean, and arrived upon the French coast by the river
of Rone, with the plasauntnes of which place, they were so taken in love, that
at their return home, they re ported what they had seen, and procured mo of
their contrymen to go thither with them. The Captains of their flete were
furius, and Peranus. Who with their company presented (...) before Senanus king
of the Segoregians, in whose territory they coueted to buyld them a city,
desyring his amity and friendship. By chance the very A marriage.
same day the king was occupied in preparacion for the mariag of his daughter
Eyptis, whom according to the custom of the country, he purposed to marry to
such a one, whom she herself at the feast would chose to be her husband.
Among other that were bydden to the Marriage the strangers of Greece were
desired to the feast also. Anon the young lady was brought in who being
commanded by her father to reach a cup of water to him whom she would have to
her husband, passed over all the other gestes, and turnyng herselfte the Greeks,
gave the water to Peran. Who by this means being made of a stranger the
kings son in law, obtained of his father a plo^te, to buyld a City upon.
So was the City of Marsielles builded, hard by the mouth of the river of
Rone, in an out nooke, as it were in an angle of the sea. But the Ligurians
envying the prosperity of the City, distroubled The (...) of the Ma (...).
the Greeks with their continual wars. Who through valeaunt defendyng of
themselfes, became so renoumed, that after they had vanquished their enemies,
they builded many cities in the grounds that they took from them. At their
hands, the Frenchmen learned a more civil trade of living, (through the
whiche'. their Barbarousnesse was laid a side, and as it were tamed,)
together with the tyllage of the ground, and the wallyng in of their cities.
Then they framed themselfes to live by laws, and not by force, then they
learned to shred their vynes, then they learned to plant and graffe their
olyues, finally both the men and all other things were so exquisytely
polyshed, that Greece seemed not to be removed into France: But rather that
France was transformed into Greece. After the death of Senanus king of the
Gegoregians, by whom the place to build the city upon was granted his
son Comanus, succedyng him in the kingdom, was inuegled against the
Massiliens, by one of his Lords, alledgyng that the time would come, that
Marsielles should be the destruction of the people that were next neig^bors
about it, wherefore it was to be suppressed now in y^ very rising thereof, least
afterward being suffered to grow stronger, it might oppress him. For the
further manifestacion whereof, he recited this fable, how A (...) applied.
upon a time a byt^h, being great with whelpe, desired a shepeherde to lend
her houseroume to whelpe in, the which being obtained, she desired of him
eftsoon, to respite her so long, but till she might bring up her whelps:
at length when they were full grown, she and her whelps were so strong, that
she challenged the place to her self for ever.

In likewise the Massilians which then seemed to be but soieourners, would
perchance hereafter become Lords of the country. The king being provoked by
this instigacion, devised how to surprise the Massilia^s. So upon a so lemne
feastfull day of the Goddess flora, he sent a great Treson against the Mas
silians.
sort of strong and stout men into the City, as it had been to make merry,
causyng a great number mo to be conveyed in carts and wagens hydde^ with
rushes and leaves, and he himself with his host lay in ambushe in the next moun
taynes, to thentent that in the night, when the other had set open the gates, he
might comme with all speed to the performance of his prepensed policy, and
put the city to the sword as they were dead a sl^pe, or else eating and
drinkyng. But a kynswoman of the kings bewrayed Women can keep no coun sell.
this treason: who being wont to play the goodfellowe with a certain young man
of the Greeks, as she embraced him, having pytie on him for his beauty,
uttered the mat ter unto him, and counseled him to avoid the danger. He
forthwith told the matter to the Officers of the City. By means whereof the
treason coming to light, the Liguriens were laid hand on, and they that lay
hydden in the rushes, were pulled out by the heles. The which being
euerichone ^layne, the treason was turned upon the kings own head: for the
Massilians slew the king himself, and seven thousand of his soldiers with
him. From that day forward, the Massiliens upon their feast full days, kept
their gates shut, made good watch, set men to ward upon the walls,
serched all strangers, took good head: and even as if they had had war, so
kept they the City in time of peace. So well is good order kept among them at
al times, not so much in time of The fortunate success of the Mas^.
need, as upon custom of doing well. Afterward they had sore wars with the
Ligurians, and with the Frenchmen. The which thing both increased the renoume
of the city, and also by atcheuing so many victories made the knight ^ode and
^heualry of the Greeks, famous and redouted among their neighbors. Moreover
they diverse times vanquished the armies of the Carthaginenses. When they
warred upon the^ for taking of their fisher botes, and gave the peace at their
pleasure like conquerors. With the Spanyardes they entered in leage of amity:
with the Romans they made a continual confederac^e and aliance almost from
the first laying of the foundation of the city, the which they observed most
faithfully and to thuttermoste of their power aided the^ as their
co^federates, in all their wars. The which thing, both, made the^ to be bolder
to trust to their own strength, and also purchased the^ peace of their en
nemies. Therefore at such time as Marsiels flourished most in renown of
cheualrie, and in abundance of riches, and was in the chief flower of her
strength, suddenly all the people bordering about the^, gathered themselves
together to rote up the name of the Massiliens, as it had been to ertinguish The
(...) of Caram^us
some common fire. A noble man called Caramandus was by a common consent chosen
to be captayn general against them: who as he lay at siege before the city
with a great host of the best men that could be chosen, in all the country,
saw in his sleep the likeness of a woman with a grim and terrible contenance,
which said she was a Goddess: at her sight he was so astraught, that of his
own mind un requested, he made peace with y^ Massiliens. And making request y^
he might enter into their city to worship their Gods, when he came into the
temple of Minerua, espiyng in the porches the image of the Goddess which he
had seen in his dream, he cried out sodaynlie that is was eue^ she y^ had
feared him in the night, it was she that c^maun ded him to raise his siege.
Wheruppon greatly rejoicing with the Massyliens, because he perceived that the
Gods immortal had such care and regard over them, he gave the Goddess a
chain of Gold for an offering, and made abonde of frendshyp and amity with
the Massilie^s to continue for ever. After that they had thus gotten peace, and
established quietness, the Massilieu (...) returnyng from Delphos (whether
they had been to carry presents unto Apollo,) heard say that the City of Rome
was taken and burnt by the Frenchmen. The which ^dynges when they had brought
home, the Massiliens pro A faithful friend is tried in aduersytie.
claymed an universal mournyng, as if it had been for the death of some
especial friends, and gathered all their Gold together, as well private as
public, the which they sent to make up the Sum, that the Frenchmen
demanded of the Romans for their ransom, and for to grant them peace. In
recompense of which good turn, they were made free of the City of Rome, and
placed among the Senatoures at all shows and pageantes. And Alyance was
knytte with them to be contynuallye reputed as Romans. In his last Book,
The ancestors of ^rogus Po^ pcius.
Trogus declares, that his Ancestors fetch their Pe tegrie from the Uolces,
that his Graundfather Trogus Pompeius in the wars against Sertorius, did
save the City to Eneus Pompeius, that his uncle had the leadynge of the
Horsemen under the said Pompey in the war against Mythridates: and that his
father also served in the wars under C. Caesar, in the room of Secretary,
Lieuetenaunt, and keeper of his Seal.

The xliiii. Book
Spain, like as it is the uttermost Thauncient names of Spain.
bownd of Europe, so shall it also be thend of this work. Men in old time
called it Iberia after the River Iberus, and afterward they called it Spain
after the name of Hispalus. This Country lies The situacio^ of Spain and the
fertility thereof.
between affrike and France, and is enclosed with thocean Sea and the
mountains Pyrenei. Like as it is lesser then any of both those lands, so is
it more fertile then them both. For neither is it scorched with the outrageous
heat of the son as Affrike is, nor infested with contynuall winds as France
is. But as it is mydde between them both, so on the one side through temperate
heat, and on the other through the moisture os pleasant shoures falling in due
season, it becomes fertilie of all kind of fruit and grain, in so much
that if not only suffiseth thinhabytants thereof, but also sends abundaunce
of all things into Italye, and even unto Rome it self. For there comes from
thence, not only great plenty of Corn and grain, but also of wine, ho^ny
and Oil. Besides that, there is not only the best iron and steel that can
be, but also many races of most swifte horses: neither are the commodities that
grow above the ground to be praised only, but also the plentyfull and rich
Mines of Mettalles hydden deep within the ground. Of Flax and Baste there is
great store: and as for Uermilion, there is no land has more plenty of it.
In this land are running Ry^ers, not violently and outragiously flo wing to do
any harm, but gently moisting the vineyards and cornefieldes, and where they
ebb and flow with the Oceane, very full of all kind of fys^hes, whereof many
al so are rich of gold, which they carrye to their great co^mendacion. Only
by the rydge of the mou^tains Pyrenei is it parted from France, being on all
other parts beside environed rownd about with the Sea. The platte of the land
is almost fouresquare, saving that the Sea beatyng The platte and bygnesse of
Spain.
on both sides does gather it somewhat narrower at the mountains Pyrenei.
Moreover whereas the Mountains Pyrenei run, it is in breadth syx hundred
miles. The air is wholesome through all Spain, and the wind so cool in a
temperate, that there ryseth no stynkynge mi^tes out of the low grounds and
marisses to infect it Besides this the continual air of the saltwater rysyng
from the Sea round about on all sides, perseth through the whole country: the
which being qualyfied with the open air of the land, do chiefly preserve al
men in health. The bodies of the men are ready to endure hunger and pain, and
their minds ready to abide death. They live The nature and disposition of
the S paniardes
all very nigardly and hardly, they covet rather war then peace. If they want a
foreyn enemy, they will seek one at home. Oftentimes have they dyed upon the
rack, for concealyng things put to them in secret. So much do they esteem
more their secrecy the^ their lives: the which may well be perceived by the
sufferance of that servant in the wars of Carthage, who having revenged the
death of his Master, in the mids of his torments, laughed and reioysed, and
with a merry and gladsome countenance vanquished the cruelty of his
tormentours. The people of A notable ex ample of constant patience.
that contrie are excedyng swift of foot, unquiet of mind, and many of them
set more by their horses and armor, then by their own blood. They make not
any preparature for feastyng, but only upon high and solemn days, to wash
in warm water, they learned of the Romans, after the second wars with
Carthage. During the con tinuance of so many hundred years, they never had any
worthy captain saving Uiriatus. Who by the space of The doyngs and co^menda
cions of Uiriatus.
ten years together held ye Romans at the staves end, sometime to his gain,
and sometime to his loss (so much were they of nature more like brute beasts
then like men) the which forenamed captayn they followed, not as one chosen by
the discretion of men, but only because he was pol litique and connyng in
auoidyng and eschewyng of dangers. Yet notwithstanding he was of that virtuous
behauior and modesty, that albeit he oftentmies vanquished the consuls with
their armies, yet after so great enterprises atcheued, he neither changed the
fashion of his armor, neither altered the fashion of his apparel, nor brake
he thor der of his diet, but look in what sort he began first his wars, in
the same he continued to the last: so that there The swiftenes of the Spanish
Ge nets.
was never a common soldier but seemed welthier then the Captayn. It is
reported of diverse writers, ye about the river Tagus in Portingal, mares do
conceive with the wind: The which fable sprang first of the frutefulnesse of the
Mares, and of the great number of the races of the which in (...) of the
Gallecians in (...).
Gallice and Portyngale, there are such store to be seen, and those so swift,
that not without good cause, they may seem to be conceived by the wind. The
Gallictans allege themselfs to be Greeks by descent. For after thend of the
battle of Troy* they say that Teucer being hated of his father Telamon, for
the death of his brother Ayax, and there upon not permitted to enter into his
Realm, departed to Cyprus and there builded a City, which he named Sala mine,
after the name of his natif country, that he came fro. Where hearing of the
decease of his father, he returned to his country again, but being prohibited
from arri uall by Eurysaces the son of Ayax, he arrived in Spain and took the
ground where new Carthage stands now. From whence he removed to Gallice, and
there placing himself and his, gave the country that name. For a portion of The
(...) of (...)
Gallice are called (...), a contrie most plentiful of brass and lead, and
of Uermilion, which also gave the name to the river thereby. Furthermore it is
most rich of Gold, insomuche that diverse times they ere up cloddes of gold
with the ploughe. In the borders of this Country there is a holy hill, the
which it is not lawful to cut with any iron. But if it chance that the earth
is bro ken with thunder and lightning (which is a common thing in those places,
they are permitted to gather up the gold as a gift of God. The women have all
the doing in houskeping and husbandry, and the men give themselfs to war and
robbyng. (...).
They have the hardest yro^ that is, but yet their wa ter is of more force then
the iron: for by temperyng y^ metal there with, it is made tougher and
sharper, neither do they count any weapon good, that is nor dypped either
(...) the river Bilbo, or in the river Chalybs. Where upon the people y^ dwell
about the said river, are called Chalybes, and are reported to have the best
iron of all others. In the playnes of the Tartesians, (where it is reported
that the Tytanes made war (...) the Gods) dwelled some time the Curettes:
an ancient king of the which people named Gargoris, first inverted the manner
to gather honey. The Inventions of Gargoris.
This man perceiuyng that his daughter had played the miswoman, for shame of
her wicked deed, attempted diverse ways to have destroyed the child. But
through good for tune he was preserved from al those dangers, and at the
length for compassion of so many perils, was created king. First of all when he
had commanded him to be cast away, and certain days after had sent to seek
his body, he was found nourished with the milk of sundry wild beasts.
Secondly, when he was brought home, he commanded him to be laid in a narrow
path where cattle were wont to go through, surely he was very cruel, that
would have That which God will have saved can not be (...).
his nephewe rather trodden to death, then simply killed. There also perceiuyng
he lay unhurt, and not unfed, he ca^ sed him to be cast first to hungry dogs
that he ^adde pyned from meat many days before for the nones and afterward
also to Swyne. Finally when they not only did him no harm, but also some of
them gave him suck, last of all he had throw him into the sea. Then as it
were by the open and manifest providence of God, among the ragyng sourges, and
the wallowyng waves, as though he had been ^aried in a ship and not in the
stream, the calm sea bare him up alo^t, and brought him softly to shore. By
and by came a hynde and gave him suck. Wherevppo^ by keeping company with his
nourice, the child became excedyng swift of foot, and kept in the mountains
and forestes among the herdes of red dear as swift a foot as the wightest of
them. At the length being overthrown in a toil and taken, he was presented
to the king for a gift. There by reason of his stature and making, wherein he
much resembled the king, and by certain marks that were growe^ in the child
from his birth, the king knew him to be his neph^w. And because he had so
wonderfully escaped so The doyngs of (...).
many perilous chances, he proclaimed him heir and successor of his
kingdom. His name was called (...), who after that he had taken the crown
upon him, became a Prince of such Majesty, that men thought it was not for no
thing, that he was so preserved by the providence God from so many perilles.
For he first ordained laws, to keep the savage people in good order and
conversation one with another. He first taught them to break oxen to the
ploughe, and to till and so we the ground, he first (for (...) of such things
as he had suffered himself (caused men to for sake their (...) meats, and to
feed upon better. The chan ces of this man might seem to be but a fable: if the
buylders of Rome had not ben nourished by a wolf, and Cyrus king of Persia
nourished of a bytch. This man forbad the people all seruill occupacions, and
divided the commons into s^uen cities. After the death of Habis, the kingdom
remained in his posterity itie many hundred years. In another The Story^ of
Geryon.
part of Spayn which consists of Isles, Gerio^ was king: in the which part
there is so great plenty of sweet pasture, that onles the cattle were kept
hungry, and not suffered to feed their fill, their bellies would brust. In the
same place were the cattle of Gerion (wherein at those days men's substance did
chiefly consyst) which were of so great fame, that Hercules allured with the
richnes of the botie came out of Asia thither. Moreover Gerio^ was not triple
as the fables report, but three brothers which accorded so friendly one with
another, y^ it seemed as though one soul and one mind ruled the^ all three.
Neither did they of their own motion make war upon Hercules, but when they
How the Carthaginobteyned the (...) ^f Spayn.
saw their cattle driven away, they sought with him for the recovering of
the^. After that y^ kings ceased in Spain, the Carthaginenses first took upon
the^ the Dominion and rule of the contrie For when the Gaditanes (commanded so
to do in a dream) had brought from Tyrus (out of the which City the
Carthaginenses had also their beginning) the sacred Ceremonies of Hercules
into Spayn, and there builded a city, through^ the malice of the people of
Spain their next neybors, envying the^creasment of their new city, and thervpo^
infestyng the Gaditanes with war, they sent to their kynsmen the
Carthaginenses for help: Who having a prosperous journey, both defended the
Gaditanes from taking wrong, and also subdued the more part of the country
under their domini^n. Afterward also The doyngs ofthe Cartha ginenses in Spain.
encouraged by the fortunate success of their first viage they sent Hamilcar,
as granndcapitayn with a great host to co^quer the whole Realm. Who having
atcheued many hault enterprises, whiles he followed his good luck without
aduiseme^t, was en^rapped by a policy and slain. In his room was sent his
son in law Hasdrubal, who also was slain by a servant of a Spanyard, in
reuengement of his Masters death. Han niball the son of Hamilcar, greater
the^ they both succeeded in the Capitainship For he surmountyng the acts of
them both, conquered all Spain. And then making war against the Romans, vexed
Italy with sundry slaughters, by the space of sy^ years together. Whereas in
the mean season the Romans, How the To maynes conquered spain
sendyng the Scipios into Spain, first drove the Carthaginenses out of the
country, and afterward had sor^ wars with the Spanyardes themselfes.
Nevertheless the countries of Spayn could never be brought under the ^oke of
bondage, until that Caesar Augustus having conquered the whole world, came
against them with his victorious army, brought those Barbarous and cruel
people, to a more civil trade of living by order of law, and substituted a
Lieuetenaunte over them, like as was done in all other Prouynces of Thempyre.

FINIS.

