A godly and learned treatise, wherein is proved the true iustificacion of a
Christian manne to come freely of the mercy of god in Christ, without the
deseruyng of man by his merits: and also how good works ought to be done
and what be true good works in deed. Whereunto is joined a conference between
the law and the gospel, very profitable for all men to exercise themselves
therein.

Esaias. xliii. I, even I am he only, who for mine own selfs sake do away
thine offenses and forget thy sins, so that I will never think upon them. To
the reader.
IT was truly and wisely said of the poet, that one witness, which has
seen the thing with his eyes, is more to be set bye, then tene of report. For
in deed in things ye be subject to senses, as every sense has certain of
the^ peculiar to him, and by some bye means common with other: so each of
them, in things properly apperteyning to them, perform their functions more
suerly. As most certeynlye judges the smell of odors, the eye of colors, and
the ear of voices, though the ear also can judge of colors by relation of
others, and the eye can perceive the difference of voices set out in
geometrycall proportions, or of musicians by writing expressed. For clearer is
the water at the spring, then farther of in the river. but whereunto serves
this: Herunto gentle reader. We see in these owre days, in which, after long
and horrible darkness of gods true knowledge, which lighteneth every man that
comes in to the world, ye like to have chanced among us between the
worldlyngs and messengers of god, which, because they were not of the world,
could not be favored in the world, as did happen among ye Israelites, when so
ever god of his infinite mercy raised unto them any prophet, good prince or
other promotor of his glory. For as then ye world lacked not that spoured
forward on there side, both among the commons through simplicity and of the
learned sort by malice blinded: so led god in his array against the world
learned for learned and simple against ye simple man. For by Christ they
said, yt the ruder sort followed him and not the princes and learned: and yet
we know that Nicodeme, a price of ye pharisees, resorted to hi^, and Gamaliel
doctor of the law and Paul's school master, drew some what nigh to him, and
Joseph, the Centurion and ye Eunuche of Candia cloue to him, and were every one
of them, for their tale^tes, setters out of that faith, yt was preached in his
name. But in them we perceive this difference, as in ye servants of god at
these days, that among those, that embrace the truth, some only know that
their enemies part is false, some know ye truth, but not so thoroughly that
they se the foundation and ground thereof, which is granted yet unto so^e
other. Wherefore, me seems they may not unaptly be called, the first two
hearing witnesses, the other saying. For as they are several gifts, to perceive
yt error, to hold the truth, and to know yt: so may the one be with owte
the other, as other distinct gyfts of god be. But to my purpose, where as the
endeavors of them all, tending to the instruction of others, are thankfully to
be accepted, and the spirit to be extincted in none: so what ye latter sort
does to the same end diligently, me seems yt is worthy not to come owte to
the hands of many, but with some special note unto the reader, to make him
for his farther commodity the more attent in reding it. For though the
saylable wine need no yue bough, because it will in time get cheymen, and well
abide their slow coming: so yet, seeing the late knowinge of the spiritual
works hinder most the reader, and not itself, as abydinge still good in
ytselfe, where as contrary wise the seller and not the byer is hurt in evil
wine through lack of the yue bough, me thinks this proverb should nothing
fear me from commending this book unto the, except yt, whereas ye only cause
why I print it is ye increase of thy godly knowledge, I cold in the same mind
be loathe of thy most profit. Wherefore as I hope thou know the doctrine,
where of it is intyteled, to be ye chief point and in manner the whole some of
our relygion, utterly ransacking the kingdom of ye devil: So, if I can judge
any thing therein, yt is handled in such exact sort, as to do the like few
men would, and fewer cold. So that me seems, yt may worthily be said:
diverse learned men have hitherto, to our great comfort, shot at this mark, and
some came nigh ye wight, but this has hit the prick. I mean for clear
vtteryng of the matter to our more perfect under standing, and to the plain
and brefe dissoluing, which both are given but unto few, of al such scruples,
as well that rise to the simple Christian in wayeng this doctrine, as also that
are otherwise by the malycious suggestion and craft of the truths subtle
enemies invented and forged: and to be short he has done the whole so
distinctlie, referringe al things to their peculier places, by their difference
plainly separated: yt in him, if in any man again, appears that rare
virtue, of which the wise man Socrates, as his divine scholar plato shows,
set such store, that when he met with such an one, he would make of him as of
half a god. I mean to distinct things, which gift he truly said was the
principal way to come in questyons to the fynding out of truth. In which
virtue this author not only passes the old writers, touching this matter, which
wrotte not so clearly, as our age of certain articles, because they were not
so sore darkened as a little before our time, yt they should so much need to
labor in them: but also surmou^teth the most part, that has learnedly
written at this days thereof, so that I may in manner say of him and them, as
a learned man said in comparing the two worthy philosophers, Plato and
Aristotel, together: that is to wit, yt the one set forth of his profou^d
knoweledge but little in many elegant words, and the other much in few.
Wherefore gentyl reader, if thou would gladly know the book for the
doctrynes sake, double thy diligence in reading yt attentli, playeng as the
good judge would in matters criminal: who if he gave half an ear to an ear
witness, would give the whole to an eye witness. For as thou coldst not but
profit much thereby, if yt were but a mean work: so must thou much more
profit yt being as it is: seeing a thing ons well don is twice done.

VALE.
The contents of the book.
The. 1. Chapter. The autors intent in iustificacion. The. 2. Chapter. The
significations and description of the term, justifying. The. 3. Chapter. Who
is the mediator and how he delyuereth us. The. 4. Chapter. That Christ takes
away our sins, and that so we are reconciled to god, proved by the scripture
The. 5. Chapter. Christ bears our sins, when his justice is made ours,
which is don by faith on our side. The. 6. Chapter. That the manner of
iustificacion is on our behalf by faith. The. 7. Chapter. These sayenges: we
are justified by the grace of god, or by christ's merits, or by faith: be all
one. The. 8. Chapter By faith only are we justified: which term, only, is
not of man's brain invented. The. 9. Chapter. Justification is taken from al
manner of works, whether they be of the law, or of grace. The. 10. Chapter.
Faith justifies not in yt it is a work, but in that it trusts to yt mercy
of god through Christ. The. 11. Chapter. That no man is iustyfyed by works,
whether they go before or after iustificacion, is proved by the nature of
works. The. 12. Chapter. The nature of iustifycacyon argues, that faith and
not works justify. The. 13. Chapter. Faith is not without works, but what
place they have in the church, and whence they spryng in us. The. 14. Chapter.
That we do not well, till god dwell in us to work good works in us, and how
rightwysenes is ascribed to works. The. 15. Chapter. How gods works in us are
called ours, but so yt we can challenge naught for them, but for an other
cause. The. 16. Chapter. The. 2. sorts of men, that the Apostles had to do
with, which make them seem to vary in iustificacyon. The. 17. Chapter. The
terms, rewards or merits, examined by the scripture. The. 18. Chapter. The
rule to measure good works, that they may be good indede, and not of our good
intent only. The. 19. Chapter. The exposition of the. 10. commandments,
which are the lymites of our good works. The. 20. Chapter. That ye lord
requires naught else of us but the works of the. x. commandments. The. 21.
Chapter. That the foresaid proprietes of good works are requysite indede to
works, is declared more plainly by the scripture. The. 22. Chapter. The
conclusion or peroration,
FINIS.
A godly and learned treatise, wherein is proved ye true iustificacion of a
Christian manne to come freely of the mercy of god in Christ, without the
deseruyng of man by his merits: and also how good works ought to be done
and what be true good works in deed. Whereunto is joined a conference between
the law and the gospel, very profitable for all men to exercise themselves
therein.

Esaias. xliii. I, even I am he only, who for mine own selfs sake do away
thine offenses and forget thy sins, so that I will never think upon them.
The authors intent and purpose in this matter of iustificacyon.
The. 1. Chapter.
PUrposing plainly and brefely to speak of the true justifying of a Christian
man, and as well of upright true good works, as the manner and form thereof: I
mind not to tell what disputacio^s me^ have had of the same, but what God (who
cannot lie) has uttered and spoken thereof in his word. This matter of
iustificacion I thought to serve my turn: First because that John the Apostle
and Evangelist, whom I now have in hand does in manner treat wholly thereof. Upon
whom I was persuaded to make the better declaracion, if I aforehande out of all
the scripture set a short Sum of iustificacion and of good works. Secondly,
because that in our faith and religion there is nothing, whereof we may be
ignorante with greater hurt, or that with greater profit may be known,
perceived and understand, then even the manner of iustificacion and of good
works. For iustificacion is the surest ground and establishment of our life
and welfare.

Thirdly, because this matter (being else plain and euydent) is now in our
days, through the many fold dark mystes* of contencious men, utterly confused
and clean tossed out of order. For, concerning iustificacion, diverse and
sondrye men have strange and nyce opinions. Some say still, that the faithful
are justified through the only belefe in the Lord Jesus Christ, which is a
truth in deed.

Other there be, that refuse and condemn this as an erroneous opinion, but
with great arroga^cye ascribe their iustificacyon unto men's works. Some refer
iustificacion to faith and works a like. And some there be, that unto faith
ascrybe the beginning of iustificacion, and the finishi^ge or perfourmaunce
thereof unto works. Yet have I not recyted the minds and opinions of all. But
forasmuch as there is such contencion among the learned, the peoples
consciences are thereby vexed, troubled and sore tempted.

Wherefore to establishe the Christian verite, and for an introduction into the
holy and godly gospel of John: I mind to colleete and gather together a
short Sum of the iustificacion of a Christyan manne, and concerning good
works. Nether will I here bring forth any thing at all, which I do not
declare and prove with sensible plain testimonies of gods scripture: yea and
as touching iustificacion and good works, I will collecte and confer
together nothing else, but the most evident witnesses of the scripture. So that
without the order and homely unpainted oracion, there shall be nothig mine:
nether will I compte any thing mine own but try and prove altogether by gods
word. And doutles in the most weighty matters of our Religion, we ought even so
to use our selfs.

Before al things it shall be needful, to set forth a sure description,
exposicion and significacion of this term justifying.
The. 2. Chapter.
TO justify, or this term, Justify is in the scripture taken sondrie ways.
For sometime it signifies to ascribe honor and right unto god, to yield unto
him: stowtlie and boldly to confess, that he only is rightuous, but we our
selves sinners and unjust. Thus is it red: And all the people and the Luke. 7.
publicanes, that heard him, justified god, and were baptized and the baptisine
of Ihon.

More over, it signifies as much, as to defend and spare himself, and to set
forth himself for just and ryghteous. For so the Lord uses it when he
rebukes ye Pharisees, Luke. 16. saying unto the^. Ye are they, that justify
youreselues Luke. 16.
before men, but god knows your hearts.

Notwithstanding in this our present matter, I use this term (Justify) as the
custom is in causes judicial and belonging to the law. And so does it betoken
as much, as to pronounce him just and righteous, that is, to discharge from
punishment, and by sentence to clear and quite him free, which is accused and
required to have execucion. Again contrary unto this does the scripture now
set that, which is called to pollute or stayne: that is, by sentence to
pronounce one defiled, ungodly, unrighteous and worthy to be plaged, and so
to give him over to be punished.

For it is red thus: If there be Deu. 25.
a strife between men, they shall come to the law: and let ye judges give
sentence between them, and justify the rightuous, and condemn the ungodly.
What can this be else, but even as much as to say: Let them discharge and
quite free the rightuous, and judge the unrighteous to be punished. For Esaye
in the fifth Chapter says Esaias. 5.
yet more plainly thus: they justify the ungodly for rewards sake, but
condemn the just cause of the ryghteous.

Which is even as much to say as: the righteous do not they de clare to be
righteous, neither deliver they him from the vilanye and wrong of the unjust:
but take rewards and gifts, and leave him to the wilfulnes of violent
oppressors. Here unto serves it that is writ in the proverbs of Solomon
the 17. chapter: The Pro. 17.
lord hates as well him that justifies the ungodly, as him that condemns
the innocent. Item that, out of the. 12. of Matthew: Out of thy words thou
shall be justified, Math. 12.
and out of thy words thou shalt be condemned.

Of the word Justify, comes the word iustificacion or justifying.
Iustificacion.
And the same is a judicial term in the scripture. For iustificacion is the
declaracion of the judge, who pronounces sentence for the accused: that is,
discharges and quyteth him free from ye accusacio^ and threatened punishment.
Iustificacio^ therefore is nothing else, but a discharge, delyueraunce and
restitucion from death to life.

Hereof is righteousness called a discharge and pardon from sin: And they be
the rightuous, whose sins are forgeuen, and which, being a quyted from death,
are become hieres of eternal life. The Apostle Paul therefore, more
Iustificacion is remission and rede^pcion.
then in one place, does expound Iustificacio^, by ye name of rede^pcion and
remission of sins: For ye which cause he sets them both together, yt one
may be understood by another. For in yt Acts of ye Apostles he says: Be it
known unto you therefore, ye men and brethren, Acts. 13.
yt through this man (namely Christ) is preached unto you forgeuenes of sins,
and that by him all, that believe, are justified from al things, from which you
could not be justified by the law of Moses. And to ye Romans he Roma. 4.
says: even as David also descrybeth the salvation of that man, unto whom god
imputes right ousnes without works. Blessed Psalm. 32.
are they (says he) whose vnrighteousnesses are forgeuen, and whose sins
are covered. Blessed is that man, unto whom the Lord will not impute sin.

Behold now, how he joins and knytteth iustificacion, blessedfulnes (or
salvation) and remyssyon of sins together. So does Esaye also in manner with
Esaias. 53.
more plain words in the. 53. Chapter, saying: my ryghtuous servant shall
with his knowledge (or with the knowledge of him) justify the multitude: for
he shall bear away their sins. For this last: he shall bear away their
sins: does in manner expound that, which goes beforewyth his knowledge, or
with the knowledge of him, shall he justify and deliver the multitude. Thus he
declares, that iustificacyon is nothing else but remyssion of sins. For when
the lord takes away our wyckednes, he justifies us.

To iustifye therefore and to bear sin away, to deliver from sin or to
forgive sin, is all one matter. So that we lack now no more but to say:
iustyfycacion is the remission of sins and the discharge from damnacyon, the
deliverance, I say, and forgeuenes of sin: yea even the receiving up of a
sinner into the grace of god, and inherytaunce of life. Wherefore when the
questyon is The form fashion and manner of ye mediacyon and iustificacion.
asked concerning the true iustificacyon of man: undoubtedly it is demanded,
what that may be, for whose sake or by who^ sinners are discharged from the
threatened and deserved death, or by whose means our sins are forgeuen us.
Or: Wherein is the world reconcyled with god: And so in these points consists
the whole knowledge of our iustificacion, that when we have known the
mediator and redemer, the fourm and manner of the redemption, ye fashion and
mean also whereby the delyueraunce comes unto us and is given us: the
iustificacion of a Christian man may likewise be understand.

Uvhat is to be held of ye mediator, as who he is: and the manner of
iustificacion, as how he delyuereth us.
The. 3. Chapter.
BUt to the intent y^ no dark nor doubtful thing remain in any man's mind: I
will first declare, what is to be holden of the Mediator or intercessor, and
what the manner of iustificacion is. All this will I set forth before men's eyes,
yt every one may vewe and se it: Namely, y^ Christ Jesus is y^ same, for
whose sake the father is pacified and contented: In such forte, yt he imputes
not sin unto us, but co^pteth us righruous and just. For Christ has take our
sins upon him self, satisfied for them with his innocent death, and has
given us his own righteousness. Then will I show, how we beco^e partakers of
this righteousness. For in this matter must special respect be had to these two
points: Namely, who is ye mediator and redemer of ye damned and how he has
delivered the^: yt is, after what sort we become pertakers of the redemption
and iustificacion, or how the deliverance extends to our commodite and
welfare. To speak of the first, imagen thou now by thy self, that god, the
righteous judge of all, sits upon his iudycyall Throne, before who^ stand al
me^ and before accused as ungodly and unfaithful, stained and defiled with al
vices, and are conuicte of the same, by mea^es whereof, the sentence of
condemnacion is called for and required. The men have utterly nothing, whereby
to excuse themselves, nether is there aught else to look for, but that they
altogether shall be carried forth and hurled away to damnacyon and eternal
death. Nevertheless in this greatest and final danger, there appears to the
most woofull mankind, an exceadyng great hope: namelye the eternal son of
god, who to be arbiter and mediatoure between god and man, and to deliver the^
from destruction, that were condemned unto death: took our flesh upon him,
and became very man, to the entente that he, being tormented and sufferynge
death, might also lade our sins upon him, and with his innocent death to take
away our gyltines, purginge our sins with his blood, and making us heirs of
eternal life.

With this ensample, I think it evidently enough uttered and declared, what the
mediator is and what is iustificacion. I suppose also, every man does well
perceive and understand, that Christ the mediator, and the in carnacyon with
the cross of the Lord Jesus, is eue^ the same right principal point and only
cause, whereby we are justified and made rightuous.

But here might an unreasonable and unequal hearer or reader cry against me
and say: Thou shuldst bide by thy promise, bringinge forth gods scripture, and
not ymagined ensamples. For at the first thou did promise a pure and sincere
conference of ye scriptures: but now, forgettinge thy self, thou hold the
simple up with bare ensampls. Answer. I am nothing at all ashamed, to speak
after the property of the eternal majesty of god. Now does yt holy scripture
yet set forth such sunilitudes and figures unto us. For it brings god in as a
judge, before whose presence there goes forth a consumynge fire, Before god is
no man justified. Psalm. 5.
and in whose sight the guilty is not excused. Here unto serves it that David
writes: For thou art the god, that has no pleasure in wickedness, nether shall
any evil dwell with the. Such, as be foolish, shall not stand in thy sight:
for thou hate al them that work vanity. Thou shall destroy them that
speak lesyngs: the lord will abhor both the blood thirsty and disceatfull
man. This same David likewise, remembryng the accusacyon and accused, says
moreover: The Psa. 14. 53.
lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were any,
that would understand, and seek after God. But they were al gone out of the way,
they altogether became abominable: there was none ye did good, no not one. And
this testymony of the Prophet David is rehearsed again of S. Paul in ye third
chapter to the Romans. Roma. 3.
Again the same royal Prophet himself, making mencio^ of the judge, the
judgment and da^nacyon, says thus: Enter not into Psalm. 143.
judgment with thy servant, O lord: for in thy sight shall no man living be
justified. Ite^: if thou, Psalm. 130.
Lord, wilt be extreme to mark what is done amysse, O Lord, who may abide
it? Holy Job Job. 9.
also says: I know and am suer it is true, that a man, compared unto god,
cannot be justified. If he would argue with him, he might not answer him unto
one among a thousand.

If I would justify my self, mine own mouth should condemn me etc. Thus in
my forere cited ensample, I have brought forth nothing, that is strange, or
not co^sonaunt to the scripture. As concerning the mediatoure and redemer, our
Lord Jesus Christ, the manner also and measure of the Mediacyon and redemption,
whereof I have spoken somewhat before: the scripture expresses altogether so
plainly and perfectly, yt doubtless whosoever ever would deny the same, must needs
be such an one, as has never red the scripture.

But for as much as the right sure point of our iustificacyon lies in this,
which I have proponed out of the scripture, that our Lord Jesus Christ,
being the mediator, has laid upon himself the giltines of all such, as
were condemned, making satysfactyon for them with his own body upon the tree of
the cross, and washyng them away with his blood: namelye, in that he has
iustifid, absolved and quite discharged us, which were damned unto death: And
in that god, receauynge us unto grace, has judged and pronounced us just and
rightuous for his sake. Therefore mind I now to confirm ye same, proving and
declaryng it with strong, sure and euydente testimonies of holy scripture.

That Christ / our mediator, has taken upon him our sins: and that
therefore god has received us into grace, is proved out of scripture.
The. 4. Chapter.
Esaias, the chief among the most holy witnesses, in ye liii. chapter alone
geuethe us eight testimonies. The first is this: he only has taken Esa. 53.
on him our infirmites, and borne our pains.

And immediately after: whereas he yet was wounded for our offenses, and smitten
for our wickedness.

This is even as much, as if he said thus: we through our sins deserved
stripes and wounds, sicknesses and pains: But all these has ye lord laid
upon him, to discharge us of those griefs.

The second testimonye: For the punishment of our correction was laid upon
him, and with his strypes are we healed. Lo, y^ punishment, that belonged unto
us, was laid upon him, and with his strypes are we made whole. The third: As
for us, we al have gone astraie like sheep, every one has turned his own
way, but the lord has heaped together upon him the iniquity of us.

That is to say: that Whereas no man might be saved by his own virtue, the
Lord, having compassyon upon the miserye of man, has, of his mere goodness,
given his own son: that he taking upon him the sins of us all, paying our
ransom and satisfyeng for us, might also make us partakers of his
rightwisnes. The fourth: He was cut of from the ground of the living. Which
punishment did go upon him for the transgression of my people. The Lord was
unguilty, and therefore suffered he for our sins which he took away.

The fifte: Yet pleased it the lord thus to bruise him with plages, and to smite
him with infirmite: that when he had made his soul (or life) an offering for
sin, he might see a long lastyng sede. The offering for sin, has he here
taken for the sufficient reco^ciliacion and obteyning of grace for all sins.

The sixte: for he shall bear away their sins. Hereof doubtless is it thought,
that John the Baptist took this his excellent sentence: behold the lamb of
John. 1.
god, that bears or takes away the sin of the world. Assuredli out of this
place of the Prophet Esaias, did holy S. Peter speak in his Epistle, saying:
which his 1. Peter. 2.
own self bare our sins in his body on the tree.

The seventh accords with the Sixte: who yet shall take or bear away the
sins of many: namely, of the whole multitude, doubtless even of faithful
beleuers.

The eight testimonye concludes this present matter: and he made i^tercessio^
for the misdoers. That is, he sets himself between god and men, in that he,
taking upon him our sins, satisfied ye justice of god forth same, and has
made us partakers of his own righteousness.

The second witness, holy S. Paul, ye elect vessel of god, speaks Roma. 8.
very plainly: Who shall lay any thing to the charge of gods Chosen? It is god
that justifies: Who is he that can condemn? It is Christ which dyed, yea
rather which is risen again: which is also on the right hand of god, and makes
intercession for us.

Here thou hear, that we are justified by the intercession and mediacion of
our lord Jesus. S. Paul says moreover: For god was in Christ, and made
agreement 2. Cor. 9.
between ye world and himself, and i^puted not their sins unto the^.

And immediatlye after he says: For he made him to be sin for us, which
knew no sin: yt we by his means should be y^ righteousness, which before god
is allowed. Doubtless even yt we (through him) having portion and feloshippe in
gods true righteousness, might altogether be reputed and compted rightuous
before god. Whereunto that also agrees whereof ye same Paul makes mention with
these words: But are Roma. 3.
justified frelie by his grace, through ye Redemption yt is in Christ Jesus, whom
god has set forth to be the obteyner of mercy, through faith in his blood etc.
Likewise to ye Galathians: Christ has delivered us from ye curse of the law,
Gal. 3.
in as much as he beca^e a curse for us, that the blessinge of Abraham might
come among the Gentiles in Christ Jesus.

Now let the third witness come forth, even Ihon, the son of thonder, and
dearly beloved disciple of the Lord, who in his Epistle says with express
words after this manner: and the blood of Jesus Christ his son John. 1.
cleanses us from all sin. And afterward he says: and if any man John. 2,
sin, we have an advocate with god, even Jesus Christ the righteous, and he
it is, that obteineth grace for our sines: not for our only, but also for the
sins of the whole world.

If all truth now shall stand in the mouth of two or three, then will no man (I
trust) from hence forth deny, that Jesus Christ is our righteousness, that we
are justified by the blood of Jesus Christ, that the death of ye lord Jesus
Christ is it, by means whereof sinners are delivered from death, that our
sins are pardoned and forgeuen us for Chrysts sake, and that in him we are
reconcyled with God the father: who for the ryghtuousnesse sake of his
anointed, which he has given us, does compte us ryghtuous, being of our
selves void of all ryghtuousnes.

Unto these very plain testymonyes, comes this also, that descended from the
excellent glory out of heaven, even the sentence of god upon the Lord Jesus,
when he went up from the Baptyme, with these words: This Math. 3.
is my dear son, in whom I delight, and in whom I am pacyfyed.

And Paul to the Colossyans says: for it pleased the father, yt Colos. 1.
in him should dwell al fulness, and by him to reconcyle al things unto
himself, and to set at peace by him, through the blood of his cross, both
things in heaven, and things in earth etc. To this agrees also that, which
he says to the Ephesians with these words: He (namely the father of our
lord Jesus Christ) ordained Ephe. 1.
us before, through Jesus Christ, to be heirs unto himself, acordinge to the
good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his grace, wherewith he
has made us accepted through the beloved: By whom we have redemption through his
blood, even the forgyuenes of sins, acording to the riches of his grace etc.

Out of all this I conclude, that a Christian man is justified through Christ,
and reconcyled with god the father: even by him; who with his blood has
cleansed us from sin, delivered us from ye power of the deuel and of darkness,
restored us unto life with his own death, and made us heirs with him in
eternal life.

And for all this now, yet does not the scripture speak against itself sayi^g:
A Christian man is justified by ye grace of god: for Christ the anointed of the
lord is the free gift of god, and the fullness of all grace, for as much as
Ihon says: We al, taking out of the fulness of Christ, have received John. 1.
grace for grace. For the law was given by Moses, but grace and truth comes
by Jesus Christ, who is full of grace and verity.

Christ bears our sins, and by his stripes we are healed, when his justice
is made ours: which is done by faith on our side.
The. 5. Chapter.
THis hitherto have I spoken in general, concerni^g the manner of
iustificacio^: that is, how and after (...) what sort the sentence of
damnacyon, given of god upon al mankind, is hyndered: how they, that were
condemned, be delivered, How we be made partakers of the righteousness of
Christ.
and reconcyled again with god through Christ.

But yet have I spoken nothing of the law, how the righteousness of Christ is
become ours, or how we be partakers of this redempcyon.

For there be many, which, understanding Christ to be a medyatour, do not yet
believe, that he is also their mediatoure with god the father. And so the
strength and virtue of the Mediacyon does not profit them. Hereby may we
perceive, that the manner of iustyficacyon is not fully fynished and
performed, wha^ we have gotten only some knowledge of the mediator and
intercessor, unless we also know, and be suere through faith, that Christ is
our mediator, yea in every point ours all together, and yt therefore al his
gifts and goods ar our own.

Therefore hereafter have I noted specially, how the Reconciliacion and
iustificacio^, wrought by Jesus Christ, is become ours: And what it is, yt
makes us partakers of the redemption or righteousness of Christ: so that now
the Lord Jesus has not only suffered death, but dyed even for us, washed
away our sins with his blood, justified us and made us rightuous: Yea so has
he justified us, that we now, being absolved from our sins, and delivered
from damnacion, are assuredly become inheritours of all the goods of Christ,
namely of true righteousness and eternal life. Her I speak openly, playnlie
and symplie: We are become partakers of Christ by only faith, that is, by trust
and belefe on ye By faith are we justified not by bare knowledge but by sted
fast belefe in Christ.
lord Jesus Christ. And even therefore is it, that the prophets and Apostles
have said so evidently, that men are justified by faith: Item that Christ
justifies through faith. For such saienges express this meaning and
understanding: namely, that Christ gives unto us his own righteousness: that
is, he forgeueth us our sins, he delyuereth us from damnacion, and makes us
partakers of eternal life: Not for any work or deseruyng of us but of his
own pure grace and merit through faith: In who^ we hold and believe us to be
accepted, not for ours;elfes or for our own works, but for Christ's sake. Whom
the father of al grace and mercy has given us for a pledge and assurau^ce, yt
we shall live in his name.

That the manner of reconciliacion through christ is on our side by faith.
The 6. Chapter.
IT is not my desire to be credited herin, unless I defend with very plain
and evident scriptures yt, which I have taken in hand. Now have I said, that
Christ justifies us by faith: that is, through steadfast belefe is the
righteousness of Christ given unto us. This did the prophet Esaye establishe
before with Esa. 53.
sensible words, saye^ge: my rightuous servant (namely Christ ye lord) shall
with his knowledge, or with the knowledge of him, justify the multitude. Behold
how he says, my rightuous servant shall justify the multitude, church or
congregation, and that through ye knowledge of him. Now is it certain and sure,
that the knowledge of him signifies the knowledge of Christ: even ye science, no
doubt, whereby true faith knows him, confesses him, and poynteth unto him.
This is therefore the prophet Esays doctrine, or rather gods: that Christ through
faith justifies those that be his. After Esaye does the prophet Abacuc Abac.
2.
speak, sayi^ge: The just and rightuous shall live in his faith and beleffe.
Which sentence holy S. Paul Tim. 1. Gala. 3. Hebr. 10
used not only one time, to prove by this testimonye, as with it which is
most evident, ye all beleuers are justified and made living by faith. S. Ihon
also, speaking of the lord in his gospel, John. 1.
says thus: He came among his own, and his own received him not. But as
many as received him, to them gave he power to be the sons of god, even them
that believed on his name. Lo now, what could more sensibly have been spoke? As
many, as receive Christ, are gods children: but they that believe, receive
Christ: therefore through belief become we undoubtedly the children of god,
just and rightuous, blessed and saved. And in the gospel of Iho^ says our
lord Jesus Christ himself: Verily, verelie I say John. 5.
unto you: He, that hears my word, and believes on him that sent me, has
everlasting life, and shall not come in to damnacio^, but is escaped from death
unto life. And again: This is the will of him which sent me, that who soever
John. 6.
seyth the son, and believes on him, have everlasting life, and I will raise
him up at the last dai. Hereof comes it also, that this Apostle in his epistle
says very evidently: if we receive the witness of men, the witness of god 1.
John. 5.
is greater. For this is ye witness of god, which he has testified of his
son: Who so believes on the son of god, has gods witness in him. But who
so believes not, has made him a liar, because he has not believed the witness,
which god has testified in his son. And this is ye testimonye, that god has
given us eternal life, and this life is in his son.

Whosoever has the son of god, has life: He that has not ye son of god, has
not life.

Here we se clearlie, yt the son of god is had and possessed through faith:
and in the son assuredlye righteousness, all good things and eternal life.
Therefore must it needs be true, that we are justified by faith. Now says ye
Apostel Paul also very distinctlie: The righteousness of god is declared without
the law, for as much Roma. 3.
as it is allowed by ye testimony of ye law and of ye prophets. The
righteousness of God comes by the faith of Jesus Christ unto al and upon al
them, yt believe. And in the tenth chapter: Christ Roma. 10.
is ye end, or fulfilling, of ye law to justify al yt believe. Finally while
Paul and Silas lay at Philippis in prison for Christ's name sake, and the
keeper of the prison asked: Act. 16.
good syrs, what must I do to be saved? They answered him: Believe in the Lord
Jesus Christ, so shall both you and thy household be saved. By this now I
suppose it evidently enough proved, that we be justified by faith: Namely that
unto us through faith is given righteousness, with the merits of Christ.

These sayings: we are justified by the grace of god, or by Christ's merits, or
by faith, vary not.
The. 7. Chapter.
NEther can I think, that any man, which is but a little exercised in holy
scripture, will stomble or be offended at such kind and manner of speech: We are
justified through the grace of god, or horow the merits of Christ, we are
justified by faith on the lord Jesus: as though they any where did not agree,
or ascrybed Iustificacion to unlike things. For they are all one in effect,
ascrybing iustificacion to the only mercy of god, to whom only the
prophets and Apostles directed all their understanding and meditacion. These,
as often as they looked behind the^ to the fountain and well spring of
iustificacion, said, that men are justified through the grace of god. But when
they had pondered and considered the mercy pledge, and him, by who^ we are
justified, they said: We are made rightuous by Christ. And when they called to
remembrance it, whereby we become partakers of grace and of Christ, they said,
that we are justified by faith.

Nether were they for all this careful, that their sayenges should not agree
together and serve the matter: As some curious bodies Sharp disputacions of
this matter.
do sharply dispute: Namely, whether faith be righteousness, or an instrument
and mean to beco^e partakers of righteousness: whether it be an instrument to
receive, or a thing where through righteousness is poured in as through a tonnell:
Or whether it be the righteousness itself etc. After this sort is man's
understanding occupied, but what avails it unto true godliness? The holy
Apostles, who alwaie studied simplicity with playnesse, they distinctly
express and declare, that god, the grace of god, Christ and faith justifies.
Ite^ that by grace, by christ and by faith we are justified. Which symplicitie
I, myndinge to follow, leave such subtle curiosity unto others.

By faith only are we justified, which term, only, is not of man's brain
invented.
The 8. Chapter.
ANd where as I have already added there unto: We are justified only by
faith for Christ's sake, and not for our works: the sa^e have I not le^t of
mine own, but taken it out of the holy scripture. For the son of god, Jesus
Christ, says in the gospel: Except ye eat the flesh of ye son John. 6.
of man and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. Lo, the only eating of
the flesh, and drinking of the blood of Christ, makes us lyuinge: nether is
there any thingels in ye whole world, that gives life. Now what it is to eat
the flesh of Christ, he declares immediately in ye same chap. saying: Verelie
verily I say unto you: Who so believes on me, has everlasting life. Item: He,
that comes unto me, shall not ho^ger: And he that believes on me, shall never
be a thirst. Here should he have said: He, that drynketh me, shall never
thirste: but in the place of this word, drink, he has set, believe. Therefore
to eat and drink here, is nothing else but to believe. So then if we believe not
that the son of god was given for us unto death, we can never live: Ergo
faith it is that makes lyuinge. With this evangelist agrees Paul also,
saie^g: we know Gala. 2.
that a man is not justified by the deeds of the law, but by ye faith of Jesus
Christ, And we have believed on Jesus Christ, yt we might be justified by the
faith of Christ, and not by the works of the law. For in that he says: A
man can not be justified but by the faith of Christ, what gives he with this
saying else to understand, but that a man must be justified by the only faith
of Christ or in Christ? For in Gene. Gene. 43.
Joseph said unto his brethren: look that ye se not my face, except your
yo^gest brother be with you. And in the book of Numerus, the Number. 11.
people complained, whyninge against god, and saienge: Our eyes se nothing but
this Manna. And in the same book says Balaam: Nume. 23.
Must not I keep that and speak it, which the lord has put in my mouth? In
Deuteronomy Deuteronomy. 10.
says Moses also: And now Israel, what does ye lord thy god require of the,
but to fear the lord thy god, and to walk in all his ways: And Paul himself
to the Romans uses ye same manner of speech when he says: there is no power
but of god. Item in Roma. 13.
ye first epistle to the Corinthia^s: Even so knows no man what is in god,
but the sprite of god. And 1. Cor. 2.
again: I showed not my self forth among you, that I knew any thing, save
only Jesus christ, that was crucified.

These, and such like sentences innumerable in the scripture, signify nothing
else, then if thou should say: This only point shall open you the entrance
unto me again, if ye bring your yongeste brother with you: Our eyes see but
only Manna, and nothing else: Only that, which ye lord commits unto me,
may I do and speak: This only requires the lord of the, yt thou love
him: All power is only of god: Only gods sprite knows the things that are
in god: I have compted my self to know only Christ, that was crucified.

Seeing the^ it is thus undoubtedly, and no man can deny it to be most
evidently spoken also of Christ and Paul, namely, that no man is made living,
just or rightuous but by faith: It is much to be wo^dred, that certain famous
men, which will be reputed to be syngularly learned, braule and chyde so
veheme^tlie against us, for that we say, we are justified only by faith.

For Christ and Paul have spoken so before. Why go they not to rebuke the^, if
they think them to have failed therein? We speak but as we have learned out
of the^: the sense and meaning of our doctrine we find in them.

For very childish is it, yt they obiecte: Namely, that this word, only or
alone, is not added of them. For this is even one thing, as if a scholar would
think the scholmaster had not given him leave to go forth, when he had asked
him: Sir give ye me leave to go? And he made him answer, I give: And did not
expreslie say after the common manner: Yea. For either of both the saie^ges
gives one understanding. Even so, wha^ thou say: we know that no man is
justified but by faith: Or, we know that a man is justified only by faith:
The saienges are all one, and mean one thing. And wha^ it is said, that a man
is justified by faith not by works, is it not even as much, as to give evident
testimonye, that a man is justified only by faith? The Apostle says: they
are made rightuous Roma. 3.
frelie (or for naught) by his grace But how can any thing be don frelie or
for naught, that is done for reward or worker Doubtless if we be justified
frelie through the grace of Christ, then is it not done by works. For in the
xi. chapter also says this Apostle: If it be of grace, the^ is it not now of
works: for else grace then is no more grace. but if it be of works, then is it
now no grace: for else were deserving then no more deseruyng. Therefore in the
most assured truth we knowledge, and be steadfastly persuaded, that a Christian
man is justified by the help and mynistracion of only faith. Faith stands
or leaves upon the grace of god, and not upon man's strength. But unto god it
ascribes altogether, as I will shortly declare hereafter at large.

Iustificacion is taken not only from works of the law, but also from all
manner of works, as from faith in yt it is a work.
The. 9. Chapter.
IN ye fore recyted cap. co^cludth the holy Apostle the whole matter of
iustificacion, thus: We hold therefore, that a man is justified Roma. 3.
by faith without the works of ye law. And in ye fourth chapt. he declares
evidently, that righteousness is imputed unto us by faith, not by works
(meaning not only the works of the law, but all manner of works) acordinge
as he says also to the Ephesians: By grace are ye saved through faith, and
that not of your Ephe. 2.
selves. It is the gift of god, and comes not of works, least any man should
boast himself. For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good
works, which god ordained, yt we should walk in them.

By grace (says he) are ye preserved or saved (assuredly justified) through
faith. For faith apprehends and lays sure hold upon grace. And to the
intent that no body here should ascribe aught to the strength of man, he adds:
And that not of your selves. For nether grace nor faith comes of you. What
then? upon yt he adds immediately: It is the gift of god (undoubtedly that we
are justified, and also that we believe) Yea he sets yet one thing to it: Not
of works, lest any man should boast himself. For in the prophet Jeremy also
the lord will not, that any man Iere. 9. Esa. 65.
glory or rejoice, save only in his mercy. Yet there folowth a cause: We are
his woorkemanship etc. Why would earth and claye then lift up it self against
the potter, of whom he has, what he is and has? And so this place does
evidently ascribe iustificacion unto faith, and takes it from works.

Faith justifies not in yt it is a work, but in that it trusts to the
mercy of god through Christ.
The 10. Chapter
ALl this shall be yet more plain, and more perfectly understand and known, when
I shall show, that this justifying faith holds and believes, yt we are
accepted unto the lord, not for our selves, or for our own works, but for
Christ's sake: That is, faith trusts not unto works or deseruinges, but to
the promise of god, and to the merits of Christ our lord. Therefore when Paul
says to the Romans, Roma. 3.
that Christ our lord is of god set forth unto the world, to be ye mercy seat
or reconcyler through faith in his blood: he teaches and declares evidently,
yt faith trusts unto ye blood, that is unto the death, merits and redemption
of Jesus Christ. And treating largely and perfectly of this matter in the
fourth chapter, he writes thus: Nevertheless it is not written only for him
(namely Abraham) that it was rekened unto him for righteousness, But also for
us, to who^ it shall be so co^pted, if we likewise believe on him, that raised up
Jesus our lord from the dead: which was delivered up for our sins, and
raised again for our iustificacio^.

With these words he shows us two things: The one, that faith is compted
unto us for righteousness: The other, that ye same faith leans and trusts
upon the lord Jesus Christ, who dyed for us and was raised up again. That is,
faithful beleuers co^pte themselves rightuous and justified, because they
understand by faith, that Christ dyed for them, to take a way their sins:
And that he was afterward raised up again, to make them lyuinge, for whom he
had paid the rawnsome, and reconcyled them.

And in the tenth chapter of Roma. 10.
this epistle, when Paul holds and compares the righteousness of the law and
the righteousness of faith together, the one against the other, he declares
playnlie, that the righteousness of the law trusts unto works, but ye
righteousness of faith trusts unto Christ. For faith says thus: The word is
nere unto the, even in thy mouth and in thine heart. Then adds he thereto: This
is ye word of faith which we preach, namelye: if thou confess Jesus with thy
mouth, that he is the lord, and beleuest in thine heart, that god raised him up
from the deed, thou shall be saved. For to believe with the heart, justifies:
and to confess with the mouth, saves. For ye scripture says. Who soever
believes on him, shall not Esai. 28.
be confunded. Therefore is it no maruaill, that this Apostle, writing Philip. 3.
to ye Philippia^s, reputeth al things but loss, for the excellency of y^
knowledge of Jesus Christ, and judges them but vile: desyringe to win Christ,
and to be found in him, not to have his own righteousness of the law, but
rather that righteousness, which comes by the faith of Jesus Christ. Which
things afterward immediatlye he sets in ye true knowledge of Christ's
death and resurrection.

Here unto (I suppose) serves specially the very plain argument of this
Apostle, when he says: If the inheritance should Gala. 3.
come by the law, the^ were it not given by promise: But god gave it frelie
unto Abraham by promise. The word of promise is this: In thy sede etc. For the
salvation sets he upon one only, and not in many. Now if the inheritance
and blessinge were set in many, then should it be given for ye works sake: But
we all are blessed and saved in one, and by one. For as Roma. 5.
the curse, by the sin of one, reached over all men unto condemnacion: Even
so, by the righteousness of one, reaches the gift or blessing upon al men to
ye iustificacion of life. For as much now as the blessing, righteousness and
redemption, is in the word of truth ascribed only unto christ, and seeinge
our faith is directed straight upon him: every faithful beleuer does well
understand, ye he is accepted unto god through Christ, not for his own self or
for his works sake. For god did chose and ordeyne us before, because he would
accept us for his Ephe. 1.
own children through Ihesus Christ in him self, acording to ye good pleasure
of him self, to the praise of the (...) of his grace: whereby he has accepted
us in ye beloved, in whom we have rede^pcion through his blood: namely ye
forgeuenes of sins, out of the riches of his grace, which he has poured
upon us. Hereunto also belongs it, that the Apostle says: faith comes by
hearing Romans 10.
and hearing comes by the word of god.

For immediatlye thereupon, does the holy Apostle Paul add out of the Psalm:
Verelye their Psalm. 19.
sound went out into all lands, and their words unto the ends of the world.
With all these most strong testimonies of the scripture, I have undoubtedly
gotten the justifying faith, confidence and trust: that we are reconciled and
accepted unto god, not by means of our selves or our own works, either of the
law^^ of grace, but for Christ and ^^ merits sake. For faith standing fast,
trusts and leans upon ye true promise of god, even upon the lord christ, and
not upon any of our works. Therefore is iustificacio^ referred unto faith,
because that what soever belongs to salvation and righteousness, faith
ascribes it al to ye grace of god in Christ. And thus by the nature of
iustifyinge faith, I have showed, that only faith justifies: now will I also
declare out of the nature or property of men's works, that they do not
justify.

That no man is justified by works, is proved by the nature of works, whether
they be before or after iustificacion.
The. 11. Chapter.
WHat the works of man's nature be (namely ye works that are done by such, as
are not yet regenerate) the lord him self in the gospel declares, and
says: That, which is borne of flesh, is flesh. Paul also, John. 1.
speaking of the flesh, says: To be fleshly minded (or the mind Roma. 8.
and will of the flesh) is death, and enemitie against god: for it, na^elie the
flesh, and ye inclinacion of the flesh, is not obedient to ye law of god,
nether can be. For Ephe. 2. Deu. 27. Gala. 3.
we all by nature are children of wrath. Now is every one cursed, that abides
not in all things, which are written in the book of the law. So far
therefore, ar our own natural works from justifying any man, that they
rather condemn.

Moreover of the works of the law has Paul the elect vessel spoken thus:
we know that whatsoever the law says, it says it unto Roma. 2.
such as are under ye law: that al mouths may be stopte, and that all the
wholle world may be detter unto god, because that by the deeds of the law no
flesh is justified in his sight. He says also else where: I refuse not the
grace of god. For if righteousness Gala. 2.
come by the law, then dyed Christ in vain. And yet more playnlie: If there
had been mynistred Gala. 3.
a law, which could have given life, then no doubt righteousness should come by
the law. But the scripture has shut up all under sin, that by faith in
Jesus Christ the promise might be given to those, that believe.

Now come we to the works Works of faith and grace.
of faith or of grace, which be called good works, and works of righteousness.
These (say they) these justify. Answer. If they be good works, and works
of righteousness, then must they needs be wrought by good and rightuous people.
Wherout it follows that the works go after righteousness, and not before
iustificacion: for they are done by those, that be rightuous or justified.
Whefore if they first follow after, then make they no man rightuous: but faith
it is that justifies. And such, as be rightuous themselves, do work
righteousness or yt works of righteousness. For it is written: The rightuous shall
live Abac. 2. Romans 1. Hebr. 10 a. 3.
by his faith. And again: who so applies himself unto righteousness, the same
is rightuous and just. Thus is faith the ground and just occasion of virtue,
and goes before the works of righteousness, of faith and of grace, nether is
it first made out of works.

If thou be not satisfied here The ungodly and ipocrites.
with, the^ let us set this co^sideracion before us not after ye things, but
after the persons: Thus: They, that work or do the deeds, be either ungodly
wicked people and ypocrytes, or else they be godly, rightuous and holy friends
of god. No man (by the grace of god) will ascribe iustificacion to the works
of the ungodly and ypocrites, for as much as it is written: The lord hates the
sacrifices Pro. 15. 21,
of the ungodly. And again: The ypocryts hope shall Job. 8.
come to naught, his confidence shall be destroyed, and his trust shall be a
spyders web, he shall lean upon his house, but it shall not stand and he shall
hold him fast by it, but yet shall it not endure. And before him (namelye
before GOD) may no ypocryte stand. As for ye godly (of whom it is written:
Ye are whashe^, ye are sanctified, ye 1. Cor. 6.
are justified by the name of the lord Jesus, and by the sprete of god) they
ascrybe their virtue and righteousness unto god and unto The holy and regenerate
gods sprete, by whom they know they are sanctified, and that they now may do
and perform holy and good works. And also they feel in their sanctified
flesh, namely in themselves, there remains and works, through out their
whole life, so great weakness and feebleness, that they dare not ascrybe any
iustificacion not unto the works, that are done by faith in holiness. Hereof
might I bring forth many records. Yet will I allege only two. First the^
let Job, the most faithful servant of god, come forth: For him Job. 1.
has the godly sentence commended and praised unto us, that he was a perfect
and just man, such one as feared god, and eschued evil and that there was none
like him upon earth. And yet the same man, being with so excellent a titell of
righteousness commended unto us, does say: If I will justify myself, mine own
mouth Job. 9.
shall condemn me. If I will put forth myself for a perfect man, he shall
prove me a wicked doer. And again: If I have done wickedly, Job. 10.
woe unto me. And though I have do^e rightuouslie, yet dare I not lift up my
head. Therefore is it certain, that this most holy and just man did ascribe
nothing to the fruits of his own righteousness, but trusted only upon ye mercy
of god. Now let the other witness come forth, even Paul ye Apostel, who says
with sensible words: I delight in the law of god after the inward man: But
Roma. 7.
in my membre I se another law, which rebellein against the law of my mind and
subdueth me to the law of sin, which is in my members. The holy Apostle
speaking of himself, and of all such as be regenerate, testifies, that in
them abide still yt remnauntes of the flesh: by the nature, power and force
whereof, it comes to pas through out the wholle life of man, that they also do
the thing which they themselves would not: And therefore are they never able to
attain and come to true perfectnes, so long as they live upon earth and in this
flesh.

For as much then as it is so, every man seith well, that iustificacion is not to
be imputed unto the works of faith or of such as be regenerate, consydering
that it must be athinge most pure and thoroughly perfect, whereby god is pacified
and pleased with us. Yea the scripture gives evident witness, that eue^
Abraham, the Abraham.
father of all faithful beleuers, was not justified by the works of faith.
Hereof then may we be bold to conclude, that we also by no works of faith are
justified. For thus Paul argues: if Abraham were justified by works, the^
Roma. 4.
has he whereof to rejoice, but not with god. But what says ye scripture:
Abraham believed god, and it was compted unto him for righteousness. To him that
goes about with works, is the reward not rekened of grace, but of duty.
To him that goes not about with works, but believes on him that justifies
ye ungodly, is his faith co^pted for righteousness. Where as we now by the
ensample of Abraham do conclude, yt we must be justified in such like pure
manner as he was, we speak it not of our own ymaginacio^, but out of the words
of S. Paul, that says: Nevertheless it is not written Roma, 4,
only for him, that it was rekened unto him for righteousness, but also for
us: to whom it shall be so compted, if we likewise believe on him, that raised up
Jesus our lord from the deed.

The nature of justification argues, that faith and not works justify.
The. 12. Chapter.
NOw like as out of the nature and property of faith and works I have showed,
that faith, and not works, does justify: So will I now declare and prove the
same by ye nature of iustificacion. The right property, natural virtue and
power of iustificacio^, is to pacify, to still and quiet the conscience, which
heretofore, by the remembering and considering of sin and damnacion, was vexed
and troubled. For Paul says: Because therefore that we be justified and made
rightuous by faith, we have peace with god through Roma. 5.
our lord Jesus Christ. As for men's works, they are never able so to
comfort and pacify an vnquyete conscience. For who has at any time persuaded
himself, yt he with his own works has satisfied the law of god, and is
therefore absolved, discharged of his sins, delivered from damnacion, and
become rightuous and undefiled? Specially seye^g that Salomo^, the wisest among
al me^, Pro. 20.
has said: Who can say: My heart is clean, I am innocent from sin?
Wherefore if our works quiet not the conscience, then do not they in any wise
justify a man. But faith justifies and perfectly stilleth the conscience. And
therefore it justifies. For the lord has said in the gospel: Who so ever
drynketh of this water (whereby John, 4,
undoubtedly he did mean outward things, and al man's help) shall thyrst
again: But who soever drynketh of the water that I give him, shall never be
more a thyrst: but the water, that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of
water springing up in to everlasting life. And again: I am ye bred of life. He
that comes to me, shall not honger: And he that believes John. 6.
on me, shall never thyrst.

Here thou seist, yt faith, which preasseth on forth directly upon ye lord
Jesus, does satisfy us. For faith understands, yt Christ him self is the
right fulness and plentiful sufficie^cie of heavenly goods, and that even he
gave himself whollye for us, and in all things became our own: so yt now
from hence forth an oppressed and afflicted conscience may rest upon himfor in
christ the son of god, full of grace and truth, there is nether blemishe nor
weakness. But in works, yea of most holy me^, there is alwaie found feebleness
and imperfection. And if we would now behold the property and nature of him,
before whose judgment seat we shall stand, we should plainly find, yt we are
justified by ye mynistracio^ and help of faith, and not of Holy men do not
glory in works but in the mercy of ye Lord.
works. For undoubtedly ye highest and most rightuous of al has respect only
to such as are humble of contrite hertes, and those assuredly he justifies.
But such as are proud and glory i^ their own merits those he condemns, and
turns himself from the^. Here unto serves ye parable or symilitude out of
the gospel, concerning the two that went up together in to the Luke. 18.
temple to pray: Of who^ the one boasted of his good works, told what they
were, trusted unto the^ and set out himself for a rightuous and good man. As
for the other, he trusted in the only mercy of god, and nothing at all in his
own merits, but cried: O god, be merciful unto me sinner. This man went
down, out of the temple, justified: but yt other, being wrapped and snared in
sin, failed of his hope. Therefore in the prophet Ieremye has the lord given
us a right good counsel, and said: Let Ieremi. 9.
not ye wise man rejoice in his wisdom, nether the strong man in his strength,
nor the rich man in his riches: but who so wilreioice, let him rejoice in
this, that he understands and knows me. For I am the lord yt do mercy,
equity and righteousness upon earth. This counsel did the godly Apostle Paul
follow, saying: God forbid that I should rejoice, save Gala. 6.
only in the cross of our lord Jesus Christ, whereby the world is crucified
unto me, and I unto the world: For in the gospel also the lord said: when ye
have done Luke. 17.
all that is commanded you, say: we are unprofitable servants, we have not
done that we ought to do. Therefore the godly praise yt grace of god, not
bragginge of their own merits, nether trusting any thing at all unto them,
The right ousnes of faith and works agree not to gether.
but comfort them selves in the mercy of god.

Finally, if we now compare both the righteousness (namely of faith and of
works) the one against the other, we may easily perceive that these being
most unlike may not stand together. For as concerning the righteousness of
works, the holy Apostle Paul has spoken: Through the Roma. 3. Gala. 2.
works of the law shall no flesh be justified before god. But of ye
righteousness of faith he says thus: Al they are justified that believe. And in
another place he says: The righteousness of faith is Roma. 4.
imputed of grace or favor: but ye righteousness of works is not imputed of
grace or favor, but of dewti. And again he says: Israel, which followed ye
law of righteousness, could not attain to ye Romans 9.
law of righteousness: But ye Heithen which followed not righteousness, have
ouertake^ righteousness, even the righteousness which comes of faith. And
immediately gives he a reason of the first point, and adds thereto:
Wherefore? Even because they sought it not by faith, but as by the works of
the law: for they stombled at the stombling stone. Therefore remains it still
true and certain, that the one righteousness overthrows the other: And
therefore we that teach, a man to be justified by faith in the lord Jesus,
and not by works, do not peruerte ye Christian faith, as our adversaries
shamfully belie us: But they rather do overthrow it, that by all means and
ways mynishe ye honor of ye faith in Christ: mainteinyng, that the church or
congregation of the faithful ar, by the works and merits of men, absolved
from sin, delivered from damnacion, and obtain the inheritance of eternal
life.

Faith is not without works, and what place works have in the church, and
whence they spring in us
The. 13. Chapter
WIth this disputation and talk, concerning Christ, the lord, who justifies
us by faith, not by works: Or concerning faith, that justifies without
works: Many without all doubt will be sore offended, thinking that I set nothing
by good works, and that I leave them no place of honor in the church. For
they sai: if good works help not a man to obtain righteousness, then are they
nothing worth, nether necessary in the church: And therefore is it in vayn that
good works are so often and many times menci^^^d of in holy scripture: The
^^^stles also of the lord, and the holy prophets lose but their labor, in
requiring us to exercise and declare our faith, praisyng god our father in
heaven, with good works. Why is the holy Apostle James so ernest Jacob. 2.
to teach, that a man is justified by works, and not by faith only? If faith
only be sufficient to obtain salvation, what else remains for us to do, but
even to eat and drink, and then to say unto god the judge: I have believed thy
gospel, therefore save thy servant? Thus is banished all virtue, good life, and
Godlynes, And thus men exercise and apply them selves no more to innoce^cie of
life and good manners. Answer


They that after this sort take the matter so evil and compain, understand
nether the strength of faith, nor ^^e true order of good works. A^^ as for us,
we do not hold, that faith is without good works, wha^ we say after the
Apostle: that faith justifies with out good works. But we knowledge and
confess, that faith justifies with his own strength, not with ye help and
addition of works. For Christ is mighty enough of himself and of his own
power to justify the faithful beleuers, nether needs he enye supply or
filling up of our works. Faith also is not without good works, nether are
Christian men's works therefore in vain or unprofitable, because they do not
justify. For they have nevertheless a very honorable place and rowme in the
holy church. And wha^ it is said in ye scripture (as it is often) yt they
justify, it is so spoken of them for special causes. Which thing to ye intent
it may ye better and more perfectly be understand, I will make somewhat deper
rehersall of good works, and bring the^ forth out of their own fountain and
original, declaring their certain and undoubted bounds, whereby all their
nature and property may perfectly be known. Upon ye name or term, I do not
much pass. for (as every man knows) there be evil and unprofitable works,
works of iniquity and wickedness, ye doers whereof are called the workers of
wickedness. The same works also are called the works of the flesh and the
works of darkness. Again there be good works, contrary to the other, which
the scripture calls the works of repentance, the fruits of the sprete and of
light: such are the offices and duties of friendship a love, which were
co^me^ded i^ Tabitha, of whom it is said, that she was full of good works.

Now wha^ we descrybe them, we say: they be such as are done by those, that are
borne a new, or regenerate, Good works
out of the good sprete of god, by faith, and acording to gods word, to the
praise and honor of god, to the honest bewtifulnes of life, and finally to
the profit and commodity of ye neighbor. These are short words, and
therefore peradventure unto some they be ye darker and more hard to
understand: But if the grace of god show us light, they shall, by the
declaracion folowinge, be playnlie and easelie perceived. No other fountain of
good works can I show, then only god himself. For the prophet says: All
men are liars, only god is true. And the lord says in ye gospel: There
Psalm. 116. Math. 19.
is no man good, but only god. Therefore is it necessary, yt good works
spring not of man, who is a liar, wicked and naught, but of god himself, of
whom proceadeth all that good is.

Nevertheless it behooves such men, as by the sprete of god and faith in the
lord Jesus are regenerate, that they hence forth work not their own, namely
carnal works, but the works of god. For the works of those, that be
regenerate, grow and spryng of gods good sprete, dwelling with in them: which
sprete, as the sap of life, gives strength to the trees, that they may
bring forth fruit: Eue^ so makth he multituds of sondrie virtues to spring and
grow out of man, As the lord himself testifies and says: I am the vine,
ye are ye branches. John. 15.
Like as ye branch can not bring forth fruit of it self, except it abide in
the vine: Eue^ so ca^ not ye also, unless ye abide in me. Whosoever abides in me,
and I in him, yt same brings much fruit: for without me ca^ ye do nothing.

And thus (I sai) ye good works, that be done, are done by faith. For faith is
a gift of god, whereby we receive Christ, and are justified and made living,
for as much as the scripture says: The just shall live by his faith. And in
another ^hac. 2.
place: Christ dwells in your hertes through faith. And as Ephe. 3.
gain: Now live not I (says Paul) but Christ lives in me, for that I live
in the flesh, I live Gala. 2.
in the faith of ye son of god, who loved me, and gave himself for me.
Lyuinge works the^ does he, undoubtedly even through him, by whom he himself
became alive. And he, that is justified, does also works of righteousness,
assuredly even through him, by whom he is become righteous. Which is thus much
to say: the just works righteousness through Christ, and rightuosnes
comprehe^deth the wholle sum of all virtues. And therefore yt only god
remains still the fountain and original of all good works. Hereto serves
it also, that unto god, who in the regenerate works by his sprete in faith,
holy scripture ascribes ye works of those yt be regenerate.

That god is the worker of good works in us, and that we do not well til he
dwell in us, is showed out of scripture, and how righteousness is ascribed to
works.
The. 14. Chapter.
THis will I now evidently declare with plain testimonies, taken out of the
law of god, out of the holy prophets, out of the most holy gospel, and of
the elect Apostles of Ihesus Christ. For thus says Moses: The lord shall
bless the. And the lord thy Deu. 30.
god will circumcise thine heart and the heart of thy sede, that you may love
the lord thy god with all thine heart and all thy soul, that thou may live.
The prophet Esaie says: Lord unto us thou Isa. 26.
shall provide peace, for thou also workest al our works and deuyces. In the
gospel of Ihon our Savior says thus: Who so John. 3.
does the truth, comes to the light, that his works may be known, because
they are done in or by god. And again: Who so abides in me, and I in him, ye
same John. 15.
brings forth much fruit, for without me ye can do nothing. Item the holy
Apostle Paul to the Philippians says: To you it Phil. 1.
is given, not only to believe in Christ, but also to suffer for his sake. And
yet more playnlie: It is Phil. 2.
god that works in you both the will and the deed, acording to the good
purpose of his mind, or because he has delight unto you. Thus sayet also S.
James one of Jacob. 1.
the. xii. Apostles: Every good gift and every perfect gift comes down from
above, even from the father of lights. Yea all parts of the work does the
holy Apostle Peter ascrybe unto god, saie^g: The god of all grace, which 1.
Pet. 5.
has called us to his eternal glory by (or in) Christ Jesus, shall his own
self (after that ye have suffered a little affliction) make you perfect, setle,
strength and stablish you. For (as the Apostle Paul says again) we are not
sufficient 2. Cor. 3.
of ourselves to think any good thing, as of our selves: but if we be able
unto any thing, the same comes of god. Wherefore god abides still the only
fountain of good works, and even he it is that works al good things in us
al. By this then that I have broghte forth herein out of holy scripture,
concerning ye true occasion of good works, it is farthermore easy to be
considered, how the scripture ascribes righteousness unto works, seeing that it
is rendered unto the grace of god, when it is ascribed unto faith: and being
ascrybed unto works, it is ascribed to the same grace of god. For gods grace
it is (and therefore god himself) yt in us workth good works: and so is it the
more convenient, yt iustificacion be rather imputed to the grace of god and
unto Christ, which works by us. Hereunto had holy Augustine respect who in ye
book de gratia et libero arbitrio. Augustinus.
ca. 8. writes thus: if eternal lif for reco^pe^ce be given unto good works,
as ye scripture openly says: for god shall give unto every one acordi^g to
his deeds, how is grace ye eternal life: If grace be not ascribed unto works,
but given frelie, as ye Apostle writes: To him yt goes about with works, is yt
reward given not of grace or favor but of dewtie, and again: The re^nau^t
(says he) are saved Roma. 11.
through ye election of grace. And immediately he adds thereunto: if it come of
grace, the^ it is not of works else should grace be no grace. How the^ is grace
eternal life being taken out of works? Or did not yt holy apostle name eternal
life to be grace? Yea he named it so, which ca^ in no wise be denied. Nether
requires it one of a sharp understanding, but only a diligent hearer. For
when he had said: the reward or stipend of sin is death, he added straight
there unto: But the grace of god is eternal life in Christ Jesus our lord.
Therefore me thinks, this question can in no wise be resolved, unless we
understand, that our good works, to the which eternal life is ascrybed, belong
also unto the grace of god, because the lord Jesus says: without me ye can do
nothing. And when the Apostle had said: By grace are ye saved through faith, he
adds thereto: And that not of yourselues, it is the gift of god, and comes
not of works, lest any man boast himself. This writes holy Augustine.

How the works / that god works in us, are called owres, but so that we can
not brag of the^ or challenge awt for them, but must refer that to another
cause.
The. 15. Chapter.
HEre unto must add also, that good works, though in very deed they be
properly gods and ye fruits of faith and of the sprete, yet are they called
and be ours: that is to say, works of faithful beleuers: Partly, because god
works them by us, and uses our mynistracion to fynishe them: Partli, because
that through faith we be children of god, and therefore ar beco^e brethren and
heirs annexed with Christ. For by menes of this inheritance, all the works and
gifts of god begin to be ours, not as strange, but as specially our own.
The scripture also ascribes the same unto us, as unto children and to those
that be^ born free forasmuch as our savior in the gospel says: the
servant abides not for ever in the house, but the son abides for ever.
Now as al with is in the fathers house, is ye sons by titel and right of
inheritance, although he has not purchaced it by his own trauail and policy,
but has received it of the fait^^^l liberality of his pare^tes: Eue^ ^^ good
works, which ye father works in and by us, are also called and be ours,
because we are ye heirs and children of god. Now were it an exceading shame
full thing, and a sure declaracio^ of a very unthankful mind, if ye son not
remembering ye faithfulness, and liberality of yt father, would boast himself,
yt he with his diligence, care and watching had gotten al these goods which he
has as heier.

Therefore says S. Paul very godly: What have you, that you have not received?
If thou have received 1. Cor. 4.
it, why the^ braggest thou, as though thou had not received it? The holy
martyr Ciprian had Ciprian.
a very Christian an godly opinion hereof, for he was wont to say: It is not
for us to boast of any thing, for as much as nothing is our own. Here unto (as
I suppose) serves it yt is red in Esayedoth the axe boast it self against him
yt heweth with it? Or does the saw bragg against him that carries it? Therefore
out of the mind of scripture and after god has Augustine i^ his book degratia
et libero arbitrio. ca. 7. showed his judgment, declared and spoken with these
words: As sone Augustinus.
as grace is lent and given, our merits begi^ne to be good, nevertheless
through grace. For if the same be with drawn, the^ man falls, and is not
lift up, but thrown down through fre will. Therefore when a man begins to
have good merits, he ought not to ascrybe that unto himself, but unto god, to
whom it is spoken in the psalm: Thou art (or be thou) my help. O forsake me
not etc. In that he says: forsake me not, he declares, that if he be
forsaken, he is able of himself to no good thing.

Hitherto has Augustine showed evidently enough, that good works are ours,
and that nevertheless all perteyneth unto grace. By means whereof, when
rightwisnes is ascrybed to our works, it is truly ascrybed unto grace, out of
the which good works proceade. Others there be, that undo this knot thus,
saying: that faithful beleuers please god through Christ, who has reconcyled
them again with god. And seeing they please god, that do the works: the^ ye
works which be do^e of such, as are reconcyled and in ye favor of god, be also
acceptable unto him: Doubtless not for their own sake, or for yt they be done by
the^, but much rather because they are wrought by the members of Christ. Some
are of this opinion: Faith (say they) and works are not severed: for the
rightuous lives by faith, and he, that is rightuous, works righteousness.
Nether is vncircu^cisio^ any thing worth, nether avails circumcision: but
faith, that is strong in operacion and works by love. Therefore by means of
this vnses parable co^iunctio^ and unity, yt is ascribed to ye one, which else
in very deed and properly is the others. This matter also might be well
expounded and declared thus: Nameli In faith there must respect be had to two
things: To ye reco^ciliacio^, and to obedience. To ye reco^ciliacio^, because
we understand by faith, that god is reco^cyled and pacyfied to us ward for
Christ's sake, by who^ we are accepted and in favor with god. To obedience,
because yt they, which be reconcyled and received unto grace do wholly give
themselves to him, by who^ they be reconcyled, and are desirous to do his will.
Here there fore may it well be said, yt it is a two fold righteousness: one
iustifie^g and one harknyng or obeing. Of it, ye justifies, is Paul myndful,
wha^ he says: Because therefore yt Roma. 5.
we be justified by faith, we have peace with god through our lord Jesus christ,
by whom also in faith we have entran^ce unto this grace, wherein we stand. Of it
also, that harkeneth, he makes mencio^, saying: know ye not, ye unto who^ ye
give over yourselues as seruau^ts to obey, his servants ye be, to who^ ye
obey: whether it be sin unto death, or obedience unto righteousness? Properly
now is iustyficacio^ ascribed unto yt righteousness which justifies, and not
unto it yt is obedient: for ye same comes of ye other, and with out ye other
might not it be called righteousness. Moreover, this knot may be losed thus.
The most natural work of faith is purifieng or sanctifieng. For ye holy
Apostle Peter says expresely, through faith ar ye hearts purified. Now in ye
matter of sa^ctifie^g does ye holy scripture declare two things: The first,
that as many of us, as beeleue, are freelye sanc tified by the blood of
Ihesus Christ. For S. Peter says: we 1, Pet, 1,
are elect through sanctifieng of the sprete, in the obedience and sprinklinge
of the blood of Jesus Christ. And yet more playnlie: Ye know, that ye are not
redeemed with tra^sitory silver or gold from your vain conversation of the
tradicions of the fathers: but with the precious blood of christ, as of the
innocent undefiled lamb. Paul also says: By the will of god we are made
holy, eue^ by the Heb, 10,
offering of ye body of Jesus christ once for all. For (as it follows
immediately after) with one oblacion has he made perfect forever them, that
are sanctified. The Apostle Ihon likewise testifies the same, and says: The
blood of Jesus Christ, the son of god, 1, John, 1,
cleanses us from all sin. And thus faith in the blood of Jesus Christ
verelye and naturally sanetifieth or makth holy, by yt means of him that
said: I sanctify my self for them, that they also may John. 17.
be sanctified in the truth.

The second thing, that holy scripture declares in the matter of sanctifie^g,
is this: Namely, that they, which through faith are sanctified with the blood
of Christ, do daily sanctify them selves, and apply them unto holiness. And
to this end, in my judgment, does a good part of the exhortacions of the
Apostles serve. Verily S. Peter 1. Pete. 1,
says: Like as he which has called you is holy, even so be ye holy also in
all your conuersacio^, according as it is written: Be ye holy, for I am holy.
And the holy Apostel Paul says: This is the will of god, even your
sanctificacion, 1, These. 4,
that ye refrain from whordome, and yt every one know, how to kep his vessel
in holiness and honor, not in fleshly lust, as do the Heithen which know
not god. And that no man oppress or defraude his brother in bargainyng. Thus
did Ihon also the Apostle teach and say: We are now gods children, and as yet
it appears not what we shall be. But we know, yt wha^ he appears, we shall be
like him: for we shall se him as he is. And every one that has this hope in
him, purifieth himself, like as he also is pure. Therefore eue^ this our
purifie^g, which is done by our care and diligence, has also the name of
sanctifieng, not because of it self, but for the first purifieng sake that
goes before: which if it go not before, then is our sanctifienge nothing
worth. Again, if the same go before then must this also follow after. For right
well and truly says S. James the Apostle: Faith, if it have no works, is
deed in it self. In it self, or for it self, I say, that is: It alone, and
fruteful with no good works. For as the body without ye sprite is deed, so
faith also without works is deed.

Doubtless a living body does and works somewhat, and serves many: likewise
faith, by deutie and offices of love, must be profitable and commodious unto
many. Now if faith do good to no man with godly works, the^ is it an empty
ymaginacion and vain name. As also the sanctifieng of man, if it do not break
forth and show it self in holy words and works, assuredly it is to be reputed
false, feyned and full of ypocrisie. Besides this, all that belongs unto true
holiness in yt our sa^ctifieng, which appears in our works, must be referred
to the sanctifie^g done by the blood of christ, to the which most properlye
apperteyneth the honor of sa^ctificacio^. Wherefore when thou seist in holy
scripture, that righteousness is ascribed unto our works, remember it is done
for such causes as I hitherto have showed. For the sprete of the Apostles
cannot be against himself.

The. 2. sorts of me^, that the Apostls had to do with for iustificacion, which
make the^ seem to vary in assignyng the cause of iustificacion, with their
reconciliacion.
The. 16. Chapter.
AND known it is, that the Apostles of the lord did strive with two sorts of
people: the one sort ascrybed righteousness and salvation to their own good
works, which were done after the mesure and rule of gods law, and therefore
they despyced Christ. For while they went about to stablish, mainteyne and set
up their own righteousness, they were not obedient to ye righteousness of god.
Against the ungodly opynio^ of these, did the holy Apostles teach (and
specially S. Paul) that righteousness and life is obtained by faith in the lord
Jesus, and not by our works. The same Paul says to the Galathians: I refuse
not the grace of god. For if righteousness come by the law, then dyed christ in
vain. And again: Christ profits you nothing. And: ye are gone quyte from
Christ, and are fallen from grace, if ye will be justified by the law. Against
such also was kept at Jerusalem the Counsel that Luke makes mention of in
the Acts of the Apostles.

There were again certain other light and evil disposed people, that abused
such doctrine of the Apostles to the liberty and sensuality of the flesh:
thinking it sufficient to salvation, when they beasted themselves of faith,
although there were no good works found in them. Therefore against those, as
against the very pestilence and decay of true Religion and gods service, did
the same Apostles also strive, and taught that the Christian faith was not a
vain opynio^ or frutelesse knowledge, but a lyuelie and strong confidence,
most fruteful in good works. For Paul, writing against these, says unto
Titus: They say they know god, but with Titu. 1.
their deeds they deny him, saying they are abominable and disobedient, and
unapt unto every good work. And Peter the Apostle rebukes such dissemblers,
but some what more darkly, wha^ he says: Hereunto give all diligence, that 2.
Pete. 1*
in your faith ye mynistre virtue, in virtue knowledge, in knowledge te^perau^ce
in te^perau^ce patience, in patience godlynes, in godliness brotherlye kyndnes
in brotherly kindness love. For if these things be among you and be plenteous,
they will make you, yt ye nether shall be idle nor unfruitful in the knowledge of
our lord Jesus christ. But he, yt lacks these things, is blind and gropeth
for the way with his hands, and has forgotten that he was pourged from his
old sins.

It is manifest also unto every man, that Ihon and James, ye holy Apostles of
Christ, wrote hereof: S. James most ernestlye defe^ding that Abraham was not
justified by only faith (that is, by a vain opynion) but by works,
undoubtedly even by true faith. And yet with those, and such like
exhortacions, would not the faithful Apostles of Christ mynishe his grace and
merits, and magnify the merits of man: but rather wtstand the filthynes of
such as never rightly knew nor learned the faith of Christ, and made yet their
boast there of to the great offense and hinderaunce of ye weak. For if they
truly had known it, they had vndoubtedliled a more sober life. Therefore when
the Apostles are ernesti provoking unto good works, they provoke unto ye true
faith in Christ, which is mighty in operacion and works by love: And yet
nevertheless they ascribe al things to the grace of God, yea even the same
works which they require of the faithful. And that I here teach the true
upright doctrine of faith, all they shall affirm, that have but a little
searched, tried and red the scriptures of the Apostles. Augustine also, a
Augustinus.
true faithful teacher of the Christian church, shall testify, that I have
here invented no new thing. For in his book of grace and fre will the seventh
chapter, he writes thus: Such as have not understand what the Apostle says
(we hold, that a man is justified by faith without the works of ye law) Have
thought him to affirm that faith is sufficient to a man, although he live
evil and have no works: which thing god forbid the elect vessel should so
mean, who yet in another place when he has said, in Christ Jesus avails
nether circumcision nor uncircumcision, he adds immediatlye thereto: But
faith, which works by love. Even this is the same faith, that separateth
gods beleuers from unclean deuels. For they also (as the Apostle James says)
believe and tremble, but no good thing do they. Therefore have they not that
faith, out of the which ye just lives: namely which works by love, that god
may give him life acordinge to his works. But for as much as good deeds are of
god, of who^ we have not only faith but also love: therefore the same teacher
of the heithen named eternal life it self, grace.

This have I alleged out of Augustine, and hitherto have I opened and
declared, how the scripture ascribes righteousness unto good works, and that
ye same doctrine is not against ye Apostles teaching and judgment, which
ascribes righteousness unto faith in Christ Jesus. But for as much as upon this
matter of ye righteousness of works, there hangs the question concerning ye
merits of good works: I will add hereunto a little, touching the reward and
merit of good works: chefelie to the intent that no man rashlye and ungodly
judge of good works, and so purchase himself to have not good but rather euel
merits.

These terms / rewards or merits, tried by the scriptures and expounded how
largely they ar to be exte^ded.
The. 17. Chapter.
Merit or deseruyng, as it is spoken of in ye schools, is no where found in
holy scripture, and yet there in is often mention made of the reward. The
scripture in this follows our manner and fashion of speaking. And for as much
as unto such, as be our freindes or that have well deserved it at our hands,
we give rewards and gifts, as an hyre or wagies: Therefore after like manner of
speech is it said, that god gives his friends eternal life to a reward, for
their noble and excellent deeds and merits. For thus we read in Esaie: O
happy are the rightuous, for they may enjoy ye fruits of their deuyces. But
woe unto the ungodly and unjust, for he shall be reco^penced acordinge to his
deeds. In the gospel the lord says: Blessed are you, wha^ men reuyle you,
and persecute you, speak all manner of euel against you, and belie you for my
sake. Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven. The Apostle
Paul also says: Every one shall receive his reward acording to his labor.
But herein must not the word (Reward) be violently forced, as if ought were
ours: for even our merits themselves are nothing else but gifts of god.
Therefore like as holy Augustine in other doctrynes of our faith did every
where observe and teach ye universal mind and understanding of the right
canonical truth and of the holy church: Even so he not only shows
plainly the true meaning and understanding, concerning the merits of good De
gra. et. lib. arbi. cap. 7.
works, but also with very diligent conference of the scripture he defends
the same, and says thus: Ihon, the forerunner of our lord, says: A man can
receive nothing, except it be given him from above. Now if thy good works be
the gifts of god, then does god crown thy merits, not as thy merits, but
as his own gifts. Now let us co^sidere the merits of the Apostle Paul, that
is, whether he obtained the^ of himself, or whether they be the gifts of god.
He says: I have foughten a good fight, I have ended my course, I have kept
faith. First, if good thoughts had not gone before these good deeds, the^
should they be no good deeds. Mark therefore what he says of the same
thoughts: Not that we be able of ourselves to think any good thing, as of our
selves, but al our ability is of god. Let us then behold every thing
several. He says: I have foughte^ a good fight. Here I demand: with what
strength fought he? with it that he had of himself, or with it that was given
him from above? But god forbid, that such an excellent teacher of the heithen
should not have known the law of god, whose voice and word stands in
Deuteronomie: Thou shall not say in thine heart: My strength and the power of
my hands was able to bring this to pass: But remember thou the lord thy god.
For it is he that gives the strength and power to do it. And what profits a
good battle, if the victory follow not after? And who gives the victory, but
even he of whom he says: god be thanked, which has given us the victory
through our lord Jesus Christ? And in another place, when he has recyted the
testymony out of the psalm: for thy sake are we put to death all the day long,
we are compted as sheep appointed to be slain) he added thereto and said: But
in all this we overcome for his sake yt loved us. It is not therefore by our
selves that we overcome, but by him which has loved us. And afterward he said:
I have ended my course. This spoke he, yt said in another place: It lies not
in any man's will or runnyng, but in ye mercy of god. Which meaning may in no
wise be perverted, as to say, that it lies not in the mercy of god, but in
every man's will or runnyng. For whosoever dare say so, declares evidently,
that he speaks against the Apostle. Finally, he said: I have kept ye faith.
This spoke even he, which in another place said: Mercy have I obtained, yt I
should be faithful. He said not: I obtained mercy because I was faithful, but
that I should be faithful: By this the^ declares he, that faith can not be had
except god be merciful, and that faith is the gift of god. Which thing he
techeth very evidently and says: By grace are ye saved through faith, and that
not of your selves, but it is ye gift of god. For they might say: Therefore
have we received grace, because we believed, ascrybinge so faith to themselves,
and the grace unto god. Therefore the Apostle when he had said through faith, he
says: And that not of yourselues, but it is the gift of god. Again: to the
intent they should not say, that with their works they had merited such a
gift and reward, he added there unto immediately: not of works, lest any man
should boast himself. Not that he denies or minisheth good works, for he
says: god shall reward every one acordyng to his works: But because that
works proceade out of faith, and not faith out of works. And therefore have we
the works of righteousness even of him, of whom faith itself comes. The just
shall live by his faith. Out of S. Austine word by word have I alleged all
this: which doubtless so perfectlye comprehends, and so co^stauntly with
scriptures proves and sets forth, what so ever may be said of ye merits
of good works, that I suppose, there can no more be spoken thereto. For what
could be more brefelye, more syncerly and more perfectly spoken, then that unto
good works there is prepared a reward, and that the sa^e is nothing else but
grace: Yea the merits of saints are gods gifts, which wha^ god crowns, he
crowns his own gifts? In all this therefore stands sure the perpetual,
vnfayling and universal doctrine, that they, which believe, are justified and
saved by only faith or grace of god.

The rule of good works to measure them by, that they may be good in deed,
and not of our own good intent and brain only.
The. 18. Chapter.
Wherefore now come we again to good works, which if they proceade not out of
god by faith, they may not be named good. But if they spring out of god through
faith, then are they ordered acording to ye rule of gods word. In ye descripcion
therefore of good works, I have added thereto and said, that, they are done by
such as are regenerate, out of the good sprete of god, and acordinge to gods
word. For the works that we ymagen of ourselves, they please not god. For he
allows obedience: As for the good meaning and intent that grows in us, he
refuses it. Which thing I affirm and proute wih these testimonies of
scripture: In Deuteronomye the lord commands euide^tli with these words: ye
shall not do, every one that which he thinks good. What so ever I command
you, that look ye observe, to do thereafter: Add nothing thereto, nether myny
she aught there from. Moreover in the story of Samuel there stands an
ensample hereof. For Saul the king of Israel, being commanded to make a slain
offeringe of the Amalechites and al their substance, did, of a good intent and
self chosen gods service, reserve the fatteste oxen for a sacrifice unto god.
But the prophet Samuel says unto him: has the lord as great pleasure in
brent sacryfices and offeringes, as when the voice of the 1. Reg. 15.
lord is obeyed? Behold, to obey is better then sacrifice: and to herke^, is
better the^ the fat of rams. For rebellyon is as the sin of witchcraft,
and stubburnes is as the wickedness of ydolatrie.

Here in these few words thou have a godly co^mendacion of self chosen
relygion or gods service, and of works that spring of our own good meanynges
and good inte^ntes. They, that despisynge and refusing the law of god follow
their own good inte^tes, are of ye truth called witches, rebels and
ydolatoures. Although they think them selves to be gods good servants, and
fervent folowers of the tradicions of holy fathers, bishops, kings and
princes: yet god, who can be no liar, says evidently, that the works of such
folks do nothing dyffer from witchcraft, rebellion and ydolatrie, which are
the most horrible things, that ca^ be thought or devised. The lord therefore
in the gospel, out of the prophet Esaias, condemns and refuses all such self
chosen works, as proceade out of our own good meanynges and intentes, wha^ he
says: in vain serve they me, while they teach the doctrynes and precepts of
me^. Every plantyng, which my heavenly father has not planted, shall be rooted
out. Let the^ go, blind they are, and ye leaders of ye blind. Here of came it
no doubt, ye G. Paul so boldly and stowtly said, ye the co^maundmentes and
statutes of men are not only contrary to the truth, but also very lies. In
another place he says: What so ever is not of faith, is sin. And again:
Faith comes of hearing, and hearing comes by the word of god. Whereby it
may well be gathered, yt the works, which are not done out ye word through
faith, are so very naught, yt they be also called sin. To the Colossia^s does
Paul most euidentlye reiecte the self pleasing gods service, ethelothreschian,
which is expounded a supersticio^, and signifies a self willed and selfchose^
religion and gods service.

Wherefore out of all this it is plain, that we do not reiecte nor withstand
upright good works, when we refuse the works of monckes, freres and popish
priests, which proceade of the election and good intent of man, without gods
word. For now is it more certain, that they of a truth are not good works,
which we ymagen of our selves, but only such as god has commanded us. Which
thing is yet more evident out of the words of S. Paul: We are created (says
he) through Ihesus Christ, unto good works, to the which god ordained Ephesians. 2.
us before, yt we should walk in the^. Here sets he two marks or evident
tokens of good works. The first: we are created through Christ Jesus unto good
works. A good work then must be done by such one, as is created through
Christ, or graffed in Christ Jesus. For if the branch abyd not in the vine, it
can not bring fruit. By faith are we graffed in to christ the vine. The second:
They must not be every nor al manner of works, but such as god ordained of
old, that we should walk there in. What the same be, he has expressed in his
law, which is the will of god. Hereof is it, that the lord in the gospel, being
deman^ded concerning eternal life and true virtues, poynteth to the law and
says: What is written in ye law? And, if thou will enter in to life, keep the
commaundmentes. The ten co^maundmentes then are the most sure and most perfect
form of good works. Which thing, to the intent it may be perfectly
understand, I will brefely declare it all, as in a painted table.

The exposition of the. x. commaundmentes, which are the limits and precinctes
of our good works.
The. 19. Chapter.
TO the first co^maundme^t thou must refer the fear of god, faith in god, and
finally most sure hope in trouble and adversity. Ite^ sufferau^ce and
immovable vnshrinking stedfastnes. To the second, belongs the true, and to
god acceptable, undefiled and sincere worshipping: likewise ye refusing, denial
and eschuyng of all supersticio^ and perverted gods service. To the third: ye
reuerencyng of ye power and majesty of god, also confession, true inuocacio^
of ye name of god and sanctifieng of yt same. In ye fourth is contained the
co^elie obseruacio^ of the ceremonies and rytes of ye church, ye preachi^g of
gods word, the comme^ prayer, and al external mynistracions. To the fifth
majesty thou refer fear and love toward father and mother, toward thy
natyue country and kynsfolkes: Item the right obedience that we owe to
magistrates, and of al duties of a cyuile life and conversation. To the sixte
thou shall refer righteousness and judgment, the defense of wedowes and of the
oppressed, afflicted, frendles, Fatherles and Motherles children: benefits and
innocencye. To the seventh may be referred matrymonyall plight and trothe, the
honest and godly bringynge up of children, diligence and exercise of clennesse,
sobernes and temperauncie. To the eight shall thou refer equitye in
bargaynyng, liberality, myldnesse: and hospitality. To the nyenth: dilligent
applie^g of truth through out the whole life, to keep faithfulness and fydelitie
in words and works, to use such words as are sober, honest and may edify.
To the tenth, refer good and holy desires, and finally all holy and honest
thoughts.

This is now a very short su^me and form of good works. But if thou desire
yet a shorter, then harken unto the Lord himself, saying in the gospel: Thou
shall love the lord thy god with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all
thy mind. This is the chief and greatest comman^dment. The second is like unto
it: thou shall love thy neghbour as thyselfe. Item what so ever ye would men
should do unto you, do you the like unto them.

That the lord requires naught else of us, but the works of the. x.
commandments, is proved out of scripture.
The. 20. Chapter.
AL faithful beleuers, which be desirous to do good works, must direct their
eyes, hertes and minds unto these commaundmentes of the lord: And that with
so much the more diligence and sted fastnes, as they more euydently se, yt god
in the law and in the prophets requires nothing else, yea none other works
of those that are his. This may I prove and maynteyne with most euydent
testimonies of the most principal prophets. Moses in his fifth book says
thus: Now Israel, What requires the lord thy god of the, but that thou fear
ye lord thy god, and walk in his ways, and love him, and serve the lord thy
god with all thy heart and with all thy soul. And that thou keep the
co^maundme^tes of the lord, and his ordinances, which I co^mau^d the this
day? King David also asks: Lord, who shall dwell in thy tabernacle? And
immediately he answers: Even he yt leads an incorrupt life, doing yt which
is right, and other things contained in ye ten co^maundme^tes. Esaias the
prophet moves the same question also, and says. Who is he among us, that is
able to abide the eternal heat? And he answreth: Eue^ he yt leads a verteo
life, speaking that which is right, and doing the other things contained in ye
x. co^maundmentes. Ieremye in the. 22. chap. brings in even the same things,
and ernestly requires them, saienge: Thus the lord commands: Keep equity
and righteousness, deliver the oppressed from the power of the violent, do not
grieve nor oppress the stranger, the fatherles nor the wedow, and shede no
innocent blood in this place. And no other works does Ezechiel recyte through a
long Registre in the eightenth chapter. In Osea the lord says: I have
pleasure in mercy, and not in sacrifice: And in the knowledge of god, more then
in burntoff ringes. Miche as also asks what he shall do, and with what works he
must reco^cyle himself unto god. And by gods reuelacio^ he answers: I will
show the, O man, what is good, and what the lord requires of the? Namely, to
do right, to have pleasure in loving kyndnes, and to walk lowly before thy
god. Like answer does the prophet Zachary give Zach. 7.
unto those, that asked him concerning virtues and acceptable works. Thus
says the lord of hoostes: Execute true iudgmente, show mercy and loving
kyndnes every man to his neghbour: do the wedowe, the fatherles, the stranger
and poor no wrong. And let no man ymagen euel against his brother in his heart.
Love no false oothes, for these are the things Zach. 8.
that I hate, says the lord. From this doctrine of the prophets, disagreeth
not the doctrine of the Evangelists and Apostles: which every where teaches
love, righteousness and innocence, doubtless as the effect and sum of al good
works. This now so plentifully, and with so many testimonies of the scripture
have I uttered and declared: to ye intent no man hence forth should either
doubt or be ignoraunte, that those only are good works, which be done our
of the good sprete of god through faith, and acording to the scripture or word
of god.

That the said proprietes of good works are requisite i^ deed to good works,
is declared by the confere^s of the scriptures more plainlye.
The. 21. Chapter.
YEt there rests somewhat which I must add unto the end of the descrypcio^
of good works, namely to confirm and make it more plain with the conference
and agreement of the scripture. I said that tyght good works be done by such,
as are regenerate, to the glory of god, to the bewtifienge of life and to the
edyfieng of the neighbor. For unto our good works does the lord appoynte
this end in Matthew, and says: So let your light shine before me^ y^ they may
se your good works, and glorify your father which is in heaven. Ite^ the
Apostel Paul, many times exhorting me^ unto good worckes, adds thereto a
thing, which might specially move any man, Namely that with their godly works
they should do worship unto ye doctrine of our savior and redemer, in all
things. Now like as a co^ely and honorable apparel does bewtifie the man, so
do right good works set fort, and garnish ma^s life with great commendacion. And
this is ye cause yt ye Apostles of Christ gave so often counsel, to lay aside
ye old man, and to put on the new, which is shape^ and fashioned after god:
for thereof comes praise and honor unto us. We are called, and be in deed, ye
servants and children of god, whose property and virtue appears in us, to
the praise and magnifie^g of his name. Moreover, if we do good, he increaceth
his gifts in us continually the longer ye more, considering he has spoken:
Unto every one, that has, shallbe given, Mat, 13,
that he may have abundance: But who so has not, from him shall be taken also
even that he has. And hereof it comes, that unto such, as do well, god is
gracious and merciful, replenishing the^ with many (yea and with temporal)
gifts, and finally endeweth them with eternal life. For ye Apostle Paul
speaks evidently and plainly: god shall give unto every on acording to his
deeds: Namely praise and honor and immortality unto those y^ with patience
in good works seek eternal life. And again: Praise, honor and peace unto
all such as do good. Howbeit in all good works the just and godly ar
appoi^ted to keep these bounds and lymites, that they will not seek their own
wealth, but the glory and will of god, and finally the commodity and profit of
their neghbour. For the Apostle Paul says: Let no man seek that which is
his own, but let eueri man ^. Cor. 10.
seek yt which belongs to another: Even as I please all men in all things,
not sekyng mine own profit, but the prophet of many, that they might be saved.
Al godly persons therefore direct all their diligence, exercise and works to
this end, that they may edify many: wherein they express and declare the
nature of god, whose children they be. For he is enclyned and desirous to show
goodvnto all creatures. And hereof it comes, that his children also are well
doers. And in all things whatsoever they take in hand, they have still before
their eyes (as the only marck of their life) a delight and desire to do good.

The Conclusyon or peroration.
The. 22. Chapter.
THus much at this time have I done concerning the property, nature,
disposicion, cause, end and operacion: that is, ye true and right fashion and
measure of good works Out of ye which, I trust, this may chefelie be
understand, how the lord ascribes the name of righteousness and Iustificacion
to the good works of holy me^: And how god in scripture is said to give
reward: And that nevertheless the right and principal doctrine of our religion
stands sure and unmoved: Namely, that we are justified out of the grace of
god for Christ's sake by faith, and not by works.

Wherefore there remains now nothing else, but that for the true faith in the
lord Jesus, by ye which we are justified, we fall down at the lords fete with
ernest prayer, with fervent and devout cryeng and calling upon his name: in
such forte that we put in practice this talk and disputacio^ had of good
works: Namely, that as touching the faith, which we profess in the lord Jesus
Christ, we express, show forth and garnishe the same with right good works:
Remembering the words of the lord Ihesus Christ, who in his gospel says: Not
every one that says unto me, Lord, lord, shall enter in to the kingdom of
heaven: but he that does the will of my father, which is in heaven.

Many shall say to me in that day: Lord, lord, have not we prophesied in
thy name? have not we cast out deuels in thy name? have not we done many
mighty deeds in thy name? And then will I knowledge unto them: I never knew you,
depart from me ye workers of iniquity. Therefore who so ever hears of me
these words, and does the same, I will licke^ him unto a wise man, which buylte
his house upon a rock. And a shower of rain descended, and the floudes came,
and the wyndes blew, and beat upon that house, and it fell not, because it was
grounded on the rock. And every one yt hears of me these words, and does them
not, shall be likened unto a foolish man, which buylte his house upon sand. And
a shower of rain descended, and the floudes ca^e, and the wyndes blew, and
beat upon that house, and it fell, and great was the fall of it.

Wherefore let us apply all our diligence with holy fervent praie^, with true
zeal and godlynes of our mind, that we also as lyuinge stones, being builded
upon Christ the sure rock of life, may become a lyuinge house, which may
endure fast in all assaults of manifold tentacions: That we (I say) being a
spiritual habitacion, and an holy priesthode, may bring and offer up to our
Redemer and iustifier, Jesus Christ, spiritual and acceptable sacrifices: praise
and thanks geuyng, alms and our own bodies, yea our selves, fully, wholly,
and all together.

Amen.
Amirrour or glass / wheryn al men may behold their own condemnacyon by the
law of god: With a remedy for the same.
The office of love
THe law is a doctrine that beddeth good and forbid death euel as the
commau^deme^tes specify saying. Love thy Lord god with all thine heart, with
all thy soul, and Deuteronomy. 6. Mat. 22.
with all thy mind.

This is the first and great commaundment. The second is like unto that: love
thy neighbor as thy self. In these two commandments hang all the law and
the prophets.

He, that loves god, loves his neighbor.
If a man say, I love God, and yet hates his brother, he is a liar. 1, John. 4.
He yt loves not his brother who^ he has seen, how can he love god Let every
man examyne his conscience by this rule
whom he has not seen.

He yt loves his neighbor as him self keeps al ye commandments of god,
what so ever ye would that men should do to you, even so do you to the^. For
this is the law Math. 7. Romans 13.
and ye Prophets. He that loves his neighbor, fulfylleth yt law.

All the law is fullfylled in Gala. 5.
one word, that is, love thy neighbor as thy self.

He, that loves god, keeps all the commau^dmentes.
He that loves his neighbor, keeps all the commaundmentes To. 13. Gal, 5.
1. Ioh. 4.
of god, and he that loves God, loves his neighbor: ergo he, yt loves God,
keeps all his commaundmentes.

He that has faith, loves god and keeps the co^maundmentes.
My father loves you, because ye John. 16.
love me and believe that I came from God.

He, that has the faith, loves god, and he that loves God keeps all his
co^mau^deme^ts: ergo he that has the faith keeps all the commandments of
God.

He that keeps one commandment of god keeps all.

For without faith it is impossible Heb. 11.
to keep any of the commandments of GOD, and he that has the faith keeps
all the commandments of god: ergo he that keeps one commandment of god
keeps them all.

He that keeps one commandemente of God, he keeps all: ergo he that keeps
not all the co^maundmentes of god, keeps not one of them.

The office of the law
It is not in our power to keep any of the commandments of god which were
given to show us our sins, and bid things impossible for us.
Without grace it is impossible to keep any of the commandments of god, and
grace is not in our power: ergo it is not in our power to keep any of ye
commandments of god.

By the law comes the knowledge of sin.

I knew not what sin meant, Romans 3. Romans 7.
but through the law.

I had not known what lust ^^d meant, except the law had said, thou shall
not lust: without the law sin was deed, that is, it moved me not, neither
wist I that it was sin, which not with standinge was sin and forbidden by
the law.

The law byddeth us do that thing, which is impossible for us.
It bids us keep the commandments The law is a scholemaster to brig us to
christ
of god, and yet is it not in our power to keep any of the^: ergo it bids us
do yt is impossible for us. Thou wylt say, where to does God bid us do yt is
impossible for as? I answer, to make the know that thou art but euel, and
that there is no remedi to save ye in thine own hand, and that thou may seek
remedy at some other, for the law does naught but condemn the.

Of the Gospel.
Like as the condemned man is joyful to hear of pardon for his fault: Eue^ so
shall thou hear for thye delyuerans the joyful nues of the gospel.

THe gospel is as much to say in our tongue, as good John. 4. Luke, 2. Romans 5.
Romans 4. 1. Pet. 1. Apoca. 1. He. 7. 9. 1. Pet. 2. 1. Tim. 1. Gala. 5, 1. Ioh. 2
1. Tim. 2.
tidings, like as one of these are: Christ is ye savior of the world.
Christ is our savior. Christ died for us. Christ dyed for our sines. Christ
bought us with his blood. Christ washed us with his blood. Christ offered
himself for us. Christ bare our sins on his back. Christ came into this
world to save sinners. Christ came in to this world to take away our sins.
Christ was the price that was given for us and Gene. 5. These. 5. 1. Cor. 1.
our sins. Christ was made debt our for us. Christ paid our debte, for he
dyed for us. Christ has made satysfaction for us and our sins. Christ is our
rightwisenes. Christ is our satisfaccio^. Christ is our redemption. Christ is
our goodness. Christ has pacified the father of heaven.

Christ is ours and al his. Christ has delivered us from the law, from the
deuel, and from hell. The father of heaven has forgeuen us our sins for
Christ's sake. Or such like, whereyn is declared unto us the mercy of god.

The nature of the law and the gospel.
The law shows us our sin. The Gospel shows us remedy for it. The law
shows us our co^demnacion. The gospel shewet us our rede^pcyon. The law is
the law of Ire. The gospel is the word of grace. The law is the word of
despair. The Gospel is the word of comfort. The law is the word of unrest.
The Gospel is the word of peace.

A disputacion between the law and the gospel.
The law says, pay thy debt. The gospel says, Christ has paid it. The
law says, thou art a sinner, despair and thou shall be damned.

The gospel says, thy sins are forgeuen the, be of good comfort, thou shall
be saved.

The law says, make amends for thy sins.

The gospel says, Christ has made it for the. The law says, the father of
heaven is wroth with the. The gospel says, Christ has pacifyed him with his
blood.

The law says, where is thy ryghtwysenesse, goodness and satisfaction: The
gospel says, Christ is thy ryghtwysenes thy goodness and satisfaccion. The
law says, thou art bound and obliged to me, to the deuel and to hell. The
gospel says, christ has delivered the from them all.

Of faith.
Faith is to believe god: like as Abraham believed god, and yt was imputed unto
him for Gene. 15.
ryghtwysenes.

He, that believes God, believes 1, John. 5.
his word, and who so believes it not, believes not him also.

To believe god, is to believe his word, and to recou^te it true, that he says.

He yt believes not gods word he cou^teth him false and a liar, and believes
not yt he may and will fulfill his word: and so he denies both the might of
god, and god him self.

Faith is the gift of god and not in our power.
Eeuery good thing is the gift of god, faith is good: ergo faith Iaco. 1.
is the gift of god.

The gift of god is not in our power, faith is the gift of god, ergo faith is
not in our power.

Without faith it is impossible to please God, and that is done by faith
pleases him.
All that comes not of faith is sin, for without faith can no Romans 14. Heb.
11.
man please god. Besides that, he that lacks faith, he trusts not god, he
that trusts not god, trusts not his word, he that trusts not his word,
holds him false and a liar, he that holds him false and a liar, he believes
not that he may do that he promised, and so denies he that he is god. And how
can a man being of this facyon please him: No manner of way, I suppose, though
he did all the deeds that ever did man or angel.

Right is the word of god and al his works in faith Lord thine eyes look to
faith, that is as much to say, as lord thou delyghtest in faith God loves him,
that believes in him, how can they then displease him? He that has the faith
is just and good, and a good tree bears good fruit: ergo all y^ is done in
faith pleases GOD. Moreover, he that has the faith believes god: he that
believes god, believes his word: he that believes his word, woreth well that
he is true and faithful, and may not lie. But knows that he both may and
will fullfyl his word. How can he then displease him? for thou can not do any
greter honor to god, then to count him true.

He, that has the faith, is certain that he pleases god.
For all that is done in faith, pleases god.

Faith is a sure confidence of Heb. 11.
things, which are hoped for, and a certeinte of things which are not seen.
The sa^e spirit certeneth our spirit, yt we are ye children of Romans 8.
god. Moreover he ye has ye faith, wotteth well yt god will fulfill his word:
ergo faith is a surenes.

A man is justified by faith.
Abraham believed god, and yt was imputed unto him for rghtwysenes: Gene. 15.
Roma. 3,
we suppose therefore ye a man is justified by faith, without the deeds of the
law.

He, that works not but believes on him that justifies ye ungodly his faith
is counted to him for Romans 4. Aba. 10. Gal. 2.
rightwysenes. The just man lives by his faith. We know that a man is not
justified by the deeds of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ. And we
believe in Jesus Christ, that we may be justified by the faith of Christ, and not
by the deeds of the law.

Of the faith of Christ.
The faith of Christ is to believe in him, that is to believe his word and to
believe that he will help the in all thy need, and deliver the from all evil.
Thou will ask me what word? I answer, the gospel. he ye believes ichrist
shall be saved

He that believes the sone has everlasting life: verily verily I say to you,
he that believes in me has everlasting life: This I 1, John, 4.
wryt unto you, that believe on the name of the son of god, ye ye may know
how that ye have eternal^ life. Thomas, because thou have seen me therefore
beleueste thou: John. 20.
happy are they that have not seen, and yet have believed in me. All the
Propheres to him bear wytnes, Act. 10.
that who so ever beeleueth in him, shall have remissyon of their sins. What
must I do y^ I may be saved? the Apostles answered, believe in the Lord Jesus
Act. 16.
Christ, and thou shall be saved. If thou knowledge with thy mouth that Jesus
is ye lord: And Romans 10
believe with thine heart that god raised him up from death, thou shall be saved.

He that believes not in Christ Mar. 16 John. 2.
shall be condemned.
He that believes not shall be damned. He that believes not the son shall
never se life, but the ire of god abides him. The holy ghost shall reprove the
world of sin, because they believe not in me.

They, that believe in Jesus Christ are the sons of god.

Year all the sons of god because Gala. 3.
ye believe in Ihesu Christ

He that believes that Christ is the son of god is saved.
Peter said, thou art Christ Mark, 16,
the son of the living god. Ihesus answered and said unto him, happy art thou
Simon the son of Jonas, for flesh and blood has not opened to the that, but
my father that is in heaven. We have believed and know that thou art Christ
the son of the living god. I believe that thou art Christ the John, 6, John,
11,
son of god which should come into the world.

These things are written, that John, 1,
ye might believe yt Jesus is christ the son of God, and that ye in belyuing
might have life. I believe yt Jesus is the son of god. Act. 8.


He that believes God, believes the Gospel.
He yt believes god, believes his word, which is ye gospel: ergo John, 4,
he that believes god, believes ye gospel: As Christ is ye savior of the
world, Christ is our savior. Apo. 1.
Christ boughte us with his blood. Christ washed us with his blood, Christ offered
himself for us. Christ bare our sins on his own back. etc.

He that believes not the gospel, believes not god.

He, that believes not gods He. 7. 8. 1. Pet. 2,
word, believes not himself, for the gospel is gods word: ergo he yt
believes not ye gospel, believes not god himself: and co^setque^ly they that
believe not ye above written and such other, believe not god: He, yt believes the
gospel, shall be saved. Go ye in to all the world and preche the gospel unto every
creature, Mar. 16.
he yt believes and is baptized, shall be saved, but he that believes not, shall
be condemned.

A comparison between faith and unfaithfulness or incredulite.
Faith is the rote of al good. Incredulyte is the rote of all evil. Faith
makes God and man good friends. Incredulite makes the^ foes. Faith brings
god and man together. Incredulite sundreth the^. All that faith does pleasyth
god. All that incredulyte does displeases god. Faith only makes a man good
and ryghtwyse.

Incredulite only makes him unjust and evil. Faith makes a man a member of
Christ. Incredulite makes him a member of ye devil. Faith makes a man ye
inherytour of heaven. Incredulite makes him inheritour of hell.

Faith makes a man the servant of god. Incredulite makes him the servant
of the devil. Faith shows us god to be a sweet father. Incredulite shows
him a terrible judge. Faith holdth stiff by the word of god. Incredulite
wauereth here and there. Faith counts and holds god to be true Incredulyte
holds him false and a liar. Faith knows god. Incredulite knows him not.
Faith loves both god and here neighbor. Incredulite loves nether another.
Faith only saves us. Incredulite only condemns us. Faith extolleth god and
his deds. Incredulite extolleth herself and her own deeds.

Of hope.
HOpe is a trustye lokinge after the thing, that is promised us to come: as we
hope after everlasting joy, which christ Psalm, 117,
has promised unto all that beeleue in him.

We should put our hope and trust in god alonly.

It is good to trust in god and Psalm, 113,
not in man. He yt trusts in his own heart is a fool. It is good to trust
in god and not in princes. They shall be like unto the images they make, and all
that trust in the^. He yt trusts i his own thoughts does ungodly. Cursed be
he that trusts in man. Bid the rych me^ of this world, that they trust not
Hiere, 17,
in their unstable riches, but that they trust in the living god. It is hard
for them that trust in money, to enter in to the kingdom of heaven.

Moreover we should trust in Mar, 10,
him only that may help us: God only may help us: ergo we should trust in him
only, well is them that trust in god, and woe is them that trust not in him.

Well is the man that trusts Hiere, 17, Sapi, 3. Psalm, 5,
in god, for god shall be his trust. He yt trusts in him shall under stand
the verytye. They shall al rejoice that trust in god, they shall ever be glade
and he will defend them.

Of charity.
Charity is the love of thy neighbor. The rule of charity is this. do, as
thou would be done to. For charity holds al a life, ye rich, and the
poor, the friend and the foe, the thankful and unthankful, the kynseman
and stranger.

A comparison bitwene faith, hope and charity.

Faith comes of the word of God, hope comes of faith, and charity spryngeth
of them both. Faith believes the word.

Hope trusts after that is promised by the word. Charity does good unto her
neighbor through the love, that it has to god.

Faith looks to god and his word, Hope looks unto his gift and reward.
Charity looks on her neighbors profit. Faith receaueth god. Hope receives
his reward. Charity loves her neighbor with a glad heart, and that without any
respect of reward. Faith pertayneth to god only, hope to his reward and
charity to her neighbor.

Of works.
NO manner of works make us rightwise: we believe yt a man Gala, 2,
shall be justified without works: No man is justified by ye deeds of the law,
but by ye faith of Jesus Christ, and we believe in Jesus Christ, that we may be
justified by the faith of Christ and not by the deeds of the law. If
rightwysenes came by the law, then Gala, 3,
dyed Christ in vain. That no man is justified by the law, it is manifest:
for a rightwise man lives by his faith, but the law is not of faith.
Moreover sith Christ the maker of heaven and earth, and all that is therein,
behooved to dye for us, we are compelled to grant that we were so far drowned
and su^ke in sin, that nether our deds nor all the treasures that ever god
made or might make, might have helped us out of them: ergo no deeds nor
works may make us rightwyse. No works make no vnrightwise. For if am works
made us vnrightwise, then the contrary works should make us rightwyse. But it
is proved that no works can make us ryghtwyse: ergo no works make us
vnrightwise.

Works make us neither good nor evil.
It is proved that no works Nota.
neither make us rightwyse nor vnrightwyse: ergo no works make us neither good
nor evil. For rightwise and good ar one thing, and vnrightwise and evil
likewise one.

Good works make not a good man, nor euel works an evil man, but a good man
makes good works, and an evil man evil works:

Good fruit makes not the tree good nor euel fruit the evil tree, but a good
tree bears good fruit, and an evil tree evil fruit. A good man can not do
evil works nor an euel man good works, for a good tree can not bear evil
fruit nor an euel tree good fruit.

A man is good ere he do good works, and euel ere he do evil: for tree ye is
good er he bear good fruit, and evil ere it bear euel fruit.

Every man is either good or evil, and his works like wise.
Every tree is either good or euel: either make ye the tree good and the fruit
good also, or else make the tree euel and the fruit of it likewise evil,

For all fruit trees are either good or evil. Either make ye the tree good and
the fruit good also, or else make ye tree euel and ye fruit of it likewise evil.
A good man is known by his works: for a good man does good works, and an
evil euel works: ye shall know the^ by their fruit, for a good tree bears
good fruit, and an euel tree euel fruit A man is lykened to the tree, and Mat, 7,
his works to the fruit of ye tree.

Beware of the false prophets, which come to you in shepes clothes but
inwardelye they are rauenyng wolves, ye shall know them by their fruits.

None of our works nether save us nor condemn us.
It is proved that no works make us another rightwyse nor vnrightwyse, good nor
evil, but first we are good ere we do good works and evil ere we do evil
works: ergo no works, neither save us nor condemn us. Thou will say, then
makes it no matter what we do. I answer, yes. For if thou do euel, it is a sure
argument yt thou art evil and want the faith.

If thou do good it is an argument that you art good and have ye By the fruit
the tree is known.
faith, for a good tree bears good fruit, and an evil tree euel fruit: yet good
fruit makes not ye tree good, nor evil fruit the tree evil, so the man is good
ere he do good deeds and euel ere he do euel deeds. The man is the tree, his
works are the fruit, faith makes the good tree, Incredulite the euel tree: such
a tree such fruit, such a man such works. For all that is done in faith pleases
god and are good works. And all that is done without faith dispeaseth god and are
evil works.

Who so ever believes or thinks to be saved by his works: denies that
Christ is his savior. For how is he thy savior, if you myghtest save
thyselfe by thy works? or whereto should he dye for the, if any works might
have saved the? Verily, thou should have dyed perpetually, if Christ to
deliver the had not dyed for ye and changed thy perpetual death in to his own
death. For thou made the fault, and he suffered the pain, and that for the
love he had to the or ever you wast borne, when thou had done nether good
nor euel. Now sith he has paid thy debte, you nedest not, no thou canste not,
but should be damned if his blood were not: But sith he was punished for ye,
thou shall not be punished if thou trust in him. Fynallye, he has delivered
the from thy condemnacion and al euel, and desires naught else of the, but yt
thou will aknowledge what he has done for the and bear it in mind, and yt
thou would help other for his sake, both in word and deed, even as he has
helped the for naught and without reward. O how ready would we be to help
other, if we knew his goodness and gentelnes toward us. He is good and a
gentle lord, for he gives us freely. Let us beseech you yt ar Christians to
follow his fotesteppes, who^al the world ought to praise and worship.

Amen.
He that thinks to be saved by his works calls him self Christ.
For he calls him self his savior, which pertayneth to christ only. What
is a savior but he yt saves? and he says I save my self, which is as much to
say as I am Christ, for Christ only is the sauyoure of the world.

We should do no good works for ye intent to get the inheritance of heaven or
remissyon of sin.

For who so ever believes to get the enheritaunce of heaven or remission of
sin through works, he believes not to get yt for Christ's sake. And they that
believe not that their sins ar forgeuen the^ and yt they shall be saved for
Christ's sake, they believe not the gospel. For the Gospel says, you shall be
saved for Christ's sake, sins are forgyuen for Christ's sake. He yt believes
not ye gospel, believes not god. So it follows that they which believe to be
saved by their works or to get remission of their sins by their own deeds,
believe not god: but recount him as a liar, and so utterly deny him to be god.
Thou will say, shall we then do no good deeds? I say not so, but I say we
should do no good works for the intent to get the inheritance of heaven or
remissyon of sin. For if we believe to get us heaven through good works, the^
we believe not to get it through the promise of god: if we think to get
remissyon of our sin so, the we believe not that they are forgeuen us for
Christ, and so we count God a liar. For god says, you shall have the
inheritance of heaven for my sons sake, thy sins are forgeuen the for my
sons sake: and you say it is not so, but I will win it through my works. So
I condemn not good deeds: But I condemn ye false trust in any works For all
the works, that a man puts confidence in, are there with povsoned and become
evil.

To god only give the glory.
A dialogue wherein is brefely declared the long continuance of ye Gospel
taught as well to the ungodly as to the godly: The cause of the destruction of
the wicked: And also the office of the law, and the gospel.
William. For as much as God has constituted me a creature reasonable, and
endued me with an understanding, I am naturallye desirous to know what end I am
created to.


Gyles. Tha^ shall it be necessary John. 3.
for you to have faith. For he, that shall have to do with God or with godlynes,
must first of al believe after ye holy scriptures.


William. Than tell me what faith is, by those holy scriptures.


Giles. After ye saienge of saint Paul, it is a sure Heb. 11. Gala, 4,
certaynie of godly things which we trust unto, and a grounded euydence in the
spirit of heavenly causes that never were seen with the eye.


Will. What suppose ye most necessari Apo. 14.
to direct me into this faith


Gi. The eternal Testament or gospel of Jesus Christ. Romans 1. John, 14.
For that is the power of God unto salvation to al them that believe.


Will. When was this gospel first taught.


Gil. Soon after the worlds begyunynge, when Adam had once Gene. 3.
offended lest that he should have fallen in utter despair and so have been
lost for ever more.


Will. And has the Gospel continued ever syns, to the comfort of man?


Gil. Yea truly, and often sins that time has been confirmed by more earneste
promises from age to age, till the meke Lamb came, which tok away the sins
of the world Gene. 22. Psalm, 131, 1. Pet. 1,
through the shedyng of his most innocent blood. For the scripture says, that
his mercy was plentuous from kyndred to kiudred, to them that feared the
Lord.


Will. Has all men ben called to grace by that gospel of salvation?


Gil. Yea doubtless have they, yet have they not all thankfully received it. So
well was it tought of our first father Luke. 1. Mat. 22. Luke. 4. Ge. iiii.
Adam to Cayn as to Abel.

Sowel did Noe preach it to Cham as unto Sem and Iaphet. So well did Abraham
show yt to Ismael as unto Isaac. So well Gene, 21
Moses to Pharao as to ye people of Israel. David to Ammon and Absolon, as to
Solomon and Nathan. Helyas to Achab and Iesabel, Exo. ^. 2. Reg. 13 3. Re. 18
as to the most faithful beleuers. No less did Christ open thereof to Judas,
then to Peter, James and Ihon. And so forth Math. 10. Act. 8. Romans 1.
to the other Apostles and true preachers to this present day. So that none
can excuse the^ selfs


Will. How comes it than to pass that so many are lost and still yet does
dalye perish, through their conversation and lycencious living?


Gyl. No fault can be ascribed to the gospel, but to their unthankful receiving
of the fruits thereof, so frelye offered them.

The disdaynfull spurnyng aside Roma. 1. 2. Cor. 12.
of that necessary health in christ, is cause of their decay, and not the set
ordinance of god, which wills all men to be saved.


Will. If Ada^ thus received this Gospel, and so taught it to his posterite, it
has continued much longer than I supposed.


Gil. The Gospel is as the lord is, everlasting. For as witnesses the apostle
saint John: In the beginning Apo. 14.
was the word, and the word was with god, and god was the John, 1.
word.


Will. Than was not Matthew with the other Evangelists, the first writer
thereof.


Gil. No, god did write it first in the natural heart of man, and so it
remained here still, till Moses and the prophets did leave it in outewarde
writing to the peoples further erudicion. For as saint Paul says: Al they
eat from the first beginnynge of one spiritual meat, and dra^ke of one
spiritual drink, the hard Rock following the^, which 1. Cor. 10.
was Jesus Christ. And this is an euydent token, that one Gospel has reigned
among the people of God syns the worlds beginning.


Will. But now tell me, what shall become of them, which have not, of all this
long season in the true fear of god, regarded his Roma. 1.
wholesome and sweet promises.


Gylles As they have in their unthankfulness here be^ left to them selves to
work all ungodliness, and have departed hence with a desperate conscience: so
shall they at the later day be condemned unto eternal fire, with the devil and
al his angels. Mat. 22



Will, Our mercyful redemer defend us from that maledic^ion. But what shall most
spedeli bring me to the Gospel of health?


Gil. The meke knowledge of thy self, Luke. 3. The. 3.
that thou art of nature the synful sone of Adam, iustlye condemned in his
transgression, beesydes thine own wicked doings, and so lost for ever, were
not the resurrection, which thou have in Jesus christ.


Willi. Show me by what mean I may come to that knowledge.


Gile. Seek first unto the law, 1. Cor. 15.
which the lord Jesus taught by Moses.


Willi. What is the lawer


Gil. The law is a godly Myrrour or glass given unto us sinners, that we
therein should se and know our sins, what we are and John. 2.
what imperfection is in us.


Wilia^ Does the law then make us rightuouse and good.


Gilles No more tha^ the glass makth him fair that lokth therein. For the Law
demands of us righteousness, but it gives us no power to do that, which yt
commands.


William What helps than the knowledge of ye Law, am I than thereby made free
from my sin?


Gilles No yt makes no man quyte of his sin, but it gives an occasion to
run and call for help of Jesus Christ our lord, that he would do that thing
which is impossyble to the law, yt is, to make us pure and clean. The glass
does nether wash nor make fair any man's face, but it gives occasion,
either to seek for water, or else some other thing that may make it fair and
clean. Thus our sores once known by ye law and the dangers and perils of
the same considered, we are driven of necessite to seek remedy in the gospel.


Willi. What is the Gospel?


Gil. It is the power of god, which saves al men that believe in it. It
promises us a merciful god, it declares unto us forgyuenes of our sins and
life everlasting, through Jesus christ our savior.


Willi. Does the Gospel make us rightuous?


Gil. Yea, for it promyseth us that Jesus Christ is our own, and that he dyed
for our sins, and did rise again for our ryghtuousnes. If we have Christ,
than have we forgeuenes of our sines, and everlasting life.


Willi. Does the gospel than teach none other salvation, but that which is in
Christ?


Gilles No surely. He alone is the La^be that takes away the lynnes of ye
world. The false worshippers seek him in outward things, and never find
him: but seek thou him in sprete and verity, and thou shalt have him
present.


William By this your hole protestacion, it should seem unto me, that I am
ordained of god to this end: first to a knowledge my self a wicked sinner,
than to arise from it through true repentance, and so to lead a new life
after the Gospel, till such time as my eternal Father shall with save to call me
from this corruptible ma^sio^, this fore^ la^d, this vale of misery, this
castle of sin, and this habitacion of death, into y^ eternal heritage of his
son Jesus Christ. To whom with the holy ghost be everlasting praise, honor
and glory, world without end.


Amen,

