The Christians LOOKING-GLASS: Wherein he may clearly see, His love to GOD
lively expressed, His Fidelity truly discovered, And Pride against GOD and
Man, Anatomised.

whereby the Hypocrisy of the times is notoriously manifested.

By THOMAS TVKE, Minister of GODS Word at Saint Giles in the Fields.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks, and are to be sold by Richard Bolton, at
his Shop in Chancerylane, near Holborne. 1615.

TO THE RIGHT VIRTUOUS AND HONORABLE LADY, the Lady ALICIA DVDLEY.
MADAME,
THere are three necessary virtues well be-seeming every Christian Man,
Charity, Fidelity, and Humility, both toward God and Man. 4. Reasons of
loving God. Math. 23. 9
There are four reasons (to pass by many more) which should move us to the
love of God: First, Iam. 1. 18.
because he is our gracious Father, who of his own will begat us with the
word of truth, that we should be as the first fruits of his Creatures. Now if a
child shall love his father, of whom he has received a part of his body, how
much more ought he love God, (Qui animam suam infundendo creauit, and creando
infudit) of whom he has received his soul, and to whose goodness he stands
obliged both for soul and body, both for the being and continuing of them?
Therefore David says, Thou have possessed my reins, Psalm. 139 13. Psalm. 71.
6.
thou have covered me in my Mothers womb. Upon thee have I been stayed from
the womb: thou art he that took me out of my mothers bowels. And Job long
before him, Thine hands have made me, Job. 10. 8. 11. 12.
and fashioned me wholly round about; thou have clothed me with skin and flesh,
and joined me together with bones and sinews: thou have given me life and
grace, and thy visitation has preserved my spirit.

Secondly, 2. Reason.
God is to be loved for his most sweet and pleasing nature, which the wicked
indeed feels not; because (as Isidore says) he has lost the palate of his
heart with the fever of iniquity.

Thirdly, 3. Reason
God by his beneficence has deserved our love: Ioh. 3. 16.
for out of his mere love he sent his own and only Son into the world, to
save us when we were lost, to redeem us when we were captives, and by his
death to give us life when we had deserved naught but death.

Fourthly, ask now the beasts, 4. Reason. Job. 12. 7.
and they shall teach thee, and the fowls of the heaven, and they shall tell
thee: speak to the earth, and it shall show thee, or the fishes of the sea,
and they shall declare unto thee. Even these things in their kinds do praise
God, and show their love unto man, for whom they were appointed: and shall man
show no love to God; and in love do nothing for God, for whom his creatures do
so much good, and suffer so much evil, being all put under his feet, and
subjected to his power, Psalm. 8. 6. 7. 8.
All sheep and oxen, yea and the beasts of the field, the fowls of the air,
and the fish of the sea?

Of the manner how we ought to love God.
Now because a man has in him life like a plant, sense as a beast, and
understanding proper to a Man, therefore it behooues him to love God with his
life, with his senses, and with his reason. Our Savior says, we ought to love
God with all our heart, with all our soul, Mat. 12. 37 1. With all our heart.
and with all our mind. We ought to love him with all our heart, that is, with
all our affections, delighting and ioying in him more then in any thing: For he
loves not God, that delights in any thing more then in God: and as St Austen
says, Minus te amat, qui aliquid t^cu^ amat, A Simile.
quod non propter te amat. By how much the more the lower bows of a Tree are
multiplied, by so much the less it grows upwards: so by how much the more a
man does love these things beneath, by so much the less is his love erected
and lifted unto God above: therefore such love is to be pruned and cut away, as
superfluous branches from a tree, that it may thrive the better. God requires
the whole heart, My son, give me thy heart, Pro. 23. 26. A Simile.
like some noble Bird of prey, that seizes upon the heart: for he alone
created it, he alone couers it, and he only can content and fill it. Totum
exigit te, Augus^ine.
qui fecit te totum, he requires thee all that made thee all. Si totum me debeo
pro me facto, quid addam iam pro me refecto? Bernard.
If we owe our selves wholly for our generation, what shall we add for our
regeneration? Neither are we so easily new made, as made. In the first work God
gave us unto our selves: in the second he gave us himself, and restored us
unto our selves. Being therefore both given and restored, we do owe our selves
for our selves, and we do owe our selves twice. But what shall we repay unto
the Lord for himself? For although we were able to repay our selves a thousand
times, what are we unto the Lord? A Simile.
If a man had some special jewel which he is minded to give away, he would
bethink himself where he might best bestow it. Our heart is the best member
which we have, and God is our best friend, let us bestow it upon him: it is
not lost, that is given unto him.

Secondly, 2. With all our soul.
we must love the Lord with all our Soul, enduring rather the separation of
the soul from the body, then that our soul should be separated from God, who
is the soul of our soul, and the comfort both of soul and body. Our life and
senses should be bestowed upon God
And because our soul affoords life and sense unto the body, therefore to show
that we love God with all our soul, we ought to honor him with our lives all
our life long, and with all our senses, suffering them to be guided by his
will, and choosing rather to be deprived of them all, then of him, that gave
them all.

Thirdly, 3. With all our mind
we must love him with all our mind and understandings and cogitations being
fixed upon him, and ruled by him: His word should inform and direct our reason;
God m^ have o^ though^^ and understanding
our reason rightly informed, should rule our wills, our affections and
conuersations, in all which we ought to seek and apply our selves unto God,
that our lives, our affections, our wills, and our understandings may be said to
be Gods, so as although we live, yet we may truly say, We live not, but God
does live within us. And so much for our love of God.

Of self love Why and how a man should love himself.
Love of Man is either love of our selves, or of our Neighbor. That a man
should love himself it is very necessary: for he that loves not himself,
cannot love another. And as St Austen says, Sinon nosti diligere teipsum,
tim^o ne decipias proximum sicut teipsum; if thou know not to love thy
self, I am afraid least thou should deceive thy neighbor as thy self. Yet
is it no easy matter for a man to love himself aright: for he that loves
iniquity hates his own soul, and he that loves himself in the way of sin,
does love a robber condemned to dye. Augustine.
Si male amaueris, tunc odisti: si been ode^is, tunc amasti: If a man love
himself amiss, he hates himself: but if he hate himself well, then he
loves himself. If a man loose himself by loving himself, then he finds
himself, if he hate himself. Let us therefore learn to love our selves by
not loving our selves. He that hates his lusts, loves himself: he that loves
his lusts, hates himself. He that will love himself well, must love himself
in God, and ^or God: and either because he is Gods, or that he may be Gods.
and thus much for Self-love.

Our Neighbor also is to be loved, whether friend or foe, rich or poor, young
or old, high or low: Gregory. Why our neighbor is to be loved.
For (Per amorem Dei amor proximi gignitur, and per amorem proximi amor Dei
nutritur) the love of our neighbor is begotten by the love of God, and the
love of God is nourished by our love of our Neighbor. Here first I say, we
ought to love our neighbor, because he is a Man of the same flesh with us, or
because he is a Christian of the same faith, incorporated into the same body,
and animated by the same spirit. In whomsoever Christ does show himself, he is
to be loved, in the poor as in the rich, without respect of persons. A
Diamond is a Diamond whether set in Gold or Silver, or in Iron, or Wood, and
he that reiects or co^temnes Christ in a poor man, loves not Christ in a rich
man, but riches: yea, 5. Reasons of loving our enemies. Math. 5. 44
we are to love our Enemies. So Christ said, and so he did. He said so: I say
unto you; L^ue your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that
h^^e you, Colos. 1. 22 Romans 5. 8.
and pray for them that hurt you. And so he did; for us, which were strangers
and enemies, has he also reconciled. Whiles we were yet sinners, Christ died
for us. Secondly, thus it behooues us to do, that we may resemble our
heavenly Father, and show our selves to be his sons: For he sends his
rain on the just and unjust. Thirdly, else shall we loose our reward: Math. 5.
45 46.
For if you love the^ that love you, what reward shall ye have? Fourthly,
because GOD has selected and singled us out from the multitude of the world,
therefore we must be singular and egregious for our conversation: Mat. 5. 47.
If ye be friendly to your brethren only, what singular thing do ye? do not
even the Publicans likewise? And shall Christians do no more the^ Publicanes,
then Turks, then Indians, then natural men? Fifthly, it is by our Apostle
commanded and commended unto us, When he says; Gal. 6. 10.
Let us do good unto all; if unto all, then unto our enemies; Romans 12. 20
Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him, says he, If he thirst give him
drink. Now if we must not deny him our beneficence, then not our benevolence
for it is no good deed, if it be not of good will: And if we must recompense
no man evil for evil, Romans 12. 17.
then not to our enemies; and where there ought to be no maleficence, there
should also be no malevolence; as we must not work him ill, so we must not
will, nor wish him ill.

So then our Neighbor is to be loved, How our neighbor is to be loved.
but how? Even as our selves; which As does not show partiality, or equality,
but similitude; not measure, but manner; Mat. 22. 39
that is to say, Holily, Justly, Truly, and Constantly: Holily, Sancte.
that is, for GOD, and not against GOD, under GOD, not above GOD: For he loves
not GOD, that loves his neighbor with GOD, whom he loves not for GOD; and he
that loves his neighbor more then GOD, is unworthy of GOD, and makes his
neighbor to be his GOD.

Justly, Just.
for a man must not love his neighbor in evil, or for evil, but in good, and
for good: He must be so loved, as that his vices may be hated: He must be
loved, if not (quia iustus) because he is just, yet (vt sit iustus) that he
may become just. Love must not be the bond of unrighteousness; we may not
love a man so as to fall in love with, and to learn his vices.

Vere. August.
Truly, that is in the Truth, For (nemo potest veraciter esse amicus hominis,
nisi primitus fuerit amicus ipsius veritatis) no man can be a true lover of a
man unless first he be a lover of the truth. I say again truly, that is,
the man must be loved, not his riches, honors, greatness, his good must be
sought, and not his goods; he, not his. Some love their neighbors, as dogs
do bones, for the flesh that is on them; or as men do Trees, for their fruit;
or as Kites do a Carkase, for relief: But we ought to love them even for
themselves, for this, that they are men, or for this, that they are virtuous
and good men.

Lastly, Perseueranter. Of the co^stancy of love.
our Neighbors are to be loved Constantly: With some men, friends are like
flowers, which are esteemed of no longer, then whiles they are fresh. Many men's
love is like to that of Harlots, who love, whiles there is lucre; they love not
the man, but his gifts: They are like the Gleads in the fable, that followed
the old wife bearing Tripes to the Market, but forsook her home-ward, when she
returned empty. A man shall be loved in prosperity; but it is a question
whether the man, or his fortunes, be rather loved: Adversity will try the
force of friendship, and virtue of love: He which forsakes his Neighbor in
adversity, does manifestly show that he loved him not in prosperity: It was
not the man which was loved, but the man's prosperity. But we ought to be
constant in our love: Whiles we see either Humanity, or Christianity, we have
cause to love. Gal. 6. 9.
Let us not therefore be weary of well-doing: Heb. 13. 1.
Let brotherly love continue. And so much for charity, which for perpetuity, 1.
Cor. 13. 13
and serviceableness unto others, is more excellent, then either faith or hope.

Of faithfulness.
The next is Fidelity, when men are fast and faithful unto men for GOD, and
unto GOD for GOD himself. This faithfulness unto GOD is demonstrated by
fearing him vehemently, by obeying him constantly, by dispensing faithfully, by
keeping things committed to him carefully, by loving him incessantly, and by
suffering for him courageously. The reasons that should move us heereunto are
many. 7. Reasons o^ Fidelity. Reu. 2. 20.
1. GODS Commandment. Be thou faithful unto the death: 2. His Promise, And I
will give thee the Crown of life. 2. Tim. 4. 7. 8.
I have fought a good fight, (says Saint Paul) and have finished my course, I
have kept the faith: heeres his Fidelity: From henceforth is laid up for me
the Crown of Righteousness: there is his reward. 3. The example of GOD, and his
servants: Of GOD, Psalm. 94. 14. Psalm. 146. 6. Ier. 32. 40.
who fails not his people, forsakes not his inheritance, but Keeps his
fidelity for ever, and will not depart from them to do them good. Of his
Servants, as Abraham, Job, Moses, Daniel, and the Martyrs, whom no death could
daunt, no torment could afright, no pleasure hold, no promotion prevail with,
no allurement inchant, but claue fast to GOD, and chused rather to die for Him,
then to live against Him. 4. We desire GOD to be faithful unto us, therefore
we should show our selves faithful unto Him. 5. We exact fidelity of those,
that are under us, therefore in reason we should behave our selves faithfully
to GOD, which is above us. 6. Fidelity is a most certain argument of felicity,
Mat. 1^. 22. Heb. 1^. 39
for he that endures to the end shall be saved: Finally, unfaithfulness is
punished with perdition: Reu. 21. 8
Fearful and unfaithful persons shall have their part in the lake, which
burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death; And so much for
Fidelity.

Of humility.
The last is Humility, whereby we do not ouer-weene our selves, but behave our
selves humbly toward GOD, and Man. Humility is to be showed toward a man's
Superiors, Equals, and Inferiors. Iam. 4. 7. 10
The Superior of all Superiors is GOD. Submit your selves unto GOD: cast
down your selves before the LORD, and he will lift you up. GOD is Omnipotent,
All-VVise, most Just, and has absolute authority over all flesh, therefore we
ought to humble our selves before him, and throw our selves down before his
Foot stool. Secondly, we ought to carry our selves lowlily toward all our
Betters. Therefore the Law says, Ex. 20. 12.
Honor thy father, and thy mother: And Saint Peter, 1. Pet. 5. 5.
ye younger submit your selves unto the Elders. Thirdly, toward our Equals,
Math. 7. 12.
For we must do, as we would be done by: we would have our equals give us due
respect, and not by pride exalt themselves above us. In giving honor (says
Saint Paul) go one before another: Romans 12. 20
Romans 13. 7. 8.
Give to all men their due; owe nothing to any man, but love. It was Pompeis
too-great stateliness, that he would acknowledge no equal. Fourthly, toward
our Inferiors: Why we must be humble toward our inferiors.
For it is a man's honor sometimes to neglect his honor, and his greatest
Greatness, in case, not to know his greatness. I suppose there is in every
man something, which craves our humility; and even this should make us humble
unto all, because life and death is common to us all, because by Nature we are
sinners all, and it is nothing in us, that makes the difference, but the grace
of GOD unto us, which was never deserved of us. For who has separated thee? 1.
Cor. 4. 7
and what have thou, that thou have not received? It behoues us therefore (as
we are exhorted) To submit our selves one unto another, 1. Pet. 5. 5.
and to deck our selves inwardly in lowliness of mind: Luke 18. 14.
For every man that exalts himself, shall be brought low: and he that
humbles himself, shall be exalted. For GOD is gracious to the humble, but
opposes himself to the proud, he breaks their branches, he teareth them
up by the roots, he scatters brimstone upon their dwellings, he tumbles
them from their seats, and laughs at their downe-fals.

Thus have I given you a say of that, which is more largely handled in this
Book, which I Dedicate unto your Ladyship, in whom these three virtues, by the
Grace of GOD, have met together, and do kiss each other, beseeching this good
GOD still to increase his Graces in you, and at the length to Crown you with
eternal glory in the heavens.

Saint Giles in the Fields, August. 13. 1614. Your Ladyships in Christ Jesus,
Thomas Tuke.

The Contents.
Love in general described. page. 1 Good, either true, or seeming, is the
object of love. p^g. 3 The property of love is to vrite, or join. page 3 The
love of man to God described. p. 3 Love is an affection of the heart. page 3. 4
Love is a gracious affect. page 4 Love rises out of knowledge and Faith. page
4. 6. 7 Love is a Celestial fire page 9 Love is kindled by the holy Ghost p.
9. 10 Love knits us to God, and makes him our contentment. page 10. 11 This
love to God is necessary in six r^gards. page 16. 18 The equity of this love
is showed in six respects. page 19. 22 Gods love to us is a descending love p.
19 There are 6 benefits of this love. p. 23. 30 This love is excellent in nine
regards p. 32. 38. Of the Author, Nature, Ends, Effects, Subjects and Object of
this love. page 32. 33. 34. 38. In five respects God is worthy of our love
above all other things. p. 45. 48 What Jehovah, Kurios, Dominus, and our
English word Lord does signify. page 39 Why the world should not be loved. p.
59 Why riches should not have our heart. page 61 Of the love of Pleasures, and
why they seem so sweet. page 63 Of the incertainty of honors. page 64 Of the
vanity of beauty. page 65 How a man may love himself, and who is he. page 67
Nine undoubted tokens of true love to God. page 69. 83 God ought to be loved in
his Church universal, and in every true visible society of believers. page 85
Which is a true visible Church. p. 85. 87 God ought to be loved in his
Ministers. page 88 A Minister is to be loved merely for his Office, Power,
Work, and faithful execution thereof. page 88. 89 The note of a true
Minister of God. p^g. 90 God is to be loved in his people. page 91 How
Ministers ought to demonstrate their love to God in feeding their Flocks. page
95 God must be loved in Christ page 96 Why CHRIST ought to be loved. page 96.
97 Two special ways whereby love is showed to Christ. page 97 99 A man may be
said to be faithful in two respects. page 100 Who have been counted
faithful to the Lord. page 101 How God preserues the Faithful. Externally p.
102 How God preserues the Faithful. Internally, p. 102 How God preserues the
Faithful. Eternally. p. 102 Three reasons of Faithfulness page 103 Five notes
to know a Faithful Man. page 103. 106 Who is a Christian indeed. page 107 A
Commendation of love from some notable effects thereof. page 110 Sundry
similies to illustrate the worthiness of this virtue. p. 111. What pride is.
p. 112. Seven ways of proud dealing against God. p. 113. How Pride against man
discouers it self. p. 114. Twenty three examples of Gods judgments upon the
proud. p. 116. 120 Two milder kinds of his punishments. p. 122 Of the folly,
baseness, inhumanity, impiety, and injustice of pride. p. 123. Of the
contentiousnesse, ugliness, and wastfulnesse of Pride. p. 124. 125 Pride like
a Thief, like thunder, like a venomous beast, like a Moth, or worm. p. 126
How pride is to be avoided. p. 127. An Exhortation to the love of God. page
128. If God love us, we need not so much fear the ill will of men: this
cleared by two comparisons. page 129
The Christians Looking-glass.
PSALM. 31. VER. 23. Love ye the LORD, all his Saints, for the LORD preserves
the faithful, and abundantly rewards the proud-doer.


HOLY David, having in four verses next afore-going declared the goodness of
GOD to them that fear him: and among them to himself in special; in this
verse he exhorts All Saints; even all that the LORD has sanctified to
himself by his mercies, to deuote and addict themselves to the LORD by love.

In this verse two things are considerable: First, the Psalmist Exhortation,
Love ye the LORD all his Saints; And secondly his Reasons to set it on, drawn
from an act of GODS grace to some, and of his justice to others, expressed in
the words ensuing.

In the exhortation three things are to be observed: first, the duty
required, Love: secondly, the object of it, the LORD: thirdly, the persons, of
whom it is to be performed, All his Saints.

Scal. ex. 301 Sec. 1.
Of love first, Amor est affectus vnionis. Love is an affection of union; Quo
cum re amata aut vnimur, aut perpetuamus vnionem: By the which we are either
united, or do continue the union with the thing beloved. What love is.
Or Love is a certain motion, whereby the heart is moved toward that, which
either is Truly, or Seemingly good, desiring to draw the good unto it self,
that it might enjoy it. The object of love.
For the object of love is good; The property of love.
And though a man sometimes love an evil, yet it is to him a seeming good: And
the Nature of love is to unite and Knit diverse things together, and of sundry
things to make one; And a regular and true-hearted love is that, which causes
us to love a thing* because it is good in it self, and not for any base, or
by-respect. With this love we ought to love GOD, and our neighbor for GOD.
Love of GOD what.


The love then, wherewith we are exhorted to love the LORD, is an Holy
affection, Whereby we love GOD in CHRIST JESUS, for himself: Or it is, a
Gracious affection of the Heart, arising out of Knowledge and Faith in GOD, and
kindled in the soul by the HOLY GHOST, by which a man is joined and Knit to
GOD, taking delight and content in him more, then in any thing besides.

First, Love is an affection.
I call it an affection of the heart, because with it the heart is affected and
inclined; affections being certain motions of the heart, where they have their
seat and being.

Love a grace.
Secondly, I said it is a Gracious affection; for to love is a work of Nature,
but to love an object W^ll, that is truly Good, as is the LORD, is (...), a
work of Grace. For we are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing,
1. Cor. 3. 5.
as of our selves: Therefore our sufficiency and strength to love a right object
rightly, must needs be from the Grace of GOD, Who works in us both the will
and the deed of his own good pleasure. Phil. 2. 13.


Thirdly, I say this love arises out of the Knowledge and Faith in GOD. Ovid.
Love is from knowledge
For Quod latet, ignotum est, ignoti nulla cupido; Things unknown are
unaffected, and love is according to a man's acquaintance: A man cannot love
GOD, before he know that GOD is, and that he is good, and therefore worthy
love, sweet and amiable, and according to that measure of knowledge, that men
have of him, and of his benefits, and according as they ponder and remember
them, so they may be said to love him: And for because our knowledge of him is
in this world nothing so perfect as it shall be in the world to come,
therefore also our love on earth is not so perfect, as it shall be in the
heavens, when besides the vision of Grace we shall attain unto the vision of
Glory, 1. Cor. 13. 9. 12. Vision of Grace, and of Glory.
When We shall see face to face, and know as we are known, as the Apostle
speaks to the Corinthians. Will ye see this in the glass of humane
practice? The last point cleared by Similies.
A child not knowing the worth of silver preferres a Counter to it; Barbarous
people not knowing the benefits of learning love it not. The covetous man
knowing the virtue of gold, hoords it, loves it as his GOD: A good soul
knowing the vileness and dangers of sin shunnes it, loathes it; and
perceiving the benefits of true Religion loves it, follows it; and experience
shows that many men, places, things, are vnloued, and unregarded, because
their virtues, properties, excellencies are not known to them, that do
looke-ouer and neglect them. He then that would love GOD, Why men love GOD no
better.
let him learn to know GOD: If men knew him well, they would not love him so
ill. The reason why men commonly are so far in love with pleasures, profits,
and preferments is because they know the sweetness of them, though they prove
often bitter to them in the latter end, so as that they might justly wish they
had not known them, or had known better how to have used them: So surely our
knowledge of GOD would stir up our love, did we know him and understand his
perfections well and truly, he would ravish our hearts, but the love of the
world does raise up such a mist within us, as that our eyes are darkened, the
stars of our understanding are clouded, so that we see not, we think not of
his lovely Nature, we cannot behold his Beauty: But let us dispearse these
fogs, and labor to know him, that we may be fit to love him. Love is as a
thread, and knowledge a Needle.
Love like a third sowes our souls to GOD, but the way is prepared by
knowledge as by a needle.

And as concerning Faith, Love springs out of faith.
certain it is that faith in the love of GOD makes a man return his love unto
GOD, for till a man believe that GOD does love him, and is reconciled to him,
he comes not to him: So long as he apprehends nothing but wrath, he flies
him as his enemy; and being punished he repines and murmurres, as male-conted:
But when a man comes to be persuaded of GODS favor to him, and begins to have
affiance in his mercy, forthwith he begins to draw near by love unto him,
he sets his heart upon him, and in love preferres him to all the world: And
the more he believes, the more he loves, his soul is ready to say with David,
Thou art my LORD, Ps. 16. 2. 5. and 103. 1. 3. 4
and the portion of my inheritance: My soul praise thou the LORD, and all that
is within thee praise his holy Name, which forgiueth all thine iniquity, and
heals all thine infirmities, which redeemeth thy life from the grave, and
crowns thee with mercy and compassion?

The truth of which we see confirmed by Saint Paul, who says that Love is out
of a pure heart, 1. Tim. 1. 5.
and a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned: Without the which faith also
there is neither pure heart, nor good conscience. This we may illustrate by
the dealings of men, A Similie.
who will not make a league of love with them whom they trust not, but rather
abandon all society with them: On the contrary, whom they dare trust them they
dare live with; in whom they have confidence, in them they do delight; and of
whose love they are persuaded, them they will love and show kindness too. A
Similie.
And we see by experience that one flame licks another to it, and one fire
draws another; so one love also begets and draws another. And if it happen
that a man be hated of him to whom he bears love, Why a man hates him, that
loves him.
it is because he that is loved, takes no notice of, nor feels the love which
is borne unto him. Let us therefore have faith in GOD, for as we believe, so
shall we love: A Similie.
Without doubt the brethren of Joseph, when they met with him in Egypt, did
not love him as their brother, till he had made himself known, and till they
were verily persuaded that he was their brother; so we shall never love GOD
as his children, till we acknowledge him for our Father, and be by faith
persuaded of his love.

Fourthly, Love a fire.
I said that love was Kindled in the soul: For the love of GOD is a
Celestial Fire, serving to comfort and refresh the heart* and to inflame it
with an holy zeal and to consume these filthy vapors of malice, envy, pride,
treachery, and such other noisome lusts, as ar^ within him.

Fifthly, I say it is kindled by the HOLY SPIRIT, therefore Sai^^ Paul calls it
the Fruit of the Spirit; Gal. 5. 22. Love, the work of the Spirit.
for if the hatred of GOD be a work of the flesh, and from the motion of the
Devil; then the true love of GOD must needs be the work of the Spirit, who
enlightens the mind, inspireth faith, and persuades the heart to love and
delight in GOD: How much are we bound to GOD, of whose pure love to us it is,
that we have any love to him: He comes down to us, before we go up to him;
He draws us before we run, and looks upon us before we turn our eyes to
him: Ps. 144. 3. Ps. 116. 12. Psalm. 145. 1.
LORD, what is man that thou regardest him, or the son of man, that thou so
think on him? What shall I render unto the LORD for all his benefits toward
me? O my GOD and my King, I will extol thee, and will bless thy Name for
ever and ever.

Love knits us to God.
Finally, I said that love does knit our hearts to GOD, and makes a man take him
for his chief contentment: For as hatred does rend, disioyne, and separate: So
love does unite, knit, and tie together. Love married Jacob and Rahel, love
united David and Jonathan: and so our hearts by love are wedded and united to
GOD, and for GOD to one another: That they might be knit together in love,
says Saint Paul. Col. 2. 2. Ioh. 17. 21.
'Twas Love* that made our Savior pray that all his Members might be One with
Him, and his Father: and it is love also, that makes us deny our selves and the
world, and study to live so, as if we were not ours, The fruits of hatred and
love.
but GODS: It Is hatred that breeds dislike, auersation, and discontentednesse:
And so it is love, that causes joy, delight, contentment: When love has once
possessed the soul, it moves it to joy in GOD, to make him her prime
contentment, and to exclaim with the Psalmist: Whom have I in heaven but thee?
Psa. 73. 25. 26.
and I have desired none on earth with thee: GOD is the strength of mine heart
and my portion for ever. And undoubtedly, what thing soever a man does best
love, that to him is his best contentment: for love causes content, as the
light does comfort, A simile.
and contentment is embarked and enbotled in it, as a Tree in a Bark, as water
in the clouds; Therefore the Greek word ((...)) signifying to love, signifies
to rest in, or to be contented: And thus we have seen what love is.

GOD the object of this love.
The Object, on whom this love here spoke of should be fixed, is the LORD,
even he, who is gracious, and merciful, Ps. 145. 8. 17
slow to anger, righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works: Psalm.
145. 3. and 147. 5. and 146. 6 7. 8. and 147. 3 Ps. 145. 19 20. and 146. 9.
Even he, whose greatness is incomprehensible, and whose wisdom is infinite,
which made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that is therein; and keeps his
fidelity for ever; which executes justice for the oppressed, gives bread to
the hungry, loves the righteous, heals those that are broken in heart;
preserves all that love him, fulfill the desires of all that fear him
releeueth the fatherless and widow, and shows mercy unto thousands to them
that love him: Ex. 20. 6.
Even he, I say, that remembered us in our base estate, cut the cords of the
wicked, rescued us from our oppressors, delivered us from our sins, brought us
from our errors, translated us out of Babylon, saved us from that Purple
Harlot, showed us his Word, given us his Gospel, honored us with peace;
delivered our Rulers, rescued his Anointed, and saved us all, both Church and
Kingdom, from that Hel-made, horrid, Nouem. 5. 1605.
and prodigious Powder. O LORD, how great is thy love unto us! how amiable is
thy Name in all the world! Blessed be thy Name for ever, and let all thy
people say, Amen.

The Person^ who are exhorted to this Love are All GODS Saints, Who ought to
love GOD.
even all they, that have tasted of his love, and which in mercy he has
hallowed for himself; even All of them, young and old, rich and poor, high and
low, men, women, and children; for in saying All, he ex^epteth None; the Young
men for their strength; Old men for their wisdom, the Rich for their wealth,
the Poor for their correction, the High for their greatness; the Low for
their meanness, with which virtue and piety commonly cottens best with; Men for
their supereminent honor, Women, because he has graced their Sex, by
bringing forth of a Savior, and Children for his great care and manifold
protection of them: and all in general for their Sanctification by grace on
earth, and eternal Salvation in immortal glory in the Heavens.

Object.
But are none bound to love the LORD but his Saints?

Solution. Psalm. 145. Math. 5. 1. Tim. 4 10
Yes, without doubt, the Law ties all, for all are of his making, his goodness
reaches unto all, and he is the Savior of all: But David here speaks unto
Saints only, being such as himself most delighted in, and of whom he best
hoped, being best affected, and such also as whom GOD does most dearly love,
and honor with his greatest favors.

Our lesson then from hence is this; All of us, every mothers child, Doctrine.
without exemption of any; should love the LORD.

But because, Barbarus his ego sum, cum non intellig^r vlli, Ovid.
as he that speaks Greek or Lattine to him, that is no Grecian or Latinist,
is but as a Barbarian to him, and does but beat the air: So the Language and
discourse of love to him, that loves not, is but barbarous and unpleasing, as
sounding Brass, and a tinckling Cymball: T^erefore that we may conceiu^ and
reap profit by these things, which shall be delivered concerning our love of
GOD, it behoues us to blow up the dying and fainting coals of this heavenly
and holy fire within our breasts: Job. 12. 11.
And seeing that the ear tastes words, as the palate does meat, let us have
understanding and attentive ears, that discerning the things, we shall hear,
to be good, we may receive and digest them, and like prudent hearers
shewforth the fruits thereof in our lives and conuersations.

Reason 1. Why we should love the LORD from the necessity thereof. Deuteronomy. 6. 5
and 10. 12.
First, then I say, Necessity lies upon us to love the LORD: Woe unto us, if we
love him not. For first, it is GODS express commandment: Thou shall love the
LORD thy GOD; and now Israel (says Moses) what does the LORD thy GOD require
of thee, but to fear and love him. This our Savior calls a Great
Commandment; Mat. 22. 38
the Commander is great, the Object is great, the use of the duty is great,
and their reward is great, that take care to do it: GODS precept binds us to
love him.
And though there were no other reason to move us to it, but his bare command,
yet were that reason strong enough to bind us: Sic vult, sic iubet, stet pro
ratione v^luntas. The power of a King, the authority of a Father, the place of
a Master, necessitatis, the subjection, and obedience of a Subject, Child,
and Servant. But GOD is our King, our Father, and our Master, he has an
absolute, inevitable and uncontrollable power and jurisdiction over us:
Therefore his very bare command should condition and control us without more
ado.

But secondly, besides the precept, Except we love GOD we shall be cursed.
there is a most heavy curse, which, unless a man do love GOD, he cannot
escape: For though our love of GOD be not the caus^ why, but a sign that GOD
will bless us, yet our hatred, or Non-loue, does deserve his curse. Therefore
Saint Paul denounces him accursed, 1. Cor. 16. 22. Romans 9. 5.
that loves not the LORD JESUS, who is GOD over all, blessed for ever, Amen.

Thirdly, except we love GOD, No love no worship.
we cannot worship him: For true worship is, Love joined with duty toward a
man's superiors: So that, Scal. ex 317 s. 3.
where there is no love, there is but counterfeit service, or none at all.

And indeed, No love of GOD, n^ lo^^ of the go^. ^. h. 3.^^.14.
as he that loves not GOD, cannot worship him, so neither can he love his
neighbor for GOD, and in GOD: And He that loves not his brother, is not of
GOD but abides in death: Certainly, he that loves not the father, as the
father, loves not the son, as the son, loves not his brother as the child of
GOD, as the brother of CHRIST, as the child of the Church: which we all
ought, and who so does not, shall have small reward.

GODS ordinances profit not him, that loves not GOD.
And that the necessity of this duty may yet appear, let us know, that as iron
is unfit to be wrought on, unless it be heated in the fire: and as wax will
not seal well, except it be warm and soft: even so are we, till we be
inflamed with love, till that holy fire has heated v^: Till then, the Word,
the Sacraments, the Minister, his Binding, Loosing, Preaching, Praying,
Blessing, will be of no true reckoning with us, and we shall take no comfort
in them.

Without love, good deeds, fa^our of ^en, and^. ^e nohing ^o^^h.
And say that a man had the love of all men; say that he could speak all
Languages in the world, and were able to remove Mountains, to cast out devils,
to cure all diseases, to heal all wounds, and should crumble out all his goods
to the poor, suffer for the truth, do and suffer many things for his Country,
yet if he loved not GOD, he might truly say with Saint Paul; 1. Cor. 13. 2
He were Nothing: And thus we see the necesity of loving GOD.

A second argument of this duty, 2d Reason, To love GOD is a matter of equity.
is from the Equity thereof: For seeing Almighty GOD does love us, as it
appears by his Electing, Redeeming, Sanctifying, and Preserving us in CHRIST
JESUS his beloved Son, it is a matter of equity that we should remonstrate
our love unto him in that his Son; and the rather also, because our love to
him comes short in measure of his love to us: For GODS love is a Descending
love, but our love to him is an Ascending love; GODS love to us desce^ding
and love descending is more natural, more vigorous, and more vehement then
love ascending: As we see in fathers and mothers, who love their children
better then their children love them. And reason may be given hereof: For GOD
knows us better then we know him: And there is no corruption, no vitiosity of
nature in him, as there is in us: We are not so good and candid of nature, as
He: Neither have we any thing of ours in GOD to love, as he has in us; for
we, and every good thing in us is of GOD.

Besides, GOD loves us, that deserve his hatred, Ephe. 2.
being by nature dead in sins, and children of wrath, and bringing forth many
roots of bitterness, and fruits of injustice; how unequally then should we
deal with him, if we should not love him, who deserves our love, being most
lovely in himself, and bearing such love unto us. What is man (says David
unto GOD) that thou art so mindful of him, Psalm. 8. 4. 8. 144. 3.
or the son of man, that thou think on him? And what is GOD, o man, that
thou art so unmindful of him, bearing so small respect and love unto him? If
it be intolerable ingratitude for a man to be loved of a man, and to receive
continual tokens of love from him, and yet in the mean time not to love his
lover, and to show no signs of kindness toward him? What horrible impiety,
injustice, and unthankfulness, is it to be beloved of GOD, and to return no
love unto him; to receive daily testimonies of love from him, and yet to show
no love unto his Name? Far be this uneven and unthankful dealing from us,
that owe more love unto him, then we can express in work or word? Nimis
durus est animus, August.
qui si dilectionem n^lebat impendere, n^lie rependere: His heart is Oak, not
flesh, but flint, that though he will not begin to love, yet finding love
will show no love: But GOD does love us; out of his love he sent his Son,
Ioh. 3. 16. Col. 1. 13.
his only Son, the Son of his love into the world to save us; He sends us
fruitful seasons, and fills our hearts with gladness: Lam. 3. 22. 23.
It is his mercies that we are not consumed, they are renewed every morning.
Yea, we should be very unjust and injurious unto our selves, if we will not
love him, seeing (as the Apostle teaches) All things (life and death, Romans 8.
28.
health, and sickness, same and reproach, plenty and penury, prosperity and
adversity) work together for good unto those that love GOD. The equity of our
love further explained.
And what reason is there, that we should desire his love to us, and withold
ours from him? Or what reason have we to require love of our wives, children,
servants, neighbors, acquaintances, if we care not to show love to him, who
has adopted, married, and assumed us unto him? Or finally, with what equity
can we desire that our commands should be respected of those that depend on
us, if we make no count of this duty (which draws on all the rest) which he
exacteth and expects at our hands? We see then that common sense and Equity,
extorts it from us, and calls us to it.

3. Reasons from the profit of love.
Thirdly, the commodities of this love should move us to the entertainment and
performance of it. For first, 1. Commodity.
by this love our faith produces those good duties, which we owe to GOD. For
Faith, is as an Hand Receiving, but by love we give and bestow, and without it
we can do no good works well: Therefore the Apostle says, Gal. 5. 6.
that Faith works by love: And as Saint Austen speaks, Our life and all our
conversation is named of our love: Nec faciunt bonos vel malos mores, nisi boni
vel mali sint amores: Which being good or bad, makes our manners to be
thereafter; such as the love is, such is the life; ^ike as the love (...) the
l^^e.
a holy love, a holy life; an earthly love, an earthly life: If a man's love be
set on GOD, his life must needs be good: And though this be certain, A man
is justified by Faith, yet this is true; The life of a man is justified by
Love, a naughty love, a naughty life: Again, his life is good, whose love is
fixed on good: and what greater good then GOD, who is the good of goods, and
n^thing but Good? 3. Commodity.


Secondly, this love does poise and season knowledge, which without love would
be windy, light, flashy, and unsavory: Knowledge without Charity makes a man
to swell and bluster; 1. Cor. 8. 1.
but the love of GOD and of man, for GOD will make the best learned most humble
and officious. A Similie.
Meat undigested breeds corruption, but being digested, it affoordeth
nourishment and strength: so knowledge, unless it be boiled and concocted in
the stomach of the soul, with this sacred fi^e of love to GOD, and of man for
GOD, it engenders crudities, windiness, and diseases, even corrupt conditions
in heart and life; but being by love digested it is very nourishable and of
great use. A Similie
Yea further, as shewers of rain occasion store of weeds, except there be
heat and dryness to receive, alter, and digest them: but being by the drought
of the ground and heat of the Sun turned and concocted, they make the soil
more fresh and fruitful. Even so the words of instruction, exhortation,
admonition, communication, counsel, consolation, straining from the Scriptures
in the Ministry of the Church, and falling upon men, become unprofitable and
dangerous to them, except they be tempered and received by love: But being by
love embraced, and as it were digested, they bring forth in them the fruits of
righteousness, and make them more fat and fertile, much more serviceable to
both GOD and Man: Yea, whereas meat by heat is turned into the body, and
dewes and shewers into the earth and herbs: By love the word is not turned
into us, but we rather into it, being brought under the obedience of it, and
now no longer seeking and serving the flesh, but studying to conform our
selves to it, and wrestling against our lusts, that it might possess us, guide
and order us. O Love, by thee I go out of my self, that the Word of GOD might
enter in, by thee I war against my self, that it might reign in peace
within me, by thee I mortify mine earthly members, that it might live, might
like, and prosper in me!

3. Commodity of love. By the love of GOD a man may know his estate before GOD.
Thirdly, by the love of GOD we may know in what estate we are in. A man by
grace within him may know the grace of GOD unto him: A may by looking upon a
Dyall may know the motion of the Sun in heaven; so by sifting his own soul
he may see the good will of GOD unto him. I see not the air, but I can
perceive the operation of the air; neither do I see the heart (or love of GOD)
as it is in his own breast, but there are certain operations of his love,
even in the hearts of men, which if they truly find, they may assure
themselves of his love unto them. Now that love, whereby a man loves GOD, is a
work of GODS love, whereby he loves man; So that he that loves GOD, may
conclude that GOD loves him. For GOD calls no man effectually, but out of his
love unto him: But as Saint Paul shows, he that loves GOD is called of his
purpose: And again, Romans 8. 28.
If any man love GOD, 1. Cor. 8. 3.
(says he) the same is known (scientia approbatiua) That is, acknowledged,
and loved, and approved, of him. And Saint John says; We love him, 1. Ioh. 4.
19. Eccles. 1. 7. A Similie.
because he loved us first. For our love springs out of his, as the Rivers
from the Sea; his love drawing our hearts unto him, as the Loadstone does iron
to it, or as the Sardius does wood; our love answering to his love, as an Echo
to a man's voice, or as a face does to a face in water: A Similie.
And as one candle does lighten another, so the consideration of his love to us
does cause the reflection of our love to him: Which our consideration of his
love unto us, is a gracious operation of his love within us, being a fruit, not
of the flesh, which is bent against GOD, but of the Spirit, which proceeds
from GOD: And for because the haters of GOD, and the lovers of worldly things,
are of Babylon, of the world of the devil; and seeing the lovers of GOD are of
Jerusalem, of the Catholic Church our Mother, of GOD our Father, and have
their sins forgiven (Interoget se vnusquisque quid amet, Luke 7. 47. Aug. in
Ps. 64.
and inueniat vnde sit ciuis) Let every man but examine himself what he
loves, and he shall find in what estate he is, and to what City he does
belong; It Is true I confess a man is not loved because he loves, but because
he is loved therefore he loves: A Similie.
And as the Sun shining upon a plate of silver is not idle and void of
operation, but heates the plate, which sends from it both light and heat: So
GOD shining with the resplendent and burning beams of his love upon us, is not
now idle, and void of all success, but inflames our heart with love, by which
we are both well affected toward him, and for his sake also toward others;
that as no man can stand by, or meddle with, that plate of silver, which shall
not receive of the light and heat of it; so no man can (as it were) pass by
us, or have any dealing with us, but we shall show our good affection toward
him.

Fourthly, 4. Commodity of our love of GOD.
the love of GOD is not lazy; if it labor not it is no love. Our love of GOD
ingenders in us the love of the godly for GOD, which is also very comfortable:
For as he that loves the King, as King, The love of GOD makes us to love the
godly.
cannot but love his faithful and loyal subjects: And as he that loves the
father, cannot, will not, A Similie.
does not hate his child; and as he that loves his friend, will not misuse
his picture: So he that truly loves GOD, will also love those, that by their
godly conversation do show themselves to be the servants and children of GOD,
and which are the liueliest pictures of GOD, which mortals can see: And this
kind of love is comfortable, because hereby we may assure our selves to be
the true Disciples of our LORD, and know (as the Apostle teaches) that we are
Translated from death to life. 1. Ioh. 3. 14.


5. Commodity. A Similie
And as many boughs come from one root, and much water from one spring; so
many virtues arise from this love, and (as Gregory speaks, Non habet
viriditatem ramus boni ope^^, nisi manserit in radiee charitatis) the works of
all virtues will but wither, except they remain in the greenenesse of this
Root, except they be nourished by this love: The love of money, A Similie.
the love of mammon is the root and nourisher of all evil; so the love of GOD
is the mother and nurse of all good, of all pious Offices unto GOD, and
Christian duties unto man.

6. Commodity. A Similie.
And in one word, the love of GOD is as strong as death; for as death does kill
the body, so our love to GOD does mortify our love to the world, and like a
strong wind it dispels the thick and stinking fogs of rancour, wrath, malice:
And as the rising of the Sun does drive away the cold and dullness of the
night, and as the pouring in of wine into a vessel causes the air to give
place; so the love of GOD does diminish and send packing the inordinate love of
worldly vanities, and when our hearts are once warmed with it, it causes the
coldness of our affections unto good to depart and lessen: When GOD comes into
the heart (as he does when the heart does love him) Mammon must needs go out;
When we fix our eyes on heaven we remove them from the earth; and when we
fall into a league of love with GOD, it cannot be but that we must fall out
of love, and into hatred, with all his enemies. Therefore David says out of
his love to GOD: Psalm. 139. 21, 22.
Do not I hate them, O LORD, that hate thee? I hate them with an vnfeygned
hatred, as if they were mine utter enemies: And thus we have had a say of the
commodiousnesse of this our love to GOD.

4. Arguments of love to GOD from the excellency o^ it. Excel. 1. 1. Ioh. 4. 7.
Iam. 1. 17.
The Excellency thereof remains yet to be discussed: True love, wherewith
GOD is affected, is excellent in all these respects which follow. First, in
respect of the Author of it, which is not man, but GOD: For love, as Saint
John shows, comes of GGD: and whosoever loves GOD, does it by the finger
and gift of GOD.

Excel. 2.
Secondly, in respect of the true Ends thereof, which are not base but
honorable, as the glory of GOD, the salvation of our soul, the edification of
our brother, the honor of our calling, and that we might not grieve the
Spirit of GOD.

Excel. 3.
Thirdly, in respect of that of GODS, which moves us to love, which is his
goodness, because he is good in himself, and good to us.

Excel. 4.
Fourthly, in regard of the Subjects of it, or the persons, in whom it reigns,
which are only the beloved Saints and Servants of GOD, the excellentest of
humane race, and in them the Heart, even the best member in them is the Hearth
or Altar, on which this heavenly fire kindled by the HOLY GHOST does lie.

Fifthly, Excel. 5.
in respect of the manifold and excellent Attendants and Companions, which
wait upon it; even all the virtues: For our love of GOD, is not forlorn and
solitary, but like an honorable Lady, very well attended.

Sixthly, for the perpetuity thereof, Excel. 6.
beyond faith and hope: For whereas they shall cease, when a man has once
obtained full fruition of the things which he does believe and to expect have
and enjoy; love shall not cease, but become complete.

Seventhly, our love of GOD, Excel. 7.
has three most excellent Effects, to speak of no more.

First, 1. Effect of love.
it makes a man officious to GOD, and for GOD to Man. True obedience is the
fruit of love; and all obedience which is not of love, is hipocriticall and
unsavory. We see the love of a child forces him to obey his father, though he
had not a rod, not an arm: So GODS Child by his love is moved to serve GOD;
yea, and would study to obey hi^, though he would not strike, though there
were no hell to be punished in for disobedience: Yea, the force of love is such,
that it will make a man obey GOD, though there were no After-reward of
obedience: Even as we see amongst men, love will enforce a man to do well
unto one, whom he loves, even freely, then when the party receiving the
benefit is not able now, nor likely hereafter, to make a requital of it.

2. Effect of love. 1. Ioh. 4. 8.
Secondly, it makes a man like to GOD (for GOD is LOVE) and it is not the least
commendation of a child to be like his father.

3. Effect.
Thirdly, he that loves GOD, does, as it were, deprive himself of himself,
and bestows himself on GOD, whom he does love; insomuch that he does dye,
by little, and little, in himself; but GOD, whom he loves, lives in him:
For the love of GOD (if sincere and fervent) is of a Rauishing disposition, by
the which the lover is so rapt out of himself, that he forgets himself,
denies himself, and is wholly in GOD, whom he loves, and GOD, whom he
aff^cteth, being in him. So that this love is able to make the lover say; I
live, but not I now, but GOD lives in me. A Similie.
For even as the love of the world makes the worldling live unto the world, and
the world to live in him; so, as it may be said of them in some sort: They two
are become one: So our love to GOD does cause us to live to GGD, and GOD (as it
were) to live in us; so as that we are now no more Ours, but His, no more Two,
but One: Neither seek we our selves, but Him: Non nostra sed sua; not ours,
but His. Excel. 8. The reward of the love of GOD.


Eighthly, our love of GOD may be said to be excellent, in respect of that
excellent and supereminent Reward, wherewith GOD will recompense them, that
love him, how poor or mean soever: and this is no less then a Crown, then a
Kingdom, the Crown of Glory, the Kingdom of Heaven. Hearken my beloved
Brethren (says Saint James) Has not GOD chosen the Poor of this world, Iam.
2. 5.
that they should be rich in faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom, which he has
promised to them, that love him? 2. Tim. 4. 8. Why it is called the crown of
righteousness.
And Saint Paul likewise shows, that the Crown of righteousness, even that,
which CHRIST has purchased by his righteousness, that which GOD has in mercy
promised, and in justice will perform, that wherewith righteous men shall be
rewarded, shall be rendered to them, that love his coming, which only they
do, that love him himself. Doubtless, he that loves not the Judge, loves not
his coming to judgment: He then that would live in heaven like a King, let
him love GOD first on earth like a Subject: He that would have that Glory, let
him have this Grace. Oh! how men love the world, whose pleasures are but for a
season, and whose joys are but imperfect? But in the presence of GOD there is
fuln^sse of joy, Ps. 16. 11.
and at his right hand there are pleasures for evermore. O! how covetous are
men of riches, how ambitious of a Crown? And yet Riches remain not always,
Pro. 27. 24.
nor the Crown from generation to generation: But the riches of Glory, that
come By, I say, not For.
By the love of GOD, are everlasting; the Crown and Kingdom promised to them,
that love him, is eternal and unchangeable. The preferments, profits and
pleasures, which the earth can afford, are obuious to the eye, and not so
goodly as foolish men imagine: But the things which GOD has prepared for them
that love him, 1. Cor. 2. 9.
are such as no eye has seen, no ear has heard, no heart has conceived;
none can express them but they that enjoy them. Oh, that men would therefore
set their love upon him, and remove it from the world! For he, that loves GOD,
loves him that will reward him with peeerelesse honor; but he, that loves the
world, loves his own betrayer, for the world says to the devils concerning
him that is in love with her, as Judas said to the Jews: Mar ^4. 44.
Whomsoever I shall kiss, it is he, Judge. 4. 19. 22.
take him: And as Iael served Sis^ra; so serves the world all those, that she
lulles a sleep within her Tent: Well may she feed them with her milk and
butter, but if she get them once a sleep, she peirces the very Temples of
their souls, and nails them fast unto the ground. Excel 9.


Finally, this love is excellent and matchless in respect of the Object of it,
who is the Omni-potent, Omni-present, Omni-scient, All-wise, Everliving, and
Euer-louing GOD, who is Goodness, Mercy, Justice, Love, and Life it self, who
only is Verity, Virtue, Unity, Amity, the Beauty of Beauties, the Perfection
of Perfections, even Beauty and Perfection it self. What IEHOVA, CVRIOS,
DOMINVS, and LORD do signity.
In Hebrew called JEHOVAH, because he is of, and for himself, all other
things else being both from him and for him: In Greek (...), because he has
authority over all: In Latin DOMINVS, because he tameth, rules, and owneth
all things: In English LORD, because he has Honor and Authority, and for
that he is IL-LAF-FORD (where the word LORD by contraction, or corruption
comes) which is as much as a Giver, Ps. 104. 27. and 145. 16. Psalm. 3 4. 9 10.
, or an Affoorder of Bread: For he gives food to all flesh, and bread, with
all things needful, for this life present, and for the life to come, to all
his servants that attend and fear him.

The execellency therefore of the Object should move us to the love thereof:
What Nature is there comparable to GODS? Whose conditions is so sweet, so
absolute, as his? What can thou love, that is worthy love, which is not be
found in him in all compleatnesse? Do thou delight in the Mighty? Ier. 32. 27.
Behold (says he) I am the LORD GOD of all flesh: Is there any thing too hard
for me? If he but speak the word, it is done, his power is so great.

Do thou love Wisdom? GOD is All-knowing and most Prudent: He scatters
the devices of the crafty, Job 5. 12. 23
so that their hands cannot accomplish that, which they do enterprise: He
takes the wise in their craftiness, and the counsel of the wicked is made
foolish. He is wise in heart, Job 9. 4. and 12. 16. 17.
and mighty in strength: who has been fierce against him and has prospered?
With him is strength and wisdom: He causes the Councillors to go as
spoiled, and makes the Judges fools: Pro. 21. 30
There is no wisdom nor understanding, nor counsel against the LORD.

Delightest thou in Valor and Stoutnesse of Spirit? Psalm. 24. 8.
The LORD, is strong and mighty in Battle: He leads away Princes as a Prey,
and overthrows the Mighty: Job 12. 19. 21.
He powers contempt upon Princes, and makes the strength of the Mighty
weak: The courage of al men, the fortitude of all Angels; the stoutnes of all
creatures, is to GODS, as a drop of water to the vast Ocean, the light of a
candle to the splendour of the Sun, or as a thing finite to infinite.

Is thy delight in him, that deserves admiration? The LORD does great things,
and unsearchable, yea merueilous things without number. Lo, when he goes by
me (says Job) I see him not, and when he passes by, Job. 9. 10. 11.
I perceive him not! Behold, when he takes a prey who can make him to restore
it? Who shall say unto him, what do thou? Isa. 40. 22. 23.
He sits upon the circle of the earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as
Grasshoppers: He stretches out the heavens, as a curtain, and spreads them
out as a Tent to dwell in: He brings the Princes to nothing, and makes the
Judges of the earth as vanity: He blows upon them, and they wither, and his
whirlwind takes them away as stubble.

Will thou love the Faithful and him that is constant in Truth? GOD is
faithful, 1. Cor. 1.^. Psa. 146 6 Psa. 100. 5
he keeps his fidelity for ever, and his truth indureth from generation to
generation.

Could thou affect one that is lust in all his proceedings? The LORD is
righteous in all his ways: Ps. 145. 17 Psa. 96. 13
He will judge the world with righteousness, and the people with his truth.

Could thou find in thine heart to love him that is merciful by Nature, and
which has compassion on the poor, and him that is afflicted and weary? Psa.
116. 5 Psalm. 146. 9. 2. Sam. 22 28. Isa. 40. 29 Job. 36. 15.
The LORD is merciful and full of compassion: He relieueth the fatherless,
and is a friend to the poor: He gives strength unto him that faints, and
unto him that has no strength he increases power: He delivers the poor in
his affliction, and opens their ear in trouble.

Will thou fix thy soul on him, that loves a good heart, and which hates him,
that is ill disposed? Behold, GOD will not cast away an upright man, Job. 8.
20. Psalm. 84. 11. Job. 13. 16.
neither will he take the wicked by the hand. The LORD will give grace and
glory, and no good thing will he withold from them, that walk uprightly:
but the hypocrite shall not come before him.

Would thou set thy heart on him, that is so complete in himself, as that
he can neither be profited by the justice of any, Psalm. 16. 2.
nor hurt by the sin of any? This is only the LORD: My goodness extends
not to thee, says David. May a man be profitable unto GOD (says Eliphaz) as
he, that is wise, Job. 22. 2. 3
may be profitable to himself? Is it any thing to the Almighty that thou art
righteous? or is it profitable unto him that thou make thy ways upright? if
thou sinnest, Job. 35. 6. 7. 8.
what ^ost thou against him? Yea, when thy sins be many, what do thou unto
him? If thou be righteous, what give thou unto him? or what receives he at
thine hand? Thy wickedness may hurt a man, as thou art: and thy righteousness
may profit the Son of man: No man can give any thing to GOD, which he has
not, nor take ought from him which he has.

Finally, will thou love him, that will save them, that fear him, and preserve
them that love him? Then love the LORD; For his salvation is near to them that
fear him: Because he has loved me, therefore will I deliver him: Psalm. 85.
9. and 91. 14. and 145. 20. 1. Pet. 1. 5. 9.
The LORD preserves all them that love him: And by his power he will guarde
them through faith, that in the end they shall attain to the end of their
faith, the salvation of their souls in heaven. And in one word, because
nothing does more move a man to love another, then faith and constancy, then
this, that a man loves one that is no flincher, no changling, Mal. 3. 6.
even this should provoke us to the love of GOD, Who changes not, Iam. 1. 17.
and with whom (as Saint James speaks) is no variableness, nor shadow of
turning. Is. 46. 10. 11 Ier. 31. 3. Ioh. 13. 1. Ier. 32. 40. Psalm. 94. 14.
His counsel shall stand; he will do whatsoever he has said: Whom he loves
once, he loves with an everlasting love unto the end: And will never turn
away from them to do them good: but will delight in them to do them good, and
will not fail them nor forsake them.

The truth is, Five reasons why GOD should be loved above all things. 1.
Reason. 2. Cor. 12. 15.
there is no man, no nothing in the world, which does deserve our love so as
GOD does, or which should stand cheek by ioule with him in our affections.

For first, a man may love men, and yet not be loved of them: For (as it
sometimes falls out) the more that some are loved, the less they love,
affecting them least that love them most. But the more any man loves GOD, the
more he may be sure that GOD loves him; Not that GOD is drawn to love for
the merit of our love: But because our love to him is a fruit of his love to
us, and increases as his: Even as the more heat is, which comes from a
wall, or from the ground, the more it argues that the Sun beats upon it.

Secondly, earthly things, 2. Reason.
as riches, honor, credit, preferments, and the like, cannot give a man such
contentment, as may be found in GOD. For they are momentany and uncertain;
but GOD is cerraine, constant, and eternal. They are mingled with something,
which may displease us: But GOD is altogether profitable, and full of pleasure:
A man may be glutted with them, he may love them too well, he may surfeit on
them, he may joy so long in them, as at last he may be punished with his own
perdition: but no can be too full of GOD: He will cloy no man's stomach, no
man can love him too much, too long; for the measure of loving him is to love
him without measure, the end is endless, it is a debt which is always due
unto him, and for ever; which a man must be ever a paying, and never have done
paying: And further, although a man had all pleasures, all wealth and honor
that the whole world could afford him, yet if he gave way unto his mind, he
would still wish for more, and delight in change: For the Round world, and all
that is in it, is not able to fill man's heart, that is Triangular, Pro. 30. 16.
and insatiable as fire, that never ^aith it is enough; For if any man be
content, and think he has enough, it is out of discretion because he sees no
true contentment can come from earthly things: But GOD, because he is the
fullness of good, a pure, and a perfect Truth, Beauty, and Perfection, is able
to give true and full contentment to the soul, to all the souls of men, yea
though there were 2 thousand thousand worlds of men.

Thirdly, we love men, 3. Reason.
whose fury reaches not unto the soul, and whose love sometimes can do but
little good: But the wrath of GOD is the woe of man, his anger reaches unto
the soul, his indignation is more terrible then the roaring of ten thousand
Lions: But in the light of his countenance is life, his favor is like the dew
upon the grass, or as a cloud of the latter rain, his love is even our life,
and the fountain from whence our holiness and happiness, our grace and glory,
our comfort and contentment springs.

4. Reason.
Fourthly, our love to the creature is joined with fear and care, least the
thing, we love should take some harm: Res est solliciti plena timoris amor:
Our friends may be killed or hurt, goods may be stolen, houses may be burnt,
a man's stock may be wasted, his credit may be weakened, his servant seduced,
his children misvsed, and his wife corrupted: A thousand mischances may happen
unto these things, which are subject to fire and water, winds and weather,
birds and beasts, sin and sickness, Men and devils: But GOD is liable to no
such thing in himself, He is over all, under none, altogether blessed,
Impassible, immutable, Invincible, Inviolable.

5. Reason. Act. 10. 34.
Finally, whereas some will be loved of some, but contemn the love of others;
GOD, with whom there is no respect of persons, accepts of every man, that loves
him, yea, though the love of all men can add nothing to him: even as also in
loving other things, men are often jealous, envious, and malicious, and will
endure no riuals, no competitors; which is clean otherwise in our love of GOD*
for so powerful is the grace of GOD in those that love him, as that it makes
men desirous of companions. A man that addicts himself to some man, is afraid
of another, least that he creeping into his love should hinder his gains: But
GOD has enough for all, that loves him, he is able to give them all so much,
as that they themselves shall say, They have enough; He is so well able to
satisfy them all, as that every one of them might say; Psalm. 16. 6.
The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places; yea I have a fair heritage:
Thou do anoint mine head with oil, Psalm. 23. 5
and my cup runs over. And though it fall out sometimes among us, that we
will dislike him, that does increase our acquaintants, followers, or such as
shall hang upon us to be relieved and maintained by us; yet it is not so with
GOD: For if any man shall convert sinners unto him, and increase his friends,
if true, tho not vncostly to him, the same man does a work pleasing to him,
and doing it out of love he shall not loose his reward: For GOD is not unjust
to forget your work, Heb. 6. 10
and labor of your love, (says Saint Paul) which ye have showed unto his
Name. And they (says the LORD) that turn many to righteousness, Dan. 12. 3.
shall shine as the Stars for ever and ever. And indeed wherefore were the
Apostles sent abroad into the world, but to gather Disciples to him, and to
increase his followers?

And that I may yet press this poi^t a little more, being of so great
importance. Tell me, how shall man show himself thankful unto GOD. except
he love him for creating him in his Image? G^^. 1.^7 2^.
How shall he excuse himself, if he love him not, seeing he has not planted
him in a world unfurnished, but has prepared him all things needful: Light
for seeing, Air for breathing, Meats for feeding, Clo^thes for covering, and
has given him rule over the Fish of the Sea, Psalm. 8 7.
the Fowls of Heaven, and over every beast that moves upon the earth?

We are forbidden to have any other GOD unto our selves, Exodus 20. 3
but the LORD which has brought us out of the land of darkness, the region
of death, and delivered us from bondage under sin and satan: which we shall
never be able to observe, unless by love we deuote and wed our selves unto
him.

How shall we sanctify the Name of the LORD, and not defile it, Leuit. 19.
12. 18.
except we love it? How shall we merely upon GODS naked Precept forget an
injury, and ^ot avenge our selves, if ^he love of GOD do not persuade us?

Will any man with Moses post-pose his ow^e greatness to the glory of GOD,
Numb 14.^.12. 13.
except he love ^im? and will he be careful that those, which are committed
to his care, should not behave themselves a^ rebels, and start-awaies, unless
the love of GOD enforce him?

How can parents bring up their children religiously, Deuteronomy. 6. 7. and 11. 19.
Ephe. 6. 4.
instruct them in GODS Commandments carefully, and bring them up (as they are
required) in the information of the LORD piously, except the love of GOD does
move them to it?

How shall we be able to meditate in the Law of GOD day and night, Josh. ^. 8.
as we are exhorted, our dullness and averseness is so great by nature, except
the love of GOD do spur us up and vanquish us?

Judge. 2. 17.
How shall we with the children of Israel, turn quickly out of the way,
wherein our fathers have walked, and go an whoring after the idol, idle and
addle inventions of men; specially if we were but put to it a little, except
our love to GOD restrain and bridle us?

What soul will say to GOD, but that which loves him dearly, as Ruth said to
Naomi, Ruth 1. 16.
Whether thou go, I will go, and where thou dwell I will dwell. It is
lack of love, which makes men forsake him, deny him service, and depart out of
his house.

Will a mother with Hannah, 1. Sam. 1. 11 24. 28.
dedicate her son unto the LORD, but that she loves him? surely if her
dedication be in devotion, it is the fruit of her love.

Would thou with David set all the Laws of GOD before thee, 2. Sam. 22. 23.
24.
and not depart there from? Would thou be upright toward him, and keep
thee from thy wickedness? Then love him; For what was it, 1. Sam. 20 4. 17.
that made Jonathan so sincere to David? what caused him to say unto him,
Whatsoever thy soul requires, that will I do unto thee? Even this, Because
he loved him as his own soul.

What but love forced the true mother of the child to say unto Solomon, 1.
King. 3. 26.
Slay him not; whereas the other for want of love said, Divide it. So nothing
but the love of GOD makes a man study the peace and unity of his House, and
causes his bowels to yearne at the dividing of it.

What but the zeal of love to GOD, 2. King. 18. 4.
moved Hezekiah to break the images, to cut down the groves, and to demolish
the brazen Serpent? So certainly thou shall never ^leaue fast to the LORD, and
throw down those idols, that are within thee, and keep thy soul from
inchastity, except thy love to GOD constrain thee.

Would thou have thy Religion costly, and not count it a burden to thee?
Would thou be cheerful, and Free-spirited in all thine oblations and gifts
unto GOD? Then must thou needs addict thy soul to GOD by love. It was this
which made David say to Ornan, I will not take thine for the LORD* 1 Chronicles. 21.
24.
nor offer burnt offerings without cost. It was devotion, which moved the
Israelites to bestow their silver and gold and precious stones unto the
building of the Temple: Of whom it is written, that They offered willingl^ unto
the LORD, 1 C^^^n. 29.^.
with a Perfect ^eart.

It was without question true love to GOD, which made S^lomon pray for wisdom
and knowledge to govern the people of GOD, 2. Chron. 1. 10. and 2. 1
and build an house for the Name of the LORD: Psalm. 132. 3.
and which made David say; I will not enter into the Tabernacle of mine house,
nor come upon my pallat or bed, nor suffer mine eyes to sleep, nor mine
eyelids to slumber, until I find out a place for the LORD, an habitation for
the mighty GOD of Jacob. Even so do thou, Reu. 1. 6.
whom CHRIST has made a spiritual King, deuote and bestow thy self on GOD by
love, if ever thou desire to govern thy self, to mortify thy lusts, and to
make thine heart an house for GOD to dwell in: Would thou not sleep till
thou have found out an house for GOD to dwell in? Then surely thy love must
keep thee awake.

Love unto God, and of his worship, E^^a 3. 11.
made the people sing for joy and shoute with a great shoute, when the
foundation of the LORDS House was laid: Even so it behoues us truly to love
GOD, if we would truly rejoice, when we see the Church, 1. Tim. 3. 15
which is the House of GOD, newly founded or repaired, in any Kingdom, State,
City, Town, Village, Family: or when we see the truth of CHRIST planted and
received in any man.

We are commanded to sanctify the Sabboath day: and Nehemiah was very zealous
for the keeping of it, and reproues the Rulers for the breach thereof. Neh. 13.
17
What evil thing is this (says he) that ye do, and break the Sabboath
day? Did not yours fathers thus, and our GOD brought all this plague upon us,
and upon this City? yet ye increase the wrath upon Israel in breaking the
Sabboath. Now certainly, unless by love we sanctify GOD in our hearts, we
shall never sanctify the Saboath for GOD. This is the cause that we steal
away the Saboath from GOD, because our lucre and pleasures do steal away our
love, that is due to GOD, from us.

It was love that made Ester say to the King: Ester 8. 6.
How can I suffer and see the evil that shall come upon my people? or how can
I suffer and see the destruction of my kindred? Doubtless he loves Jacob,
that pitties the affliction of Joseph. Love unto GOD will make the heart bleed
at the bloodshed of the godly: Thou can not love GOD, if thou be not
moved at the plots and practices of godless men against the people of GOD: I
suppose him void of all love to GOD, that could have seen and suffered that
execrable Powder-practise, Nouemb. 5. 1605.
or which now does grieve in secret to see it disapointed.

To conclude, what moved Job to patience? Love. Job 13. 15.
What made him say, Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him, Psalm. 16. 2.
and 40. 8.
and I will reprove my ways in his sight? Love. What made David say, Thou art
my LORD, thy Law is within mine heart? Love. What made him so sing of GOD, and
compose so many Psalms unto him? Prou. 30. 8.
Love. What made Agur pray, Feed me with food convenient, least I be full,
and deny thee, and say; Who is the LORD? and least I be poor, and steal, and
take the Name of my GOD in vain? Love. What made Solomon rise at the last,
Eccles. 1. 2 and 12. 1.
relinquish his lusts, cry All is vanity, and call us to the remembrance of GOD
in our youth? Love. What moves the Church to speak thus unto her husband;
Cant. 1. 1. 6 and 2. 5.
Let him kiss me with the kisses of his Mouth: Show me where thou feed^st,
where thou lie at noone? Stay me with flagons and comfort me with Apples?
Nothing but Love. She is sick of love. What made Daniel venture upon the
Lions, the three children upon the fire, and the Christian Martyrs upon all
kinds of deaths? Surely this, They loved not their lives unto the death, but
out of their love unto GOD made more account of his glory, then of their own
lives, liberties, pleasures, profits, and preferments, and held the truth at an
higher rate, then all earthly things whatsoever.

Lo then, what reason we have to love the LORD! I all the wit and industry of
flesh and blood were spent and exercised in arguing for the love of earthly
things, yet all were nothing, of no validity, nor efficacy to remove our love
from GOD to them. What shall detain our love? the world. Iam. 4. 4.
Know ye not, (says Saint James) That the amity of the world is the enmity of
GOD? Why men should not dote on the world. 1. Ioh. 2 15.
Whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world, makes himself an enemy
of GOD. Love not this world (says Saint John) neither the things that are in
this world* What the world is.
if any man love this world the love of the FATHER is not in him What is the
world, but a pleasant frenzy, a Theater of vanity, a si^ke of sin, a shop
of deceit, the center of inquities, and a very mi^rour of misery? Reu. 17. 2. 4
A Simil^e.
She is like that skarlet Harlot, lovely to look on, but dangerous to deal
with; who makes the Kings and Inhabitants of the earth drunken with the wine
which she presents unto them in her golden cup. He which follows the world,
is like a fool or child, that follows a shadow, or a butterfly, a thing of no
value, and which mockes them most, that love her best, and follow her fastest.
But say, why will thou love the world? The world is unconstant.
because she is constant? Err not: nothing is more inconstant then the world,
constant in inconstancy, and as inconstant in her constancy: She is in nothing
the same, save in this, that she loves not to be the same. But GOD is the
same for ever. Thou art the same, Ps. 102. 27.
and thy years shall not fail: Iam 1. 17.
With thee there is no alteration, nor shadow of conversion. Number. 23. 19
GOD is not as man, that he should lie* nor as the son of man that he
should repent: Has he said it, and shall he not do it? and has he spoken,
and shall he not accomplish it? The world is fleeting and floating up and
down in her love; whom she favors to day, she forsakes to morrow: But whom
GOD loves once, he loves ever: Once and Ever are all one with him; John 13.
1. Ier. 32 4^. Psa. ^9. 33.
The world will shake off her dearest lovers, as an Olive her leaves, or as a
Colt does his rider; But GOD never casts off him, that loves him (Et te nemo
amittit, August.
nisi qui te dimittit) and no man does loose him, but he that leaves him: Then
love the LORD, and let go the world: Why should thy Soul, Reasons against the
love of the world.
which is of an heavenly beginning, be buried and closed up within the earth?
Why should it, which is immortal, be pinned on things, that are but mortal?
Why should it, which is a Spirit, and Invisible, be fixed on things that are
gross and visible? Amor rerum terrenarum est viscus spiritualium pennarum. The
love of the world is the lime-twigs of the soul, Amicitia sol^ est inimicitia
poli. Friendship with the earth is enmity with heaven: But we will descend
unto particulars.

What will thou love? Prou 23. 5. Why men should not love riches.
Wealth and Riches? Will thou cast thine eyes upon that, which is nothing? For
riches takes her to her wings, as an Eagle, and flies into heaven. Riches
have sold more, then they have redeemed; and rich men have few friends, but
many flatterers that follow them, as Ants do Corn, Seneca.
or as crows do carrion: Praeda^ sequitur ista turba: no^ homine^: Such follow
the prey, and not the person, love the riches, but care not for the man; they
would flea off his Hide to make themselves thongs with it. An Ethnique could
say, when he had lost all his goods; Perijssem, ni perijssent; I had lost my
self, if I had not lost them. But for GOD who is our greatest good; whether
we loose our goods or not, if we loose him, and will loose him; if we love
riches more then him, we loose our selves, our comfort and contentment:
Therefore if riches increase, Psalm. 62 1^. Who is most rich.
set not thine heart upon them: If thou aboundest not, be contented, for he
has most that covers least; He is the richest that least admireth riches:
He is the greatest, who is contented with the smallest portion.

Why the love of pleasures should not hinder our love to GOD.
What then shall have thy love? shall Pleasures? What are pleasures but pleasing
vanities? What are pleasures to the pains of hell which wait upon them? What
sweetness is there in them to the sweetness which is in GOD? If our souls
were sweetened with the true taste of GODS love, all other things would seem
bitter to us: And that men feel not the sweetness of GOD, Why GOD seems not
so sweet to some. Heb. 11. 25
it is because their mouths are out of taste, being corrupted with the ague of
worldly love. Consider the example of Moses, who chose rather To suffer
adversity with the people of GOD, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season, esteeming the rebuke of CHRIST greater riches, then the treasures of
Egypt. Remember that ironicall speech of Solomon to voluptuous persons:
Eccles. 11. 9
Rejoiced young man in thy youth, and let thine heart cheer thee, whilst thou
art young, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine
eyes; but know that for all these things GOD will bring thee to judgment.
Plutar.
Lysimachus to quench his thirst yielded himself to the Scythians, and when
he had drunk their cold water, he said; Quam breuis volupt^tis causa quantam
deposui foelieitatem! O what great happiness have I forgone for a short
pleasure! Let us beware that we part not with our Birthright for a little
water-gruell, and that we loose not GOD, and forgo the joys of heaven, for a
small portion of vain delights. Malorum esca voluptas, T^ll.
qua homines cap^untur, vt hamo pisces. Pleasure is the bait of evils (of
devils) wherewith men are caught, A Similie.
as fishes with an hook: Either therefore we must shune them utterly, or take
heed of the hook which lies hid within them.

But what will thou set thy love on? Honor? How uncertain is it, and subject
to be lost? Est. 7. 10.
Haman was Honorable, and hanged in one day. Olofernes was Honorable, Judith
13. 8
and Headed in one night: Why honou^s should not steal away our hearts.
How great and common are the falls of many? He that is in account to day, may
be contemned to morrow: In pratis vt flos, sic perit omnis honos: Honor
vanishes like a vapor, A Similie.
and great men are like great bubbles, and all the glory of the world like
grass, like the flower of the grass. Caesar was stabd in his height.
Nebuchadnezer was abased in the midst of his greatness: Alexander was poisoned
in the top of his honors. Act. 12. 22. 23. A Similie
Herod was struck with an Angel then, when he was applauded as a GOD. How
vain a thing is honor, which like smoke mounted aloft does vanish, whiles a
man is looking on it? But great, constant, infinite are the honors, which are
laid up for those that love GOD.

But peradventure Beauty shall have thy love. Hear the judgment of beautifall
Bathsheba unto Solomon her son. Favor is deceitful, Pro. 31. 30.
and beauty is vanity, But a woman that fears the LORD, she shall be
praised. The vanity of beauty.
What is beauty? indeed the Loadstone and delight of the eye, very pleasing to
the sight, but exceeding brittle, mutable, and momentany, like Summer Apples
which last not long: One wound, one fit of an ague, a little sickness, or a
few years will mar it. How beauty has bin called.
Bion called it, Bonum alienum, a good but none of ours, being able neither to
give it, nor to keep it: Socrates called it, modici semporis tyrannidem, a
tyrant, which reigned but a while: Theophrastus said it was; Tacitam
deceptionem, aut silentem fraudem; a Still deceiuer, or Silent fraud: And as
for be^utifull persons, if vicious, and void of love to GOD, they are like
Tulipees, A Similie.
goodly to look on, but of no good savor: Or like Alablaster boxes filled
with vinegar; like gilded pot-sheards; or more properly, like a ring of gold
in a Sowes snowt; or some precious jewel in a Bears ear: And finally, if
beauty, the gift of GOD, be of so great request, how much more then should GOD,
the giver of it, who is so full of beauty, as that if His Beautifulness could
be seen, it would draw the eyes and hearts of all, that saw it, to him?

But say, if none of these, what shall have thy love, Thy self? Beware, if
thou make thy self thy GOD, thou make thy self thy diuill: How a m^ may
love himself.
Certainly thou may love thy self, so thou love GOD in thy self, and thy
self in GOD; and whilst thou do love thy self under GOD, and not over GOD;
For GOD, and not against GOD: Otherwise, if thou do love thy self, thou do
but hate thy self; if thou would save thy soul, thou shall destroy thy
soul; For GOD is the Soul of thy soul, the Joy of thy heart, the Strength of
thy life, thy Shield and Shadow, thy Savior and Deliverer: Much better were it
therefore for a man to leave his body, and to loose his life, rather then by
loving what he should not love at all, or more then is allowed, to loose and
deprive himself of GOD, who is the true Light and Life, the Grace and Glory of
all our souls, and bodies also.

What shall therefore separate us from the love of GOD, Heb. 12. 9.
the Father of our spirits; the Breath of our nosthrils, the Castle of our
comfort, Psalm. 18. 2. and 144. 2.
our Rock of defense, and the Fountain of Life? What shall extinguish this
Sacred and Celestial fire of love unto his Majesty within our breasts? What
shall unloose us, or cut the cords of our love, whereby we are tied unto him?
What shall wipe him out of the Table-bookes of our hearts, and blot him out of
our memories? Shall promotions, profits, pleasures, beauty, bravery,
tribulations, life, death, men, or devils? No, no: nothing: no not the whole
world, and all that is therein. What were it to gain all the world, and to
loose thy soul? Mark. 8. 36.
What were it to be Lord of all the world, and to be deprived of him, for
whom all the world was made? What were it to be beloved of all men, and yet to
be hated of the GOD of men? I will therefore love GOD, keep GOD; for he that
has GOD wants nothing; but he that wants GOD, has nothing.

Now because to love GOD truly, and as every good Christian ought, is a duty
so needful, equal, excellent, and commodious; and because men are much abused
by their immaginations (the heart of man being a Sea of subtilty, and a Mine of
deceit, given to deceive and beguile it self) I will therefore propound
certain notes, whereby we may discern, if we love him truly with a sincere
and regular affection; or whether we only draw near unto him with our lips,
being far from him in regard of hearty love.

First, true love is not lither, 1. Note of true love. Gregor.
but laborious, Si operari renuerit, amor non est: it if it will not labor it
is not love. True love is laborious.
What pains will not the Soldier take that affects the victory? what will not
the worldling do to get or keep riches? How did Ester labor to save her
kindred and Countrymen the Jews? Genesis 31. 40 41.
Jacob endured the heat of the day, the frost of the night, and want of rest,
even continual toil and travel in a service of fourteen years, under none
of the kindest Masters ( Laban, his name turned, but his nature retained, a
very Naball) and all this for his love to Rahell. Our Gamesters will sit up
night and day, at dice and cards: Our gallant Dames, out of their love of
bravery, what cost will they spare, what time will they not spend in making,
changing, dressing, pluming, pranking? And is the love of GOD only lazy,
sleepy, sluggish and unwilling both to do, and suffer? It is not doubtless.

2. Note.
Secondly, he that loves GOD truly, and with a well regulated love* GOD is to
be loved for himself.
will love GOD, chiefly for GOD himself, even because he is Good, Excellent,
Perfect, and Amiable in himself, and not for those Loue-tokens only, which
GOD in love does daigne to give him: For to love one merely for gain, is not
to love him, that gives it, but our selves, that take it. If this be well
considered, it is to be feared that many men love GOD, as they use to love
their friends; that is, not for their friends sake, but for themselves; not
because their friends are Religious, Just, Wise, Virtuous; but because they
receive benefits, as money, meat, credit, and such things by them. But Saint
Paul was of a more generous, and truer Spirit: For he says: I seek not mine
own profit, but the profit of many, 1. Cor. 10. 33. 2. Cor. 12. 14. 19.
Phil. 4. 14 17.
that they might be saved. And again, I seek not yours, but You; and do all
things, that you may be edified: And again, ye have done well that ye did
communicate to mine affliction; Not that I desire a gift, but I desire a fruit,
which may further your reckoning: Rom 9. 3.
And yet more fully; I could wish my sefe to be sep^rated ( (...).
anathematized) from CHRIST (my life, my light, my glory) For my brethren, that
are my kinsmen in the flesh. If they might be received, he passed not though
himself were rejected; if they might be saved, he cared not though himself
were excluded out of heaven: so they might be blessed, he could wish himself
were accursed: Thus the Galatians loved the Apostle: Gal. 4. 13 14. 15.
They despised not his trials, not his poverty, and afflictions, but received
him as an Angel of GOD, and to have done him good could have found in their
hearts to have pulled out their own eyes, and have given them unto him. This
true love also was seen in Moses to GOD, and his Countrymen: For when they
had, in his absence, made them an Idol, and provoked GOD against them by their
idolatry, insomuch that GOD speaking to Moses said; Let Me alone, Ex. 32. 10.
12.
for I will consume Them, but I will make of Thee a mighty people: (which was a
tempting offer, but mark how Moses took it) He most earnestly besought the
LORD to spare them; preferring their good, to his own greatness, which argued
the truth of his love unto them; and entreated the LORD to turn from his
wrath, and why? Least his enemies should blaspheme his Name, and say; He
brought them out maliciously to slay them in the mountains; esteeming more of
GODS glory, then his own greatness, and advancement. Yea so loving he was of
the people, but especially so jealous of GODS glory, that rather then he would
have them destroyed, or it eclypsed, he wishes himself To be razed out of
GODS Book. Ex. 32. 32. Genesis 22.
So likewise Abraham out of his devotion unto GOD is ready at GODS commandment
to sacrifice, to slay his only Son, his Hope, and Honor. Indeed this is the
nature of a man's sincere and regular love to GOD, to love GOD for himself, to
obey him without scruple, and to neglect ones self for the respect of GOD. And
though we ought to love GOD for those good blessings, GOD is to be loved for
his blessings, and the order how.
which he communicates unto us, (as a friend his friend for courtesies
received) yet we must not rest there, if we will prove our love to be
upright and sound; but we must go further, and learn to love him for that
lovely and peerless Excellency, and that immense and profound Sea of
Goodness, which is in him, esteeming those his benefits conferred on us as
certain streams flowing from the same; and prizing of them, not so much in
their own worth, as for being effects and tokens of his favor to us. A
Similie.
Even as a man should not so much value the good turns of his friend,
according as they are worth in their own nature, as because they are fruits
and arguments of his vertu-full and bounteous disposition. And this is the
purer degree or kind of love, Job 6. 3. and 8. 14.
such as was in Job, who though GOD seemed to be his Enemy, (For he says
that the arrows of the Almighty were in him, the venom whereof drunk up his
Spirit, and that the terrors of GOD fought against him; that he feared him
with dreams, and astonished him with visions) yet did he continue to love
GOD, and professed that though GOD should slay him, Job. 13. 15.
yet his confidence should be reposed in him.

Thirdly, 3. Note of true love.
whosoever shall love GOD cheerfully, and in conscience of GODS commandment,
even because GOD bids him love him, he does evidently declare the truth of his
love unto him: For he, that does a thing simply because he is bidden, does
show a loving and reverent respect unto the bidder.

Fourthly, 4. Note of true love.
he demonstrates a sound heart, and entire love unto GOD, that suffers nothing
to dominere within him but his GOD: A man loving GOD tru^^y, loves none more
then GOD.
Not Mammon, not Bacchus, not Venus* not the love of any Man, not of Himsefe,
nor of any other thing whatsoever, but deturbs and cast out all, that GOD alone
may have possession of him, and reign within him: as he may be said to be a
chaste and loving husband, who suffers no other to steal away his love from
his lawful wife, to whom he has vowed his love, and plighted his Troth: Ovid.
Non been cum socijs Regna, Venusque manent: Nec Regna socium far, Seneca.
nec tede sciunt: Lordship and love will broke no fellowship: Aut Casar, aut
nullus: GOD will have the Throne, or else be gone.
GOD will be either alone or gone: He will admit no copes-mate; He will not
part stakes with any. He will allow thee to entertain some thing, that shall be
subordinate, and under him, How a man may love other things.
but none that shall stand in opposition unto him, or which shall draw against
him: If therefore thou permit nothing to draw thine affection from him, it
argues thy love is firm and fast unto him.

5. Note of love.
Fifthly, as a worldly-minded man does show his love of riches by his insatiable
desire of having more and more: For the more he has, the more he would; like
those two daughters, which cry, Give, give; or like the earth, Pro. 30. 15. 16.
That (as Agur says) cannot be satisfied with water So may we prove our love
of GOD, if whilst we live on earth, we covet to have more and more interest
in ^im, and never rest contented, whiles any thing lives in us besides
himself. 1. King. 22.
And as Ahab was tormented in mind for Naboaths vineyard; 2. Sam. 13. 2.
and as Ammon was so sore vexed, that he fell sick for his sister Tamar: And
as the Spouse in the Canticles exclameth: Can. 2. 5.
Stay me with flagons, for I am sick of love; Even so he that does truly
love GOD, Grief or sickness of soul wai^s on love.
is not quiet till he do enjoy him: And because there is no full fruition of
Him, till we come in heaven, therefore if we truly love him, we shall not
meet with full contentment, till we come in heaven: but shall, as that Spouse
our Mother, be Sick of love, and wounded with longing after him, till we do
enjoy him to the full. Indeed the sickness of mind is not love; for love it
self is most sweet and pleasing; but it is the fruit of Desire, This
sickness is not love, but from desire.
which waits upon love, till love do perfectly enjoy the thing it does love:
And if delay be made, that it cannot enjoy the thing, which it would, as it
would, and so soon as it would, then this delay, by reason of the desire, does
engender a certain grief and sickness in the mind; which sickness, and
the desire which does produce it, shall both end, when that, which is desired
is perfectly obtained, and enjoyed. Love ends not, when this desire cease.
But then love has that it would: and then ends not, as the desire; but is at
her highest pitch, in all her iollity, and in her proper element, there where
she would be, and would never but be: Now whosoever has in him this longing
after GOD, this sickness and grief to torment and vex him, (seeing that
here on earth a man sometimes loses his feeling of GODS love unto him, and
never enioyes him full^) he may assure himself that he truly loves GOD.
N^te.
And this g^iefe of heart should be so far from causing diffidence, doubting,
or desperation, that a man should rather gather strength and comfort by it: A
Similie.
For where this is, there is the love of GOD; as there is a love of drink,
where there is a thirst and earnest desire after it, and a certain trouble and
grief of soul, because it cannot be had, or is long a coming: As David
says, Psalm. 63. 1.
My soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs greatly after thee: which argues
the desire and languishment of his spirit; so he likewise says; 9.
My soul cleaves unto thee, which declares his love. Now he, that loves GOD,
may be bold to think that GOD loves him: And the proper and principal ground
of our consolation and salvation is in this, Psalm. 63. 3.
that GOD loves us; Ioh. 3. 16.
not in this that We love GOD, Ephesians. 2. 4. 8.
in this that GGD is gracious unto us, and not in this, That the graces of GOD
are in us. Tit. 3. 5.
Of which love and grace of GOD unto us, Our love to GOD a sign of his to us.
this ((...)) free grace of Love wherewith our hearts are enflamed toward GOD,
is an undoubted token and effect (as breath is of life, or ice of cold)
appropriated to GODS Elect, and faithful Children.

6. Note of true love.
Sixthly, as the minds of adulterers run upon their harlots, as the thoughts
of worldlings are on their wealth; as the heads of the ambitious are occupied
about their honors, as the hearts of Epicures are with their pleasures; as the
brains of Scholars are beat about their books; as the mind of Soldiers is
on the victory; and as he that loves the Law, has his meditations in the Law;
Ps. 119 97.
O how I love thy Law (says David!) It is my meditation continually; so he,
that loves the LORD is still musing and thinking of him, of his Grace and
Glory, his Power and Providence, his Truth, Justice, Mercy, etc. His Head is on
him, his Heart goes with him, his Spirit is present with him; For the soul is
present as well ( Vbiamat, Bernard.
as vbi animat) where it loves, as where it lives and lisens: As GODS love to
us made come down (as it were) to us; so our love toward him, makes us go up
to him, as his love to men made him converse with men; so men's love to GOD, The
fruits of love Divine and Humane.
makes them converse with him: And as his love to us makes him present with us
to help and guide us; so our love to him makes us present with him to cleave
unto him, and to follow him. His love causes him to think on us, and our love
makes us to think on him: So that he which in heart is present with him, and
does meditate and think often on him, may be assured that the love of GOD is
in him. It is true, a man cannot but be where GOD is, because he is every
where; Ier. 23. 24. Presence in case i. as absence.
Do not I fill heaven and earth, says the LORD? Yet this presence is rather
absence, when our heart is absent; even as his presence is but absence, if his
love be absent: A friend is then present, when he is at hand to help, and his
thoughts are to relieve; and he loves truly, whose heart is present with his
Love continually, not letting it to slide out of his memory.

Seventhly, 7. Note.
he that is not fickle and inconstant in his devotion and deuote affection
unto GOD, may know that he loves him truly: I say, if he love, like a true
friend, At all times, Pro. 17. 17.
as well when the whether is foul as fair; in winter, as well as in Summer;
True love is constant.
when the heavens are black, as well as when the Sun does shine: For only
true love is constant, it accounts nothing hard, nothing grievous, and
intolerable. Plautus.
Fell. quod amarum est, id m^l faciet: It will make gall, which is bitter to be
sweet as honey: Periculis insultat, mortem irridet: si amor est, ^incit omnia:
It contemns dangers, it scorneth death; if it be true love, it overcomes
all things, insomuch that though the lover may be killed, yet Inuictiu moritur,
^ee dies vnvanquished: as we see in the Martyrs, The praise of the Martyrs.
whom neither pleasure, profit, nor promotion, on the one side; nor any
torture, or cruel kind of death on the other; could beguile, inueigle,
astonish, or deter: But through their love (by Him, that did enable them)
they conquered, and contemned all things, stuck fast to GOD.

Eighthly, 8. Note.
the keeping of GODS Word (in the mind to remember it, in the heart to believe
and embrace it, and in the life to live by it) and a contention of Spirit to
obey his Precepts, is an infallible argument of true love unto him. 1. John. 5.
3.
This is the love of GOD (says Saint John) that we keep his Commandments: A
child by obedience demonstrates his childe-like affection unto his parents: He
shewe^ his love and loyalty to the King, No loyalty, no love.
which makes account of his Edicts and Laws: In vain does a servant say he
loves his Master, except he be careful to obey his will. So then, he that
lives in any known enormity, and preferres his gain, pleasure, credit, and
favor with men to GODS Commandments, does plainly show that he wants the
love of GOD: without which his Love, his Baptism, hearing of Sermons,
receiving the Communion, and all his fair shows will stand him in no steed,
but rather further his condemnation: And one thing more I add; although he do
many deeds, Good deeds are, without love, of little or no account.
in appearance good, and seem to keep sundry precepts, yet it is not of love
unto GOD (without which his doing and keeping shall not be remembered in the
world to come) but for some other reason, if he shall in the mean while
addict himself unto some one sin, which he knows to be a sin: The
virtue of true love.
For the power of true love is such, as it will move a man to humor his friend
in every lawful and convenient thing: and he gives not his heart, that is
disposed to thwart and resist him (especially being his Governor*) in
anything, that is honest, and not unseemly: But GOD is our Supreme Moderator
and LORD, and all his Commandments are lawful and good: For his Will is the
rule of Law, GODS Will the Rule of Law.
and reason; and all his Commandments ate according to his will.

To conclude, 9. Note of true love.
GOD will be loved in his Church, in his Ministers, in his Chil^ren, and
finally in that his beloved Son CHRIST JESUS, so as that they, which hate
these, love not him.

First, for the Church, GOD is to be loved in his Church.
by which I understand not so much the Catholic Church, (which is the Mother
of us all, and which whosoever loves not as his MOTHER, loves not GOD as his
FATHER, and so will prove himself to be some Bastard-plant) as I mean all
True visible Chu^ches, Every true visible Church is to be loved. The mark of
such a Church.
or Congregations: And such I call True, which GOD has honored with True
Doctrine; or means sufficient unto salvation, and with such men, as have a
True Power, or authority, to Minister, and Dispense the same. Now here, I say,
whosoever loves such a Church, because she is such a Church, whosoever loves
her for GOD, and in GOD, without doubt it argues his love to GOD. A Similitude.
He that loves a Ring for the Diamond, that is set in it, or for the
worke-man, that made it, questionless he loves ^he Diamond, and the Worke-man
much more: So certainly, ^ee that loves a Church for the Word and Sacraments,
and power ^f GOD, that is in her; and because she is the Church of GOD planted
by his gracious blessing, does much more love GOD: Surely that thing, for which
we love an other thing, that we cannot hate, but love.

On the contrary, if thou shall hate a true Church of GGD, how dwells the
love of GOD in thee? Thou will say, I know, that i^ thou were assured that she
is a true Church, thou weul^st not hate her, but join unto her. Mark this
well.
I say, again, art thou sure that the Church, which thou hate, is false? If
thou be sure of it* if thou dare pawn thy soul upon it (but be sure thou
be sure) then avoid her, depart out of her, give her a Bill of Diuorcement,
let her go: But if thou be not sure, hate her not, sever not thy self from
her. Will thou hate and leave her most certainly, whiles thou art not certain
what to judge of her? Thou do not see her Truth; but can thou spy her
falsehood? A blind man cannot see the Sun at Noone, but they which ca^ see,
may see her: But what if a man be so blind, a^ that, because he does not see
the Sun himself, therefore he thinks the Sun is seen of none? And what
if thou, with a few more, as blind as thy self, do hate and forsake a
Church, because ye do not see her Truth? I say, what if all her
Sister-Churches in Europ^, besides your selves (which were borne within her
jurisdiction for the most) will say she is a true Church of GOD? Whether are
they to be believed or ye? Or do ye think that all they are blind, and that
ye are the only men, that see?

Well let us beware, if we think that we love GOD, let us show our love unto
him by loving of his Church.

GOD is to be loved in hi^ Minist^^s.
Secondly, GOD is to be loved in his Minist^rs, which are called the Men of
GOD, and Saints, by reason of their holy Office and authority, which GOD has
sanctified and set apart unto himself: And this their Function and Ministry,
is not only Sanctified, Act. 1^. 1^. 1. T^^. 4 ^6
but Sanctifying, and Saving. Now whosoever does l^ue these Saints, as Saints,
does love God the Sanctifier of them: He that loves this Office simply, does
love him that has ordained it: He that loves the man of GOD in this Name, A
Minister ^s t^ be love f^r his (...).
does undoubtedly l^ue G^D the MASTER. He that loves a Minister merely for
his Ministry, or as Saint Paul exhorts, F^r his work sake; 1 Thessalonians. ^ 1^.
(...).
he, no question loves GOD, whose servant he is, and for whom he works.
On the contrary, they that love not the Mi^ist^r for his Office and Labors,
but rather malice and molest him, because he P^eacheth the Truth, which they
distaste; or confuteth errors, that they foster; or reproves their sins,
which they delight in; as ignorance, pride, drunkenness, profane swearing,
violating the Saboath, contempt of the Ordinances, and Church of GOD: these men
without doubt are offended at GOD, and did he come himself in the shape of a
Man, they would deal with him, as they deal with his Messengers. But thou will say, thou for thy part do love thy Minister; I ask thee, How a man
should love his Minister.
Do thou love him even because he is thy Minister, because he has
authority over thee in GOD, for the benefit of thy soul? If thou do love
him simply in this respect, (but do not delude thy self) surely ^hy case is
good, thou love GOD; Receiving him, thou receiuest GOD: But to love a
Minister, for his Parentage, Alliance, Riches, Aduancements, and such worldly
considerations, is no token of love to GOD, it is not to love the Minister, but
some circumstances belonging to him. The love of the man for his Office, or for
his careful execution of it, is Divine, a note of love indeed unto GOD: And to
contemn, or persecute, him, for his very place and power, or the faithful
dischargement of it, is devilish, and argues the love of darkness: He that
that hates the servant, how can he love the master? They that hang head,
look under the brows, stamp, and storm, at them, that deliver but their
Masters errand, even for the very doing of it, they do it to the Master, that
did appoint and send them: And refusing or disgracing the men, they dishonor
their Master.

Who are GODS true Ministers.
But when I say GOD is to be loved in His Ministers, mistake not the men: For
those are his True and Faithful Ministers, which are sent by GOD, and who
delivers their Masters Errand, and not in steed thereof their own errors.
For though he should deliver GODS Message, and adminster the Sacraments, yet
if he have no power, no authority committed unto him by GOD, he runs unsent.
And though he have a sending, yet if he do not that Message, which GOD
appoint^ him, but brings some Such, I mean, as euert^ the ground^ of Faith, or
go^d Manners, and which sets the Church in an uproar.
Nouelty, coy^ed in the brain of man, he abuses his power; if he defile, or
mangle, the Sacraments, he transcends his bounds, and transgresses his
authority, and therefore is to be reproved, and avoided.

Thirdly, GOD is to be loved in his Children. GOD is to be loved in his people.
All godly men have the Name of GOD called upon them, and a new Nature created
in them, and are become holy, through the work of the HOLY SPIRIT in them. Now
he that loves a godly man for his godliness, a Saint for his Sanctimony, a
new Man, for his new Nature; questionless, the same man loves GOD, who is the
Author of it. O^ the contrary, if any man say, I l^ue GOD, 1. John. 4. 20.
and hate his brother, he is a liar, ^or how can he, that loves not his
brother, whom he has seen, love GOD whom he has not seen? Hatred of
godliness is the hatred of GOD.
He that hates, dislikes, and persecutes his brother for the Truths sake, for
Virtues sake, for that new Nature which his FATHER has created in him, and
because he lives not so riotously, as himself, does hate, dislik^, a^^
p^rsecute the FATHER Himself. Therefore CHRIST says: Saul, Saul, Acts 9. 4.
why persecutest thou me? Whereas not he personally; b^t his Servants and
Confessors, were persecuted of him. And if thi^ be true, which is most true,
That Every one, which loves him which did beget, 1. Ioh. 5. 1.
loves him also, which is beg^^ten of him: Then certainly he, which hates
him, which is begotten, hates him also, which did beget him. Let men therefore
take heed; for he that loves GOD, cannot but love a good man for GOD: and he
that hates the godly, hates GOD, whose Image he sustaines: He that hates true
Devotion, true Zeal, and a Sober Conversation in man, will never be able to
excuse ^im of ^a^red unto GOD the Worker of them. There is a brood of men (or
of diuils rather, in the shape of men) such as David speaks of, which are
adversaries to their Neighbors. Psalm. 38. 20.
Because they follow goodness: These are enemies to GOD, whatsoever they
think of themselves: Of such the Psalmist speaks, when he says; Surely GOD
will wound the head of his enemies, and the hairy pate of him, Psalm. 68. 21.
that walks in his sins: And again, Ps. 129. 5. 6.
They that hate Syon shall be all ashamed and turned backward; they shall be
as the grass on the house tops, which withers before it comes forth. It
were good for them therefore to take up betimes, and to turn their hatred into
love.

There is, I confess, Many sorts of love, yet little true charity.
much love in the world, such as it is; Natural love, Civil love, Dom^sticall
love, Matrimonial love, Fleshly love, Worldly love, Pot-loue, Humane love, but
little godly charity is seen among us: For who loves godliness in a man? Who
seeks GOD in his Neighbor, Friend, Child, Servant, Familiar? Who studies and
strives, that Religion, Justice, and true Christianity should flourish in his
Children, Servants, Friends, and Neighbour^? I doubt not but Turks, Moors, A
Turk may love a Christian, but not his Christianity.
and other Pagans, love Religious and true Christians sometimes, as I am
persuaded some of our Merchants, and their Factors are, that live and trafique
with them? But love they their Religion, do they lou^ them for their
Christianity? No, no: they could wish them as superstitious, as themselves: If
therefore thou will give an infallible demonstration of thy love to GOD, love
thy brother for GOD, and in GOD, love his Piety, his Christianity, and pray
that the Kingdom of GOD may be planted, and establ^shed in him.

How M^^^st^rs hold show love to GOD.
And as all me^ should show their love unto GOD by loving of his people: so
especially the Ministers of GOD; which they shall do by their dilligent and
faithful feeding of them. Therefore our LORD will have Peter express his love
unto him by feeding his Flock: Ioh. 21. 15. 16. 17.
Peter (says he) love thou me? Feed my Lambs, feed my Sheep, Feed my
Sheep: Pasce mente, pasce ore, pasce opere, Sermon. 2. de resur.
pasce animi oratione, verbi abhortatione, exempli exhibitione. Feed them
(says Bernard) with thy mind, Feed them with thy mouth, feed them with thy
work, feed them with the prayer of thy heart, with the exhortation of the
word, with setting them a good ensample. What other thing (says Saint August.)
is this, Aug. in Joan. tract. 123.
If thou love me, Feed my sheep, then if it had been said^; If thou love me,
do not think to feed thy self, but my Sheep; Fe^d them as mine, not as
thine; seek my glory in them, not thine, my Lordship, not thine, my gains,
not thine: Chrysostom. praesat. in Epistolas. What Minister does truly love GOD.
Which speech when Saint Paul, (as Chrysostom speaks) had heard was uttered
to Saint Peter, he studied to declare this love (...) even in the superlatiue
degree: And undoubtedly doubtedly there is no Minister, which does truly love
GOD, but he will be careful to feed the people of GOD, which are the Sheep
of His Pasture, Psalm. 100. 3. 1. Pet. 5. 2.
committed to him, and Depending on him. And he, that only looks after the
Fleece, but leaves his Flock at six and seuens, does bewray his love of the
world, but declares no love to GOD.

GOD must be loved in CHRIST. Ioh. 15. 23. John 8. 24.
Finally, GOD will be loved in his Son JESUS CHRIST, the Son of the Virgin
Mary: For he that hates me (says CHRIST) hates my FATHER also. Except ye
believe that I am HE, ye shall die in your sins. See 1. Cor. ^6. 22.
Which shows the fearful estate of unbelieving Turks, Jews, and Pagans.
And most worthy is he of our love: For he is White and Ruddy, Cant. 5. 10. 16.
the chiefest of ten thousand, and wholly delectable. Being GOD he has
married our flesh, He came down from heaven, that we might go up to heaven;
He served, to make us free; He became poor, to make us rich; He was made a
curse, Gal. 3. 13.
that we might be blessed; He died, that we might live; He was Crucified,
that we might be Crowned: And that our love unto him might appear true, let
us try it by these two notes.

First, 1. Note of love to CHRIST.
by our care to know and keep his Laws even to the death. For, says CHRIST,
If ye love me, keep my Commandments: Ioh. 14. 15. 22. 23. 24.
He that keeps them loves me, He that loves me not, keeps not my words.
If we break them at our pleasure, and prefer our gain, or gaming, or any
thing else to them, truly we love him not: For did we indeed love him, we
would be loath to offend him, and would make more estimation of Him and his
Word, then of any earthly thing.

Secondly, 2. Note of love to CHRIST.
try thy love to CHRIST by thine endeavor to be Like him: For true love
causes imitation. CHRIST was the mirror of Mercy, very Meek, Humble,
Patient, and Zealous of GODS Glory: He went up and down doing good: He
prayed for his persecutors, FATHER fogiue them. Luke 23. 34
Can thou for CHRIST pray for thine enemies? CHRIST forgave thee, Co^. 3. 13.
will thou for CHRIST forgive him, that wrongs thee, that reuiles thee to thy
face, that bites thee behind thy back, that scorns thee, hates thee, troubles
thee? If thou do, thou love him; but if thy heart be so great, thou will
not, where is thy love? For understand thus much, where CHRIST is loved, there
CHRIST loves, where CHRIST loves there he lives, and where he lives, there the
flesh, with the lusts thereof dies; Ioh. 14 21.
so then he that lives out of Charity, in the spirit of rancour, hatred, and
revenge, and will not control his corruptions, he is not CHRIST'S, CHRIST
lives not in him, he lives not in CHRIST, he loves not CHRIST, he loves not
God, but is in the state of death, how well soever he conceiueth of himself:
For tell me, do thou think that CHRIST lives in an heart of Oak, of
Adamant? No, no, but in an heart that is humble, meek and loving. And what
thankfulness, what love is showed unto CHRIST, when thou will not pardon him,
We ought to forgive one another.
whom CHRIST does pardon, when thou will not forgive him, whom CHRIST has died
for, when thou will not vouchsafe him thy pardon, to whom CHRIST has given
himself, when thou, I say, thou will not forgive, CHRIST having forgiven thee,
and having given Himself unto thee, yea and thy self unto thy self, for by
thy sins thou had lost thy self: Certainly therefore thou must forgive
for CHRIST, or else (believe it) thou do not love CHRIST.

Let v^ therefore deal truly with our selves, examining our hearts and
practices by the forenamed notes, and we shall easily see whether the love of
GOD, and of his Son CHRIST JESUS be in us; or whether the love of the world,
and of our selves, bear sway with in us. And so much concerning the Love of
GOD, to which we are exhorted.

The reasons of the exhortation.
The reasons, which the Psalmist uses to persuade us to this duty, follow: One
is drawn from the Loving and courteous dealing of GOD with them, that are
faithful in their love and service to him; the other is taken from the
severity of his Justice against those, that out of pride and obstinacy cast of
his yoke, and care not for to love and serve him.

1. Reason.
The former is set forth in these words. The LORD preserves the faithful: A
man i^ said to be faithful in two respects.
A man may be said to be faithful in a double sense: First he, that
believes in GOD, and gives credit to his Word, is a faithful man; and to
this Faith, diffidence, and incredulity is opposed; and by this kind of faith a
man lays hold upon the mercy of GOD in CHRIST for his Justification. Secondly,
he that may be believed for his truth, he that is just and true in his words
and dealings, is a faithful man: For faith (Fides) is of, fio, to be done: Fac
quod dicis, and fides est, do what thou say, and it is Faith, says Saint
Austen. Then (says Gregory) are we truly faithful, if what we promise in
word, we perform in deed. To this kind of faith, treachery, falsehood, and
hypocrisy is opposed: So that he that does truly love GOD, and is a faithful
keeper of his Doctrine, and forgets not his promise to him in his Baptism^, but
is careful and studious to perform it, Neh. 9. 8.
he may be said to be a faithful man. Such a faithful man was Caleb, Number.
14. 22 24.
Who followed GOD still, and had another Spirit, then those tempting and
disobedient Israelites had, which were not suffered to enter into Canaan. Such a
faithful man was Moses, Heb. 3. 5.
who was faithful in GODS House: Such a one was David, of whom GOD spoke
saying; Act. 13. 22.
I have found David the son of Iesse, a man after mine own heart, which will
do all things that I will: Such were Zacharias and Elizabeth, Luke 1. 6.
that walked in all the Commandments, and O^dinances of GOD, without reproof:
Finally, such were all the Martyrs of CHRIST, who rather then they would betray
his truth, and make shipwreck of their faith and conscience, endured all
manner of torments, and refused no kind of death which was devised for them.

Now those that are thus faithful, GOD does preserve them, says David:
Sometimes he preserues them by vouchsafing them deliverance from dangers (as
in his Wisdom he sees convenient) whiles they live here: 2. Chron. 16. 8. 9.
as he preserved Noah in the Flood, Let out of Sodom, David in many dangers,
Daniel among the Lions, the three Confessors in the fire; our Religious King,
with many others, N^^^. 5. 16 ^5.
from that infernal Powder Plot, of the Papists; and infinite are his savors
of this kind. But further, he pre^^rueth the saithfull as concerning their
souls, and the spiritual and eternal happiness of both body and soul: Isa.
49. 16.
For he has engraven them upon the palms of his hands. Ier. 32. 40.
He will Never turn away from them, to do them good, but gards them by his
power through faith (as Saint Peter teaches) unto salvation, 1. Pet. 1. 5. 9
that in the end they shall attain to the end of their faith, the felicity of
their souls without end.

This should stir us up to love this good GOD, and to show our selves faithful
to him in our service; Reu. 2. 20.
the Crown of life is promised to the faithful, we desire faith of GOD, and
exact it of others, let us then be faithful our selves. 5. Notes of
faithfulness.
This faithfulness may be demonstrated five ways.

First, 1. Note.
by being careful to know the will of our Master, and diligent to keep all
his Precepts: For if we will not endeavor to please him in all things, Mark.
6. 20
but will be Licentious Libertines in some things, we are very Herod's,
hypocrites and disloyal, our hearts are not upright with Him, but do go an
whoring after our own desires: He is no faithful servant, which will do but
what he list himself.

2. Note.
Secondly, faithfulness is seen in trouble: Pro. 24. 10.
If thou be faint in the day of adversity, thy strength is small. A friend
that forsakes in affliction, was no friend, but of himself: So he that shall
forsake GOD, deny his Truth, embrace errors, by reason of persecution, does
betray GOD to his power, and shows a false and unfaithful spirit has possessed
him. Seneca.
Fidem nemo vnquam perdit, nisi qui non habet: No man ever loses faith, but
he that has it not: For Faith (if it be not feyned) is very valorous and
trusty: Ci^. l. 2. Rhet.
Nulla necessitate ad fallendum cogitur, nullo corrumpitur pramio: It is
compelled to falsehood by no necessity, it is corrupted by no reward; Ure,
coede, occide; Burn, beat, kill, do what you will, it will not perish: It is
like Camomill, which being trodden upon smells, the better: or like the
Chrysoprasus, which (as Zanchy writes) shines more clearly in the dark, Lib.
3. de Met. ter. c. 6. 3. Note.
then in the light.

Thirdly, a faithful servant will delight to save his Masters gain, and is
glad to see his Masters customers increase; even so he, that is
faithful-hearted toward GOD, will rejoice to see his Kingdom flourish, his
Word received, his Laws observed, Isai. 55. 1.
his graces esteemed, and his Customers or Chapmen, that come to buy them of
him, multiplied.

Fourthly, 4. Note.
if a Master shall allow his servant time to dispatch all his own businesses,
but withal appoint him a certain time to do him service in: if this servant
shall not only spend his own time (allotted him by his Master) as he list
himself, but will also mis-^pend that time, which his Master commands him to
spend for him, mis-spend it (I say) in idleness, leudnes, gaming, wickedness or
otherwise upon himself, and not upon his master, this servant is unfaithful
to his master, and (as I thi^k^) if he will not break this c^stome, his
master will not keep him, but turn him packing. So are t^ose v^faithful unto
God, that profane his holy Sabbath, Mark this we^l. Of profaning the Sa^oth
day.
which he has sa^ct^fied for himself, by their merchan^ising, gadding,
gaming, rioting, and such proph^ne behavior. And I fear, tha^ if they will
not mend these manners: S^d vox faucib ^^ h^r^t On the contrary, they that are
careful to spend their masters time in their masters worship, as in prayer,
reading, hearing, m^ditation, singing of Psalms, doing the works of mercy,
and the like, these show themselves faithful to him: and as they are careful
to keep his S^bboth on earth before him, so shall they certainly celebrate an
everlasting Sabbath in heaven with him.

5. Note.
Finally, a servant is not therefore to be counted faithful, because he is
entertained in his Masters house, and wears his cloth, and eats his meat,
and hears him speak: For say he be not afraid to displease him, suppose he
shall corrupt an^ pervert the minds of any of his fellows, and bring them to
be stout and saucie, or lazy and untrue; and imagine he does secretly conspire
with his Masters foes, and do service underhand, or openly for them, will ye
say that this is a faithful servant, or rather a Fals-hearted and wicked
Knave? So, even so a man is not presently to be counted faithful and true to
God, because he is admitted into his Horse, which is the Church, because he is
baptized, 1. Tim. 3. 15.
which is his livery, because he is called or reputed his servant, because he
receives the Sacrament, which is (as it were) his bread, because he hears his
master speak unto him in his Ministers. For we may say of a Christian as
Saint Paul says of a Jew, and of Baptism, as he speaks of Circumcision. All
they are not Israel, Romans 9. 6 7
which are of Israel: neither are they all Children, because they are the seed
of Abraham. He is not a Jew which is one outward; neither is that Circumcision
which is outward in the Flesh: Romans 2. 2^. 29.
but he is ^lew, that is one within, and the circumcision is of the Heart, in
the Spirit, not in the Letter, whose praise is not of Men, but of God. So we
may say, every man is not faithful unto God, that is counted or called Godly,
but he that proves his heart and practices unto God. He is not faithful, that
is come of faithful parents, unless he partake with them in their faith, as
well as in their flesh. A man is not indeed a Christian, Who is a true
Christian*
because he is so named, or reputed, except he be flesh of Christ's flesh, and
bone of his bone, except he be anointed with the Oil of gladness, and have
the Spirit of Christ to rule him. Neither is that Baptism which stands in
water only, What true Baptism is.
( Flumine, non Flamine:) For true Baptism is to be baptized with the Holy
Ghost and Water, with the blood of Christ as well as with water. Neither has
he any benefit by the Sacrament, that does not receive (Panem Dominum) the
Lord, who is the bread and staff of our souls, as well as (Panem Domini) the
bread of the Lord, which the Lords Steward does dispense unto us. Those
therefore, that fear not Gods displeasure, that would seduce his servants from
their allegiance to him, that are at a league (as it were) with sin, and
conspire with Satan, and do him service, all these whatsoever,
notwithstanding their place in the Church, their hearing of Sermons, their
coming to Church, and receiving of Sacraments; and al-be-it they be called
Christians, and called godly, the truth is, they are not faithful unto God,
but false-hearted wretches. On the contray, those are truly faithful which
truly fear God, Who truly faithful.
which counsel and encourage their fellows to be faithful to him, and which
do truly hate Sin, Satan, and the World, and are at no league or covenant
with them, but keep continual watch and ward over their hearts, lest they
should be surprised and drawn away.

And thus we have seen the first reason that David uses to move us to the
love of God, because he preserues them that are faithful to him: and therefore
if we desire his preservation, or if we will show our selves thankful to him
for preserving us, or if we do take delight in that his so sweet and good
disposition, who is by nature provident over, and careful for those that love
him, and are faithful to him, it behoues us much to love him: and let us be
assured, that except we love him truly, we do not t^uly love our selves; but
certainly we do clean forget our selves, if we fo^get to perform this duty
to him: yea, we have lost our selves, unless we have him to live in our
hearts by love. ^^e praise o^ L^ue.
O Love! what shall I spe^ke i^ thy commendation? Magnaes, and pr^uales, thou
art great in power, Can. 8. 6 ^
and preuailest. Thou art str^ng as Death, powerful as the grave, thy coals
are fiery* thy fl^mes v^olent, the waters cannot quench thee, the floods cannot
drown thee, thou do subdue mine understanding for God, thou bring mine
ambitious and unruly conceits into bondage under Christ, thou leadest me
Captive, yea thou kilst me, that he may live within me. Love a fire
Thou art a Fire to purify my mind from dross by meditation on him. A Light.
Thou art a Light to comfort and enlighten my soul with those lovely virtues
that wait upon thee. Honey.
Thou art Honey to sweeten my soul with the feeling of Gods favor, and to make
sweet unto my soul, those ordinances of life and godliness which he has
erected in his house. And Wine
Thou art Wine to make my soul glad by enjoying my God, my Savior, whose
goodness is equal to his greatness, both of them infinite and unmatchable.
If I loose thee, I loose my self, my soul, my Savior. If thou live in me* I
live my self, nay I dye, but God my Lord and Savior does live within me.

And this is the Psalmists first reason to incite us to the love of God. The
second is taken from his severe judgments against the Proud, The se^o^d reason
of the exho^tation.
which will not stoop to God and his Law, but are disobedient to him, and by
their pride and insolency trouble and misufe other men better then themselves.
The Psalmist says; God Rewards abundantly the proud doer: that is, he
punishes him for his pride with manifold and grievous puishments.

Pride (which is hateful before God and Man, Ecclus. 10. 7. What pride is.
as Syracides speaks) is a certain vice, or swelling of the heart, whereby
we count our selves worthy of more honor and dignity then there is reason, by
reason of an ouer-weening opinion of our selves, imagining that we have those
good things which we have not indeed, or that we have them in greater measure
then we have.

Now a man may show pride either against God, or against man.

Pride is against God and Man.
Against God, pride is showed many ways, some whereof I will declare, that the
madness of men may appear unto you. As first, 1. Note of pride against God
when a man imagines himself to be God, and would be so conceited of men, as
Caligula, who (being an open mocker of all religion) at length fell to think
there was no other God then himself. Secondly, 2. Note.
when men imagine, that what they have, they have it of themselves, or that, if
God give them any thing, it is for their deserts. Thirdly, 3. Note.
when men in their hearts say: He shall not reign over us, who shall control
us? and so contemn the ordinances of God, his Word, his Sacraments, his
Ministers, their Work. their power. Fourthly, 4. Note.
when a wan shall think he is perfect, breaks not the Law, and is able to do
good deeds, whereby he shall merit everlasting life for the worthiness of
them. Fifthly, 5. Note.
when men imagine they can do good works by their own strength: or when in
heart they say, we will do this and this, who shall let us? we will go
thither, or thither, who shall hinder? Sixthly, 6. Note.
when men will disobey the will of God under pretense of humility, Thou art
unworthy to pray to God, but God is worthy to who^ thou should obey. Psalm.
50. 15 Mat. 11. 2^ 7. Note.
as they that plead for their prayers to the Saints in heaven, because they
say, it is a point of humility, to come to so great a King by such means:
whereas God says: Call upon me in the time of trouble. And Christ accordingly,
Come unto me ye that are heavy lad^n, and I will ease you. Lastly, when men
will murmr against God, and are angry with him when he does afflict them.

Of pride against Man.
Pride against Man discouers it self many ways: for the proud person enuies
the good of another, as if he deemed himself either only worthy, When men
make great outward shows, and brave it in cost^y apparel, of purp^se to be
counted better men then they are, it is very pride. So painting of the face to
be thought a beautiful creature, not being so, is very pride.
or else the greatness of others to hinder his. He will acknowledge no
superior, nor equal by his good will, as Agamemnen and Pomp^y, he uses his
equals as inferiors, his inferiors as servants, his servants as beasts: he
thunders, lightens, crackes, threatens, his words are great, his looks big,
he is mad if he be not applauded: and as for humling himself to any man
sincerely, he knows not how: if he give back, it is but to fetch a better
leap: if he stoop a little, it is but to vant and climb the higher. If he be
below, he will not patiently tarry till one come and bid him sit up higher; but
he will work by indirect courses, as by bribes, or slanders, or (it may be)
poisons; nothing being so horrible in his eye, as a mean or low degree. And
when he is climbed up, he pluckes up the ladder after him, if he can, that no
man shall come up after, or but such as he pleases.

To these proud and haughty persons God opposes himself, these he resists,
1. Pet. 5. 5.
these he throws from their pinnacles, and tumbles down headlong, shakes
with his whirle-windes, strikes with his lightnings, beats with his
thunderclaps, turns up their roots, and punishes them (when he pleases)
very severely, openly, and (as David says here)* Abundantly. But let us see
some judgments of God upon the Proud.

2. Pet. 2. 4. Jude 6. Genesis 3. 5. 6.
The wicked Angels for their pride were banished out of heaven, and are under
wrath. When our first Parents would have been check-mate with God by pride,
they brought a downfall of themselves and children. Genesis 11. 4. 9.
The builders of Babel for their pride were scattered, and their tongues
confounded. Haman by pride brake his neck. 1. Sam. 17 10. 45. 50. 51.
God overthrew that vaunting Giant Golias by David, then when he was in the top
of his iollity. God threatened to visit the fruit of the proud heart of the King
of Ashur, Senacherib, and his glorious and proud looks, Isaiah. 10. 12. 13.
because he said: By the power of mine own hand have I done it, and by my
wisdom, because I am wise: and so he did, for by his Angel he killed in one
night, an hundred fourscore and five thousand of his Army, Isaiah. 37. 36 38.
gathered against Hezekiah, and not long after his own sons, Adramelek, and
Sharezer slew him as he was in his Idols Temple worshipping of Nisrech his God.
Dan. 4. 27. 28. 30. 31. 34.
Proud Nebuchadnezzar for his pride was banished the company of men, and
deprived of his kingdom: and after, coming to better sense, he could praise
God, and say, That those which walk is pride he is able to abase. Proud and
bragging H^lofernes by Judith lost his head: Judith. 6. 2 4. and 13. 8. 2. Mac.
1. 15. 16.
so likewise was that wicked and insolent Antiochus met withal, as he had
deserved, his head being first well battered with stones, and afterward cut
off. The judgments of God upon Pharoh for exalting himself against God, and
in his people, were many, and famous. Not. Comes Myth. l. 9. c. 25.
Timotheus the Ateenian never prospered in any enterprise, after he had in his
account given to the state, often intermingled this speech; And in this fortune
had no part; so disclaiming Gods providence, and sacrificing to his own nets.
Apryes a king of Egypt, Guide. Iuuenan Ter. Eun.
which gloried that neither God nor Man could put him by his kingdom, was
afterward strangled. Caphaneus, when he had said, that he would overthrow
Thebes, Inuito Deo, whether God would or no, was struck with lightning. Ajax
said, that Cowards could win with the help of God: But I (says he) will win
this glory without God: not long after God punished him by permitting him to
kill himself with a sword, which he had received of Hector. Herod Agrippa for
not giving glory unto God, when the people madly flatter him in their
acclamation, Act. 12. 22. 24.
The voice of God, and not of Man, was suddenly smitten by Gods Angel, and
eaten of worms, and so ended his life. Simon Magus also to nuzzle the people
in their foolish opinion of him, Joseph. Antiq. lib. 19.^.17.
who for his wonders thought him to be a God, boasted that he would fly into
Heaven: and as he was in his flight, Saint Peter commanded the wicked spirit,
by whose help he flue, to throw him down, so that he fell, and was bruised to
death. Alexander the great was also sick of this disease: for he practiced
with the Priests at the Oracle of Hammon to be pronounced the Son of I^piter:
but not long after he was wounded in India, which made him confess he felt
the infirmities of a man, and a little after being returned to Babylon, as he
was there in all his pomp and iollity, he was poisoned in a banquet after
supper, and so dyed. Emp^docles desirous to be counted an immortal God, threw
himself into Aetna, where he perished. Domitian likewise was so blinded with
pride, that he would be called a God, and worshipped: but how did God reward
him? He was slain of his servants with daggers, by his wives consent, in his
privy chamber: his body was buried without honor, his memory cursed, and his
trophies defaced. Demetrius, Alexanders successor, was by the foolish Athenians
entitled a Saving God, and had a Priest to do Sacrifice unto him, which honor
he liked well of: but how did God like of it? He spoiled a number of his ships
with his wind^s, he overthrew him in battle by Saleuchus, and after this
suffered him to stuff himself so full with vittails, that he burst in sunder.
To all these we may add those, that have by their devises counterfeited
lightnings and thunders, that they might be feared as Gods, as did Alladius,
Dio^^s. Hal^a^^. 1. Antiq. R^m. Dio^. l^b. 4.
a king of the Latins before Romul^s, and a certain king of Elide: both which
were notably punished for their insolency by that God into whose th^one they
would have advanced themselves. For Alladius had his house fired with true
lightning, and overthrown with a tempest of rain, together with the
ouer-flowing of a pond hard by it: so that he perished by fire and water, being
both burnt and drowned all at once. The other was destroyed with a thunderbolt
from heaven, and so suffered a just punishment of his wicked pride. Histories
furthermore report, how Q^eene Venda, daughter to Gracus the famous King of
Poland, H^^^. H^ ^. Pol^. lib. 1. c. ^.
out of her proud and stately nature, refused to be joined in marriage with
any; and at length, least her fortunate government should be disgraced by
some unlucky mishap, and so her pride eclypsed, to prevent this fear,
desperately cast her self from an high bridge into the River Vistula, and so
suffered the punishment of her proud and stately mind, I^s^p^. de ^^l Iadd.
1.^.12. 13.
by a shameful and base death. When Jerusalem was taken by Herod and Sosius
there was a Jew, that had hid himself in a Cave with his wife and seven
children; to whom Herod offered both life and liberty, if he would come forth:
But he, out of the pride and wilfulness of his spirit refusing this offer,
first threw down his children from an high Rock, and brake their necks, then
flung his wife after them, and lastly cast himself after them; a fearful
spectacle of a proud and obstinate spirit. And* Many ways GOD punishes the
proud.
many ways does the LORD meet with the pride of men; sometimes giving them up
to hardness and impenitency of heart; sometimes bringing them into disgrace
and open shame, and opprobry; sometimes suffering them to fall into other
sins, whereby the laws of men take hold of them, either to deprive them of
their lives, or of their places, offices, and honors: One way or other he
does usually punish them, even i^ this life, to say nothing of those
punishments of the life to come. And his mildest and most merciful corrections
of them are, The milder kind^ of GODS judgments upon the proud are two.
when either by cutting their combs, and abasing them by some notable
affliction, he teaches them by his grace to confess their pride, and to see
their weakness; or when he suffers them to fall into some grievous sin, at
which by his grace, he makes them to blush, and moves them to distaste their
proud opinions of their own strength, and to seek in all humbleness of heart
for his assistance and protection. By the former mean he schooled
Nebuchadnezzar: Dan. 4. 34
and by the latter Saint Peter, who by his fall did learn ever after, not to
va^nt, or build, upon his own strength, but to depend upon the grace and aid
of GOD.

Now the consideration of these things teaches us these two duties. First to
detest, eschew, and abandon pride; Osorius de Reg. Instit. l. 5 fol. 151.
Then which nothing is more foolish, more base, more inhumane, more impious.

For what can be more foolish, The folly of pride.
then not to see how frail, and brittle, all the things of the world are, how
soon all things are changed, and by what sudden, and grievous chances men
are deprived of their riches, glory, greatness, and life it self?

What can be more base and abject then to have the mind pinned and nailed to
the ground, The baseness of pride.
and not to look on heavenly things and eternal, but earthly and momentany,
and to be puffed up with wealth and honors, mortal and vain things, that
delight to flit, and change their Masters?

What more inhumane and less beseeming the state of man, The inhumanity of
pride.
then to contemn and skorne others, and ^steeme all as Cyph^rs in comparison
of themselves?

The impiety of pride.
What more ungodly, then to glory of riches, honors, dignities, nobleness of
birth, wit, strength, beauty, virtue; as if they were not ^he free-gift^ of
GOD* as if men were not obliged to him for them?

The injustice of pride.
Again, what more iniust then pride? For a proud man ascribes more to himself
then is due, and takes that from others, which is due unto them.

What more contentious then pride? P^o.13.^^. Pride the mother of contentions.
Therefore Solomon says, Only by pride does man make contention. Pride has
ever been a setter on foot of all heresies and schisms, that ever were in
the Church; and is a notorious Makebate in Commonwealthes, Kingdoms, Cities,
and private houses. Harder it is for a man to keep peace with the proud, then
with any; and impossible it is for one proud person to agree sincerely with an
other, except peradventure in such a case as this, when as one, out of his
pride, will endure no man to be above him, and another being proud of
humility, or humiliation rather, will not like that any should be under him:
These two perhaps may live friendly together, being though both proud, yet in a
different respect.

Finally, The ouglinesse of pride.
what can be more misshapen and ougly then this vice of pride, which makes a man
unlike to GOD (whom to be like is man's greatest Honor) and like to the
devil, who is the father of pride, and by pride overthrew himself? What more
certain sign and effectual worker of any man's overthrow, then pride? Pro.
16. 18.
Pride goes before destruction (says Solomon) and an high mind before a fall.
What more hateful and wastefull enemy to all virtues and all good things, a
man has then pride? By p^ide a man is spoiled of them all: A Similie.
Therefore as men take heed of Thieves, that rob and spoil, so and much more
should we beware of pride ( Quae insidiatur bonis operibus, August.
vt pereant) which marres all good things, and turns them up side down. Pride
a waster.
If an humble man be proud of his humility, he has lost of his humble mind,
and is become puffed with pride: If a man be proud of his beauty, he has lost
his true beauty, and is a beautiful fool. If a man be proud of his wisdom,
he is become a fool; if he be proud of his wit, an Ass has it in keeping;
if he be proud of his poverty, he is rich in pride; if he be proud of his
riches, he is poor in piety. Now what a woeful and odious sin is pride,
which is not only evil in it self, but it turns the nature of good things,
as (they say) thunder does good drink, A Similie.
and as venomous beasts turn, whatsoever they eat into venom; so pride makes
the proud man, turn all his thoughts, words, and works into pride, whiles he
draws and refers every thing to his own praise and honor. Thus pride
becomes like a moth, or worm, Pride a moth.
which frets the cloth, and eats the wood, wherein it was bred. For pride
springing of virtue corrupts it, and there is no good thing so excellent, which
becomes not evil, so soon as this wicked vice has tainted it.

It behoues us therefore to fly this wretched vice, The way to withstand pride.
which we cannot, unless we submit our selves to GOD and his Ordinances,
unless we confess him to be the Free-Giuer of all good things we have;
unless we cut off that error of conceit, whereby we think better of our
selves, then there is reason; unless we seek to GOD for his help; and
finally, unless we remember that GOD resists the proud, but gives grace to
the humble, Iam. 4. 6.
Hugo lib. 1. de anima.
and that Pride (as one prettely speaks) was bred in heaven, but having (as
it were) forgotten which way it fell from thence, it could never afterward
find the way thither back again,

Secondly, the consideration of Gods judgments upon the Proud should teach us
(as David would have it) to love the LORD who, hates and punishes that sin
abundantly, that is, or ought to be so odious to us. Seeing therefore GOD
takes part with us against the proud, and by hating them shows the goodness
of his own Nature, and in that he plagues them, being ever the bitterest
enemies to his truest friends, it behoues us, and the rest of all GODS Saints
to delight in GOD and love him, He that loves GOD, loves himself.
and in love to submit our selves unto him. If we love not him, we do not love
our selves; but if we love him truly, we do truly love our selves, and we
are, (not in our own opinion only, but) truly beloved of Him; which is
infinitely much more worth, then if all the world besides him did affect us.
Neither need we care how ill the world thinks of us, if he think well of us;
A Similie.
as a sober and chaste woman cares not how other men are conceited of her, so
be it her husband like well of her, and truly love her: or as a loyal subject,
who makes more reckning of his sovereigns love, then of the friendship of all
the traitors in the world. Now the God of love work and confirm this love
within our hearts, that we may live and dye in his love, and at length obtain
a full and final fruition of him, whom we do love, receiving the reward of
our love, the everlasting life and happiness of our souls, and that by the
merits of that his beloved Son, Jesus Christ our Savior, to whom with the
Father and the holy Ghost, three persons, but one Everliving and Euerlouing
God, be all love, and honor, all praise and power, now, and euer-more. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 25. l. 2. read commination. l. 3. read streaming. P. 39. l. 11. read
Laf-ford. and whence. p. 58. and last line, read, if all.


