A CONTINVATION OF THE COLLECTION OF THE HISTORY OF ENGLAND, BEGINNING WHERE
SAMVEL DANIELL Esquire ended, WITH THE REIGN OF EDWARD the third, and ending
where the honorable Vicount Saint ALBONES began, With the life of Henry the
seventh, being a complete History of the beginning and end of the dissension
betwixt the two houses of York and Lancaster. With the Matches and issue of
all the Kings, Princes, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, and Vicounts of this Nation,
deceased, during those times. By I. T.

Sequitur non passibus aequis Ascanius.
Virgil. LONDON, Printed by M. D. for Ephraim Dawson, and are to be sold in
Fleet Street at the sign of the Rainebowe near the inner Temple-gate. 1636.

TO THE HONORABLE REVEREND, AND RIGHT Worshipful, Sir JOHN BRAMSTON Knight,
Lord chief Justice of his Majesty's Bench, Sir WILLIAM JONES, Sir GEORGE
CROOK, Sir ROBERT BARCKLEY Knights, the Learned Judges of that Court.
License me (I humbly beseech your Reverend fatherhoods) with the contrite
penitent: Ingeniously to acknowledge my Error, which is overmuch presumption
in undertaking, more in publishing, but most in thus presenting this my
Collection: But withal to appeal from the bar of Rigor, to the board of
favor, and thereat to obtain this extenuation of censure; That being it was
begun with a good intent, prosecuted to a seeming good end, and is now in all
befitting humbleness presented to procure protection, that I may pass without
public reprehension: And sithence words and writing are not real according
as they are spoke or writ but as they are appoved by others: Let your noble
dispositions but make a favorable exposition of what is done: And then I am
confident I shall untoucht pass the pikes of scorn and reproof; In earnest
expectation whereof, humble and hearty prayers to God, the giver of all good
gifts for our long lives, in health and hearts ease here, and sempiternall
happiness hereafter, shall not want daily to be powered out, by him that
hourly rests,

Your Lordships reallest in all service and duty, JOHN TRVSSELL.

To the Courteous Reader.
MY natural propension to the reading of History, was the occasion that I left
no Chronicle of this land, that purse, or prayer could purchase or procure,
unperused: whereby I found that verified, that Prince Henry (now with God)
complained of, which was, that of all Nations the English were most
blameworthy; That being inferior to none for praiseworthy achievements, yet
were surpassed by all, and leaving the memory of those their praise worthy
actions to posterity. This I took to heart, but every way unable to remedy
it, I rested silent, until of late it came into my mind; That that part of the
History of great Britain, which was most intricate and troublesome, which was
the beginning of that Story was happily begun, and as ingeniously followed (by
that every way well) deserving Gentleman Samuel Daniel: And thereby all those
rubbes and blancks, which the deluge of time, had raised and left on the
plat-forme, were made smooth or taken away, and that Vicount Saint Albones had
so sufficiently perfected, that of all other the most doubtful (if not
dangerous piece) of Pater times to be undertaken, the happy Conjunction of the
so long severed Houses of York and Lancaster, and that many others, reverend
and judicious men, had by way of Annuals pursued the History unto the blessed
Uniting of the two neighbor, but long before divided Kingdoms, of England and
Scotland, so that now there wanted nothing to make the History complete, for so
much as was requisite until that time, but only the passages from Richard the
second, to the period of Richard the third, a great part whereof was-likewise
accurately done, by Sir John Heywood and Sir Thomas More, so that now with
little labor, that gap might easily be filled up, and the History made;
Whereupon I have adventured to add my piece of ordinary valor, to those rich
remnants of three pild Velvet, by enterviewing the times of Richard the second,
Henry the fourth, Henry the fifth, Henry the sixth; Edward the fourth, Edward the
fifth, and the Usurper Richard the third, Wherein though I prove but a botcher,
yet as the old saying is, better a course clout then a hole out. And to clear
my self though not a toto, yet a tanto, from that aspersion that happily might
be cast upon my endeavors, that howsoever not ignorant of my own manifold
imperfections, yet like blind bayard, I should over-boldly venture, to tread in
that Maze, which ought not to have been undertaken, but by a more able body,
and a more active brain, and thereby have forgetfully brought my self within
the number of those over-forward Writers, which Doctor Heywood in his Epistle
Dedicatorie to his first three Norman Kings affirms, has sullied the beauty
of the English History.

Give me leave gentle Reader, (I beseech thee) as before I have yielded the
reason, that incited me to the undertaking of this work, so to give thee an
account of my proceeding therein.

First, I have forborne to assume unto my self the liberty of an Historian,
to obtrude upon thee any thing of my own invention, quia malui aliena
imprudenter dicere quam propria impudenter ingerere: And for that History is or
ought to be a perfect register of things formerly done truly: ot at least
warrantable by probability, I have pro posse meo examined, though not all,
(yet without touch of Arrogance, I may speak it) the most and best, that have
written of those times, and culling out the truth as near as I could gather
it, like an Echo, Voces quas accepi fidelissime reddidi.

Secondly, I have pared off these superfluous exuberances, which like Wennes
upon a beautiful face, disgrace the otherwise graceful comeliness of the
countenance, I mean,

1. Matters of Ceremony, as Coronations, Christenings, Marriages, Funerals,
solemn Feasts, and such like.

2. Matters of Triumph, as Tiltings, Maskings, Barriers, Pageants, Gallefoists,
and the like.

3. Matters of Noveltie, as great inundations, sudden rising and falling of
prizes of Corn, strange Monsters, Justice done on petty offenders, and such
like executions, with which the Cacoethes of the Writers of those times have
mingled matters of state.

And lastly, I have inserted the matches and issue, of all above the degree of
a Baron, that have ended their days during those times, with the number of
slain, during the division of the two Roses, which how far it may conduce to
the better understanding of the History, I leave to thy capacity, and my self
to thy courtesy, and expecting a favorable censure rest thine;

JOHN TRVSSELL.
April 24. 1635.

Perlegi hoc Opus Hystoricum duobus voluminibus comprehensum, cui titulus, A
Continuation of the Collection of the History of England, etc. quod quidem in
toto continet folia 418. aut circiter, in quibus nihil reperio sanae doctrinae,
aut bonis moribus contrarium, quo minus cum utilitate publica imprimi possit:
Sub ea tamen condition, ut si non intra triennium typis mandetur haec licentia
sit omnino irrita.

Gulielmus Haywood Capell. dom. RR. P. Archiep. Cant.

A CONTINVATION OF THE HISTORY of ENGLAND.
Liber tertius.
RICHARD the Second.
RIchard the second borne at Bordeaux, son of Edward An. 1377. R. 1.
the black Prince, and Ioane the daughter of Edmond Earl of Kent, and
grandchild to Edward the third, being eleven years old, was crowned King at
Westminster the 21. day of June 1377. by Simon Sudbury Archbishop of
Canterbury, at the time of whose Coronation the Duke of Lancaster, per nomen
Iohannis Regis Castiliae and Legionis Dux Lancasteur put his claim as Earl of
Lecester, to have the place of Earl Marshall of England, as Duke of Lancaster,
to carry the Sword at the Coronation called Curtana, as Earl of Lincoln, to
be Carver that day: all which to be executed by himself, or his sufficient
Deputy, which with the fees thereunto belonging were confirmed unto him, and
he accordingly did them and there in person execute the place of high Marshall
at such years. As this King was then of, the mind of man is like unto the
potters earth, apt to be wrought into any fashion, and then which way soever it
hardens by custom, it seldom swerves from the same; The governance of the
King at the first, was committed to certain Bishops, Earls, Barons, and
Justices, but either by niceness and fear of discontenting the King, or
negligence, to discharge their duty, or both, every one was more ready to
please him, with delightful conceits, then with profitable counsel to do him
good: for smoothe, and pleasing speeches, need small endeavor, and always
find favor, whereas to advise that, which is most meet, is a point of some
pains, and many (if not most) times but a thanklesse office: Hereupon, two
dangerous evils did ensue: Flattery brake in, and private respects (as
eversince it has done) did pass under public pretenses; At his Coronation he
Created, Ann. 1378 R. 3.
four Earls, Thomas Woodstocke King Edward the thirds youngest son, Earl
of Buckingham, and Northampton, Thomas Mowbray, younger brother of John Lord
Mowbray was created Earl of Nottingham, Gifford Angolisme a Gascoigne, Earl
of Huntington, and Henry Piercie son of Henry Lord Piercy was Created Earl
of Northumberland; In the beginning of this Kings reign, the French on the one
side, and the Scots on the other, did cruelly infest this Land, the one, making
depredations, in the Isle of Wight harying the same, and attempting the Castle,
from whence they were manfully repulsed; by a Captain whose name I will
forbear, because in some Authors I find him styled by another appellation;
The other forraged the Country round about, and burnt the Town of
Rocksborough; This course of each side, spoiling the English: they (both French
and Scots combining,) continued by sea, until John Philpot Citizen, and
Alderman of London (lamenting the misery of the times, occasioned by common
neglect, of scouring the Coasts, and scouring the seas, whereby the Merchant
durst not traffic abroad, for fear of Pirates, which hovered in every corner,
but especially of one Mercer a Scottish Rover, who had drawn together a great
flect of French, Scotts, and Spaniards, and with them, did rob, and spoil
all they met, and did great mischief) complained hereof to the Kings Council,
and demonstrated to them: the daily wrongs sustained, by the said Mercer,
imploring their aid, but receiving from them no relief, he at his own proper
costs, victualed and manned forth a company of tall ships: himself in person
going with them to sea, and in short time, took the said Mercer, and recovered
all the prises, formerly taken, with fifteen Spanish Bottoms well fraught with
riches, besides many French, and Scottish ships; For which action he encurred
the hard censure of most of the Noble men, from whom he seemed to have snatched
by this his fortunate attempt the native cognizance of true nobility; Amongst
whom Hugh Earl of Stafford nettled with the general commendations given to
Philpot for this design publicly at the Council table, objected against him,
the unlawfulness of the act, without authority, being but a private man to
attempt to levy arms. But Philpot with a kind of undaunted resolution, not
only justified the act, as though not altogether lawful yet very expedient
being done for the honor of God, and the King, and the security of the
republicke, but retorted the objection of improvidence and slothful neglect,
upon the Earl and the rest of the Council, so that they were much to seek
for a reply, and he returned with the general applause of the Citizens, and
most of the Courtiers.

The King of France presuming of the Kings minority, with some Spanish Anno.
Dom. 1376. R. 2.
aid, landed in the Southwest part of England, and ransackt and burnt the
towns of Plymmoth, Dartmoth, Portsmoth, Rye, and diverse other Coast towns,
and marched further into the main, until, by the Earl of Cambridge, the
Kings uncle, and the Earls of Salisbury and Buckingham, and their forces, they
were encountered and beat back unto their ships; About that time also by the
King of France his instigation, Alexander Ramsey a brave Scot, with forty of
his countrymen in the night surprised the Castle of Barwicke, and intended to
have fallen upon the Town; But the inhabitants suspecting some treason by the
noise, they have endeavored to prevent mischief, hewed down the stays of the
drawbridge on the town side, so that when the Scots let fall the Bridge the
chains breaking, the Bridge fell into the ditch, by means whereof the Scots
were imprisoned by their own conquest, yet as well as they were able, they
fortified them in the Castle, which presently was besieged and assaulted, and
(though valiantly defended, An. 1380. R. 2.
was with some loss at length surprised, upon the taking whereof not one man
but the Captain Ramsey was spared.

In the third year of this Kings reign it was concluded that to avoid Anno
1381. R. 3.
unnecessary charge, the tutelage of the King, should be committed but to one
man; and by the whole consent of the Parliament dissembled, this office was
deputed to Lord Thomas Beuchampe Earl of Warwick, and a competent The Earl
of Warwick made sole Tutour to the King.
pension was assigned him, out of the Kings Exchequer, for his pains and care
thereabouts to be taken. But the King being plunged in the gulf of pleasure,
did immoderately bend himself, to advance and favor such persons, as were
reprovable for life, and generally condemned for deboshment, and this was the
cause of two great inconveniences, for many of the younglings of Nobility,
observing the secret favors and distastes of the King: gave over themselves to
a dissolute and dishonest course, which finds some followers, when it has no
furtherancers, much more when it does flourish and thrive by countenance and
abetement: The King also by favoring these, was himself little favored, and
less loved by many; For it is as dangerous to a Prince, to have evil and
despised adherents, as to be evil and despicable himself; The chief actors
in this scene were Nevill Archbishop of York, Robert Uear Earl of Oxford,
Michael Delapoole, Robert Tressilian Lord chief Justice, Nicholas Bramber
Alderman of London, and others neither eminent by birth or desert, but
observant and pliable to the Kings humor: These were highly in credit with the
King, both in company and counsel always next him; By these he ordered his
private actions, by these he managed his affairs of State, he spared neither
the dignity, nor death of any man, whose authority or life, interposed their
pleasure or profit. He removed Sir Richard Scroope from being Lord Chancellor
of England (to Scroop Lord Chancellor removed.
which place he was appointed by the Parliament,) because he refused to set
the great Seal to the grant of certain lands, which had been abusively
drawn from the King: alleging for his so doing the great debts of the King,
the small demerits of the graunts, upon whom the King might consume much, but
orderly give nothing; wishing the King might be well advertised thatryot might
deceive him under the terms of bounty, and that gifts well ordered procure not
so much love, as indiscreetly imparted incite envy: This Chancellor used not
to cauterize his conscience, with partial maintaining of such as were mighty,
but being alike to all, was the sooner disliked of all that were lewd: The
destruction of the Duke of Lancaster was plotted upon the like dislike, by
Justice Tresilian, offenses were suggested, appellors appointed, Peers named,
sudden arrest intended, and present arraignment, condemnation, and execution
concluded; But the Duke upon notice of these contrivances, escaped to Pomfret
Castle, and there made preparation for his defense against the King, from hence
grew a head of division, which the common people at that time very busily
sought. But the Kings Mother incessantly travailing between the King and the
Duke, (notwithstanding her unweldinesse and age) drew them both to
reconcilement; The King in regard of the dangerous and discontented times, the
Duke in respect of his duty and allegiance, the more easy to be made
inclinable and so partly by her entreatie and counsel, and partly by their
inclination bending to the safest course, all appearance of displeasure on the
one part, and, distrust on the other, was for that time removed. The Frenchmen
again, land in England and did much harm, at Dover, Winchelsey, Hastings, and
at Graves end, and unincountred returned to France; For prevention of which
outrages and revenge of those injuries offered, a Parliament is assembled at
Ann. 1381 R. 3.
Westminster, in which a Subsidy of four pence for poll of each sex
throughout the kingdom, (above the age of fourteen years) is granted to the
King; The levying whereof procured much heart-burning, and did much alyen the
hearts of the subjects from the King; With that money preparation is made, and
eight thousand men sent over into France, under the conduct of Thomas of
Woodstocke the Kings Uncle, who passing over Soam, Oyse, and Marne, Rivers,
spoiled and burnt all the Country, and ransomed the Inhabitants until he
came to Brittany, where by the Duke John Momford he was joyfully received, and
royally entertained.

About this time one John Balle a factious clergy man, a scholar of Wickcliff,
observing the common people much to murmr at the payment of the foresaid
Subsidy, in all places where he came used secretly to inform the inferior
sort of people, such as were poor and needy, That by descent from Adam, all
men were of one condition, that the laws of this kingdom were injurious, and
much hindered us of participating Christian liberty, nay most unjust by making
so great a difference of men's estate, preferring some to be Peers and
Potentates, giving to some others large authority, and enlarging others
possessions, and taking advantage of the humble and pliable condition, and
carriage of others in servilitie and baseness, hardly giving them allowance of
sustenance, and that not that neither, but with sweat, and hard labor, where
amongst Christians there should be an equal share of all things, and that in
common, taking this for his theme; When Adam delv'd and Eve span, who was then
a gentleman with such like traiterous persuasions he did prepare the vulgar
(apt to entertain the proffers of rebellion) and fit them for insurrection
upon the slightest occasion; This doctrine once on foot run from rusticke to
villainy, and from shire to shire, that at length it infatuated them, and
infected the City of London, the Commons whereof, I mean the poorer sort of
mechanics and handicrafts, desperately inclined to mutiny upon the reasons
aforesaid incited and invited the multitude prepared as aforesaid to come
thither, promising their best assistance and furtherance; Whereupon a rude
rowte of rascals, under the leading of Wat Tyler a Tailor who commanded in
chief, with their grave minister, John Wall: Jack Straw, a Thresher, Jack
Sheppard of the Council of war, under the title of the Kings men, and the
servants of the Commonwealth of England, came to London, ransacking by the
way, and demolishing from Essex side all the fair structures and great
buildings, of the Nobility and Gentry; They summoned the King to give them a
meeting; who accordingly accompanied, with the most of his best Councillors,
tooke-his Bardge and went to Graves End; but seeing the rabble so ragged and
rogue-like, a company of swadds compact of the off-skum of the people, it was
held no discretion for the King to venture his person among them, and so
returned to the Tower from whence he came.

The next day these unruly rake-shames approached London, but finding the gates
locked, and the bridge drawn, and well guarded, they threatened the Ann. D. 1382
R. 4.
slaughter of man, woman, and child on Southwarke side, the sacking of their
houses, and lastly the firing of the Borough and Churches there; For prevention
whereof, and somewhat to keep the staggering Commons from precipitate running
with them in rebellion, the Gates were opened and the bridge let down, and by
permission they entered, where their fury, (with fair words and kind usage)
was for that night pacified, only the Commander Tyler sent for his quondam
Master Richard Lion, an ancient grave Citizen, and in thankful requital of
moderate and deserved punishment given him An. 1382. R. 4.
in his apprentiship, he caused his head to be struck off and pitched upon a
pole, and in triumph borne before him the next day when he went to the Savoy
(a house belonging to John of Gaunt the Kings Uncle) which they rifled, burnt,
and inhumanly murdered all the chief Officers they found there; They commit
sacrilege in all Churches and religious houses, robbing the houses of the
students in the Law, committing to the fire all their books and Records,
proclayming death to any, that should be found to know law, or literature;
they spoiled all Forrainers inhabiting in or near London, and their numbers
increasing to threescore thousand. They came to Saint Katherines, from thence
sending to the King to attend their pleasure at Mile End, no sooner was the
King gone forth of the tower to the place appointed; when Tyler with some of
his comrades, entered the Tower gates, ryfled the Kings lodging, barbarously
entreating the Kings Mother both with bad language, and worse blows, where
they apprehended as he was performing the ceremonies of the Church, the
Reverend Simon Arch. B. of Canterbury (who formerly had convented their
proloquutor John Wall, for promulgating his dangerous if not damnable
positions,) and struck off his head, they broke up all the Prisons, and set at
liberty all the malefactors there, and then came to meet the King at Mile end:
The King demanded what it was that In (...) celebratione depr^ersum.
was with such hostile manner required, with a confused noyes some cried
manumission, others maintenance, others to have their lands freed from
service, every one what he thought would most conduce to his own particular
end; The King promises to call a Parliament, and thereby (which now he
granted) promised to establish, what to that purpose should be set down in
writing, and further gave a general Pardon and safe conducts for their return
every man to his own habitation, whereupon the most of the seeming best of
these bad rebels, disbanded and went homeward, and the Londoners returned; But
Tyler (whose aim was the robbing of the City of London, and the extirpation
of all any way noted for learning,) with twenty thousand of the dregs, and
skum of his rakehells, came to Smithfield; To whom the King (guarded with a
small strength,) attended on amongst others, by William Wallworth Mayor, John
Philpot the darling of the Mariners, and Nicholas Brember Aldermen of London,
and Sir John Newton, and some few others, (men of resolute and brave spirits)
presented himself, but was by that traytourly Tyler received in that base and
scornful manner, and with so many affronts to his followers, that John
Philpot told the King the abuses were insufferable, and so please him but to
command his Lieutenant, meaning the Mayor to arrest the Traitor, he would lose
his life, if it were not accordingly performed; Nevertheless the King doubting
the sequel, was unwilling to provoke a madd^ dog, and with fair speeches
and pleasing countenance, he began to expostulate with Tyler, and was willing
to condescend to some dishonorable conditions, (being betwixt sovereign and
subject) to content him, but the more he found the King pliable, the more
arrogantly did he insult, and the more unreasonable were his demands, and too
too insolent his behavior, amongst other this was one of his demands to have
all law abolished, affirming with an execrable oath, before night all the Law
of England should pass through this straight, clapping his hand to his mouth,
in the mean time Philpot had sent into the City to Sir Robert Knowles Digito
^abijs admoto, etc.
who was left behind to keep the multitude quiet, to make known the Kings
danger and his own, conjuring them by their duty to the King and love to him,
to make all possible speed to their rescues, and afterward prompting the Mayor
what to do, having by Sir John Newtons help covertly drawn Ann. 1382 R. 5.
close together as many of the Kings followers as were present, he attended
the sequel, Tyler persisting in his insupportable arrogance, demanded the
Kings dagger of his Esquire that held it, which being by the Kings conivance
delivered him: he further presumed to command the Esquire to give him the
Sword also: to whom the young sparcke bravely said, a Kings Sword would but ill
become a knaves hand, wherewith Tyler rising up, offering to approach toward
the Kings Page, the Mayor of London that only awaighted the occasion of
hazzarding his life in surprising so proud a traitor, snatcheth the Kings
dagger out of the sheathe in Tylers hand, and then sheathes the same in Tylers
body, whereupon Philpot with his sword saluted The Mayor slays Wat Tyler.
him on the cockscombe that he fell to the ground slain: This sudden action at
first dismayed the King, but being assured of present succor of the Citizens,
he took courage, and being rounded by his Nobles, they gave defyance to the
headless tomb, which wanted nor will, nor means to revenge their Captains
death, but each one expecting when another should begin, they stayed looking
one upon another, until news was brought that the Londoners under the conduct
of Sir Robert Knowles in battle array approached, and then they fling down
their weapons, and every one shifted for himself, and quit the field, at which
the King wonderfully rejoiced, and in the same place made William Walworth,
John Philpot, Ralph Standish, John Laund, Nicholas Twifield, and Nicholas
Bramber Knights; whilst these tumults were thus in agitation, by the
procurement of one John Wall that pernicious Perditus and pernitiosus
praesbyter.
priest one John Wraw (a whelpe of the same litter, a Chaplain for the Devils
good grace,) was sent into Norfolk and the adjacent countries, to incite upon
the like motives the Commons to insurrection, and to join with Tyler, which
took so suddenly, that in Hartfordshire about Saint Albons, and at Saint
Edmonds-bury in Suffolk, upon Corpus Christi day, to the number of fifty
thousand were assembled; and under the conduct of one Robert Westborne an
Inne-keeper; They outragiously destroyed and demolished all the Noble and
Gentlemen's houses of note: And put to death all the professors of law they
could find.

They took Sir John Cavendish Lord chief Justice of the Kings bench struck
off his head and placed the same upon the Pillory in Saint Edmonds The Lord
chief Justice slain by rebels.
bury. They beheaded likewise John of Cambridge the Pryor thereof, and John de
Laking^uith, one of the Pryors Commoignes, carrying them in triumph, and placed
them on poles upon the said pillory.

They caused the Covent to surrender up all Obligations and writing obligatory
in their custody, and all their Charters of privilege which Canutus their
founder had bestowed upon that house, which the more to endeere themselves to
their favor, they delivered cancelled to the Townsmen. In like manner in
Norfolk under the command of John Litistar a Dyer of Norwich the like outrages
are committed, from whose fury the Earl of Suffolk narrowly escaped, at
Northwaltham in Norfolk they styled their Captain King of the Commons, and
enforced the Lords, Scales and Morley with diverse worshipful Knights to attend
upon him at the table, which for that Sir Robert Saul refused to do, they
beat out his brains.

Henry Spencer Bishop of Norwich to suppress these insolents, by his example
drew the Knights and Gentlemen residing thereabout to arm themselves, The
Bishop of Norwich suppresseth the rebels in Norfolk.
and to take the field, who afterward rowted the Rebels, and took their
Captain (whose head he caused presently to be struck off,) and their
Chaplain Wraw prisoners, from thence Wraw was sent to London to receive his
trial, where he was afterward according to his demerits hanged, drawn and
quartered.

Like wise upon the Saturday following Corpus Christi day, the Townsmen of
Cambridge by threats enforced one James Grancester to be their Leader, exacting
Cambridge spoiled by the rebels.
an oath from him and his brother Thomas to be loyal to their encorporation,
and to join with them in execution of any their designs; And presently they
fell upon Corpus Christi College, which they miserably ransackt, tearing,
burning, or spoiling, whatsoever writing, charters, and books they could come
at, and did take away all the plate, vestments, treasure they could find,
enforcing the Seniors and students of that College, by oath to renounce and
disclayme all, and whatsoever Charters, grants, privileges, and franchises had
been formerly bestowed upon that house, and to acknowledge from thence forth
subjection to the Mayor and Burgesses of Cambridge; From thence they went like
a torrent to Saint Mary's Church; where they broke up the chests, and from
thence took out all the treasure and Church ornaments, fury being on foot left
nothing undone that was barbarous, and passion having drowned reason, they cared
not what mischief they did nor to whom, so as they might make their malice
sufficiently perspicuous to the Clergy, from Cambridge they went to the Priory
of Bernwell, a mile off which they like Sarazens defaced, felling down the
trees; spoiling the walks, and setting fire to what remained there undefaced.
Tired with doing, but not sorry for having done so many crimes they retired to
Cambridge, where in the Market place they consumed with fire, all the
ordinances, constitutions and statutes of the University, and all other the
particular books, rowles, parchments, and leidgers they could come at, taking
up the ashes, and flinging them in the air, cried away with these Clerks
cunning; and then in the dark of the night every one shifted for one and stole
away.

The King for punishment of these and other like offenders, sent the Lord Ann
D. 1382 R. 5.
chief Justice Tressilian and Sir Roger Sales, and other Commissioners into
all-those parts where insurrection had been made.

From Coventry, John Ball, who had seconded Wall and Wraw in inciting the
multitude to insurrection, is sent to the King, against whose frowardness in
practice toward authority, and forwardness in profession to sow such seeds
of sedition in his sermons, that thereby the people were both incited and
encouraged to rebelliou, such sufficient information was given, that he was
executed for high Treason.

This general flame of combustion being extinct, the King studyeth the
advancement of his Favorites, so that within short time after Michel de la
Poole, son and heir of Sir William de la Poole Knight and Banneret, (say
some, but others one of that name, a Merchant in London) was made Lord
Chancellor of England, and created Earl of Suffolk, and Robert Vear Earl of
Oxford, the fourth of that name, and ninth Earl thereof, was created Marquess
of Dublin (being the first man within this Realm that was enobled with that
title,) But they grew in hate as they did in honor, for many of ancient
nobility did stomach their undeserved as they deemed it advancement, and with
these the votes of the people generally went; But the Kings intemperate
affection was peremptory and violent, not regarding envy until he could not
resist it.

The year following the new Marquess was Created Duke of Ireland, The lower
house of Parliament exhibited a Bill of grievances against the Anno. Dom. 1384.
R. 6.
Chancellor, desiring his answer thereto, and trial thereupon, the particulars
1. Whereof were for that he had abused the King in farming the profits and
revenewes of the Crown; 2. For profusely wasting the treasure in ryotous
prodigality, and unnecessary expenses; 3. For being dived deep An. 1384. R. 6.
into the Kings debt; 4: For being careless and corrupt in his Office; 5. For
deceiving and discrediting the King in his accounts and disbursement (the
particulars whereof were annexed to the Bill) with diverse objections of, both
dishonesty of body, and dishonor in his private actions, and public Office.
This Earl from London sent a student to Oxford, returned, well clothed to the
Court, and there suddenly grown great, could not moderate his change, but in
his height of prosperity, laid open the baseness of his inclination and
condition, which before were either cunningly covered, or craftily cloked, from
being discovered; And serving a weak Ruler, in an eminent place, with an ill
mind, he made open sale of his Princes honor; But the King willing to
connive at, or remit the offenses, silently let the complaints slip, with a
short audience and no examination, expressing himself thereby neither much
grieved at the offenses, nor well pleased with the complaint: A Subsidy is
required, but answer was made, there was no need of it, since A subsidy
demanded and denied.
the Kings wants might be furnished and supplied, with his own debts due from
the Chancellor if called in, neither was it if otherwise, to any purpose, to
be granted so long as the moneys should be issued by such persons as
formerly had been, and was likely to be again.

The complaints against the Chancellor are recontinued with that earnestness,
that the King is persuaded, that it is neither for his Honor, or safety, to
justify him, for to private men it is sufficient, if themselves abstain from
wrong, but Princes must provide that none do wrong under them; For by
conniving and abetting the faults of their Officers, they make them too often
seem their own: and they will be objected against them upon the first
occasion; The importunity of both houses, wrought the Kings consent to a
Commission, to authorize diverse noble men, to hear and determine all
grievances and objections against the Chancellor; Thereupon a Subsidy is
granted, but with proviso, that the money be disposed of by the Commissioners
agreed upon to the benefit of the Realm.

The King moved that the heirs of Charles Bloyes, who laid claim to the
Duchy of Britain, should be delivered to the French upon the receipt of
30000. Marks by them to that purpose offered, the same to be delivered to the
Duke of Ireland, for the recovery of those possessions the King had given him
in Ireland, which was assented unto, so as before the feast of Easter following
the Duke should depart thither, and there remain; at so high a Commissioners
appointed to receive the Susibdie.
rate they valued his riddance out of the Realm; The charge of the Subsidy
was committed to Richard Earl of Arundle.

The Duke of Gloucester and the said Earl, were made Commissioners concerning
the Earl of Suffolk, who by the Kings absence is left to himself, to answer
the objected misdemeanors, whereof he made the Kings blind favor his
privilege and protection, presuming never to see that either altered or
overruled: He is convict of many crimes, deposed from his Office, his goods
are confiscate to the King, and himself adjudged to execution, which was
submitted to the Kings pleasure, and under sureties was permitted to go at
large.

John Fourd B. of Durham, another minion of the Kings, is removed from being
Lord Treasurer, he was a man of little depth either in learning or The Lord
Treasurer removed by Parliament.
judgment, only one that had the art of seeming, making a formal show of
whatsoever he spoke, or did, and rising from a poor estate to so high a pitch
of honor: he too excessively exercised his riot and ambition, not able to
qualify the lusts and desires his former wants: had kindled. Ann. 1386 R. 6.


This business blown over: the King returns to London, and presently
receives the Earl of Suffolk, the Duke of Ireland, and the Archbishop of
York to greater grace and familiarity then before; These Triumvirs incence
the King agalnst the Nobles, that wore best deserving, partly upon disgraces
desertfully done unto them; partly upon malicious emulation, to see others so
generally beloved (except of the King) and themselves so contemptible; And that
their private spleen might carry some show of public respect, they suggested
to the King, he was but half, yea not half a King; For (said they) if we
respect matters of State, you bear the sword, but they sway it, you have the
show, but they the authority of a Prince, using your name as a colorable
pretext to their proceedings, and your Person as a cipher to make their number
the greater by the addition thereof, without which they could be nothing,
neither are you any thing more by being so placed; Look you to the duties of
your Subjects, and you shall find it is at their devotion, for you cannot
command nor demand, but with such limitations and exceptions as they please to
propose; And for your private actions, your bounty (the most to be observed
good virtue in a Prince,) is restrained, your expenses measured, and your
affections confined, to frown, and favor, as they shall please to prescribe
you? what Ward is so much under government of his Guardian? Wherein will they,
or can they, more abridge you? Except they should take from you the place, as
they have done the power of a Prince; And in this we think they may justly be
feared, having so great might, and means, to give wings to ambitious minds;
Power is never safe when it does exceed: Ambition is like the Crocodile,
growing as long as it lives; or like the Ivy, which rising at the foot will
overpeere the highest wall, it is already grown from at spark, to a flame,
and more then time it is such increase, were stayed; For such overruling
Princes presage their overthrowing, and such cutting them short, has turned to
cutting them off, their minds are suspicious, their power dangerous, and
therefore the opportunity must warily be prevented. The Kings youth and
weakness, made him apprehensive, and framed his mind to a full but needless
fear, he was much moved with the removal of his Chancellor, and Treasurer
out of their offices, and the Duke of Ireland out of the Realm, supposing it a
restraint to his regal authority, not to have absolute power in all things,
to give and forgive at his pleasure; when these privy incensers perceived, the
Kings honor once sharpened, they so plied him with plausible persuasions, that
(though naturally he was of no cruel disposition, yet they drew him to many
violent, and indirect courses) partly upon negligence to search out the truth,
partly upon delight to be flattered, neither did they long defer their
stratagems; At first it was plotted, that the Duke of Gloucester and certain
others of that part, should be invited to supper in London, and there made
away, Sir Nicholas Brember, who had been late Mayor of the City, whose
abundance of wealth supplied the want of honest qualities in him, was a busy
agent in that butcherly business; But Richard Exon then Mayor, discovered the
plot, and thereof warned the Duke, to avoid the present peril, and afterward
to be wary of the like.

Richard Earl of Arundle, and Thomas Earl of Nottingham, commanded at Sea the
Kings fleet, and took an hundred sail of the enemies ships Anno. Dom. 1387.
R. 9.
well fraught with Wines, and well appointed for fight, they also relieved and
fortified Breast, and demolished two Forts, the enemies had placed against it.
The Earls in this service for their valor and courtesy, got great reputation;
and their actions did by so much appear, the more honorary, by how much, the
unfortunate insufficiency of other Generals before, by whose An. 1387. R. 9.
either rashness, or cowardice, or both, many soldiers had been defeated,
and every year had been famous before for one loss or other. At their
return, (the King more inclinable to revenge displeasure, then reward desert,
for it is troublesome to be grateful, but revenge is pleasant, and preferred
before gain) entertained them with strangeness of speech, and by his
countenance seemed, he was ill pleased, for that they had deserved so well.

About this time the Duke of Ireland repudiated his wife, whose mother (Isabel)
was daughter to Edward the third, and took in her place a Vintners daughter a
Bohemian; The King little regarded this indignity done unto his Cousin german,
(though by her often petitioned for redress.) And in this so great confusion
of State, let it pass unreproved, as obscured with greater vices; But
Gloucester her Uncle took it in disdain, as an indignity offered to the
blood royal, and intended revenge, and so much did intimate to the Duke of
Ireland, who plotted under hand, the destruction of Gloucester; the one openly
and manlike persecuted his enmity: but the other cowardly and covertly, and
therefore the more dangerously; Gloucester was nearer and greater in blood,
Ireland, in favor, this being uncle to the King: that bearing himself as the
Kings fellow; The one pretended all he did for the honor of the State, the
other for humor of the King, much malice did pass, but in opposition of such
equal powers, there is seldom small difference in harms.

The term assigned the Duke Uear for his departure into Ireland is past, and
lest his stay might breed some stir in England, he still showed himself
busy, for preparing for his journey, and at last (though long first,) made a
The King accompanies the Duke of Ireland, toward Wales.
show of setting forth; The King went in great state to accompany him to ship;
and the Earl of Suffolk with Justice Tresilian and the rest of that side
either for favor followed, or for fear durst not stay behind; Together they
went to Wales, and there the Dukes Irish journey was finished; There they
debate in Council, how the Lords might best be suppressed, many plots were
invented, all that were worst pleased well, without respect of danger or
disgrace, but few stood without likelihood of event to their desires, and
therefore none was fully concluded on; At length they leave Wales and come to
Nottingham Castle, where the high Sheriffs of every County are summoned to
appear, and strictly interrogated, with strength if need should rerequire,
they were able to back the King with against the Lords, the King was generally
answered; that the Commons did so favor the Lords, and were so well resolved
of their dutiful love, and loyalty to their Sovereign, that they durst make
promise of no power to be raised against them. Then they were commanded to
elect no Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses for the Parliament, but only such as
the King should approve, whereto they said it was an hard matter in times of
suspect, to rob the people of their ancient privilege, for choosing Knights
and Burgesses for the Parliament, and after some few other matters which were
either unseasonably moved, or unreasonably obtained, to small purpose, the
Sheriffs were licenced to depart; Then were assembled Tressilian chief Justice
of the Kings bench, Belknapp chief Justice of the Common pleace, Holt,
Stil^urpe, Burgh, Justices of the Co^monpleas men learned in Court-law, to
please those in highest place, these were charged upon their allegiance,
particularly to answer these propositions;

1. Whether the Statute, Ordinance, and Commission (meaning that granted
against the Duke of Suffolk) set out the last Parliament, did derogate from
the royal prerogative of the King.

2. How they were to be punished, that did procure that Statute to be inacted.

3. How they were to be dealt with, that provoked the King to consent thereto.

4. What punishment did they deserve that compelled the King to yield consent.

5. What did they merit that resisted the King to exercise his regal
authority, in remitting or releasing, any penalties or debts due to him.

6. When a Parliament is assembled, and the affairs of the State, and cause of
convoking the Parliament declared, and Articles limited by the King; upon which
only, the Lords and Commons should meddle; the Lords and Commons will proceed
upon other, and not those by the King appointed, until the King has given
answer to the other by them propounded, whether in this case the King ought to
have the rule of the Parliament, and so to order the fact, that the Lords and
Commons upon the Articles limited by the King; or that they should first have
answer of the King to the Articles by them propounded before they proceed any
further?

7. Whether may the King at his pleasure dissolve the Parliament, and command
the Lords and Commons to depart?

8. Since the King may at his pleasure remove any Officers and Justices, and
punish them for their offenses, whether may the Lords and Commons, without his
leave, accuse his Officers and Justices in Parliament yea or no?

9. What punishment have they deserved, who moved a Parliament, that the
statute whereby King Edward Carnarvon was deposed should be brought forth, by
view whereof the last Statute and Commission aforesaid were framed?

10. Whether the judgment given in the last Parliament against Michael de la
Poole Earl of Suffolk were erroneous and revocable yea or no?

These propositions which were drawn by the direction of the chief Justice
Tresilian, to which the afornamed Justices answer as follows;

1. They did derogate from the Honor of the King, because extorted against his
will.

2. 3. That they deserved to be punished by death, except the King in mercy
would remit.

4. 5. Worthy to be punished as Traitors.

6. Whosoever resists the Kings rule in that point, was punishable as a
Traitor.

7. That the King may at his pleasure dissolve the Parliament, and who so
afterward shall presume to proceed against the Kings manifest will, as in a
Parliament is worthy the punishment of a Traitor.

8. That they cannot; whosoever does the contrary deserves a Traitors
punishment.

9. As Well the mover as the bringer of that Statute to the house, are worthy
the same death.

10. And lastly, that the said judgment seemed erroneous and revocable. In
witness whereof they with John Lockton the Kings Sergeant at Law subscribed,
and so under their Seals at arms sent it.

When those hard sentences of death, and treason, were under general and large
terms, thus fastened upon the Lords, the King supposed his attempts against
them, whether by violence, or color of Law, sufficiently warranted, but his
power both ways, (as it was terrible against weak resisters, so against such
mighty defendants, was of small force to effect that, which he so much
affected; yet he did not omit his best endeavors, and first accounting the
Lords, as condemned persons, he made division of their lands and goods amongst
those he favored: Then he waged soldiers to be in readiness for his
assistance, and sent the Earl of Northumberland to arrest the Earl of
Arundell, at his Castle in Rygate where he then lay, but he either upon
advertisement, or suspicion of the Kings intent, bandied himself so strong,
that when the Earl of Northumberland came thither to him, he dissembled his
intent, and left his errand untold: The Duke of Gloucester having secret
intelligence of the Kings displeasure, and of his projects sent the Bishop A
good office of the Bishop of London.
of London to persuade the King to entertain a more favorable opinion of him,
solemnly swearing unto the Bishop, that he never intended any thing against
the King, either in person or state; The Bishop not unskilful to join
profitable persuasions with honesty; declared to the King, that the ground of
his displeasure against the Lords, was either by false suggestions of their
enemies, or misconstruction of some of their actions by himself: Then declared
he how desirous they were of his grace and favor, how faithful and forward
they promised to persist in all dutiful service, and further intimated how
honorable this agreement would be to the King, and how profitable to the
kingdom, nay which was above both, how pleasing it would be to God, and how
displeasing to him, and dangerous it would be to both sides, if these troubles
should increase. The King by this speech seemed inclinable to atonement; But
Delapoole, a turbulent person, against quiet counsel: standing near the King,
quickly hardened his mind against all impression of friendship, by means
whereof contention arose betwixt the Bishop, and the Earl, which violently
broke out into heat of words; The Earl reproched the Lords with the ordinary
objection against great men (popularitie, and ambition:) sparing no spite of
speech, but using all rethoricke to aggravate matters against them; The Bishop
replied, the Earl was thus fiercely bent, not upon any necessity of his own,
or respect unto the King, but only to satisfy his bloody and ambitious humor,
wherein he was so immoderate, that rather then the Lords should not be
destroyed, he would overwhelme them with the ruins of the State; For tumults
might be indeed raised by men of little courage, like himself, but must be
maintained by hazard, and ended with the loss of the most violent, that
neither his counsel against what was desired, in this cause was to be
followed, (being the principal firebrand of the disturbance) nor his
complaints against any man, in any thing to be regarded, being himself a
condemned person, and one that held his life, and livelihood, of the Kings
favorable mercy, wherewith the King was so exceedingly wroth, that he
commanded the Bishop out of his presence; The Duke of Gloucester hearing this,
signifies the danger to the Earls of Arundel, Warwick, and Darby, inciting
them to arms, and thereupon they confederate themselves, for a common defense:
For in so doubtful and suspected peace, open war (said they) was the better
safety; The King having intelligence of their courses indevoured to prevent the
Lords in joining their forces; and to that end sent some power, either to set
upon the Earl of Arundel in his lodging, or to intercept him in his passage to
the Duke; But the Earl had marched all night, before their coming; and so
unencountred came to the Duke, with whom he found the Earls with a sufficient
company, as well to make an attempt, as to stand upon resistance: This much
distracted the King; being now in choice either to relent or resist, much
disdayning the one, and distrusting the other, his followers also were divided
in counsel, some fretting at the disgrace, others fainting at the danger. The
Archbishop of York persuaded with the King, that occasion was now offered, to
show himself a King indeed; If he would raise a royal army; and by maine
might, beat down the boldness of their presumption; This was more readily
advised, then done, says another. The adversaries army is mighty, the
Commanders are great men, both for courage, and skill, and greatly favored by
the Commons, whereby that which is accounted so ready pay, may prove a
desperate debt; Therefore it were better, with some show of yielding, to enter
into conditions of quiet, then by standing upon too nice punctilioes of Honor:
to hazard the doubtful event of battle, wherein the King cannot join, but
by his weakening; nor loose without danger of his undoing. There was present old
Sir Hugh Linne, a good soldier, but a shuttle brain, of whom the King in
merriment demanded in this case what was as he thought fittest to be done:
Sir Hugh swore, blood and wounds, let us charge home, and kill every mothers
son, and so we shall make quick dispatch of the best friends you have in
the kingdom, this giddy answer, more wayed with the King, then if it had been
spoken in grave and sober sort; And thus it often happens, that wise counsel
is more sweetly followed, when it is tempered with folly, and earnest is the
less offensive, if it be delivered in jest; In the end the raising of arms
is laid aside, not as displeasing (being so agreeable to former proceeding) but
as despayring to prevail thereby; The Archbishop of Canterbury with the Bishop
of Ely Lord Chancellor, were sent unto the Lords, to understand the cause of
their assembly: Answer was made, that it was for the safety of themselves, the
honor of the King, and the overthrow of those, that sought destruction of
both: but by the mediation of the Bishop it was concluded, that the Lords
should come before the King at Westminster upon caution of his protection: and
there have public audience, concerning their grievances. The Bishop of Ely,
giving private promise, faithfully to discover any danger he could descry, who
accordingly, gave notice, (or little before the Lords appointed to come,) of an
awaite, that was purposed for their entrapping; at the place called the Mewes
near London, advised them, either to make stay, or to come provided, but
rather to make stay then to come forward, lest further provocation, might make
reconciliation more difficult: Whereupon, they came not at the time appointed;
The King marvelling at their faylance, demanded of the Bishop of Ely the cause,
who boldly answered, that the Lords found The Bishops sent to the Barons.
want of true meaning; and that they neither did, nor durst, repose assurance
in the Kings words, which they apparently saw, was but a means to ensnare
them. The King made the matter very strange unto him, protesting that he was
free from deceit both in consent and knowledge, and presently gave command to
the Sheriffs of London, to go to that place and to slay or take all such as
they fonnd there in wait; whether this was but a countenance of his, or
whether he was not privy to the practice, it is not assuredly known, but the
matter was not false, but the place mistaken; For Sir Thomas Tryvet, and Sir
Nicholas Bramber, had assembled diverse armed men at Westminster, to assault the
Lords at their best advantage, but perceiving the discovery of their plot, they
secretly dissolved their company, and sent them away.

Then the Lords, upon new faith, for their security, came to the King to
Westminster, but brought a guard with them, so many, as in a place where they
were entirely favored; was able to defend them from any sudden defeat. The
King upon their coming, entered into Westminster great Hall: apparelled in his
royal robes, and when he was placed in his seat; and composed himself to
majesty and state. The Lord Chancellor, made a large Oration Ann. 1388 R. 10.
to the Lords, in the Kings name, wherein he declared, the heynousnesse of
their offense, and the greatness of their peril, how easy a matter it had
been The Lord Chancellors speech to the Lords.
for the King, to have levied a power, sufficient to have destroyed them, and
yet for the general spare of his subjects blood, and in particular favor, to
the Duke and other Nobles he made choice, to encounter, and overcome them,
rather by friendship, then by force, and therefore was willing, not only to
pardon their riot, but also to hear their grief, and in a quiet and peaceable
way to redress them. The Lords alleged the cause of their taking arms, to
be, first, the necessity of their own defense; secondly, their true love both
to King, and Realm, whose fame and fortune did daily decline, by means of
certain traitors, who lived only by the dishonor of the one, and decay of
the other, like mothes in books and garments, that thrive by others loss.
Those whom they particularly challenged to be Traitors, were Robert Uear Duke
of Ireland, Nevill Archbishop of York, Delapoole Earl of Suffolk, Robert
Tresilian, Lord chief Justice, Sir Nicholas Bramber, with certain others more
secret, but little better: And to justify this their appeal, they threw down
their gloves, and offered themselves to the trial of the Combat: The King
replied, that oftentimes the causes of action being good, yet if the means
want moderation, and judgment, the ends prove pernicious; And therefore though
these complaints should be true, yet were these courses not tolerable, which
did bear an open face of rebellion, and by the licentiousness of the
multitude might soon have sorted to such a period, for it is more easy to
raise the people then to rule them, whose fury being once stirred, will
commonly, be discharged some ways. But (says he) since we have broken this
broyle; we will not by combating, give occasion of new, but at our Parliament
which I will instantly convoke, both you and they shall be present, and
Justice indifferently done to all. In the mean time I take you all into my
protection, that neither of you shall endanger or endamage other, wishing the
Lords to remember that as Princes must rule without limitation, so Christian
subjects must use a mean in their liberty; Then he caused the Dukes and the
Earls, which all this while kneeled, to arise and go with him into his
private chamber, where they talked together, and after with a most friendly
farewell, he licenced them to depart; They of the adverse part, were absent at
this meeting, and if they had not, it might have been feared, the Kings
presence should have been but a poor protection unto them. The Kings
demeanor herein was diverse ways censured, some argued him fearful: others
moderate and merciful, in preventing the effusion of his subjects blood. The
Lords were well pleased with his good will and favor; which as by base and
servile means, they would not seek, being thus gotten, they did highly
esteem, yet they thought it the safest course, not to separate themselves,
suspecting the mutabilitie of the King, and the malice of their enemies, of
whom, neither knew they where they were, nor what they did intend, and being
persons of great wealth, and greater power, but most bent to hurtful
practices, they were feared not without cause; For the Duke of Ireland, either
by setting on, or sufferance of the King, was all this time, mustering of
soldiers in Cheshire, or Wales, where he gathered an army, both for number,
and goodness of men sufficient, if another had been General, to have carried
a side; whereof the Lords advertised, they divided themselves, and beset the
ways, by which the Duke should pass to London, with an intent, to encounter
him before he did increase his power, and countenance his action, with the
name of the King; The Earl of Darby met him, at a place called Babbelake near
Burford, where the Earls soldiers, full of hearty courage, disliking nothing
more then delay, thinking loss of time, was a procrastinating of the victory:
came on bravely. But the Duke being mutinous but not fit for action, apter to
stir strife, then stint it, upon sight of their approach would have fled; But
Sir Thomas Mollineux, an approved soldier Constable of Chester, upon whose
leading all that country men did depend, persuaded the Duke that this was but
a part of the forces, led only by the Earl of Darby a man no way eminent; and
if they could not bear through that resistance, it was in vain to expect any
achievement of honor by arms; Whereupon the Duke made stay, but his faint
spirits were moved by this speech, rather to desire victory, then hope it, his
soldiers also, were dull, silent, and sad; and such as were rather ready to
interpret, then execute the Captains command; They wind battle, but scarce
ten ounces of blood was lost on both sides, before the Duke of Ireland set
spurs to his horse, and forsook the field: his soldiers thereupon, more out
of indignation then fear, refused their ranks: yielded to the Earl, the
honor of the field; Sir Thomas Mullineux flying, was overtaken and slain by
Sir Thomas Mortimer: the rest submitted themselves, to the discretion of the
conquerours; making them the Lords of their lives and death: yielding was no
sooner offered, then excepted by the Earl, who commanded, that none should be
reproched, or ill entreated, but the obstinate: which was obeyed, the soldiers
willing to show favor to their contrymen, who were led into this action
partly upon simplicity, partly for company sake, The Gentlemen and those of
the better sort, were retained by the Earl, the rest unarmed were licenced at
their pleasure to depart. The Duke in his flight, was enforced to take a river,
and in the midst of the stream, forsook his horse, and swam to the other
side: and by the benefit of the night escaped, first into Scotland, then into
Flaunders, and lastly into France, from whence he never returned, his horse,
with his helmet and gauntlets, with other abiliments of his were found,
whereupon it was generally conceived, that he was drowned, and as in great
uncertainties it often happens, some affirmed they saw him dye, with the manner
thereof, which other men, either glad to hear, or not too curious to search
did easily believe: His Trunk also was taken with certain letters of the
Kings therein, the contents whereof were, for his present repair to London,
with all power, and speed he could make, and the King would be there ready,
to dye in his defense, so unskilful was the Kings government, that to pleasure
a few, he did not respect to give discontent to many. The Earl of Suffolk
hereupon disguised, fled to Callice, from whence he never returned, he was a
cruel spoiler, and a careless spender: in war contemptible: in peace
insupportable, an enemy to all counsel of others, and in his own conceit
wondrously wise, obstinately contentious, of a quick wit, and ready speech,
both which he abused, to the cunning commending of himself, and crafty
depraving of others, he was less loved, but more heard of the King, then the
Duke, the more hurtful man, and the more hateful; The Duke being indeed
guilty, of no great fault, but the Kings excessive favor, in their course of
good, and bad fortune, both of them alike famous.

This Duke of Ireland was Robert de Vere the fourth of that name, and ninth
Earl of Oxford, he married Philip the Daughter of Ingeram de Guisnes by
Isabel his wife, the Daughter of Edward the third, from whom he was divorsed,
and took to his second wife Lantegroine a Bohemian, of an unknown parentage,
but died without issue.

This Michael de la Poole Earl of Suffolk married Isabel Daughter of Sir John
Wingfield, and had issue five sons, Thomas, William, Michael, Richard, and
John, and three daughters, Margaret married to William Lord Ferrers of Groby,
Elizabeth and Anne.

The Archbishop of York, Justice Tresilian, and others of that faction, ran
every man like Conyes to their covert, yea the King betook himself to the
tower of London, and there made provision for his winter abode: having all his
courses now crossed; first, by rashness in taking of arms, and afterward by
cowardlinesse in maintaining them; The Earls of Darby, signified this success
to his associates by Letters: but without vaunting, his speeches also were
moderate, rather extenuating then extolling his fact, but by stopping his fame
it increased; men esteeming his high thoughts, by his humble words, and his
consent of greater attempts by contempt of this. The Lords met and marched
together to London, whither with forty thousand men they came upon Saint
Stephens day, and first they showed themselves in battle array, in the fields
within view of the King, then encamped in the Suburbs. The Mayor of London and
his brethren, came forth and offered, the Lords free entertainment within the
City, but not accepted. They give liberal allowance of victual and
necessaries to the soldiers; This discord seemed to draw to a dangerous
distraction of the Commonwealth, the vanquished part being full of malice, and
the Conquerours of presumption: the one wanting power, the other right to
command and rule; The Archbishop of Canterbury and certain others of the
neutralitie, fearing the sequel, persuaded the King to come to a treaty with
the Lords: but he made show but of a slight regard, he made of these dealings:
let them (says he) stay until their numerous power have wearied them, and
eat out their provision: and then we will find a time, to talk with them at
my leisure; But the Lords suspecting the devise, stopped all passages, and beset
the Thames: generally protesting not to depart, without conference with the
King face to face. The King having neither strength to resist, nor room to
escape, consented to a treaty; And to that end desired the Lords to come to him
into the Tower; but they refused that place of meeting, upon fear of false
measure, until the King permitted them, to search diligently, and come as
strongly as they thought meet; then they came to the King well guarded, and
after a few cold complements, and strange salutations, they laid before him his
proceedings against them at Nottingham, his Letters which he sent to the Duke
of Ireland, contrary to his word: for the raising of arms against them: his
agreement with the French King for the yielding up of Callice, and other strong
houlds which he had in possession in those parts, with diverse other points of
dishonorable dealing, and negligent government. What should the King then have
done or said, all these objections were so evident and evil, that there was no
place left either for denial or defense; Therefore ingenuously first with
silence and patience, afterward with tears and dejected countenance he
confessed his errors. And certainly the stiff stomachs of the Lords, more
relented to those lukewarm drops, then they would have done to his greatest
violence. A meeting was concluded the next day at Westminster, there to treat
of these and other necessary affairs of the Realm; Then the Duke and the rest
of the Lords departed, except the Earl of Darby, who stayed supper with the
King; and all that time kept him in his proposed resolution: But when he was
also gone, some of the abusers of the Kings ear, suggested that his going
thither, was neither seemly nor safe, and would not only bring to his person
present danger and contempt, but afterward abasement, and abridgement to his
authority; whereupon the Kings mind turned. But the Lords being now nettled,
feeling the Kings hand weak to govern the raynes, became the more violent,
and sent him word that if he did vacillate with them, and not come according
to agreement, that they would choose a new King, who should be more respective
to his Nobility; This peremptory message so terrified the King, that he not
only went thither, but permitted the Lords to take their pleasure, they caused
him much against his liking to remove out of the Court, Nevil Archbishop of
York, Foord Bishop of Duresme, the Bishop of Chichester the Kings Confessor,
the Lord Souch, the Lord Harmyworth, Lord Burnell, Lord Beamont, Sir Alberick
Uear, Sir Baldwyne Bereford, Sir Richard Alderbury, Sir John Worth, Sir Thomas
Clifford, and Sir John Lovell taking caution of them for their appearance, at
the next Sessions of Parliament. And certain Ladies likewise were expelled the
Court, and went under sureties, the Ladies, Mowen, Moling. Poynings, wife to
Sir John Worth, They put under arrest, Simon Burly, William Ellingham, John
Salisbury, Thomas Trivet, James Bernis, Nicholas Dagworth, and Nicholas Bramber
Knights; Richard Clifford, John Lincoln, and Richard Motford Clerks; John
Beacham the Kings private Purse-bearer, Nicholas Lake Deane of the Chapel,
and John Blake Barrister, were all committed to diyers Prisons, to be
forth-comming at the next Parliament.

The Parliament began at London, (though the King used many means to dash or
defer the same) to which the Lords came, attended with full Ann. D. 13^ R. 10.
strength, pretending to repress any riot that might arise, but in truth by
terror thereof to draw all the manage of affairs to themselves. The assembly
continued from Candlemasse until Whitsontide, with great fear of some, and
hope of others, and expectation of all; There Tresilian by the Council
Proceeding in the Parliament against Favorites.
of the Lords against the Kings mind, was condemned to be drawn and hanged,
which judgment was presently executed, the like passed against and upon
Nicholas Bramber, John Salisbury, James Barnes, John Beauchamp, and John Blake,
Robert Belknap, John Holt, Roger Fulthorpe, and William Burgh, which last four
were condemned to perpetual exile, though they opposed not, but intermedled by
constraint, to subscribe their opinions against the Lords. Sir Simon Burly
Captain of Dover Castle, was beheaded for conspiring to deliver the same to
the Frenchmen, he was infinitely proud, equal to the meanest in virtue, but
in port and bravery not inferior to any Duke; Diverse others were put to death
or exile, and some (as it happens when the reins of fury are let loose)
without any great cause. The Earl of Darby The modesty of the Earl of Darby.
promoued no man's punishment, but did labor the life and liberty of many,
insomuch, that harsh language did pass betwixt the Duke of Gloucester and him
for so doing; whereby he purchased a favorable opinion, amongst those of the
contrary part. There was then also an oath exacted from the King, an example
without president, to stand to the government of the Lords; and An oath exacted
from the King.
an Oath of the Subjects to be loyal to the King. The King in taking this
oath of the Lords, discovered his inward conceit by his overt countenance,
looking pleasantly on those he favored, and frowningly on others; by which
untimely discovery, he made them more heedfull, and himself more hateful:
which was the occasion that afterward the revenge was prevented which he so
desired, and the mischief was procured which he so little feared. Lastly, a
Subsidy was granted; and so the King coming as it were to capitulation, had
allowance of the name of a King, and the Lords the authority and Majesty, so
the contention for that time ceased. An. 1389. R. 11.


The year following the King began to take upon him more liberty and rule,
and upon extreme disdain, that both his power, and pleasure were thus
restrained, he bore a hard conceit against the partaking Lords, and having
assembled them in the Council chamber, he demanded of the Lords, of what
years they took him to be, being answered that he was somewhat above one
and twenty, then (replied he) I am of lawful age, to make use of any
birthright, and to have the regiment in my own hands; and therefore you do
me wrong to hold me still under tutelage, as though the condition of a King
were harder then that of a subject; This the Lords were unwilling to grant, and
more unable to deny, and therefore they either kept silence, or spoke to little
or no purpose; Well said the King, since I am no longer an infant, I here
renounce your rule, and take upon me, such free administration of the Justice
of the ^alme, as the Kings thereof, my Predecessors heretofore lawfully used;
And then commanding the Bishop of Ely, then Lord Chancellor to resign the
great Seal, which received, the King put it up, and departed out of the
Chamber, but returning delivered the same to William of Wickam Bi^ of
Winchester, thereby constituting him Lord Chancellor, other officers he
likewise displaced, placing others in their room, partly to manifest his
authority, partly to satisfy his displeasure, he suspended Gloucester,
Warwick, and others from his privy Council, and took in their rooms such as
humoured him more, but honored him less; He 10. October. An. Regni sui 11.
Created John Beauchamp of Holt Baron of Kedermister by letters Patents, before
which time all Barons were chosen by Writ, it was suggested to the King, that
the Duke of Gloucester was raising a power against him, which the King in
private questioned the Duke about, but upon examination it was found a tale,
the Duke would not have pocketted up such dangerous reports, but that the King
either delighting to be tickled with such false rumors, or upon some
particular desire to pick a quarrel to the Duke upon his allegiance injoynes
him not to expostulate the matter, or to question the reporters.

The Citizens of Geneva implore aid against the Barbarians of Afric. The
King sends a company of choice soldiers under the conduct of Henry An. 1390.
Earl of Darby, who with them passed into France, and there joined with the
French forces, when with might and minds united, they sailed together into
Afric, at their arrival the Barbarians were ready on the shore to impeach
their landing; But the Earl commanded his Archers to beat the enemy An
expedition into Barbary.
from the shore, while he landed his other forces. The French seconded the
English; And so whilst both Companies contended, the one to be accounted an
help, and the other to seem to need no help. The enemies were forced to fly
and leave the shore to the Christians; In this conflict were slain and taken
seven Dukes of the Barbarians, and an infinite number of common people. The
Christians marched directly to Tunis, which they laid siege to, and in short
time took, the English first skaling the walls, and reared thereon the English
colors, in this City were taken and slain, above four thousand Barbarians,
the Kings brother also was slain, but he himself fled into the Castle, which
was strongly scite'd, well fortified and furnished with men and ammunition
sufficient, for a competent number, for some good space. This they besieged by
the space of six weeks in which space they lost many of their men by
sickness; The Barbarians also were distressed for want of beverage, having too
too many unprofitable mouths to consume it; They sent to the Christians, to
desire peace, offering them a great sum of money to depart their Country.
This was accepted upon condition, that they might freely carry with them all
their prey and prisoners, and that the Barbarians should from thenceforth
surcease pillaging the coasts of Italy and France. This voyage had a prosperous
and speedy end; The only Ann. 1392 R. 14.
service which the English and French performed together without breach of
amity or jarre in good quarter keeping. About these times certain
discontentments grew, betwixt the King and the Londoners, which set the favor
of the one, and the faith of the other at great distance; The one was denying
of the King the loan of one thousand pound (though offered to be lent by a
Lombard which received but a harsh language for his forwardness) another came
upon the neck of that thus; one of the Bishop of Salisburies servants, took a
loaf of horse-bread out of a Bakers basket in the open street, and by the rude
demand of the one, and the rough denial of the other, choler was kindled,
and the Bakers head bled: the neighbors would have stayed the Bishops man, but
he fled into the Bishops house; The Constable came, and demanded a peaceable
delivery of the offender; The Bishops men shut the gates and made resistance;
then many threatened to fire their way, and began to use violence, but the Mayor
and Officers upon notice, presently repaired thither, and partly by
persuasions, that it was not courage, but outrage that they showed, and chiefly
by their presence and authority, they repressed the multitude, and preserved
the Kings peace for that time: hitherto the harm was but small, and all night
have been quieted without much ado, had not the Bishop kindled the fuel of
unkindnesse afresh, for the Londoners were not only secretly suspected, but
openly noted to be favorers and followers of Wickliffs but then new broched
opinions, for which doing they were much maligned by the Clergy, especially by
John Bishop of Salisburie Lord Treasurer, who made a grievous complaint hereof
to Thomas Archbishop of York and the Lord Chancellor, affirming that if upon
every light pretense, the Citizens might be suffered in this sort to insult
upon the Bishops, without reproof and punishment, they would bring into
hazard not only the dignity and state, but the liberty also of the whole
Church; Hereupon they went to the King, and so incensed his displeasure against
the Citizens (being prepared thereto by former provocations.) that he was once
resolved, to make spoil of the City, and utterly raze it; But being persuaded
to some more moderation in revenge, he caused the Mayor, Sheriffs, and
Aldermen to be convented, who were at first resolved to have justified their
innocence, and to that end had plighted faith each to defend other, but there
was falsehood in fellowship, and one peached the other, and were all committed
to prison, and then all the liberties of the City were seized and taken into
his own hands, ordaining, that no Mayor should from thenceforth be elected,
but it should be at his pleasure to appoint a Warden; This Office was first
conferred upon Sir Edward Darlington, who for his gentleness toward the
Citizens, was shortly removed, and Sir Baldwyne Radington, a man of a more
rugged disposition placed in his room: The King likewise induced by the
Archbishop of York did remove the terms and Courts of Justice from London to
be kept at York, where they continued from Midsummer Anno 1393. until
Christmasse following, to the great hindrance of the Citizens of London. At
last the King at the earnest entreatie of the Dukes of Lancaster and Gloucester
called the Londoners before him to Windsor, and there he caused all their
privileges of the City, both old and new to be brought forth, whereof he
restored some, and restrained the rest that might The privileges of London
seized into the Kings hands are abridged and part restored.
prove any way advantageous unto him; Nevertheless the Londoners were not
fully received to favor, neither recovered they at that time, the Title or
dignity of their Mayor. But shortly after the King came to London where the
Citizens entertained him with such shows of triumphs, and rich presents, As if
it had been the day of his Coronation; for they supposed with their courtesies
and cost, to have removed his displeasure; yet were they not fully An. 1393. R.
15.
restored to their liberties again, until they had paid ten thousand pound.
Thus did they manifest in t^emselves a strange diversity of disposition, the
inferiors licentiously to commit offense, and the Superiors patiently to
endure punishment; having rashness and rage tempered with obedience. so were
they at last easily punished, that could not at first possibly be ruled. The
King passed over to Callice; the King of France came down to Arde, An
intervenew between the Kings of France and England.
between the two Towns, a place was appointed and tents erected for the Kings
meeting, where after interchange of complement and expenses, a cessation of
arms between them for thirty years was concluded; And the King espowseth
Isabel the French Kings Daughter, of the age of eight years. The Duke of
Gloucester was so offended, both with the match and truce, that he lost all
patience, exclayming that it was more meet to be in arms then amity with the
French, who being inferior to the English in courage, did ever outreach them
in craft: and being too weak for war, did oftentimes prevail by peace. That
the French Kings Daughter (being but a child) was an unmeet match for King
Richard, as well for the disparitie of age, as for that the King had no issue by
his first wife, and was not like to have any by this, except perhaps in his old
age; But when the Duke saw his arguments would not avail ought, he suborned
the Londoners to make petition to the King, that seeing there was peace with
France, he would release them of the Subsidy, which was granted unto him in
the last Parliament in respect of those wars to have been maintained. This
suite was by them importunately followed, and much perplexed the King, until
at length the Duke of Lancaster assured them, that the procuring of this peace,
had spent and lost the King three hundred thousand pounds, wherewith they were
pacified though not well pleased.

Guido Earl of Saint Paul, was sent by King Charles to visit and salute in his
name, King Richard and his Queen Isabel; To this Earl, the King did An. 1396.
Reg. 18.
relate with what fervency Gloucester contended, to disturb the peace, betwixt
England and France, and that because this opinion was not therein followed, he
moves the people to seditious attempts, bending himself wholly to maintain
discord in his own country, rather then not at all, he further reported what
stiff strife the Duke in former times had stirred, which howsoever they were
done, yet as they were delivered, sounded harsh and odious: The Earl of Saint
Paul's advise to the King.
Whereupon the Earl replied, that the Duke was too dangerous a subject, to be
permitted to live; That greatness was never safe, if once it grew excessive,
and bold; That the King ought not to affect the poor commendation of Clemency
with his own peril, and that it touched him both in honor, to revenge the
disgrace, which he had by him formerly received: and in policy to prevent the
dangers which he had some cause to fear. This set such an edge on the Kings
displeasure, that from thenceforth he busied his brains, about no one thing
more, then how to bring the Duke to his end. Whereupon he begun to pry more
narrowly into his deportment, to watch his words, to observe his actions, and
to interpret them to the worst, framing unto himself many vain, and needless
fears: often would he to the Dukes of Lancaster and York, complain of the
Duke of Glocesters averseness in actions and crossenesse in speech, whose
answer thereunto was, that their brother indeed was more vehement, then they
could commend, yet his fierceness was joined with faithfulness, and his
crossenesse proceeded from care, lest the Commonwealth should decrease, either
in honor or possessions, and therefore the King had neither cause to fear or
dislike him. The King Ann. 1396 R. 18.
seems to approve of their answers, and tobe satisfied, that Gloucester was
what they reported him; And in the mean time Lancaster and York withdrew
themselves to their private houses; The Duke of Gloucester also went to Plashey
in Essex. Upon this accidental separation, the King entered into Council with
John Holland Earl of Huntington, his brother by the Mothers side, and Thomas
Mowbray Earl of Nottingham, how the Duke of Gloucester might be suppressed,
the cruelty which was but wavering (nay wanting in the King,) was soon
confirmed by evil advise, and being once thereby enclinable to blood, he did
not fail, either of lewd example of vile action to follow, or direction of
cruel counsel what to do; The plot is contrived, and according thereunto,
the King and the Earl of Nottingham ride together into Essex, as though they
went on hunting: When they were in the Forest, the Earl with a selected
troop made stay in the Forest, whilst the King with a small and unsuspected
train came to Plashey, and there by the Duke of Gloucester was lovingly
entertained and freely feasted, pretending action The Duke of Gloucester
betrayed.
of present return, the King desires the Duke to accompany him to London. The
Duke supposing that only to be intended indeed, which was in words and show
pretended, went to horseback with the King, with a very small company,
appointing the rest to follow him to London. They pleasantly rode together in
familiar conference, until they came near the Earls ambuscadoe, and then the
King suddenly put spurs to his horse, the Duke following easily, was suddenly
intercepted and stayed, and with violence hurryed to the Thames side, and there
blindfolded, unvoluntarily shipped, and conveyed to Callice. The next day the
King did invite the Earl of Warwick to dinner, and gave him gracious
countenance, but in his return he was arrested and sent to prison; and so a
double breach of hospitality is committed: when feasted by the Duke of
Gloucester the host is committed, and feasting the Earl of Warwick the guest
is imprisoned. In the like manner was the Earl of Arundel and his son
entrapped, and imprisoned; In the Isle of Wight the Common People having notice
of the apprehension of these three Noble men (whom they only affected) were in
a great confusion, and there then wanted but a head, to draw them to commotion,
every man murmured, and daring no further, stood waiting for one to lead them
the way, every one being ready to follow, that which any one was loath to
begin; The Dukes of Lancaster and York upon information of these strong
proceedings, gathered a strong Army, and came there with to London, where they
were readily received by the Citizens, contrary to the Kings express command.
But this seemed to be a guard to themselves, rather then a regard to other.
The King lay within four miles of London, with a great power of armed men
drawn out of Cheshire and Wales; and to pacify the people, caused to be
proclaimed, That the foresaid Lords were not questioned upon any old
displeasures, but for offenses lately committed: and for which they should be
orderly appealed by the course of Law, and receive open and legal trial in
the next parliament, presently to begin: The like message was sent to London to
the Dukes, to whom the King made faith, for the safety of their persons, and
indemnitie of their goods, and that nothing should be done, without their
privitie and advise, all this was as rashly believed, as readily given out.
Whereupon, the Dukes dissembled their fears, and dissolved their forces, in
expectancy of what would ensue. The Parliament began at London, wherein Sir
John Bushy, Sir VVilliom Bagot, and Sir Henry Green, were principal agents
for the Kings purpose. These were the Kings chief Schoolemasters, both of
cruelty and deceit, they were proud, ignorant, and ambitious, and presuming on
the Kings favor, professed themselves enemies to the ancient Nobility, to the
end, that being but Mushrumpes lately start up, they might become famous, by
maintaining contention with greater persons. At first by their importunate
travail, especially of Sir John Bashy, who had procured himself to be made
Speaker of that Parliament, all the Chartells of pardon formerly granted by the
King, were in this Parliament annulled. The Prelates perceiving the intention
of drawing diverse of the Nobility, and others in question for their lives, did
Constitute Sir Henry Piercy their Procurator, and depart the house, because
they might not be present at judgment of blood. Then the Earls of Arundel and
Warwick were arraigned for those offenses for which they were formerly
pardoned, and thereupon were condemned to be hanged, drawn, and quartered,
but the King so moderated the severitie of this sentence, that the Earl of
Arundel was only beheaded, and the Earl of Warwick committed to perpetual
imprisonment in the Isle of Man; It was thought a point of policy and peace,
not to bring the Earl, Duke of Gloucester Gloucester murdered, not executed.
to public trial, but secretly to put him to death, and so he was strangled
between two feather-beds, by the appointment of Nottingham Earl Marshall of
Calice, which death howsoever he might be thought to him deserved, yet dying
as he did, not legally called or heard; he may be truly said to dye
guiltless; Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury was likewise there accused, for
executing the Commission, against Michael de la Poole; for which causes his
temporalities were seized, his lands and goods forfeited, and he himself
adjudged to exile, and to depart the Realm within six weeks; The Lord Cobham
was banished into the Islle of Gernsey, and Sir Reignold Cobham condemned to
death, not for any attempt against the King; But because he was appointed by
the Lords to be one of his governors, in the eleventh year of his reign:
Now the King falsely supposing himself free from danger, and that the humor
against him was clean purged away: conceived more secret content then he
could openly bewray, as more able to dissemble his joy, then conceal his
fear, being so blinded and be witched with continual custom of flatteries,
that he perceived not, That the state of a Prince is never stablished with
cruelty, nor confirmed by craft: The common people were much dismayed, having
now lost their only helps, and hopes, as well for private affairs, as support
of the public state; The Plebeians were much incensed against the King: And to
make their deaths seem the more foul, The Earl of Arundel has the
reputation of a martyr, The Earl of Arundel supposed a martyr.
and Pilgrimages are made, to the place of his interment; yea, it went for
current likewise, that his head was miraculously joined to the body; This being
generally affirmed, but without any ground; The Corpse therefore are taken up
ten days after the burial, and finding the fame to be fabulous, the King
caused the ground to be paved, where the body was laid, publicly forbidding
all further speeches thereof, afterward to be used; But this restraint raised
fame the more, and they that if it had been lawful, would have been silent,
being now forbidden, could not forbear to talk.

The King Creates five Dukes: Henry Earl of Darby was created Duke An. 1398.
Reg. 21.
of Hereford: Edward first Earl of Rutland, was created Duke of Ammerlo and
Cork in Ireland: Thomas Holland the Earl of Kent, was created Duke of
Southry: Sir John Holland Earl of Huntington, was created 5. Dukes created.
Duke of Exceter: John Lord Moubrey Earl of Nottingham, was created Duke of
Norfolk. This Title of honor long time after the Conquest, amongst the
Normans (whose chiefest Rulers had no greater Title) was accounted too high for
a subject to bear the form of the R. P. being framed Ann. 1397 R. 21.
by the Conqueror, far from equality of all, and yet the King exempted from
alike eminency of any; The King likewise created Margaret daughter and heir of
Thomas Brockerson, Countess of Norfolk Duchess of Norfolk; John Bewfort
son of John of Gaunt, Earl of Sommerset, was created Marquess of Sommerset;
Thomas Lord Spencer, was created Earl of Gloucester; Ralph Lord Nevill, was
created Earl of Westmerland; William Lord Scroope, son of Richard Lord
Scroope, Lord Chancellor was created Earl of Wiltes; Sir Thomas Piercy
Vicechamberlaine, was created Earl of Worcester; Amongst whom was made a
distribution of a great part of the Lands of the Duke of Gloucester, and of the
Earls of Arundell and Warwick, supposing by this double bounty of Honor,
and means to maintain it, to have tide them with a double obligation of duty
and affection, but ^ired friends for the most part, are seldom either
satisfied, or sure, but like the Ravens in Arabia, that full gorged, have a
tunable sweet record, but empty, scrich horribly.

The Duke of Hereford, as it were to raise his desires to his dignities, either
Herefords complaint of the government to Norfolk.
upon the disdain, of the undeserved favors and advancement of some persons
about the King, or disliking that his Sovereign should be so abused and
abased by such, or else to make known his own sufficiency, in matters of
controlement, and direction, one day having familiar conference with the Duke
of Norfolk complained that the King, too much undervalued the Princes of the
blood royal, and much discouraged the rest of the Nobility from intermedling
in public affairs; That in steed of these, he was wholly guided by a few
newfound, and newfangled Favorites, of dunghill-breed, of base qualities,
having no sufficiency, either for Council for peace, or courage for war, who
being of all men both the most unhonest, and most unable, which hatefulness of
the one, and contempt of the other, were generally despised in all the Realm,
whereby the Honor of the Kings person was much blemished: for ungrate and
ungratious adherents to a King, are always the path to hatred and contempt;
secondly, the safety of his estate might be endangered: for extraordinary
favors to men of apparent weak or bad desert, does breed insolency in them,
and coffeehouse in others, two dangerous humors in a Commonwealth.
Thirdly, the dignity of the Realm was much impaired, whose valor and
success being guided by the ill success of such unlucky leaders, stood never
in the like doubts of danger and distress, as now it did, so that matters of
peace were tumultuous and uncertain, and achievements in war were never
brought to honorable conclusions; And that it was high time, that the King
should look unto them, for the Nobility grew out of heart, the Commons out of
hope, and all the people were fallen into a discontented murmuring. And this
he affirmed, he said, not for any grudge to any particular person, but for
grief for the public grievance and good will to his Sovereign, and therefore
desired the Duke, who was one of the Kings Cabinet counsel, to discover unto
him, these deformities and dangers, that by repayring the one, he might
happily repel the other. These words procured to the Duke of Hereford, both
great offense, and great glory. At the delivery whereof the Duke of Norfolk
made show of good liking, well approving them, and made promise of sincere
dealing therein. And had they afterward by him, been as faithfully related,
and by the King as friendly taken, as they were freely and friendly intended,
many mischiefs had been avoided, but both failed. For though the Duke of
Norfolk had formerly sided with the Lords: yet afterward, affecting rather to
be lifted amongst great, then good men, he made sale of his honor, with his
honesty, to nurse his pleasure, and hold grace with the King; wherein he was
so seated, that the murdering of the Duke of Gloucester, and the execution of
the Earl of Arundel, was committed principally to his care and charge, and now
the more to wind himself into the Princes favor, he exaggerated the late
relation, and intermixed with some truth, many lies, making the truth seem
worse then it was; whereby the King not enduring the searching of his sores by
any private observer, endeavored rather to punish the boldness, then examine
the truth of these reports, his ears being so duld with continuation of
flatteries, that he accounted all too sharp, that was but savourie, approving
only that which was presently pleasant, though, afterward it proved most
poisonous. This observation from hence may arise, that no strange accident does
at any time happen, but it is some way, either foreshowne, or foretold. But
because these warnings are oftentimes either not marked, or misconstrued, or
contemned, the events are accounted inevitable, and the premonition vain. The
King being touched with one Duke, and tickled by another, was not at first
resolved what to do; At length he convokes the Dukes before his Council,
demands of Norfolk if he would publicly avouch what he had secretly
suggested; Norfolk thinking it at that time no point of wisdom, to shrink
from, or shuffle in his tale, repeated with a confident brow, all whatsoever he
had formerly related; But the Duke of Hereford who could not be dashed out of
countenance, when he was in a good cause: After a short pawse, as seeming
rather amazed at the strangeness of the matter, then abashed at the guilt,
humbly thanked the King, that he had not given overhasty credit to matters of
such tender touch, desiring him to continue yet awhile, the respight of his
displeasure, and to reserve his judgment from prejudicating; Then he orderly
repeates the truth of the passages in the primer conference, the occasion and
the end thereof, and what was related more then what he now repeated, he
resolutely denies, affirming it falsely surmised by his adversary, either upon
malice to pick a quarrel, or sycophancy to pick a thank, for which he
pronounced him a false, unworthy forger of scandalous, and seditiouslyes,
thereby trecherously machinating to seduce the King, to destroy his Nobility,
and to raise some disturbance in the Kingdom, which by (his Sovereigns
permission) he offered to justify against him, by order of the field,
Norfolkes stomach not inured to undergo scorns, could not digest these
terms of disgrace, but stiffly stood in defense of his relation; and for the
maintaining thereof, accepted and craved the combat. The King made show as
though he would have otherwise quieted the contention; but when the Dukes
persevered resolutely, to demand the trial by Duel, and that thereupon they
had flung down their gages. The King gives way thereunto, assigns the place
at Coventry, the time, the month of August following, against which time
preparation was made accordingly. At the day prefixed, the parties appeared,
well associated with friends and allies; The Duke of Anmerle was appointed for
that time, high Constable, the Duke of Surry high Marshall, who came to the
lists honorably attended, in suitable liveryes, each of their servants carrying
tipstaves, for clearing the field and ordering thereof. About the time of
prime, the Duke of Hereford mounted upon a white Courser, his Caparison of blew
and green Velvet, embrodered thick with Swannes and Antelops, armed at all
points, with his sword drawn approaches the lists; To whom the Constable and
Marshall addressed themselves, making demand who he was; He answered, I am
Henry Duke of Hereford, and am come to do my devoyre, against Thomas Mowbray
Duke of Norfolk, as a traitor to God, the King, the Realm, and me; And then
taking his oath upon the Evangelists that his quarrel was right and just, he
desired liberty to enter, which granted, he put up his Sword, pulld down his
Bever, signed himself on the forehead with the Cross, takes his Spear, and
passing the Barriers, dismounted and sat down in a chair of green Velvet,
placed in a Travers of green and blew Velvet, at one end of the lists, King
Richard enters the field with great pomp, accompanied with the Earl of Saint
Paul, who came purposely out of France to see the Combat. The King was attended
with all his Nobles, and a guard of ten thousand men in arms, to prevent all
sudden and sinister tumults; His Majesty being seated, a king at Arms makes
proclamation in King Richards name, that no man, except such, as were appointed
to marshall the field, should touch any part of the lists, upon pain of death,
which ended, another Herold cries: Behold here Henry of Lancaster, Duke of
Hereford Appellant, who is entered into the Lists royal, to do his devoyre,
against Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolk, upon pain to be accounted false and
recreant.

When the Duke of Norfolk mounted the Caparisons of his horse of crimson
Velvet, embrodered with Lions of silver, and Mulberry trees proper: taking his
oath before the Constable and the Marshall, that this quarrel was just and
true, entered the field, crying alowd, God aid the right, and then lighted from
his horse, placing himself in a chair of crimson Velvet, opposite at the
other end of the Lists. The Marshall viewed their Spears, and carried the one
himself to the Duke of Hereford, and sent the other by Sir Albericke Tressell
to the Duke of Norfolk; This done, Proclamation was made, to address
themselves to the encounter. The Dukes speedily mounted, and closed their
Bevers, casting their Spears into their rests; when the Trumpets sounded, and
the Duke of Hereford put his horse forward: But before Norfolk stirred: the
King cast down his Warder, and the Combatants had their Spears taken from
them, and returned to their Chaires, where they remained by the space of two
hours, whilst the King was in Council; Atlast Sir John Bonray, (after silence
proclaimed) read their doom, which was, that in as much as the Dukes Appellant
and defendant had honorably appeared in the royal Lists, and were not only
ready, but forward to derayne the Combat; For that this was a business of
great Consequence, for the avoiding the effusion of Christian blood, the King
by the advice of his Council, had decreed that Henry Duke of Hereford should
within fifteen days, depart the Realm, and within the space of ten years,
not to return upon pain of death without the Kings special leave first
obtained; Then upon a second Proclamation, the Secretary pronounced the decree
of Banishment against the Duke of Norfolk, for that he had used seditious
words, whereof he could produce no proof; and that the King should take the
revenews of his land, until he was satisfied of such sommes of money, as he
had received out of the Kings coffers, for the payment of the garrison of
Calice; And he further said, That the King commanded upon pain of his high
displeasure, that no man from thenceforth should presume to petition the King
in behalf of either of those Dukes to alter this Decree. The sentence thus
read, the King called the exiles before him, and took of them a solemn oath,
that they should never converse together, nor willingly come into each others
company, lest common discontent should draw first reconcilement, and after
desire of revenge. But this policy is ever weak to prevent such purposes,
for oaths are often spurnd aside, when they lie like rubbe^, to stop the way
to honor, or revenge; Therefore the Princes of the Realm, have with more
safety for the most part, abolished the use of abjuration, and either by
death, extinguish the power, or by pardon, alter the will of great offenders
from entering into desperate, and dangerous attempts, which men in misery and
disgrace, with more vehemence begin, and with more obstinacy continue: When the
Samnites had so enclosed the Roman Legions, that they had neither space to
fight, nor means to fly, and without fight had enforced them to yield; they
sent for advise to one Pontius, an ancient Ruler of their State, what to do
with them: His answer was, that the Romans should be permitted to depart
without loss, or derision: But this not pleasing those that were either cruel
or covetous, Pontius was the second time consulted with: whose answer then was,
That the Romans should be generally slaughtered, and not one spared; This
contrariety of advise, brought Pontius into suspicion of dotage which he
suspecting, came in person, and maintained both to be advantageous; The first
by an unexpected favor* might provoke the Romans to a perpetual friendship,
the second would defer the wars for many years: The third, Counsel (quoth
he) there cannot be given, that may be fafely followed; yes, say the Samnites,
to grant them their lives, but to take away their arms, and booty. This is a
way, replies old Pontius, which can neither win friends, nor weaken enemies,
but may increase fury, but not diminish force; So that that course of
punishment is out of course, which does neither reclaim the mind of man, nor
restrain the might from mischievous endeavors. The Duke of Norfolk with great
grief and perturbation of mind, now ^ving it to be true, that greatness
abused by whispering untruthes, draws if discovered, certainty of
destruction, departed into Almaine: and from thence travailed to Venice, where
shortly after he ended his days; It is observed that this Duke was banished
the same day of the year, wherein the Duke of York by his contriving, was
strangled at Calice.

The Duke of Hereford took his leave of the King at Eltham, where four years
of his exilement were struck off. The Dukes deportment, was with that
moderation, that in his countenance, he made show, neither of sorrow or
stupiditie, and at his departure, let not fall any, either intemperate, or
unseemely syllable. The Commons much lamented his departure, not sparing to
exclaim, that it was against the Law of arms, the custom of the Realm and
all Justice, that he should be exiled, who had honorably endeavored to
maintain his appeal, according to the law of the field. Their affection was
the more excessive, by reason the ground of his speech, was against those that
the people hated, and he was the only survivor of the popular faction. The Duke
of Hereford sayleth to Callice, and from thence to Paris, where he was
honorably received by the King of France; and in short time found that favor
with him, that he was offered for wife, the only Daughter of John Duke of
Berry, Uncle to the French King. But the King of England, upon notice thereof,
made such means, that the Marriage was stopped; Many things happened this year,
which were interpreted to presage, the revolt of the people, which happened the
year following; observation likewise was taken, that when King Richard brought
his first wife with him out of Beanne, she was no sooner on shore, but such a
tempest arose, as the like thereof had not been seen in many years before,
wherein many ships, and amongst them, the ship the Queen came in, was cast
away. The like storm, and the like loss did betide, when the King brought his
second wife out of France. Many prodigies are likewise storied to appear about
these times, both strange and fearful, I dare not avouch them all to be true,
neither will I detract all An. 1397. R. 22.
truth, from such things so anciently reported; Many are persuaded that these
things which are fatally allotted, though they are unavoidable, yet are they
some times foreshowne; not so much that we may prevent them, as that we should
prepare our selves against them.

About this time died John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, who was buried on the
North side of the high Altar, of the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul An. 1398.
Reg. 22.
in London, he was a man advised, and wary, liking better safe courses with
reason, then happy by hazard, neither unrespective, nor ambitiously careful
of his own glory; He carried himself toward the King in terms honorable
enough, for a moderate Prince, and yet not so plausible as an uncollected man
might desire, whereby nothing happened unto him extraordinary, either in
prejudice or preferment. This John of Gaunt (so named of the place where he
was borne) fourth son of Edward the third, did write in his style, John son
to the King of England, Duke of Aquitaine, and Lancaster, Earl of Richmond, of
Darby, Lincoln, Leicester, and high Constable of England; he married three
Wives, Blanch Daughter and coheire of Henry first Duke 1.
of Lancaster, by whom he had issue;

Henry, afterward King of England.

Philip, married to John King of Portugal.

Elizabeth married to John Holland Duke of Exceter.

His second wife was Constance, daughter and one of the Coheires of Peter King
of Castile, by whom he had issue Katherin^ married to Henry son 2.
of John King of Spain.

His third Wife, was Katherine daughter of Pain Rurt King of arms, and Widow
of Sir Otes Swinford Knight, by whom he had issue; 3.


John Bewford Earl of Somerset, and Marquess Somerset.

Henry Bewford, Bishop of Winchester.

Thomas Bewford, Earl of Dorset, and Duke of Exceter.

Ioane married to Ralph Nevill Earl of Chester, and afterward to Robert
Ferrers, Lord of Ousley; all these Children, though borne before espousall by a
Bull from Rome were made legitimate, he lies buried in Paul's. After his
death, the Duchy of Lancaster did lineally descend to his eldest son, the
Duke of Hereford. But (as the nature of man is prone, to hate those whom he
has injured) the King seized all the lands, and goods of the deceased Duke,
and endeavored to perpetuate the banishment of the young Duke: revoked the
Letters patents granted and consented unto, whereby his Attorneys had been
enabled to sue out his Ouster le maine, and Livery of those lands, which during
his exile, might fall unto him, his homage being formerly concluded upon, to
be respited at a reasonable fine. But these violent proceedings, was rather a
means to provoke, then prevent mischief.

Edmond Duke of York, the Kings only Uncle that survived, who hitherto had
enforced his patience to endure many things against his liking, now either in
disdain of this indignity or distrust of his own safety, and the Realms
disturbance; he with the Duke of Anmerle his son retired themselves to his
house at Langley. At this time the whole frame of the State was much shaken,
and matters of greatest consequence, hung but on slender threads; The King was
plunged in pleasure and sloth, by whose example others also gave themselves
over to ease and luxury, whereby cowardice and effeminacie crept in: and
shipwreck was made both of manhood and reputation. The chiefest affairs of
state, had been for a long time ordered, according to private respects;
whereby the Commonwealth, lost both the fat and the favor, and seemed not
at seasons, and by degrees, but with a Ann. 1398 R. 22.
maine course and at once, to be ruinate and fall. The North parts were many
times canvased, and by small, yet often Iosses, almost consumed by the Scots,
who had taken many Castles and Towns, and defaced all the country, with
slaughter and spoil; The South parts were diverse times pillaged by the French,
and in France many strong holds were lost for want of convenient succor, it
was much about these times, that there was a secret pact renewed between the
two Kings, for the delivery of Callice, and other pieces thereabout to the
French. But the performance thereof was resisted, both by the Court and
Council. Ireland, which in the time of Edward the third, was kept in order and
awe, and the people were taught Religion and civilitie, and well reclaimed,
yielding to the Kings coffers thirty thousands per annum, was suffered now to
be loose and licentious, and thereby the people grown rude and untractable,
so that now the King instead of receiving, was enforced to be at the charge to
expend, thirty thousand pounds yearly. Many succors were every day sent
abroad, but so scatteringly, and at such unseasonable times, and often so ill
accommodated, that they were occasions, rather of loss then help, whereupon
the King endeavored some expeditions in person, with great preparation, and
much charge, but his reputation being once cried down, whatsoever therein
succeeded well, was attributed to his Commanders, but all misfortunes, only to
him on the other side; if any exploit were well achieved by any of the
Nobility, it received misconstruction by the Court Parasit^ ^d by them (to
whom Military virtue was altogether unpleasant) so exte^ed, depraved, or
envied, that it seldom times received recompense or praise, yea sometime it
drew on suspicion and danger, it being whispered to the King, that to command
well in the field, and to be skillful and valiant, was a virtue merely to be
appropriated to a Prince, and that it was perilous, to have the name of a
private subject famous for such experience in every man's mouth, whereby few
sought to raise their fortunes, by virtue and valor, when the way was easier
for to rise by humouring the Prince. Affairs of State in peace, were managed
by those of weakest apprehension, by whose corrupt or ignorant counsel, the
overthrow of the well-minded Nobility, was many times attempted, and at the
last wrought. The profits and revenewes of the Crown were let to farm, the
King making himself Landlord of the Realm, challenging no greater privilege
by his Reign, but a dissolute and uncontrouled life. Great sums of money,
were by new found, and unwonted means, every day rather exacted, then
voluntarily granted from the Subject: whereof no good did ensue, but the Kings
private pleasures maintained, and his unworthy Favorites advanced; To these
he was beyond expectation, too liberal to continue, for which he was enforced
to borrow, beg, and extort in many places, but purchased not so much love by
the one, as he procured thereby hatred from the other, over and above Tenths
and Fifteenes, which were many times gathered double in one year, strange
impositions were devised and put in practice, sometimes exacting twelve pence
per poll, of every subject throughout the Realm, sometimes of every religious
person, male and female, vj. s. viij. d. of every secular Priest as much. Under
the favorable term of benevolence, he drew from the people great sums of
money, he borrowed so much upon privy S^ales, that no man of ability could
escape his loan, but seldom and to few was repayment made. He sent certain
Commissioners, Bishops and Lords temporal, to all shires and corporations
within the kingdom, to make known the Kings heavy displeasure against them,
for having abetted the Duke of Gloucester, and the Earls of Arundel and
Warwick, which An. 1399. R. 23.
without due acknowledgement of the offense, and submission to his mercy, could
not be pacified; Whereupon the chief in every shire, and all Corporations,
made their acknowledgement and submission, under their hands and seals, for
the redemption whereof, and for procuring of the Kings favor, insupportable
fines were paid, and all, so impoverished, that few or none were able to
subsist, none to resist. Strange and unheard of oaths were obtruded upon the
Commons for performance of what was under their hands and seals promised by
them, nay to add affliction to affliction, blancke Charters were sealed, and
delivered to the Kings use, wherein whatsoever he pleased might be inserted;
These courses were quite contrary to the government of Henry the second, who
though borne a stranger, and coming young to the Crown, and in a scarce
settled time maintained great wars, won large Dominions, more then ever were
hereditary, to any his Predecessors had many children, and always maintained a
Kingly port, yet never demanded Subsidy of his subjects, nevertheless he
left nine hundred thousand pounds, besides jewels and Plate of inestimable
value in his Treasury, having in all his lifetime held a good correspondency
betwixt his care and respect toward his subjects, and of their obedience and
loyalty to him. But this King bearing a heavy hand over his people, they bear
an hard heart toward him, and he being shallow in judgment, not of
sufficiency enough to cover his vices, but with, or by a cloak of seeming
powerful, at length drove then many to revolt, whose resolution was rather, to
run the hazard of ruin by rebellion, then to continue safety with slavery, and
did, but waiting occasion to begin, which was thus offered; The King received
advertisement out of Ireland, that the wild Irish, had massacred all his
garrison soldiers, and barbarously slain, Roger Mortymer Earl of Marsh (who
had been declared heir to the Crown) and that they proceeded with that
cruelty, that wrath and rage being master of the field could incite, or
cowardly conquerours practice; This loss being greater, was much increased, by
the report of the ill-affected multitude. The King calls his Council, where
it is much debated, whether were most convenient, for the King in person to
go, or to send his General, it was disputed, that wholly to subdue Ireland
stood neither with possibility nor policy, for if it were quiet in
possession, the governor might grow to that greatness, that he might make
himself absolute Monarch thereof, and therefore it was better to hold it
certain by feeble enemies, then uncertain by over-potent friends. But how
should those bogges and woods, which are more impregnable then the best
fortified Towns in other Countries be compassed or conquered? And if the
purpose were only to repress those Savage people, the war was not so
weighty, as should draw the King in person into the field; And therefore it was
most convenient for him to stay in some place, from whence he might show his
readiness, then t^ be present indeed. But others were of opinion (and that
not without good ground) that to subdue, and people Ireland, was a matter
neither difficult or dangerous, but acceptable and honorable to God and the
King; For this Realm of England, is truly storied, to have been as unpassible
for bogges and woods as Ireland. But the Conquerours kept not their soldiers
idle in garrison, whereby the bodies might be made diseased: and so unfit for
labor, or hard travail. But they held as well them, as the Natives
continually in action, either in exercising their arms, or in raising
fortifications, or making mighty high ways, or else in drayning and piling of
bogges; by which means the country was made habitable, and the ways
passible, and the people found it better to prefer subjection with plenty,
before liberty with penury. That the Romans kept many more large territories
in quiet Obedience (so long as there was amity, amongst themselves) without
either fear or danger of popular Governors, either by severing them into
diverse small Provinces; or assigning to every province, diverse Officers of
inferior ranks, as Lieutenants and Provosts, whereof one was able to retain
the other, or by making their offices but annual; But chiefly by retayning
their wives and children, as pledges of their dutiful obedience. That the
danger was the more to be feared, lest a weak enemy, whilst he is contemned,
should gather strength, and to be able to stand upon terms of withstanding;
That it was a pitiful policy for assurance of peace, to make all waste like
a Wilderness, and in stead of men to have domination of nothing but trees and
beasts. That by so doing, the King should lose the revenew of a fruitful
Country, and the benefit of wealthy subjects, which are the surest treasure of
a Prince; That hereby also the Majesty of his estate would be impaired; For
(as Solomon says) the honor of a Kingdom consists in the multitude of
subjects. That the Country being unfurnished of people, was open to all
Nations invasions, and a great means to invite foreign and unsent-for guests.
Lastly, if none of these respects would move, the King was bound in conscience
to reduce those wild people, to the true knowledge and worship of God, who did
then either profanely contemn him, or superstitiously serve him. These
reasons so prevailed with the King, that he gathered a mighty Army, with
intention to go in person into Ireland; But all his provision was at the
Subjects charge. And where in times of danger, a discreet Ruler when necessity
shall enforce his absence, will give least cause of distaste unto his people.
This King in peace, having been no provider for war, was forced to offend,
when he should have been most careful to win their favor. About the Feast
of Pentecost he set forward on his voyage mith many men, but few soldiers,
he carried with him all his Treasure, jewels, plate, and kingly roabes; with
him also the Duke of Anmerle, and the Duke of Exceter, with diverse of the
Nobles, and many Mitred Prelates, amongst whom was the Abbot of Westminster, a
chief favorite. He also took with him, the sons of the Duke of Gloucester
and Hereford, whose favorers he chiefly suspected; When he came to Bristow
(whether upon some matter, or mere malice, at first it is uncertain) it was
put into the Kings head, That Henry Piercy Earl of Northumberland, with some
other, intended some disloyal attempt against him; And therefore did not
tender their service unto him in this expedition. Hereupon he by his Pursevant
commanded the Earl with all his power, that could conveniently be raised, to
come unto him in person to Bristoll; The Earl by letter returns answer,
desiring thereby his Majesty to take it into his more serious cogitation, that
it was inconvenient for the Irish service, to draw men from such remote places,
in regard the rebels were neither so many, nor so mighty, but that the King
had strength sufficient at hand to suppress them; That it was dangerous to
disfurnish the North parts of their strength, thereby to offer opportunity to
the Scottish borderers (who were uncertain friends in extremity, and assured
to be enemies upon any such advantage) to make an inrode, therefore craved to
be excused at that time for not attending.

The King conceiving his command in this to be contraried, yea contemned,
would not stand to reason the matter though he had small reason (things being
as they were) not to have done so, but in an unadvised heat, proclaims the
Earl and all his Confederates Traitors, and commands all their lands and goods
to be seized to his use. The Earl much stomacking this disgrace, makes good
the information, and breaks out into open hostility, whilst the King proceeds
in his voyage for Ireland, where upon his first arrival, all things succeeded
prosperously, the King obtaining many Victories, yet without battle; For the
Irish not being under one government, were divided into many factions, so that
seldom three sects joined their strength, and study to one point; so that
whilst they fought one by one, they were all easily subdued or slain.

In the mean time, some of the Nobility of England, with most of the common
people, groaning under the burden of their oppression, taking advantage of the
Kings absence, conspired to cut off that authority, that would not be
confined, and to bestow it upon some other, who was likely to repair, what
Richard had ruined, resolving if they fell short of their wish, they would sell
that with glory in the field, which with certainty in peace they could not
enjoy. The only man upon whom they all pitched, was Henry Duke of Hereford, not
upon any motion or desire of his, But because he was of the blood Royal, and
next heir male by descent, to the succession of the Crown, of whose valor
and virtue, honorable proof had been made; The only surviving man of
quality, that had stood up against the King for the behoof of the
Commonwealth, for which he had suffered much, both in honor and state. This
attempt pleased, as possible to prove, and of necessity to be followed;
Letters are secretly dispatched to the Duke, whose speedy return into England
they importune: affirming that as well for the public good of the Realm, as
for their own particular safeties, they were forced to use force against their
King: soliciting him to be pleased, but to make the head, and they would
furnish the body with an able army, to expel the misgoverned King, from his
unbefitting government, and to settle the Crown upon his head, who was more
apt, and able to manage the same; That they would not only help him, in bare
wishes, and advise, but would join hearts and hands, to adventure their lives,
so that the peril should be common to all, the glory only his.

These Letters were cunningly compilde, and closely conveyed, by such as had
more then common interest in the Dukes respect. Amongst whom was principal,
Thomas Arundel, late-Archbishop of Canterbury, the son of Robert Earl of
Arundel, and Warren, who had been first Bishop of Ely, and then Archbishop of
York, and lastly of Canterbury, who being amongst others the Bishops in the
higher house of Parliament, at what time the Duke of Gloucester, the Earl of
Warwick, and the Earl of Arundel, the brother to the Archbishop were
convented, at least questioned, because Clergy men, by the Canons are
commanded, not to be present at any trial, or judgment of life and death, he
with the rest, as they before had used, departed the house, upon this occasion
being absent, he with his brother were condemned of high treason, and after
his brothers execution, the Archbishop was banished the Realm, his goods
forfeited and seized, and his place conferd upon Roger Walden. The Archbishop
with his Confederates by several ways, and in strange disguises came to
Paris, and in the house of one Clomigey (where the Duke sojourned) met
together, where having obtained privacie and silence, the Archbishop used these
words, or the like in sense.

We are sent unto you (right high and most noble Prince) from the chief Lords
and Peers, and people of our kingdom, who groan under the burden Archbish.
Arundels speech to Henry.
of tyrannous oppression; Yet not to vindicate injuries against our Sovereign,
upon private wrongs or displeasures, nor upon desperate discontent, to set the
State in combustion, to put the King in fear, the kingdom into a flame, nor
to second the ambitious designs of any particular person: But to open unto you
the deformities and decays of our dissected estate, and to implore your aid,
for the stay of the precipitate ruin of the same. The remembrance of your
honorable achievements, and your deserved reputation, thereby gained in our
country, does nothing else, but make remembrance of our present baseness
bitter unto us. Our victorious Armies, have heretofore been famous and
renowned, not only in the Islands adjoining, but in all parts of Europe, yea in
Asia and Africa against the Infidels and Barbarians, so that all Christian
Princes, have been willing to embrace our friendship, or unwilling to provoke
us to hostility. But now both Welsh and Scots, whom we have so often beaten,
and brought upon their knees, do not only scorn and deride us, but the weak
and miserable Irish, have shaken off their shackles, and glutted and enriched
themselves, with our blood and spoils, with these we are now enforced to
fight, not for glory, but for leave but to live, in so much as we are pitied
by our friends, flouted by our enemies, and hated of our selves, it is confessed
that King Richard, has led and sent great powers into these Countries, but
after such a manner, that they have much wasted the kingdom with their
maintenance, but have by arms neither relieved our friends, or revenged us on
our enemies. And no marvel, since all our discreet, and diligent Commanders
(the sinews and nerves of an Army) are either beheaded, banished, or buried in
disgrace and obscurity, and the managing of martial affairs, is committed
(without respect of abilities or desert) to the conduct and counsel of such as
can best comply with the Kings variable disposition. Amongst whom ancient
Nobility is esteemed, but as a vain bubble: virtue, and sufficiency, are but
a trappe to ensnare their possessours, it is a grief to me to speak it, but
it helps not to hide that which every one sees, our Ancestors lived in the
highest pitch of perfect liberty, and we of dejected servilitie, being used
not like subjects but abjects, yea, flat slaves, not to one only unrespective
Prince, but to many his proud and presumptuous favorites, not always the
same, but every day fresh ones; And no sooner have we contented one, but new
greedy stomachs are provided, whose extortion, and exactions, have devoured
more by bribes, then the enemy with the sword, what unwonted, nay what
unheard of projects are now invented, and daily practiced, without either
measure or end, yea oftentimes without need, but if any be, it proceeds
rather from riotous expense, then necessary charges: great sums of money are
every minute pilled, and pulled from the honest minded subject, to be
unprofitably wasted upon prodigal spendthrifts; and if any man impugn these
most insupportable taxations, or but speak in the defense of the liberty of a
subject; Then either by surmised imputation of capital crime, or by
aggravation of small causes, by far-fetcht circumstances, and strayned
constructions, or else by open cruelty and force, his life or liberty, or
both, is called in question, it were too tedious, too odious, too frivolous, to
produce particular examples; The lamentable loss of your noble Uncles, and
other honorable friends, and your own present estate, cannot easily be
forgotten, nay I presume, there is no man of rank, or fashion within the
Realm, who either in his own person, or children, or in his dear friends, or
near allies, but may easily find, that no man has certainty, to enjoy the
safeguard of his goods, or the use of his liberty, or surety of his head, but
rich men of the one, and good men in the other, are continually in hazard. This
is our case, but what is the remedy, we have patiently suffered, and sued
humbly for ease, But our patience has procured increase of punishment, and our
complaints more stripes: By the one our livings, by the other our lives are
daily devoured. Now therefore are we unwillingly compelled, to endeavor to
shake from our shoulders, this too too uneasy yoke, and submit our lives, and
estates to the command, of some more moderate and worthy person, not so much
for the grief of our miseries which are past, nor for the pain of our present
distresses, as for fear of worse dangers, which are most likely to follow, the
chief of the ancient Nobility. The King has cut off the Commons, he has
pared to the quick, and still he harroweth the Country, as if now but newly
conquered, whereby our nakedness is bared to our Adversaries, and we are made
utterly unable, either to recover that which is lost, or to retain that little
that is left. To whom shall we now complain? from whence shall we seek
succor? from whence expect aid? you (royal Sir) are only he, which in right
should, in wisdom can, and in goodness (we presume) will releeve us: to the
King in blood you are the nearest, to us in love dearest, you ought theresore
to undertake the rule of that that his weakness cannot well weild; Your years
are well stayed, from the loose fagaries of youth, and have been so spent, that
your former actions, have made sufficient proof of your full abilities, for
government of greatest charge, nothing therein by you past, needs excuse, and
it is vain to fear, what is to come; Your pains and peril formerly
undergone for the good of your Country, puts us all in good hope, that in
this extremity you will not forsake us: we are in a leaky ship, ready to
sink, in an old house ready to fall, and therefore humbly call and crave for
your help to succor and save us: now or never show your self to favor your
Contrymen, and free us, free your self, and the whole State from dangers,
and decays, by taking into your hands, the Scepter and sway thereof, and to
reduce the now tyrannous government to a Princely freedom, in combining the
Soveraigntie in one, with the liberty of all; Omit not this occasion, but make
your virtue and valor appear, by relieving most miserable wretches, from
their unmercifull oppressors. This we are constrained to offer, and entreat,
this is both honorable for you to accept, and easy to perform, being a task
worthy your toil; And so much the rather, since no Prince by any people, has
been desired with greater affection, nor shall more dutifully be obeyed then
your royal self.

This speech the Duke heard with attention, and entertained with great
moderation and modesty, his answer to that part that touched the King, was
Earl Henry's answer.
respective and well tempered, rather lamenting his weakness, then blaming his
malice, as touching himself, he spoke so soberly, that he seemed rather
worthy of a Kingdom then desirous thereof, he affirmed his life, had been
always free from malicious, and ambitious attempts, that stayednesse of
years, had now settled his mind from aspiring thoughts: That experience of
former dangers, had bred in him a wary reguard, in such a weighty business,
that to cast a King out of his State, was an enterprise, not hastily to be
attempted, nor easily effected; And though the matter were neither impossible,
nor difficult, the rareness of the fact, as wanting president, would make the
action seem injurious to all indifferent minds; And he that shall attain a
kingdom, upon opinion of desert: does charge himself with greater
expectation; and how honorable soever he shall compare himself, he shall
never want his deadly enviers; Besides this, in civil dissentions, the faith
of the multitude is flitting, and danger is to be doubted from every particular
person: That it is possible that all may fall away, but impossible to be safe
from every one, how ever friendly in semblance. Therefore he rather wished to
spend the remainder of his years, as he did, obscurely, in a safe and
certain estate, then to thrust himself upon those pikes of perils, which
being once entered into, are dangerous to follow, and deadly to forsake, whereas
in private attempts a man may step, and stop when, and how, and as often as he
pleases; But the aim at a Kingdom, has no middle course, betwixt the life
of a Prince, or the death of a Traitor. The Archbishop replied, saying, The
state wherein you now stand, is neither so safe or certain as you conceive:
Indeed by rejecting our request, you may avoid certain dignity, and with that
uncertaintie and contingent dangers: But shall procure most certain
destruction, both to your self and us; For this attempt cannot be kept secret
long from the King; And the best Princes are tender in points of Soveraigntie,
and bear a nimble ear to the touch of that string; and it prejudiceth more a
subject, to be thought worthy of a Kingdom, then it will profit him to have
refused the offer of it. What then will he do, that puts the chiefest
security of his Reign, in the baseness, and bareness of his Subjects: who
being perpetually possessed with jealosie, makes every presumption a proof;
and every light surmise a strong suspicion against them; And of certainty, if
the general favor, and the love which the people bears you, has as now
bereaved you of your liberty; This their general desire, will not leave your
life untouched, As for us, if we faint in our intent, or fail in the
enterprise, farewell all; we shall but be like lambs amongst Lions: And no
loss by conquest can be more grievous unto us, then the Kings reign over us:
assuredly now we have gone on too far to go back: And the time is long
since past, when you for ambition, and we for envy, might seem to attempt
against the King; The possession of the Crown, must now be the sole sanctuary,
and refuge for us both. Examples of the like attempts, are neither rare, nor
worn out of practice, nor so far off to be fetched; We might instance in
Germany, the Emperor Adulphus. In Denmark and Swedland; In the Netherlands,
in this Kingdom, both before and since the Conquest, instance were to be
given of the like, that there is always difficulty in things that tend to
much excellency; But they that are afraid of every shadow, will hardly at first
truly apprehend the substance. And as he was about to proceed, to justify the
lawfulness, the Duke interrupted him, and said, Where necessity does enforce,
it is needless to use speech, either of easiness or lawfulness; Necessity
will run through brazen walls, and cannot be bounded by laws; I have had my
full share in these calamities, and I wish you knew, with what grief I have
beheld you. What recompense have I received, for all my labor and expense in
the Kings service, but the death of my dear Uncles, and nearest friends, my
own banishment, the base imprisonment of my children, and the loss of my
goods and inheritance? And what has been returned unto you for your blood, so
often spent in these unfortunate wars, but perpetual payments of unnecessary
exactions, daily massacres, and insupportable slavery, I have tired my patience
in apprehension of my own miseries and pitying yours: remedy them hitherto I
could not (had I been never so willing:) if now I can, I will not refuse, to
sustain that part, which your importunity does enforce upon me; if we
prevail, we shall regaine our liberties: If we miss, our estate can be no
worse then it is; And if we must perish, either guilty or guiltless, it is
more noble to hazard our selves, either to win our lives, or dye in defense of
our liberties. And though our lives were safe, which in truth they are not, yet
to desert the State, and sleep still in this slavery, would argue either
negligence, or stupiditie in us, or both. It remains now that we use
secrecy, and celeritie, taking hold of the opportunity, the Kings absence
presents unto us; For in enterprises, which never are commended before
achieved, delays are dangerous; And safer it is, to be found in open action,
then private Counsel: For they that deliberate only to rebel, have rebelled
already; Hereupon the Confederates return for England, to provide arms, and
prepare necessaries against the Dukes arrival, who presently acquaints the
King of France, that he intended to go to visit his kinsman, John Duke of
Britain, and obtained from him Letters of safe conduct, there he waged some
soldiers, with whom from Callice he made for England, giving forth at his
coming aborde, that he only endeavored to regaine, the Duchy of Lancaster,
and the rest of his lawful inheritance, which King Richard wrongfully detained
from him; with him came Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury, and Thomas heir to
Richard late Earl of Arundel; the residue of his retinue exceeded not twenty
lances, so that it is The Duke of Hereford sets forward.
hard to judge, whether was the greater marvel, either that he durst
attempt, or that he did prevail with so small a company; But his confidence
was in the favor, and assistance of the people in the Realm; He for a time
did bear up for England; but not in a straight course, but hulling about the
shore, making show to land sometimes on one coast, sometimes on another,
thereby to discover what forces were in readiness, either to receive, or
resist him.

In the mean time Edmond Duke of York the Kings Uncle, and Vicegerent, having
intelligence of the Duke of Herefords design, Convoked Stafford Bishop of
Chichester, Lord Chancellor, William Scroope Earl of Wiltshire, the Lord
Treasurer, Sir John Bushy, Sir Henry Green, Sir William Bagot, Sir John
Russell, and others of the Kings privy Council, and entered into Counsel, what
was best to be done; Where it was concluded deceitfully by some, unskilfully by
others, and by all pernitiously for King Richard to quit the Sea coasts, to
leave London, and to make the randevow at Saint Albones, to gather forces to
oppose the Duke, who was lately landed about the Feast of Saint Martine,
without any resistance or rub, at Ravenspur in Holdernesse, whose side was by
nothing more advantaged, then by The Duke of Hereford landeth in Holdernesse.
that dissembling, and deceitful deliberation of the Kings Council upon his
arrival, Henry Piercy Earl of Northumberland, and Henry surnamed Hotspur his
son, the Earl of Westmerland, the Lords, Nevill, Rosse, and Willoughby, and
many other personages of honor came unto him, whose accession both increased
reputation to their cause, and was a great countenance and strength, to the
Dukes further purposes. But first they took an oath of him, The Duke of Heref.
sworn not to do, or suffer any violence to be done to King Richard.
that he should neither procure, nor permit any bodily harm to be done to
King Richard, and thereupon they pawnd to the Duke of Hereford their honors,
to join with him in all extremity, to prosecute the Kings mischievous
Counselors. The Common People desperate upon new desires, head and headlong
flocked to these Noblemen. The better sort for love to the Commonwealth, some
upon lenity, and itching desire of change, others to repair their distressed
and decayed estates, who all setting up their rests upon a general disturbance
were (in conceit) then most safe, when the common state was most unsure: So
between the one and the other, the number in short time increased to thirty
thousand able soldiers. The Duke finding success to favor him, not only
beyond expectation, but even above his wish, He followed the channel whilst
the current went strong; and cutting off unnecessary delays, with all
celeritie he hasted to London, that possessing himself thereof, being the
chief place within the kingdom for strength and store, he might best there
make the seat of War, and be easiest accommodated with provision and
ammunition.

In this expedition, no opposition was seen, nor hostility shown, but in his
passage the Gentlemen of best rank and quality, joined themselves unto him,
some for affection, others for fear, but most in hope of reward after victory,
every one though upon causes dislike, yet with like ardent desire contending,
lest any should seem more forward then they. In every place also where he
made stay, rich gifts, and pleasant devises were presented unto him, with large
supply of necessaries, far above his necessity. The common people with
showtes and acclamations gave their applause, extolling the Duke as the only
man of courage, saluting him King: with contumelious terms depraving Richard,
as a simple and sluggish man, a dastard, a niddie, and altogether unworthy to
bear rule without rule, railing at the one, and without reason flattering the
other. The Duke was no niggard of his complement, nor negligent of popular
behavior, knowing the common people are much delighted with affable gestures,
accounting that for courtesy, which the severer sort reckon abasement. At
London he was richly and royally entertained, with Processions and Pageants,
and many triumphant devises and shows, and the unable multitude (who otherwise
could not,) by their words, wishes, and wills, did testify their loving
affection toward him.

At which time there appeared not any memory of faith or allegiance to King
Richard, But (as in sedition it always appears,) as the most swayd, all
went. The Duke of York was mustering at Saint Albones for the King; But as the
people out of diverse Countries were drawn thither, many of them protested that
they would do nothing, to the prejudice of the Duke of Lancaster, who they
affirmed was unjustly expelled his Country, and unlawfully kept from his
inheritance. Then the Earl of Wiltshire, Sir John Bushy, Sir William Bagot,
and Sir Henry Green, forsook the Duke of York, and fled to Bristol,
intending to pass the Seas i^o Ireland to the King.

These four were they that were supposed to have taken of the King, his
kingdom to farm, and therefore were so odious to the people, that their
presence turned away many of the Subjects hearts. Nay, it is probable, that
more for displeasure taken against them, then against the King; the revolt was
enterprised. For they being the only men of credit, and authority with the
King, under false cover of obedience, they wholly governed both the Realm and
him, abusing his name, either against his will, or without his knowledge,
insomuch that he was clearly innocent of many things, which passed under his
Commandment; But the people could not endure, that two or three should rule
all, not because they were not sufficient, but because they were in favor: and
they distasted the King, in that he permitted them whom he might have
bridled, or to run without respect, at least for that he was ignorant of
that he should have known, and by conniving at their faults, made them his
own, and opened thereby the gappe to his destruction. For it is as dangerous
to a Prince, to have hurtful and hateful Officers in eminent places, as to
be hurtful and hateful to himself. The Duke of York either amazed at the
sudden change, or fearing his adventure, if he should proceed to resistance;
gave over the cause, and preferred present security, before duty with danger,
giving occasion thereby to be suspected to favor the Duke of Lancasters
proceeding, and thereupon all the other Counselors, either openly declared for
the Duke, or secretly wished his welfare; And abandoning all private
directions, and advise, adjoined themselves to the common course, hoping
thereby of greater safety.

In the mean time Duke Henry being at London, entered into consultation with
his Confederates what way was best to take, amongst whom it was then concluded,
finally to uncrowne King Richard, and constitute Duke Henry The Duke of
Herefard enters into Council at London. War proclaimed against King Richard.
King in his stead; And to that end open war was proclaimed against King
Richard, and all his partakers, as enemies to the peace, and quiet of the
kingdom; Pardon also was promised, to all those that would submit themselves,
to follow the present course, otherwise no favor to be expected; Not one of
the Nobility durst oppose himself in these designs, some unwilling to play
all their estate at one cast, kept themselves at liberty, to be directed by
success of future event; others consented in terms of doubtful construction,
with intent to interpret them afterward, as occasion should change; But the
most part directly, and resolutely entered into the action, and made their
fortunes sharers with Duke Henryes, in the danger, though not in the Honor, to
whom Duke Henry used this speech.

I am, as you see, at your procurement returned, and by your means have
Lancasters Oration.
undertaken arms, to vindicate our common liberty, hitherto we have
prosperously proceeded; But in what terms we now stand, I am altogether
unacquainted: As a private man I would be loath to be reckoned, being by you
designed to be a King, a Prince I cannot be esteemed, whilst another
possesses the Crown; your Title likewise is in suspense, whether to be termed
Rebels or Subjects, until you have made manifest, that your Allegiance, was
bound rather to the state of the Realm, then the person of the Prince; Now you
are they, that have both caused this doubtfulnesse, and must clear the point,
your part still remains to be acted, your virtue and valor, must add
strength to this action; We have already ventured so far, that all hope of
pardon is drowned, so that if we shrink back, and break this enterprise, no
mercy is to be expected, but butchery and gibbets, if we delay the enterprise,
we shall lose the opportunity, that now is offered, and give occasion of
advantage to our adversaries. The peoples blood is up now on our sides, and
nothing is wanting, but our care and your diligence; let us therefore now, not
trifle more time in talking; but let us strike whilst the iron is hot, let us
resolutely set forward, and possess our selves speedily of all parts of the
Realm, so shall we be either able to keep out our concurrent, or else to
entertain him little to his liking; Hereupon troops of men are speedily sent
into all quarters of the kingdom, to keep King Richards party from drawing
to an head. The vulgar (as men broken with many burdens) readily entertained
the first comers, and were not overcurious to side with the stronger; Duke
Henry pursued the Treasurer, and his accomplices The Lord Treasurer pursued to
Bristoll. The Treasurer with Sir John Bushye surprised in Bristol Castle, and
afterward executed.
to Bristoll, where he found the Castle fortified against him, but in four
days he forced it, and therein surprised the Lord Treasurer, Sir John Bushy,
and Sir Henry Green, whom the common people eagerly pursued to execution, no
defense could be admitted, no excuse heard, no respite obtained, but still
their rage continued, crying against them, that they were Traitors,
blood-suckers, that had abused the King, and undone his Subjects to enrich
themselves; And through their clamorous and importunate instance, the day
following the Earl of Wiltshire with the rest were beheaded. This Earl of
Wiltshire was William Lord Scroope, in the twenty one year of Richard the
second, Created Earl of Wiltshire, and made Lord Treasurer, he purchased the
Isle of Man, and dyed without issue. Sir William Bagot, whilst the other went
to Bristoll, posted to Chester, and pursuit being made after the most, he
alone escaped into Ireland. This execution partly because it pleased the
people, and partly because it excluded all hope of the Kings pardon, caused
them to cleave more firm unto the Duke, which greatly increased both his hope,
and glory, as having offers of so large aid, and so little need.

In the mean time the news of the Dukes arrival, and occurrences thereupon,
part true, part false, and all enlarged by many circumstances (as fame
increases by going) was related to the King, he then being entangled with
other broils in Ireland, at the receipt whereof, he caused the Sons of the
Dukes of Gloucester and Lancaster, to be imprisoned at the Castle at Trim, The
Sons of the Duke of Gloucester and Lancaster imprisoned in Trim Castle in
Ireland.
and for the speedier dispatch, to go into England, left most of the provision
behind, hasting and shuffling together, as his present have did enforce, being
both unskilful, and unfortunate himself, and void of all good direction from
others, and with more haste then good speed, he took shipping, and within the
space of three nights, with the Dukes Aumerle, Exceter, and Surry, the Bishop
of London, Lincoln, and Carlisle, and some others he arrived at Milford haven
in Wales, in which contrymen he reposed his King Richard arriveth at Milford
Haven.
chief trust for safety; But when he saw that contrary to expectation, that
as well there as in all other places, the people flocked to the Duke and fled
from him, and those that were with him were all wavering, and some revolted,
all his devises were disturbed, and he resolute what course to take, on the
one side he was confident, his cause was right, his conscience being clear
from any great bad demerit, on the other side, he saw the adversaries great
strength, and the whole power of the Realm bent against him; And being
Discouraged.
more abashed by the one, then encouraged by the other, he was perplexed in
uncertain terms, either where to stay, or whither to stir, wanting both
knowledge and resolution himself, in cases of such difficulty, and obnoxious,
to unfaithful counsel; Some advised him to march further into the land,
before his own forces fell from him, alleging that fortune seconds valor;
That in all places he should find some, who of duty, for favor, or hire,
His Counselors disagree.
would join with him, others persuaded him to return into Ireland, and from
thence to return when sufficiently strengthened. But the King unacquainted
with martial affairs, rejected both counsels, and in taking a middle course
(which always in extremes of that kind is the worst) he resolved to stay in
Wales, to attend to what head this humor would rise. The Duke upon
advertisement of the Kings landing, with great power speeds to Chester,
Lancaster marches toward the King. The Lord Steward dissolveth the Kings
household.
whereupon Thomas Piercy Earl of Worcester, steward of the Kings household, to
vindicate the proclayming his brother the Earl of Northumberland traitor,
openly in the Hall before all the Kings servants, broke his staff of office,
and departed to the Duke, willing the rest to shift for themselves in time,
hereby he lost his reputation on both sides, being by the one accounted a
corrupter, by the other a betrayer of the King; The rest by his Example, more
fearful then faithful, took every man his own way, and scattered. And they
that in the Kings prosperity, would have contended to be foremost, now
together draw back, and like Swallows forsake that house in Winter, where all
the Summer they did feed and foil. Between faint soldiers, and false
friends, the King is abandoned: Look on he might remedy it he could not, as
not of force to punish that, which he never forced to prevent, his present
remedy is patience (a cold comfort) his only revenge, complaint (a weak
weapon;) Between both, thus he vents his passion. King Richard expostulateth
with himself.


And do (says he) all forsake me? does their faith and my good fortune both
end together? Had I forsaken them in time, I had not been forsaken of others,
who once loved me better, but now are able to hurt me more. I confess the
blindness of my judgment, and so there is no friendship in flattery, nor
treachery in plain truth, and wish I had but as much space to reform this
error, as I am like to have time to repent it; But ah* they would not suffer
me to be wise when I might, and now they have made me wretched, they fly
from me, they were content to be the causes, but will not be companions of
my calamities, such attendants are like Crows to a dead carcass, which flock
to it, not to defend it, but to devour it, and no sooner have they barred the
bones, but they are gone.

Thus having lost both the fear and affection of his Subjects, distracted,
without comfort, counsel, or courage, like an Exile in his own kingdom, he
remains in Wales, not daring to go to London, and no man desirous to come to
him, shifteth still from place to place, fearing all things, but most misliking
the present. The Duke pursues him with all his power, but the King was too
weak to do any thing by force, and yet too great to be undiscovered, neither
had he any assurance of those few he had. At length he came to the Castle of
Conoway, and there utterly destitute of help, or hope, he stood divided in
mind, which way to bend his course; his followers were more ready to oppugn
the opinion of others, then to give direction themselves, as seeing better what
to shun, then what to follow: and as it always chances in desperate causes,
that course is commonly made choice of, whereof the opportunity is already
past. Some advised him that it was then time, rather to think of saving of
life, then recovering his estate, give place (say they) to the current of this
fury, let it have its full source, and when it is at the highest, it will
turn again, and then you shall have the tide as strong with you, as it is now
against you; Therefore give a little space, for the bad to draw back, for the
good to put forward. Treason gets ground at the first, but good counsel
gathers strength by cunctation. The minds of the multitude are only constant
in unconstancy, and persevere only in change, in dislike of things present,
they desire new, wherewith they rest not long contented, but are many times
glutted with the first sight; And how can they long endure the Reign of him,
who mounting the Throne only by their favor, and strength, shall hold the same
in a manner at their courtesy? every unpleasant command shall be deemed
ingratitude, every suit (though never so unreasonable) if denied, shall charge
him shith unkindnesse: if Honor be not offered, they will be much
discontented, and upon every occasion of distaste, think themselves as able to
displace him, as they were to set him up; You may therefore (say they) for a
time return to Ireland, or go to your Father-in-law into France, you may
assure your self of his assistance to stand upon your side to recover your
losses; Others who were enemies to any counsel, how good soever it was,
whereof themselves were not authors persuaded the King, that his enemies would
rather dye then desist, not so much for enmity to him, as for caution to
themselves; For it is a hard matter to forgive, but impossible to forget the
indignities, and injuries they have offered. And to omit what some Princes have
done, what all will promise to do; They will soon find fresh and bleeding
examples, what you are like to do, Gloucester, Arundell, Warwick, made
insurrection not to amove you from the Crown, but to remove from you, certain
misleaders of your affections, an action more displeasing, then prejudicial
unto you. Atonement was made, Charters of free pardon were granted under the
great Seal: But Consulteth with his followers.
what followed, was the breach ever perfectly made up? did displeasure dye, or
was it only dissembled: but the present wants of their lives, have fully
revenged their deaths. For had they lived, their countenance and authority
would easily have stinted these strifes; But the manner of their death,
persuades an obstinate resistance in all your adversaries; As for the refuge to
foreign Princes, you may peradventure receive of them fair entertainment, and
allowance, yet growing burdensome, it may perchance fail; But it is hard to
draw a Prince into such a quarrel, and more hard by that means to prevail:
Or if you should, it is to be feared, that the Victors will hold the benefit
of the conquest to themselves, and not yield it over to you: Few countries
(that have required such aid) but have been by Forrainers subdued. This drew
the Saxons into the land, who so assisted the Britons, that they could not be
resisted from possessing their kingdom; yet help of strangers in cases of
extremity, is not altogether to be contemned, but it is a remedy last to be
trusted to, least to be tried, but in no case altogether to be relied upon.
What then if you procure a Treaty, to see in what terms the people stand
against you? it may be upon fair quarter, they will submit, but if they will
persist to uncrowne you, an honorable stipend may be procured you, what shall
you lose thereby, you have no child to be disinherited, the chief motive to
make men greedy to get, and careful to retain? And as for your self you
shall be but translated from a steep and slippery hill, to a smoothe and
pleasant plain, from dangerous travail, to secure rest; And if there be no
solace without safety, no felicity without firmness, you shall find the
private life, not only more pleasant, but more happy then your principal
state. The tallest trees are weakest in the tops; and envy always aymeth at
the highest; But you shall lose (you will say) the credit ahd countenance of a
King, so shall you the cares and casualties; The Crown and Scepter are things
most weighty to wield; If a Prince be good, he is laden with labor; if
evil, with infamy, howsoever with perils, and tossed with strong and sturdy
tempests, so that to be freed from these fears, is to be esteemed a gain,
rather then a loss. Examples to prove this, are those of our own Country,
(without seeking of others) as may appear by Kinigellus, Ina, Ceonulphe,
Eadbertus, Etheldredus, Kenredus, Offa, Sebba, and Sigibertus, who of their
own accord, laid down their Diadems, and betook themselves to private and
solitary lives; Many Princes have held their estate with better fortune, but
none with greater honor did leave it, others have either abandoned their Rule
for ease, or to avoid danger, or upon some pretended devotion, but you for love
to your Country, may seem to forbear to seek your remedy, to maintain
war, wherein much blood may be spilt, and the Realm deprived of many able
Warriors, let others be persuaded to forsake their Kingdoms, when they had
no longer pleasure to hold them: But your praise will be for giving over, when
it is to the greatest benefit of the people, and the more hope you have to
prevail, if you list to contend; The greater commendations will it be to
yield, as rather being voluntary then compulsive. The King commended the
courage of the first, but this last counsel agreed best with his faint spirit,
which was more inclinable to fear, then forward in hope, preferring abject and
base safety, before hazard with honor; Others thereupon earnestly assevered,
That all conditions of yielding, were both dishonorable and dangerous; That in
extremities noble spirits will not suddenly give off, but labor courageously
to repel the danger, or wisely to decline it, alleging that none should so
little esteem honor, as without battle or blow stricken, to be crestfalne,
and stoop to miserable mercy; Others passionately said, if the honor of your
noble house nothing move you, yet let danger, and despair arm you with
boldness, neither the Duke nor his adherents dare be so confident, to think
themselves safe, so long as you shall remain (though in private state) alive,
you may assure your self, fair words will be given, and large offers made,
but the performance rests in the courtesy of the Conqueror: and nothing ought
to be thought unlawful to him, that has power. King Edward the second, one of
your Progenitors, could not be endured by his own Son: many have used
violence to themselves, rather then to fall into the power of their Corrivalls,
expect not then better fortune, then others have found, never be persuaded
that a Prince may live safely (if known) in a private estate, betwixt Caesar
and nothing, the highest honor, and the deadliest downfall, there is no mean:
omit not therefore all, or any means unassayd, to maintain your party by
arms, you can but dye if vanquished, and dye you shall if you yield, but by
the one you shall end your life with glory, by the other with perpetual
reproach; And though now you equally esteem of both, yet when you shall be
pent in prison, daily in fear, expecting the deadly messenger, you will find
a difference in death, and the weakness of that counsel, you are now about to
follow. But the Kings ears were stopped against all impression of valor, and
being unable to govern himself in prosperity, he was less sufficient to
wind himself out of this labyrinth of troubles; And being so beset, that he
could neither escape, nor stand out, he desired conference with the Archbishop
and Northumberland, the one he had formerly banished, the other proclaimed
Traitor. These came unto him, but perceiving by little conference, how much
they were bent against him, he demanded not what he saw no likelihood to
obtain, and agreed to relinquish his estate, to have a competency of means,
and the lives of but eight such persons as he should nominate allowed unto him.
This was readily, and faithfully promised by them, and afterward ratified by
the Duke. The King desires conference with the Duke, which likewise was
promised, and so they departing, the King removed to Flynt Castle, about eight
miles from Chester, whither the Duke came, at whose enterview, the countenance
and words of both were observed; The King seemed abject, the Duke neither
insulting nor relenting, but rather comforting and promising friendly. The King
repeated many benefits and courtesies that he had formerly showed; That he had
spared the Dukes own life, and now his Sons, in recompense whereof, he with
such submisnesse (as agreed rather with necessity then honor) desired the
Duke to show pity to him from whom he had received favor, and to permit him
to live, with the allowance of some fitting, but private estate of maintenance.
The Duke to comfort him, gave him assurance to provide for his safety; For
which he was contented to receive thanks as for a benefit; The King from that
time was kept safe, and sure enough from hindering the Dukes projects; Neither
could it so easily have been discerned, what had been best for him to do, as
that this which he did, was the very worst; For the same night he was brought
to Chester, and from thence secretly conveyed to the Tower of London, there to
remain until the Parliament, which was appointed should be shortly after
holden at Westminster.

The King yielded himself the twentieth day of August, being the forty
seventh day after the Dukes arrival, so that considering his journeyes from
Holdernesse in the North to London, from thence to Bristoll, and so into Wales,
and back again to Chester* A man shall not more easily travail over it, then
he conquered it, so propitious were his stars unto him, that he either
found, or made a ready passage through all hindrances and obstacles; And it
seemed he only needed to open his arms, and Fortune would fly into his
bosom. All the Kings Treasure and jewels, with his horse and fardage came to
the Dukes hands; And many that were of his company, were dispoyled by the
soldiers of Northumberland and Wales. Some Writers barely upon conjectures
affirm, that the King did not yield himself, but was surprised, passing from
Flynt to Chester; But the authority of such as lived at that time, and either
saw it, or had perfect intelligence of these affairs, such as for their place
could not but know, and for their profession would not but deliver the very
truth, so prevailed with Sir John Heywood, the Penner of this History, that he
followed their report. As the King was in his journey toward London, some had
conspired to lie in ambush by the way, to have slain him; But the Mayor of
London upon intelligence thereof, prevented the practice, and went in person,
and with convenient power brought him to the Tower. Shortly after the Duke came
to London in solemn estate, and sent forth summons in the Kings name, for a
Parliament to be holden the last day of September in the same year; In the
mean A Parliament summoned by the Duke in the Kings name.
time he consulted with his dear friends, and near kindred, for order to be
taken in his proceedings. The Duke of York, who but a little before, had been
Governor of the Realm for the King, was now the Dukes chief director, he
thought it best that King Richard should both voluntarily resign, and also
solemnly be deposed, by consent of all the States of the Realm. For
resignation would be imputed only to fear, deprivation to force, whereof the
one is always pitied, and the other envied. But if both concur, and his
desire be combined with his desert, being willing to forsake that, which he is
adjudged worthy to forgo; Then it will appear, that he is neither expelled
his kingdom by mere constraint, nor leaves it without just cause; this
advise generally pleased. And for execution thereof, upon the Feast of Saint
Michael (which was the day before the Parliament should begin) there assembled
at the Tower, Thomas Arundell Archbishop of Canterbury; Richard Scroope,
Archbishop of York; John Bishop of Hereford, Henry Duke of Lancaster, Henry
Earl of Northumberland, Radulph Earl of Westmerland, Lord Hugh Burnell, Lord
Thomas Berckley, Lord Rosse, Lord Willowbigh, Lord of Abergany, the Abbot of
Westminster, the Pryor of Canterbury, William Thirmings, and John Markham
chief Justices, Thomas Stokey and Burbacke Doctors of the Law, Thomas
Herpingham Thomas Gray, Knights; William Ferly, and Dionise Lophane Notary
publicks, and diverse others neither noted nor remembered; When all were set in
their places, King Richard was brought forth, apparelled in a royal Roabe, the
Diadem on his head, and his Scepter in his hand, and was placed amongst them in
a chair of State; never was Prince so gorgeous with less glory and more
grief; To whom it was not thought disgrace sufficient* to lose both the honor
and ornaments of a King; But he must openly to his greater scorn, renownce
the one, and surrender up the other. After he had sat a while and pawsed, he
used these words to the assembly;

I persuade my self, that some here present, and many more hereafter, King
Richards speech.
will account my case lamentable, either that I have deserved this dejection;
if it be just, or if it be wrongful, that I could not avoid it; I confess
with shame and grief, that many times I have appeared, both less provident,
and less painful for the benefit of the republicke, then I should or might,
or would have been hereafter, and have in many actions, more respected the
satisfying my own particular humor, then either in justice, to some private
persons, or the common good of all, yet did I not at any time, either
altogether omit duty, or commit grievance, upon supine dullness, or set
malice, but partly by abuse of corrupt Counselors, chiefly by error of my
youthful rash conceit without true judgment. The remembrance of these
oversights, are to no man so unpleasant, as to my self; and the rather,
because I have no means left, either by injuries done, or to testify to the
world, my reformed affections, which experience and maturitie of years, had
already begun to correct, and would, I assure my self, have grown to a more
perfect frame, if but permitted to have continued; But whether all imputed to
me be true, either in substance or quality, according as they are suggested,
or whether being true, they be so exorbitant, as to enforce these extremities,
or whether any other Prince, especially in youthful blood, and in the space of
two and twenty years (the time of my unfortunate reign) does not sometimes,
either for advantage or displeasure, in as deep manner grieve some particular
subject, I will notnow examine: it boots not to use defense, nor much avails
to make complaint, there is left no place for the one, nor pity for the other;
And therefore I refer all to Gods pleasure, and your more collected
considerations; I accuse no man, I blame not fortune, I complain of nothing.
There is no pleasure in such ayrie comforts; it may be if I had had will to
have stood upon terms, I could have procured great favors abroad, and
(presume) some good friends at home, who would have been ready, it may be, too
forward on my behalf, to set up a dangerous and doubtful war: But I estimate
not worldly dignity at so high a rate, to hazard the spilling of so much
Christian blood, and the spoiling of so flourishing a Country, as thereby might
have been occasioned in my quarrel. Therefore that the Commonwealth may
rather rise by my fall, then I stand by the ruin thereof, I willingly submit
to your desires, and am here come to dispossess my self of all Regal and
public authority or title; And to make it free and lawful for you to Elect,
and Create for your King, Henry Duke of Lancaster, my Uncles son, whom I know
to be as worthy to take that place, as I see you willing to confer it upon
him. Then he read openly and distinctly, the form of his cession, wherein he
did declare that he had discharged his Subjects from their obligations of
Fealty and homage, and all other ties whatsoever; And of his own will and
free motion, did repudiate the title, dignity, and authority of a King, and
rendered up the possession of the Realm, with the use and title thereof, and
all the rites thereunto appertaining; and thereunto subscribed, and made oath
for the performance; And then with his own hands delivered the Crown,
Scepter, Roabe, and ornaments to the Duke of Lancaster, saying, Cousin I wish
you more happiness herewith, then ever happened to my self; Then did he
Constitute the Archbishop of York, and the Bishop of Hereford his Procurators,
to intimate and declare this his resignation to all the States of the
Parliament. Lastly, he gave all his Treasure to the sum of three hundred
thousand pounds in coin, besides his jewels and Plate for satisfaction of
injuries done, desiring the Duke and those present, severally by their names,
not altogether to forget that he had been their King, nor yet too much to
think upon it; but to retain a moderate remembrance of him, and in recompense
of the ease he had done them by this voluntary resignation, to permit him to
live safely, in a private life: with the contemplation whereof he was so taken,
that from thenceforth he would prefer it before any worldly preferment. This
was done with voice and countenance so consonant to his present passion, that
not any present not unmindfull of humane instabilitie, which was not in some
measure moved thereat, insomuch that some few tears secretly dropped from many
eyes there present, in whose thoughts a confused, but obscure alteration
already began to take rising; so prone is mankind to pity misery, though by
themselves procured, and to envy prosperity, even in those themselves have
raised. The Monday following the Parliament began at Westminster, and there the
Archbishop of York, and the Bishop of Hereford (the late Kings Attorneys for
this purpose) openly declared to the States (there assembled) the Kings
voluntary resignation; and demanded whether they would assent and agree
thereunto. The Barons of the Realm, by particular assent, the Commons with
general voice, accepted and admitted the fame; Then it was thought requisite,
that some defects and misdemeanors in point of government, should be objected
against the late King, for which he might be adjudged, as unworthy, as he
seemed unwilling to retain the Soveraigntie, whereupon certain Articles were
engrossed and publicly read, in which was contained how unprofitable he had
been to the Realm, how unjust and grievous to the Subjects, repugnant both to
his oath and honor.

The principal of which Articles were: 1. That he had wastfully spent the
Treasure of the Kealme, and had to unworthy persons given the possessions of
the Crown, by reason whereof many great and grievous taxes were daily laid
upon the Commons.

2. That whereas diverse Lords, as well spiritual as temporal, were by the high
Court of Parliament, appointed to treat of matters concerning the State of the
Kingdom, they being busied about the same Commission, he with others of his
accomplices, went about to appeach them of high Treason.

3. That by force and threats he enforced the Judges of the Realm at
Shrowsbury, to condescend to his way, for the destruction of the said Lords;
That thereupon he raised war against John Duke of Lancaster, Thomas Earl of
Arundell, Richard Earl of Warwick, and others, contrary to his promise in
derogation of the honor of the King. That he caused his fathers own brother,
the Duke of Gloucester, without law to be attached and sent to Callice, and
there without reason secretly murdered; That notwithstanding the Earl of
Arundell at his arraignment, pleaded his Charter of pardon, he could not be
heard, but was shamefully and suddenly put to death. That he assembled certain
Lancashire and Cheshire men, to make war upon the foresaid Lords, and
suffered them to rob and spoil, without reproof or prohibition.

4. That though he dissembled, and had made Proclamation; That the Lords were
not attached for any crime of Treason, but for oppression done within the
Realm, yet he objected against them in the Parliament, treason and rebellion.

5. That notwithstanding his Pardon granted to them, he enforced diverse of the
Lords partakers, to be again intollerably fined, to their utter undoing.

6. That contrary to his promise in Parliament, he to his great dishonor kept
away diverse Rowles and Records, which by agreement should have been shown to
certain Commissioners, appointed to treat of the affairs of the
Commonwealth.

7. That he commanded that no man upon pain of death, should entreat for the
return of Henry now Duke of Lancaster.

8. That whereas the Realm is immediately holden of God, he after he
Lancasters easy conquest.
had obtained in Parliament diverse Acts for his own particular ends, procured
Bulls and heavy censures from Rome, to compel his Subjects, under heavy
censures from Rome, to observe and perform them contrary to the Honor and
ancient privilege of this kingdom.

9. That though the Duke of Lancaster had done his devoyre against the Duke of
Norfolk in defense of his quarrel, yet he banished him the land without
showing just cause: contrary to equity and the law of Arms.

10. That having under the great Seal given leave to the said Duke of
Hereford, to make Proxies and Attorneys to prosecute and defend his causes, The
said King after the Dukes departure, would not permit any to appear for him.

11. That he had put out diverse high Sheriffs, having been lawfully elected,
putting into their rooms, some of his Favorites, subverting the course of the
law, contrary to his oath and honor.

12. He borrowed great sums, and bound himself for repayment, but no penny
thereof paid.

13. That he laid taxations upon his Subjects at his pleasure, consuming the
Treasure in idle expenses, but not paying the poor subject for his own viands.

14. That he affirmed all the Law lay in his head and breast, by which
phreneticall conceit, diverse of the Nobility were destroyed, and the poor
Commons fleeced.

15. That he procured by his Solicitors in the Parliament, an Act to be
established, that no Act of Parliament should be more prejudicial to him,
then it was to his Predecessors; through which proviso, he did what he list,
and not what the law did allow.

16. That for his ends, he would keep Sheriffs of shires, longer then two or
one year in the office.

17. That he put out diverse Knights and Burgesses legally elected, and put
others of his own choice in their rooms, to serve his own turn.

18. That he had spies and informers in every Country, to hear and observe,
the words and demeanours of the people; And if any reproved his loose and
licentious courses, they were convented, and grievously fined.

19. The spiritualitie objected against him, that at his going into Ireland,
he squeesed out many sums of money, besides jewels and Plate, without Law or
Custom, contrary to his oath at his Coronation; That diverse Lords and
Justices, being sworn to speak the truth in diverse things concerning the
honor and safety of the Realm, and profit of the King; he did so threaten
them, that no man would, or durst deliver the truth.

20. That without the assent of the Peers, he carried the Jewels and Plate of
this Kingdom into Ireland, to the great impoverishing of the Realm, many of
them being there lost.

21. That he caused all remembrances of the great exactions and extortions by
him used, and safely deposited amongst the Parliamentary Records to be privily
imbeazeled and carried away.

22. That in all his Letters to the Pope, and other Princes, his style was
cunning and obscure, that neither they, nor his own Subjects, were certain of
his true meaning.

23. That he forgetfully affirmed, that all the lives of his Subjects were in
his hands, to dispose at his pleasure.

24. That he contrary to the great Charter of England, procured diverse able
men, to appeal aged people, upon matters determinable at Common law, in the
Marshalls Court, because in that Court, there is no trial but by battle,
whereby such Appealers, knowing their insufficiency, submitted themselves to
his mercy, whom he at his pleasure unreasonably fined.

25. That he devised strange forms of oaths, contrary to law, and enforced
diverse his subjects to take and observe the same, and to that end, bound them
by Recognizance, to the great hinderance of many poor men, and the dishonor
of God.

26. That where the Chancelour, upon good grounds denied a Prohibition, to a
certain person moving for the same, yet he granted it to the same persons,
under the privy Seal, with a grievous pain if not obeyed.

27. That he banished the Archbishop of Canterbury, without just cause, or
judgment, and kept him with armed men in the Parliament Chamber.

28. That he granted all his goods to his successors conditionally, that he
should maintain all the Statutes made Anno 21. at Shrousbury, and the 22.
year of his Reign at Coventrie.

29. That upon the first convention of the Bishop of Canterbury, he cunningly
persuaded the Archbishop to make no answer, for he would be his warrant,
persuading him to decline the Parliament; And so without answer he was
condemned to be exiled, and his goods seized on; four other Articles in
behalf of the Bishops were laid against him, by whose doings only, the King
was utterly undone.

Then was demanded of the Nobility, and Commons of the Realm, what they
judged of the substance and truth of these Articles: who all agreed, that the
crimes were notorious; And that the King was worthy for the same, to be
deposed from his Princely dignity; The Noble men partly corrupted by favor,
part awed by fear, gave their voices. And the Commons who commonly are like a
flock of Cranes, as the first fly, all followers did the like. Commissioners
are appointed by both houses, who pronounced sentence of Deposition against
King Richard, in manner and form as follows.

In the name of God Amen. We John Bishop of Asaph, John Abbot of Glassenbury,
Thomas Earl of Gloucester, Thomas Lord Barkley, Sir Thomas Erpingham, and Sir
Thomas Gray Knights, and William Thirning Justice, Commissioners for the causes
hereafter specified. By the Lords Spiritual and temporal, and the Commons of
the Realm of England, representing all the States of our Kingdom, specially
deputed sitting in place of judgment, considering the manifold perjuries and
cruelties, and many other the crimes and offenses, by Richard late King of this
Realm committed, and done (contrary to good government) in the Realms and
dominions aforesaid, during the time of his reign; Also considering the
Articles which were openly exhibited and read, before the said States, which
were so public, notorious, manifest, and famous, that they could, nor can by
any shift, or cover, be concealed, or avoided, considering also the Confession
of the said King, acknowledging and reputing, and truly upon his certain
knowledge, judging himself to have been, and to be altogether insufficient,
and unskilful for the rule and government of the Realm and Dominions
aforesaid, and not unworthy to be Deposed, for the notorious demerits by the
said Richard first acknowledged, and after by his will and mandate before the
said States published, and to them opened and declared in the English tongue,
upon these and other matters which were done, concerning the same business,
before the said States and us, by the delegation, place, name and Authority to
us in this part committed, in pursuance whereof We pronounce, decree, and
declare the said Richard, to have been, and be unprofitable, unable, and
altogether unsufficient, and unworthy for the rule and government of the said
Realms; and in regard and respect of the premises, worthy to be deposed from
all kingly dignity and honor (if any such dignity and honor remains in
him:) And for the like cautele, We do depose him by our sentence definitive in
this Writing, inhibiting from henceforth, expressly all and singular, Lords
Archbishops, Bishops, Prelates, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Barons, Knights,
Vassales, and all other persons whatsoever, of the said Realms heretofore, the
subjects of the same, and every of them, that from henceforth, none obey, or
intend to obey, the said Richard, as King or Lord of the Dominions aforesaid.
And afterward the same Commissioners by the consent and suffrage of both
houses, were constituted Procurators jointly, and severally, for all the States
of the Realm, to resign, and surrender unto King Richard for them, and all
other homagers of the Realm, all the homages and fealties, which were both
due, and done unto him, as King and Sovereign; And also to declare unto him
all the premises concerning his Deposition. Now Henry A fain^d Title.
Duke of Lancaster, that he might be reputed, or reported at the least, not
to attain the kingdom by intrusion and wrong, was counseled by his friends,
to pretend some lawful challenge, or claim thereunto; And being in power, it
was no sooner advised what was to be done, but it was presently devised how to
do it: So a Title was drawn from Edmond son to King Henry the third, whom
they nicknamed Crookbacke, affirming that he was the eldest son of King
Henry, and that he for his deformity was put from his right of succession,
which was for that cause given to King Edward the first. To this Edmond the
Duke was next of blood, by his mother Blanch sole Daugter, and heir to Henry
Duke of Lancaster, and Son to the same Edmond. This cunning conveyance was
perceived by most: but seeming not to perceive it, was a point of friendship in
some, and of obedience in the rest: Therefore the Crown of England, being
supposed unpossessed, both by the resignation, and also by the deposition of
King Richard; Duke Henry arose from off his seat, and standing in the most
view of the assembly, making the sign of the Cross on his forehead and breast,
said as follows;

In the name of God, Amen. I Henry of Lancaster, claim as my right, the
Crown, and Realm of England, with all the Dominions and appendices D.
Lancaster lays his claim to the Crown.
to the same, as being lineally descended, by the right of line, from the blood
Royal, coming from that good Lord, King Henry the third, and through the
right that God of his grace has sent me, by his assistance, and the help of
my ready kindred, and noble friends, have adventured to recover the same, which
was in point of destruction, for want of good government, and orderly
distribution of justice therein, and therewith reseated himself.

Then was it demanded, in both Houses, upper and lower, whether they did
consent, that the Duke should reign over them, who all with one voice The Duke
of Lancaster accepted for King.
accepted of him for their King; Then the Archbishop of Canterbury took him by
the hand, and placed him in the Throne of estate, the Archbishop of York
assisting him, and all the Parliament testifying their own joy, and wishing
his. Then the Archbishop of Canterbury, upon this place of Scripture, 1 Reg. 9.
17. See this is the man whom I spoke to thee of, this same shall reign over my
people: did make a paraphrasticall exposition; which ended, the Duke was
generally proclaimed King by the name of Henry the Fourth, King of England, and
France, Lord of Ireland; The Common people void of cares, not searching into
sequels, but without difference of right or wrong, inclinable to follow the
mighty, with showtes, and cl^mours gave their applause, not all upon
judgment, or faithful meaning; but only upon received custom, at first to
flatter the Prince, whatsoever he be; But lest the humor thereof should
allay by delay, it was forthwith Proclaimed, that upon the thirteenth of
September next ensuing, the Coronation of the King should be celebrated at
Westminster. These matters being thus dispatched, the proclaimed King rose from
his Seat, and went to Whitehall, where he feasted the Assembly royally: yet
he made no show of stateliness, or pride, or change of deportment, in this so
great change of fortune; Upon Wednesday following the before-remembred
Procurators, went to the deposed King to the Tower, and declared to him the
admission of his resignation, and the manner of his Deposition, and in the name
of the States of the Realm, The Commissioners acquaint King Richard with the
resolution of the House.
did surrender back the Homage and Fealty formerly due unto him, with this
attestation, that no man from thenceforth would bear unto him faith and
allegiance, as due to a King; The King answered that he little regarded
titular circumstances, but contented himself with hope, that his Cousin would
be a gracious Lord, and good friend unto him, and accordingly upon the day
appointed, which was upon the day of the translation of King Edward the
Confessor, the Duke of Hereford with all accustomed Ceremonies, was by the
Archbishop of Canterbury sacred and anointed, and Crowned upon the very same
day, that the year before, he had been banished the Realm; He was
anointed with an oil which a religious man had given to Henry the first Duke
of Lancaster (grandfather to the King by the Edward the fourth crowned.
Mothers side) when he served in the wars of King Edward the third in
France, together with this Prophecy, that those Kings which should be
anointed therewith at their Coronation, should be the Champions of the
Church: Duke Henry delivered this Oil in a golden Violl to Prince Edward,
eldest Son of King Edward the third, who locked up the same, in a barred
Chest in the Tower, with a ticket of the prediction, with intent to be
therewith at his Coronation anointed; But he dying before his Father, it
remained there, either not remembered, or not regarded, until this present
year, wherein the King being on his voyage into Ireland, and making diligent
search, for the Jewels and Relickes of his Progenitors, found this Violl and
Prophecy; And understanding the mystery thereof, was desirous to be anointed
again with that oil; But the Archbishop of Canterbury persuaded him, that
both the fact was unlawful, and the president never seen, that a King should
be anointed twice; Whereupon the King took the Violl with him into Ireland,
and when he yielded himself at Flint, The Archbishop of Canterbury demanded it
of him, and receiving it reserved the same, until the Coronation of Henry the
fourth, who was the first King that ever was anointed therewith. To discourse
either of the authority, or certainty of these Prophesies I presume not, but
this is observed many of them fail, or are fulfilled in another sense, then as
they are ordinarily conceived and taken. During the time of this Kings reign,
execution by fire was first put in practice within this Realm for
Controversies in point of religion: in any other matter he did make the Church
as much Champane, as show himself Champion of the Church; But afterward his
successors were entitled Defenders of the Faith: And how in action the first
receiver of that Title did verify the same, I refer to the report of those
times. Upon mature consideration it was found, that the title derived from
Edmond surnamed Crouchbacke to Henry, would upon examination appear, but a
jeere, for that the said Edmond was neither eldest Son to Henry the third,
nor yet a deformed person, but a proper Gentleman, and a brave Commander in the
field, and so respected of his Father, that he gave him both the heritage and
honors of Simon Mumford, Earl of Leicester, of Ferrare, Earl of Darby: and
of John Baron of Monmoth, who to their own ruin had displayed seditious
ensigns against the King, under which Leicester was slain at the battle of
Euesham, and to engratiate him to Blaunch, the Queen of Navarre, he first
Created him Earl of Lancaster, and gave unto him the County, Castle and town
of Lancaster, with the Forests of Wiresdale, Lonsdale, Newcastle beneath the
Linne, the Manor, Castle, and Forests of Pickering, the Manor of Scalby, the
Town of Gloucester, of Huntingdon, etc. and made him high Steward of England,
with many privileges and other titles of Honor; Therefore King Henry upon the
day of his Coronation, caused to be Proclaimed, that he claimed the Crown of
England, first by right of Conquest; Secondly, because King Richard had
resigned his estate, and designed him for his Successor. Lastly, because he was
of the blood royal, and next heir male to King Richard, Haeres malus indeed
cried Edmond Mortimer Earl of March, to some of his familiars, and so is a
Pirat to a Merchant, when he dispoyleth him of all that ever he has. This
Edmond Earl of March, was Son to Roger not long before slain in Ireland,
and had been publicly declared heir to the Crown, in case King Richard
should have died without issue, as descended by his Mother Philip, from Lionel
Duke of Clarence, who was elder Brother to John Duke of Lancaster, King Henryes
Father, and therefore the said Edmond thought himself, (as in truth he was)
nearer heir Male to succession of the Crown; Then he that by color of right
clayming it, carried it by dint of force. But the condition of the time was
such, that he supposed it was in vain for him to stir, where King Richard
could not stand; whereupon he dissembled, either that he saw his wrong, or
that he regarded it, and chose rather to suppress his Title for a time, then
by untimely opposing himself to have it oppressed, and depressed for ever: he
withdrew himself therefore from London, to his Lordship of Wigmore in the West
parts of this Realm, and there settled himself, to a quiet and retired life,
he counted it a point of wisdom to meddle with nothing, whereof any man was
chargeable to render account: in revenewes he was not great, in apparel
moderate, in company and train not excessive (yet in all these honorable and
according to his degree) so that they that esteemed men by the outward
appearance only, could see in him no great show of wit, or courage to be
feared, or of wealth or honor, in his estate to be envied; And thus whilst
that a greater enemy was feared, he passed unregarded, making himself safe
by contempt, where nothing was so dangerous as popular opinion, and raked up
those coals in security for a time, which afterward set all the Realm on
fire, King Richard being now deposed, was sent after his resignation to Leeds
in Kent, but afterward to Pomfret Castle, where we leave him.

THE LIFE AND REIGN OF KING HENRY THE FOVRTH.
HENRY surnamed Bullingbrooke Duke of Hereford, Ann. 1399 R. 1.
and Son of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster fourth Son of King Edward the
third, beginning his Reign the 29. of September 1399. presently after his
Coronation Created his eldest Son, Lord Henry, being about thirteen years
of age, Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl of Chester, and soon
after Duke of Aquitaine, he made also many new officers: his second Son
Thomas, he made Lord high Steward of England, appointing the Earl of Worcester
his Assistant, during the minority of the said Thomas: the Earl of
Northumberland, Lord high Constable; the Earl of Westmerland Marshall of
England. He was Crowned at Westminster the thirteenth of October following,
being Monday, the day kept in co^memoration of St. Edward the Confessor. The
Dukes of York, Surrey, Albemarle, with the Earl of Gloucester bare the Canopie
over him (which office the Barons of the Cinqueports do at this day execute,
Sir Thomas Dymock was Champion, and armed cap-a-pe, road about the Hall,
challenging any that should gainsay the Kings right to the Crown of England.
The King likewise made Sir John Shirley Lord Chancellor; John Norbury Esquire,
Lord Treasurer, Sir Richard Clifford Lord privy Seal. Upon the fourth of
October the Lord high Steward by his Fathers command sat in the Kings Hall at
Westminster, and caused Proclamation to be made, That any that could claim
any Office at the solemnization of the Kings Coronation, should prefer their
Petitions, whereupon diverse claimed Offices and Fees; And those to whom the
rights of such claymes appertained, were admitted accordingly. The Parliament
was prorogued to the morrow after Saint Edwards day, upon their reassembly, it
was enacted, that the inheritance of the Crown and Realm of England, and of
all the Dominions to the King of England appertaining, should be united, and
remain in the person of King Henry, and in the heirs of his body lawfully
begotten: And that Prince Henry his eldest Son, should be his heir apparent,
and Successor in the premises, and if he should die without issue, then they
were entayled to his other Sons successively in order, and to the heirs of
their bodies, so that nothing was left undone, that the wit of man could
invent, and authority refulcitate, for the setting of the right to the Crown
in him and his heirs. In this Parliament were deprived of their dignities, the
Dukes of Surry, Aumerle* and Exceter; The Marquess Dorset, and Earl of
Gloucester underwent the like sentence. The Inheritance of the kingdom settled,
and some exemplary punishments of some the late Kings ill counselors made; A
motion was made in Parliament, what should be done with the deposed King.
Thomas Merckes the Bishop of Carlisle, a man that used both liberty and
constancy in a good cause; In his The Bishop of Carliles Oration.
private judgment, having never allowed these proceedings, but dissembled his
dislike, till fit time to declare it, being in a place to be heard, and by the
order of the House, not to be interrupted of any, rose up, and with a grave
countenance and settled courage, said; This question (right Honorable)
concerns a matter of great consequence and weight, the determining whereof
will assuredly procure, either quiet or turmoile, both to the public State,
and our particular consciences: Therefore before any resolution thereof be
given, I beseech you to take into your more serious consideration these two
things: First, whether King Richard be sufficiently deposed or not; secondly,
whether King Henry be by Justice and good advisement seated in the succession;
In the first point is to be examined, whether a King by lineall succession,
being Crowned, anointed, and lawfully invested, may upon imputation, either of
negligence or tyranny, be deposed by his Subjects; secondly, what Richard had
omitted in the one, or committed in the other, that might deserve that heavy
judgment, I will not dispute what may be done, in a popular or consular
estate, in which though one bears the Title, and honor of a Prince, yet he
has no Supreme power of a King; But in the one the Nobility, and chief men
of state, in the other, the people have greatest prerogative, in neither the
Prince, of the last sort was the Commonwealth of the Lacedaemonians, who by
that form of government which Licurgus framed, oftentimes fined, sometimes
fettered their Princes, sometimes put them to death, such were the petty Kings
in France in Caesar's time, who were oftentimes arraigned and executed (and as
the Prince of the Leodienses, Ambiorix confessed, had no greater power over
their subjects, then their subjects had over them, and of the second condition
were the Roman Emperors at the first, being subject to the censure of the
Senate; And such are now the Emperors of Germany, whom the other Princes by
their Aristocraticall power, do not only restrain, but sometimes remove, such
are the Kings of Denmark and Sweveland, who are many times by their Nobility
dejected, either into prison or exile; Such are the Dukes of Venice, and some
other free States of Italy; And the chiefest cause why Lewis Earl of
Flaunders, was lately expelled, was for assuming unto himself, the Cognizance
of life and death, which authority was never incident to his dignity; In
these and such like governments, the Prince has not absolute Regalitie, but is
himself subject to that power, which is more transcendent then his, whether it
be in the Nobility or multitude; But if the Sovereign Majesty be in the
Prince, as it was in the first three Emperors, and in the kingdoms of Judea
and Israel, and is now in the kingdoms of England, France, Scotland, Spain,
Muscovia, Turkey, Tartary, Persia, Ethiopia, and almost all the kingdoms of
Asia and Africa; although for his vices, he be unprofitable to the Subjects,
yea hurtful, yea untolerable; yet can they neither hazard his power, nor harm
his Person, either by judicial proceedings, or by force; for neither one nor
all Magistrates have any authority over the Prince, from whom all Authority
is derived, and whose only presence does silence and suspend all inferior
jurisdiction and force. And for power, what subject can assist or counsel, or
conceal, violence against his Prince, and not incur the high and heinous crime
offensonry or treason, it is a common saying, thought is free, free indeed from
punishment of secular Laws, except byword or deed, it break forth into action,
yet the secret thoughts against the sacred Majesty of a Prince, without
attempt, without endeavor, have bin adjudged to death; And somewho in
auricular confession, have discovered their treacherous devises against the
King in person, have for the same bin executed. All laws do exempt a madd man
from punishment, because their actions are not governed by their will, and the
will of man being set apart, all his deeds are indifferent, neither can the
body offend without a corrupt or erroneous mind, yet if a mad man but draw his
weapon upon his King, it has been adjudged worthy death. And lest any man
should surmise that Princes, for the maintenance of their own safety, and
soveraigntie, are the only authors of these judgments; Let us examine with
consideration, the patterns and precepts, to this purpose set forth in the
Sacred text, Nabucadonezer King of Assyria wasted all Palestine with fire and
sword, oppugned the holy City a great while, and at the last expugned it,
slaughtered the King, burnt the Temple, carried away the holy Vessels and
Treasure, and permitted the soldiers with unmercifull cruelty to spoil and
ransacke all the people with fire and sword, and whom from thence had escaped,
and the pestilence had spared, he led captive into Chaldea, and there erected
his golden Image, commanding those that refused to worship it, to be cast into
the fiery Furnace, notwithstanding God calls Nabucadnezer his servant, and
promises him wages for his service; And the Prophets Jeremiah and Baruke did
write unto the Jews to pray for the life of him and of Balthazar his son,
that their days upon earth might be as the days of heaven, and Ezechiel with
bitter terms upbraideth the disloyalty of Zedechiah, for revolting from
Nabuchadnezzar, after homage done unto him; did not Saul put all the Priests to
death, because one of them did relieve holy and harmless David? did he not
prosecute his faithful servant, and dutiful son-in-law, yet was not he
spared, nay protected by him? And was not David much grieved for but taking
away the lap of his garment, and afterward caused the messenger to be slain,
that upon request, and for pity did lend his hand (as himself reported) to
hasten the voluntary death of that sacred King? As for the contrary examples of
Iehu, They were done by express Oracle, and revelation from God, and are no
more set down for our imitation, then the robbing the Egyptians, or any other
particular or privileged commandment, but in the general precept, which all
men must ordinarily follow, not only our actions, but our speeches also, and
our very thoughts are strictly charged, with duty and obedience to Princes,
whether they be good or evil. The law of God ordains, That he that does
presumptuously against the Ruler of the people shall die; And Deuteronomy. 17. 12.
the Prophet David forbids both by, precept and practice, to touch the Lords
anointed, Thou shall not (says the Lord) rail upon the Judges, neither
sbeake evil of the Ruler of the people; And the Apostles do demand further,
that even our thoughts and souls, be obedient to higher powers: Romans 13. 12.
And lest any should imagine, that they meant of good Princes only; they speak
generally of all. And further, to take away all doubt, they make express
mention of the evil; For the power and authority of wicked Princes, is the
ordinance of God. And therefore Christ told Pilat, That the power which he had
was given him from above; And the Prophet Esaias called Cyrus being a profane
and heathen Prince, the Lords anointed: For God turns the hearts even of
wicked Princes to do his will; And as Iehosaphat said to his Rulers, they
execute not the judgment of man, but of the Lord: In regard whereof David
calls them gods, because they have the rule and authority even from God,
which if they do abuse, they are not to be adjudged by their subjects, for no
power within their Dominion is superior to theirs; But God reserveth them to
their sorest trial, horribly and suddenly (says the Wise man) will the Lord
appear to them, and a hard judgment shall they have. The law of God
commands, that the child Sap. 6.
should not be put to death, for any contumely done unto the Parents, but
what if the father be a robber? if a murderer? if for excess of villainies,
odious and execrable both to God and man? surely he deserves the greatest
degree of punishment, and yet must not the son lift up his hand against him,
for no offense can be so great to be punished by parricide; But our Country
is (or ought to be) more dear to us then our Parents; And the Prince is the
father of the country, and therefore more sacred and dear to us then our
Parents by nature, and must not be violated, how imperious, how impious soever
he be: does he command or demand our purses or persons? we must not shun
from the one, nor shrink from the other, for as Nehemiah says, Kings have
dominion over the cattle of their subjects at their pleasure; Does he injoyne
those actions, which are contrary to the laws of God, we must neither wholly
obey, nor violently resist, but with a constant courage, submit our selves to
all manner of punishment, and show our subjection, by suffering and not
performing; yea the Church has declared it to be an heresy, to hold that a
Prince may be slain, or deposed by his Subjects, for any default or disorder
of life, or default in government. There will be faults so long as there be
men, and as we endure with patience, a barren year, if it happen, and
unseasonable weather, so must we tolerate the imperfections of Rulers, and
quietly expect either reformation or alteration. But alas! what such cruelty,
what such impiety, has King Richard committed? examine the imputations
objected, with the false circumstance of aggravation, and you shall find but
little of truth, or of great moment, it may be many oversights have escaped (as
who lives without offending) yet none so grievous to be termed tyranny, as
proceeding rather from unexperienced ignorance, or corrupt counsel, then from
any natural or wilful malice; Oh! how should the world be pestered with
tyrants, if Subjects might be permitted to rebel upon pretense of tyranny?
how many good Princes should often be suppressed by those by whom they ought
to be supported? if they but levy a Subsidy, or any other taxation, it shall
be judged oppression, if they put any to death for traitorous attempts against
their persons, it shall be exclaimed at for cruelty; if they shall do any
thing against the good liking of their people, it shall be proclaimed tyranny.

But let it be that without desert in him, or authority in us, King Richard
must be deposed, yet what right has the duke of Lancaster to the Crown? or
what reason have we, without right to give it him? If he make Title as heir
to King Richard, then must he stay King Richards death; for no man can succeed
as heir to the living; But its well known to all men, who are not wilfully
blind, or grossly ignorant: that, there are some yet alive, lineally descended
from Lionel Duke of Clarence, whose issue by the judgment of the high Court of
Parliament, in the eighth year of King Richards reign, was declared heir
apparent to the Crown in case of Richard should die Ann. 1399 R. 2.
without issue. The claim from Edmond Crouchbacke, I pass over the authors
thereof, themselves being ashamed of so absurd an abuse; And therefore all the
pretense now on foot, is by right of conquest, and the Kings resignation and
grant, and the consent of the many: it is bad stuff that will take no color,
what conquest can a subject make against a Sovereign, where the war is
insurrection, and the victory high treason; King Richards resignation being in
prison, is an act of exaction by force, and therefore of no force to bind him;
And by the laws of this realm, the King by himself cannot alienate, the
ancient jewels, and ornaments of the Crown, much less give away his Crown
and Kingdom. And custom we have none, for the vulgar to elect their King,
but they are always tide to accept of him, whom the right of succession
enables to the Crown, much less can they make good that Title, which is by
violence usurped; For nothing can be said to be freely done, when liberty is
restrained by fear; As for the deposing of Edward the Second, it is no more to
be urged, then the poisoning of King John, or the murdering of a lawful
Prince: we must live according to laws, not examples, yet the kingdom then
was not taken from lawful successors; But if we look back to times past,
we shall find that these Titles, were more strong in King Stephen, then they
are now in the Duke of Lancaster, for King Henry the first being at liberty,
neither restrained, nor constrained, the people assented to this designement,
and thereupon without fear or force he was anointed, and crowned King. Yet
Henry Fitzempresse, having a nearer right to the Crown by his Mother
(notwithstanding his Father was a stranger, and he borne beyond the Seas)
never ceased the prosecution of bloody wars, to the great effusion of blood,
and spoiling the Country, until his lawful inheritance was assured him; It
terrifieth me but to think, how many flourishing kingdoms have been by such
contentions, either rent by intestine division, or subdued to foreign Princes,
under pretense of assistance and aid. This Kingdom has had too woeful
experience of these several mischieves, and yet neither examples of other
Countries, or miseries of our own, are sufficient to make us be wary;
Certainly I fear, it will betide us, as it did to Esops Frogs, who being
desirous to have a King, had a beam given them, the first fall whereof
affrighted them, but when they saw it lie still, they contemptuously insulted
thereon, and desired a King of more active spirit; Then a Storcke was sent
them, which stalking amongst them daily devoured them. King Richards mildness
has bred in us this scorn, interpreting it to be cowardice and dullness of
nature; I dare not say (yet give me leave to suspect) with greater courage,
we may find greater cruelty. And thus have I declared my opinion, with more
words, you may perhaps conjecture then wisdom, yet fewer then the weight of
the cause does require, and I do resolutely conclude, that we have neither
power, nor policy, either to Depose King Richard, or in his place to Elect
Duke Henry; That King Richard remains still our Sovereign Lord, and
therefore it is not lawful for us to give judgment against him. That the Duke
whom you are pleased to style King, has more transgressed the King and Realm,
then Richard has done either against him or us; For he being banished the
Realm for ten years by the King and Council (amongst whom his own Father
was chief) and given oath not to return without special license; He has
not only broken his oath, but disturbed the peace of the Land, dispossessed the
King of his Royal estate, and now demands judgment against his person,
without offense proved, or defense heard; if this perjurie, and this injury
move not, yet let both our private and public dangers somewhat withdraw us
from these violent proceedings.

This speech was diversely taken, as men's affections were diversely hurried,
betwixt hope, fear, and shame, but the most part did seem to stand for Duke
Henry; Whereupon the Bishop was attached by the Earl Marshall, The Bishop
committed.
and committed to the keeping of the Abbot of Westminster, but presently after
to Prison in the Abbey of Saint Albones; His Counsel and conjecture then
contemned, was after approved of (when too late) both in the Kings time, during
whose reign, no year passed without slaughter and executions, but more in the
time succeeding, when within the space of thirty six years twelve set
battles upon this quarrel were fought within the Realm by natives only, and
above fourscore Princes of the blood Royal, fell by each others sword.

It was concluded notwithstanding what the Bishop had spoken, that King Richard
should be kept in a large Prison, with all manner of Princely maintenance; And
if any should attempt to rere war for his deliverance, that he should be
the first man should suffer for that attempt. The Acts of Parliament of the
eleventh year of King Richard were revived, and those of the one and twentieth
wholly repealed, and all in that Parliament attainted, were restored to their
Titles and inheritances, without suing livery; And also to such goods whereof
the King had not been answered, except the rents and issues of their lands.

Hereupon Richard Earl of Warwick is delivered out of prison, and the Earl
of Arundels son restored to his inheritance, others also that stood banished,
or were in prison, recovered their liberty and estate; it was enacted, that
none that came with Henry against Richard, should be impeached or troubled. To
the Earl of Westmerland the King gave the County of Richmond, to the Earl of
Northumberland the Isle of Man, to hold of him by the service of bearing the
Sword, wherewith he entered into this Kingdom before him. Diverse others his
followers he advanced to places of highest note, some for desert, but most to
win their favor, and perhaps projecting a plot for partakers, if times should
change; For in many actions, men take more care to prevent revenge, then to
lead an innocent life.

It is likewise ordered, that the plotters and procurers of the Duke of
Glocesters murder should be strictly enquired after, and severely punished.
And judgment was given against the Appellants of the Earls of Warwick and
Arundel, and that the Dukes of Aumerles, Sussex, and Exceter, the Marquess
Dorset, and the Earl of Gloucester, who were there present, should lose their
Titles of Honor, and forfeit their estate in all the lands, Nobles degraded of
then Titles.
they had which was formerly belonging to the Appellees, and that all their
Letters patents concerning the same, should be surrendered into the Chancery to
be cancelled; and for their own inheritance to be at the mercy of the King.
That they should give no Liveries to retainers, nor keep more then should be
necessary; That if any of them did adhere or assist the Deposed King Richard,
against the Decree of his Deposition; That they should suffer as in high
treason: And for that many of the common people did murmr: That many the
Officers had grievously extorted, either by connivency or secret support of the
Lords, those Officers were removed, and the corruption Officers removed.
purged. Then were Proclamations made, that if any man had by strong hand been
oppressed, by any of the Lords, or by any underofficers to them been wronged
or abused, his complaint proved, the delinquent should give him plenary
recompense. The execution of these Nobles was much questioned. The importunity
of the people, and the persuasions of many great ones drew that way, but
policy was against it, especially the opinion of Clemency, which seemed
needful in a new, not well settled estate. In this Parliament the Lord
Fitzwater appealed the Duke of Aumerle upon points of high Treason; the like
did the Lord Morley to the Earl of Salisbury, and above twenty Appellants
more gaged battle, but the King purposing to lay the foundation of his
government by favor, and not by force, gave pardon and restitution alike to
all, upon security for their allegiance, and moderately admonished, and as it
were entreated the one part, that old griefs and grudges should not be
renewed, but altogether buried; The other part he desired to be afterward
more circumspect of their actions; and for the time past rather to forget, they
ever were in fault, then to remember that they were pardoned; No punishment was
inflicted on any, only the Earl of Sarum and the Lord Morley, who had been in
especial grace with King Richard. These two were committed, but at the
intercession of their friends, they were quickly released, the rest (but
especially the Duke of Aumerle, and the Duke of Exceter, the Governor of
Callice) he received freely to favor, Aumerle was Cousin german to both
Kings. Exceter half Brother to King Richard, and Brother-in-law to King Henry,
as having espoused his Sister the Lady Elizabeth. The greatest crime they could
enforce against them, was their being firm to King Richard, because they did
not only stomach his dejection, but stir more then others, and assay to
raise forces on his behalf. The Dukes confessed the first accusation,
affirming they were unfortunately faithful to King Richard, but as they that
are once false, prove seldom after firmly sound, so they that have approved
themselves true to one Prince may be the better trusted by another. The King
did rather admit this as a defense, then remit it as a fault, affirming that
such examples were not to be misliked of Princes, and did afterward by
courtesy, and liberality endeavor to make them firm and faithful unto him.

This fact was diversely interpreted, according to men's several dispositions,
some admiring the Kings moderation, others disallowing his confidence; And
though these means have to that purpose prevailed with some, yet the common
course may move us to conjecture, that there is small assurance to be had in
reconciled enemies, whose affections for the most part are like to glass,
which being once cracked, will never be otherwise then crazed and ever unsound.
During this time of Parliament held at Westminster, the Archbishop had convoked
a Synod which was held in Paul's Church, to whom the King sent the Earls of
Northumberland and Westmerland, who declared to the Clergy, that they were not
sent to them from the King to require any moneys from them, but to acquaint
them with the Kings resolution, which was to confirm all their privileges and
immunities unto them, and to join with them as they should desire him in the
punishment of all heretics and opposites to their religion received, for which
so doing, he craved but their supplications to God for the safety of him and
his posterity, and prosperity of the kingdom, which was by all there present
religiously promised. Now to palliate all prejudice and hard opinion, which
other Princes might happily conceive of these his proceedings, He dispatched
Ambassadors to diverse his bordering neighbors, intimating to them
respectively, both by what Title, and whose favor he had obtained the
Kingdom; To Rome he sent the Bishop of Hereford, Sir John Cheney Knight, and
John Cheney Esquire to France, the Bishop of Durham, and the Earl of Worcester
into Spain; the Bishop of Saint Asaphs, and Sir William Par into Almaine, the
Ann. 1400 Reg. 2.
Bishop of Bangor, and others; most of these Princes (as in a matter which
little concerned them, either in point of honor or hatred, seemed to take no
notice of what was done, or were easily persuaded, that all was done well. But
Charles of France, was so disquieted with this dishonorable dealing, with his
Son-in-law, that his passion, upon the first relation thereof, put him into his
old fit of phrenzie, but recovered thereof, he provided for to revenge the
injury; Many of the Nobility of France were forward, to set a foot this
enterprise, but especially the Earl of Saint Paul, who had married King
Richards half Sister, so that defiance is sent, and on both sides preparation
for war is made; These novelties much animated the Aquitains (being under the
English command) some were grieved at the infamous blemish of disloyalty,
which was cast upon the Nation; others feared their being made a prey to the
tyranny of the French, against whom they had cause to suspect that England
being distracted by civil factions, either would not attend, or could not be
able to bear them out; But the Burdisians were principally perplexed with King
Richards wrongs, because he was borne and bred in their City. The Frenchmen
generally were nothing displeased at this coffeehouse of the Aquitanes,
supposing that opportunity was now offered, to regaine the possession of the
Duchy of Guian, if either power or policy were seasonably applied. Hereupon
Lewis Duke of Burbon came down Burbon soliciteth the inhabitants of Guyan to
revolt.
to Angiers, who from thence solicited the chief Towns of Guyan by fair
speeches, and large promises, to change their allegiance, but the Lieutenant
there Sir Robert Knowles withal diligence and industry, labored to suppress
the mutinous, to stay the doubtful, to confirm the good, and to retain all
in due obedience and order. But he prevailed very little, his army being but
weak, and the people stiffenecked; Neither did Burbon much prevail, due
consideration being had, how heavy the yoke of France was, above the subjection
of the English, having been well acquainted with the tributes, and taxes,
wherewith the Frenchmen were usually taxed, who had in every Country assigned
Lieutenants and Treasurers, the one to draw the blood, the other the substance
of the slavish-made subjects, whose cruelty and covetousness, laid hold
without exceptions of all, the one tormenting by force, the other by law. Thus
like a ship that the tide drives one way, and the wind another, betwixt
obedience and revolt, stood the Aquitanes, they were willing enough to
displease the English, but most unwilling to endanger or undo themselves by
adhering to the French, upon advertisement whereof, the Earl of Worcester,
with a Company of able and willing soldiers, is sent into Guyan, who not by
unseasonable exprobrating their fault, but The Earl of Worcester sent to Guyan.
by reason convincing it, partly by his wisdom and credit, and partly by his
authority and power, so terrified the wavering multitude, that he won them to
his opinion, and kept their allegiance; The graver sort with respect of duty
and faith, the rest with regard of fear and danger; Then he took their
oaths for obedience unto King Henry, and planted garrisons in places of import
without molestation if they remained dutiful, and yet of force sufficient to
keep them under, if they should attempt to rebel, and then returned to
England, there showing a fair example of moderation, in seeming rather to have
found then made the Aquitanes dutiful Subjects. This stir no sooner stinted,
when another more desperately dangerous did arise; For diverse who had
dissembled, or did repent, the furtherance they had used to the advancement of
King Henry, conspired to compass his destruction, whether for favor to King
Richard (as the nature of man is to behold sudden miseries with the eyes of
pity) or for envy to King Henry, as commonly we can endure excessive fortune
no where so little, as in those that have been in equal degree with our
selves, or whether upon distaste received in the late Parliament, or in
disdain, to see others go before them in the Princes favor, it is
uncertain; many sought to revenge their unjust anger with revolting.

There was in those times an Abbot of Westminster that employed his studies,
not as others, to cloak their idleness, and sloth under pretext of Religion,
making a seeming show of sanctity, and a solid practice of gain and
promotion, but to enable himself for counsel and direction in public
affairs, who for the general opinion of his wisdom and integrity, was in
good credit with King Richard, and had accompanied him in his last expedition
into Ireland. This Abbot calling to mind a speech of King Henry's, when he
was but Earl of Darby, that Princes had too little, and religious men too
much, knowing the saying to be too true, for at that time the riches of the
Clergy was grown so great, that they were beheld by the eyes of envy, and
withal observing the general passages in those times tended to the abridging
of the regular power, wherein lest Avarice should appear openfaced, policy
was pretended, and the excess thought dangerous, both to the King and Clergy,
as likely to cause want in the one, and wantonness in the other, and that
thereupon in Parliament diverse bills were formerly put up in King Richards
time, to repress the increase of Religious possessions, and that inquisition,
and redress might be had against such of the Clergy, as under license to
purchase ten pounds did purchase forty and more per annum, and against such
Ecclesiastical persons, as caused their villainies, to marry free women
inheritable, whereby their lands might come to those religious persons
possession; And that it was there likewise moved, that the King should seize
into his hands, all temporal livings of Religious houses, as being rather a
burden, then benefit to religion. And that upon these, and such like Petitions
the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, in behalf of the Clergy of their
Provinces, were oftentimes enforced to make their solemn protestations in
Parliament; That if any thing were attempted, in restraint of the liberty of
the Church, they would in no wise assent, but utterly disclaim the same, which
protestations were respectively enrolled; So that now partly upon love to King
Richard, and partly upon fear, lest King Henry would be as ready to invade, as
he was to inveigh against the riches of the Church. This Abbot blew the first
coals, and brought fuel to the fire of The Abbot of Westminsters proceedings.
this Confederacy; He invited to his house, upon a solemn feast day in
Michaelmasse term, those that he had sounded, to be most sound to his
purpose: The chief of which, were such as in the Parliament before had in some
sortbeene touched in reputation, although by pardon and reconciliation, the
harm did seem to be closed up: Their names were John Holland Duke of
Exceter, Thomas Holland his brothers son, Duke of Surry; Edward Duke of
Aumerle; John Mountacute Earl of Sarum; Hugh Spencer Earl of Gloucester; John
Bishop of Carlisle, Sir Thomas Blunt, and Magitalon, one of King Richards
Chaplains, who in feature and favor, so resembled King Richard, that he was
afterward affirmed to be him indeed.

After dinner they withdrew themselves into a private Chamber to Council,
where the Duke of Exceter (who was mainly bent to restore, or revenge The Duke
of Exceters persuasions to rebel.
the cause of his Deposed brother) declared to the rest, the allegiance they
had sworn to King Richard, the honors and preferments whereunto they were by
him advanced; That they were therefore bound, both in conscience by the one,
and kindness by the other, to take his part against all men. That King Henry
contrary to both, had dispoyled him of his royal dignity, and unjustly
possessed himself thereof, whilst they stood looking on, and showed neither
the obedience of subjects, nor love of friends; That King Henry by violent
invading, fraudulently insinuating himself into the kingdom of his sole
Sovereign, was but a tyrant and an usurper, and such an one, as it was lawful
for any one, at any time, by any means, to throw down, without respect
whether he be good or evil; for it is lawful for no man, under the pretense
and show of goodness, to draw Soveraigntie to himself; That the examples of
best governed Commonwealths, did not only permit this action, but highly
honored the actor with Statues and Garlands, and also rewarded them with
titles of Nobility, and all the wealth of the suppressed Tyrant: and less he
could not esteem King Henry, that this enterprise, would be very profitable
to the republicke, by extinguishing those wars, that the Scots menaced, the
French prepared for, and the Welchmen had already begun upon this quarrel.
That he did not distrust, but it might be accomplished by open hostility,
but he thought it more sure for him, and safe for the Commonwealth, to put
first in practice some secret policy. And to that purpose it was proposed and
approved, that a solemn justs should be notified to be kept at Oxford in
Christmasse holy days, between him and twenty more on his part, and the
Earl of Salisbury and twenty more on his part, to which King Henry should be
invited; And wen he was therein observed to be most intentive, he should
suddenly be surprised by such, which without suspicion, might at that time be
assembled, both for number and preparation sufficient for the exploit; And
thereby King Richard presently restored to liberty and State.

This devise was at once uttered and approved, and so resolving on the
enterprise, they took a solemn oath of faith and secrecy, to the hour of
death The Conspirators plot.
each to other; And an Indenture Sextipartite was likewise made betwixt the
Lords, wherein they bound themselves respectively each to other, to do the
best of their devoyre, for the destruction of the one, and delivery of the
other King: which was interchangeably subscribed, sealed, and delivered; They
likewise concluded, what forces should be gathered, where and by whom they
should be ordered and placed, and to whose trust the execution of this exploit
should be committed.

In pursuance hereof, the Duke of Exceter came to the King at Windsor, and
desired that he would vouchsafe to honor with his presence, the martial
exercise that was intended betwixt him and the Earl of Sarum at Oxford: and
be pleased to be Judge of their performance, if any controversy should
arise. The King persuading himself, that that was really intended, which was
so formally pretended, easily yielded to his request; whereupon the Duke with
the rest of the Confederates did disperse themselves, and according to
direction made their preparations, and furnished themselves with all things
necessary for the accomplishment of their plot; and at the time agreed upon,
addressed themselves to Oxford, well accompanied with horse and foot, where
they all meet except the Duke of Aumerle.

The King hearing of their departure, determined the day following to follow,
according to promise and appointment: The Duke of Aumerles absence gave just
cause of doubt to the rest of his accomplices, and to be ascertained of the
cause of his stay, they send a Post unto him, but before his arrival the Duke
was departed from his house toward Oxford, but by the way went to visit his
Father, the Duke of York: As they sat at dinner, his Father espied a labell
of one of the sextipartite Indentures hanging out of his bosom, and demanded
what it was, the Son humbly craved pardon, and said it was nothing that any
way concerned him, the young Dukes change of countenance argued some guilt,
which bred some suspicion in York, and thereupon swore and said, By saint
George but I will see it, and then whether The Duke of Yorkes speech to his Son.
upon precedent jealousy, or some present cause to doubt of some strange
stratagem it is uncertain, but he took it away from him by force; The
contents whereof when he had perceived, with a fierce countenance and speech,
he said, I see Traitor that idleness has made thee so mutinous, that thou
playest with thy faith as children with sticks: Thou have already once been
faithless to King Richard, and turnst thou false again now to King Henry?
Thou know in open Parliament I became bound, body and goods for thy
allegiance, and can neither thy own duty, nor my desert, restrain thee from
seeking both our destructions, in faith, but I will rather help forward thine;
And calling to make ready his horse, he prepared to post to the King; It was
no time now for the Duke to consult with his friends, or to consider with
himself, what was best to be done, but takes horse and posts toward Windsor
another way, and was gotten thither before his Father, and pretending some
strange and sudden occasion, causes the gates of the Castle to be locked: and
alleging some cause so to do, takes the keys thereof with him to the King:
in whose presence when he came, he prostrates upon the The Duke of Aumerle
discovers the Conspiracy.
ground, beseeches the King of mercy and forgiveness; The King no sooner
demanded the offense, when he with disturbed countenance and speech,
discovered to the King all the plot, and the names of the Conspirators.

The King neither seemed rashly to believe, nor negligently to distrust the
Dukes relation, and with policy it stood not to entertain the discovery,
with harsh and violent terms. Therefore with gracious speeches he comforted
the Duke; And if this be true said he, we pardon you, if feined, be it at
your peril. By this time the Duke of York is arrived, and admitted into the
Kings presence, to whom he delivers the Counterpane of the confederacy;
which when the King had read, he complained of the unconstant disposition of
those men, whom neither cruelty could make firm to King Richard, nor clemency
to him, but upon mislike of every present government, were desirous of any
change. Whereupon he deferred his journey, and determined to attend at
Windsor, what course the Conspirators would take: knowing right well, that in
civil tumults, an advised patience, and opportunity well taken, are the only
weapons of advantage: and that it is an especial point of policy, to make
use of an adversaries oversight, in the mean time he directs his Letters to
the Earl of Northumberland his high Constable, and the Earl of Cumberland his
high Marshall, and to other his friends, of these sudden and unexpected
accidents. All this time the Confederates hearing nothing of Aumerle, and
seeing no preparation for the Kings coming, were resolved that their
conspiracy was discovered, and calling to mind that once before they had
been pardoned, the guilt of this their rebellion excluded all hope of further
mercy, whereupon they desperately resolved, to prosecute that by open arms,
wherein their privy practices had failed; first they apparelled Magdalen in
princely attire, and gave forth that he was King Richard, who by favor or
negligence of his Keepers was escaped out of Prison, and now implored the faith
and aid of his loving subjects. Then they dispatched messengers to Charles
King of France, desiring his assistance in behalf of his Son-in-law. The
common people commonly changeable, as prone to pity, as before they were too
forward in cruelty, earnestly wished the enlargement of King Richard, and
wishing it, were easily drawn to believe it, in which imaginary conceit, the
presence of Magdalen did strongly confirm them; And so either upon ignorance
of truth, or delight in trouble, they joined themselves in great troops to the
Lords, desiring nothing more, then to be a means by which Richard might be
restored. Then the Conspirators with great force, but with greater fame, as the
manner is of matters unknown, advanced forward in battle array toward
Windsor against King Henry, as against an enemy to the State, they being forty
thousand strong, upon notice of their approach, the King secretly with a small
train, the next Sunday night after New-yeares-day, departed from Windsor
Castle to the Tower of London, and the same night before day the The King
leaves Windsor.
Conspirators came to the Castle, where missing their expected prey, they were
divided in opinions, which way to take, some advised speedily to follow to
London, and not to permit him liberty to unite his forces. That Winter could
not properly be called a let, but in idle and peaceable times: that in
civil dissentions nothing is so safe as speed, and advantage increases more
by dispatching then deferring; that whilst some were in fear, some in doubt,
and others suspitiously ignorant, the City (nay the whole Realm) might be
possessed, and that many armies whose fury at first rush, could not be
resisted, by delays did dissipate, and wast to nothing, others that would
seem to be, but were not, out of a dastardly disposition, persuaded rather
first to set King Richard at liberty, for if their counterfeiting should be
discovered, before they had really his person in possession, the people would
fall from them, which would be to their utter confusion, by their persuasion
they gave over the pursuit, and retired to Colbrooke, and there delayed the
time of action in deliberation, neither being courageously quick, nor
considerately stayed, but subject to vacillation: and thereby began every day
more then other to be vilipended, decreasing both in opinion, power, and hope;
The Mayor of London is commanded by the King, to levy power in arms The Mayor
of London furnishes King Henry with Archers.
for his assistance, who presently furnished him with three thousand Archers,
besides a sufficient guard left for and in the City. Thus assisted the King
with twenty thousand able soldiers from London came to Hounslow Heath, there
staying braved his enemies, and contemning their disorderly multitude, but the
enemies either for fear of their Kings power, or distrust of their own, or
lingering until their expected aid was come out of France, refused to join;
And it is questionable, whether they showed greater courage in setting up the
danger, or cowardice in declyning it, when it was presented unto them, from
thence they went to Sunning near Reading, where Queen Isabel lay: to whom upon
the plain song aforesaid, fame had descanted, that King Richard Queen Isabels
womanish course.
was at Pomfret with an hundred thousand men well appointed, and that for fear
of him, King Henry with his was fled to the Tower of London. All which was as
lightly believed, as it was idly told; Whereupon she defaced King Henry's
arms, and plucked away his Cognizance from those, that as his servants
attended upon her, and having there with somewhat eased her swollen heart, she
with the Lords departed to Wallingford, and from thence to Abington, stirring
up by the way the people, to take arms in aid of King Richard; At length they
came to Cicester, and there took up their lodgings. The Duke of Surry and the
Earl of Salisbury in one Inn, the Duke of Exceter and the Earl of Gloucester
in another Inn, the Army encamped The Inhabitants of Ciceter assault the
conspirators.
in the fields. The Bayliffe of the Town suspecting what was true, that these
guests were no good subjects, besets the house where the Duke of Surry lay, who
with his retinue grown desperately bold, made strong defense against the
assaylants; The Duke of Exceter and his Company had not force enough to rescue
their Companions; Whereupon a Priest of their consort, supposing thereby to
divert the Townsmen from the assault, set diverse houses on fire, but the fire
more inflamed the townsmens fury, and made them insist more obstinately in the
attempt, swearing not to rescue their losses, but revenge them, and quench the
flames with the Traitors blood. The Earl of Exceter, and they that were with
him, perceiving the force of the assaylants to increase, and that it was
impossible for a few so to sustain the fury of so many obstinately bent, they
fled out of the backside toward the Camp, intending to bring the Army to the
reskue; But the soldiers having heard the alarm, and seeing the fire within
the Town, supposing the King was entered with his forces, were struck with a
sudden and causlesse fear, and wanting Commanders of courage to confirm them,
they disbanded and fled; and whilst every one sought to save one, they brought
themselves all to confusion.

The Duke of Surry and his company manfully maintained the fight, with great
bloodshed on all sides, from midnight until three of the clock the next
afternoon, and then being inferior in number and fortune, the Duke and the
Earl of Salisbury were both wounded to death and taken, and that evening
dying, their heads were struck off and sent to the King to London. There were
then taken prisoners, Sir Bennet Sherley, Sir Bernard Brockas, Sir Thomas
Blount, and twenty eight Lords and men of note, who were afterward upon King
Henryes coming to Oxford sent thither unto him, and there executed. The Duke
of Exceter with Sir John Sherley fled into Essex, from whence many times they
attempted to have escaped to France, but by contrary winds were driven back
again* and then lurking in secret places, the Duke was taken and lead to
Plashey, and there beheaded. There wanted not some in those times that made
conjectures that now the Duke of Glocesters death, was brought to be reckoned
for, who by Exceters counsel and contrivance, in the same place had been
wrongfully apprehended. An example for those which square out their actions by
the crooked line of their pleasure, or power to other men's disprofit or
disparagement, but punishment of such impiety, though it be prolonged, does
never fail, but comes at length, and then surely, though perhaps slowly.
This Duke of Exceter was a man of high Parentage, great power, and honorable
Alliance, Created Earl of Huntington in the eleventh year of King Richard now
deposed: in the one and twentieth he was Created Duke of Exceter, and upon the
resignation of the place, and release of the right thereto, by Aubery de Vere,
Earl of Oxford, was made that year Lord Chamberlain of England, and married
Elizabeth the Daughter of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, and Blaunch his
wife; by whom he had issue, Richard that dyed young, John afterward Duke of
Exceter and Earl of Huntington; Edward that dyed without issue, and a Daughter
named Constance, first married to Thomas Mowbray, son and heir of Thomas
Mowbray Duke of Norfolk, and after to John Lord Gray of Ruthyn, he was
popular, and openly praiseworthy, but his secret actions were hardly censured,
he was partaker of all his brothers vices, and of counsel to many of them,
yet somewhat more circumspect and close, and not so much partaker of his
prosperity, as violently carried with the torrent of his misery.

Thomas Spencer Earl of Gloucester fled toward Wales, but in the way was taken
and beheaded at Bristoll, he married Constance Daughter of Edmond of Langly
Duke of York, and had issue, Richard that dyed young, Elizabeth dyed young,
and Isabell who was borne seven months after her Fathers An. 1401. R. 2.
death, and was first married to Richard Beauchamp Earl of Worcester, by whom
she had issue Elizabeth; her second husband was Richard Beauchamp Earl of
Warwick (cousin german to her first husband, by whom she had issue Henry,
afterward Earl of Warwick.

The counterfeit of King Richard flying into Scotland was apprehended,
committed to the Tower, and from thence drawn, and hanged, and quartered, and
one Ferby, and an other of K. Rich. Chaplains with him: diverse others of all
sorts, Lords and Gentlemen, with a great number of common soldiers, were in
other places put to death, insomuch, that the King though otherwise of a
moderate and peaceable disposition, seemed in this too too vindicative of his
own injury, or rather in maintaining the injury that he had done.

The heads of the chief Conspirators were pitched upon poles, and set over
London bridge, lamentable spectacles of heads and quarters of unfortunate
dismembered wretches were visible, in many parts of this Realm, putrefying
above ground, not all for desert, but many to satisfy either the malice, or
want of King Henryes friends; Insomuch that some of those of deepest
apprehension, openly gave forth, That in short time there would be just cause
to wish King Richard again, as being more tolerable, to endure the cruelty of
one, then of many, and to live where nothing, then where any thing might be
permitted, was most safe.

The Abbot of Westminster in whose house, and head this Conspiracy took life
and light, hearing of these disasters, going from his Monastery Grange near
Westminster, was taken with a dead Palsy, and suddenly dyed speechless. And
although in this enterprise, accident gave policy the check, and by a strange
fortune which wisdom could not prevent, overturned the project, yet it is
apparent, that this Abbot first moved the stone, that rolling along, was likely
toturne King Henry out of his Chair. The Bishop of Carlisle was condemned for
his treason, but the extremity of his passion, closed up his days, and
prevented the violence and shame of public execution. King Richard as before
having abdicated his Regalitie, did but a short time enjoy that sweet
security, wherewith he so flattered himself; For first his goods which he
had given in satisfaction of the wrongs by him done, were shared amongst his
enemies, and he removed first to the Tower of London, and then from thence to
the Castle of Leeds in Kent, and from thence to Pomfret, where being kept in
straight Prison, innocent and ignorant of this offense, was notwithstanding
made a partner in the punishment; For King Henry observing how far the Lords
might have prevailed with their late stratagem, for if their stomachs had been
but answerable to their strength, and their bold beginning, had not ended in
faintness and sloth, they might have driven him to an hard hazard, he caused
King Richard to be put to death, thereby to make sure, that no man should
cloak open rebellion, under the color of following sides, nor countenance his
Conspiracy; either with the person or name of King Richard. But whether he
did expressly command his death or no, it is a question, but out of question he
showed some liking and desire to the action, and gave approvement thereto, when
it was done.

The report went that King Richard was Princely served every day, with
abundance of costly dishes, but was not suffered to touch, or taste one of
them, and so perished with famine; I persuade my self this is merely
fabulous, for such barbarous and unnatural cruelty against a King, and a
kinsman, is not likely to proceed from King Henry a Christian; But it is more
probable which a Writer about those times affirms, That King Henry sitting at
his Table sad and pensive, after a deep sigh, said, Have I never a faithful
friend, that will rid me of him, whose life will breed destruction to me,
and disquiet to the Realm, and whose death will be a means of safety, and
quiet to both? And how can I be freed from fear, so long as the cause of my
danger does continue? what security, what hope shall we have of peace, unless
the root of rebellion be plucked up? A Knight called Sir Pierce of Exton
hearing this, with eight of his followers posteth to Pomfret, and pretending
warrant from the King, had entrance into the Castle, where he commanded the
Esquire who sued to King Richard to surcease his service, whereupon when King
Richard being set at Table, saw that he was not served as before with assay,
and demanded of the Esquire the reason of this his neglect of duty therein;
He was answered, that Sir Pierce had brought such order from King Henry,
coming lately from the Court; Richard moved with this act, and answer said,
The devil take thee, and Henry Duke of Lancaster; with that Sir Pierce with
his Retinew before him, entered into the Chamber, and locked the door after
them; Whereupon King Richard spying their drift, and suspecting his own
danger, stepped courageously to the first man and wresting the Halbert out of
his hands, therewith slew four of his mischievous assaylants, and with
admirable resolution fought with the other until coming by the Chair wherein
the King used to sit, in which the cowardly Knight himself was got for his
own safety, he was by him stricken with a Pollax on the hinder part of the
head, who being at the point of death, groned forth these words, Edward the
second my great Grandfather, was in this manner Deposed, imprisoned, and
murdered, whereby my Grandfather Edward the third obtained the Crown, and now
is this punishment fallen upon me his next Successor. This is right for me to
suffer, but not for you to do, your King may for a time joy at my death, and
enjoy his desire, but let him qualify his pleasure with expectation of the
like justice, for God who measures all our actions, by the malice of our
minds, will not suffer this violence to pass unrevenged; whether these words
did proceed from a distempered desire, or from the judgment of his foresight,
they were not altogether idle. Sir Pierce expecting great rewards for his
ungratious service, was frustrate of both, and not only missed that countenance
for which he hoped, but lost that which before he had: so odious are crying
sins, even to him for whom they were committed; Hereupon at first he grew
discontented, and afterward tormented in conscience, and in a rage would often
exclaim, that to pleasure one ungrateful person, he had made both himself
and posterity, infamous and odious to all the world; King Henry with disquiet
held the kingdom during his life, and so did his Son King Henry the fifth, in
whose time by continual war with France. the malice of the humor was
otherwise exercised and spent. But his second Successor, King Henry the sixth
was dispossessed thereof, and together with his young Son Prince Henry
imprisoned and put to death, either by command or connivence of Edward the
fourth; and he also escaped not free, for he dyed not without many and
manifest suspicions of poison; And after his death his two sons were
disinherited, imprisoned and butchered by the Usurper, the Duke of Gloucester,
who was slain at Bosworth field, and so in his person (having no issue) the
Tragedy ended. These are excellent examples, both to comfort them that are
oppressed, and of terror to violent oppressors; That God in his secret
judgment, does not always so certainly provide for our safety, as revenge
our wrongs and oppressions; and that allour unjust actions have a day of
payment, and many times, by way of retaliation, even in the same manner, and
measure they were committed.

Thus as most of the chief Writers do agree was King Richard by violence
brought to his end, although all Historians agree not of the manner of the
violence. He was a man of personage rather well proportioned then tall, of
graceful and comely presence, of good strength, and no abject spirit, but the
one by ease, the other by flattery, were much abused and abased, he deserved
many friends, but found but few, because he bought them by his bounty, not
sought them by virtuous behavior, he was unfortunate in all his actions,
which may be imputed to his slothful carelessness, for he that is not
provident can seldom prosper, for his looseness will lose whatsoever fortune
or other men's labors do cast upon him; He lived three and thirty years, and
reigned two and twenty; in his younger years he was too much ruled by green
heads, little regarding the counsel of the grave, and judicious Counselors,
which turned to the disquiet of the Realm, and his own destruction; He
married two wives, the first was Anne the Daughter of Charles the fourth, and
Sister of Winceslaus King of Bohemia; she was crowned Queen the twenty two of
January 1384. but dyed without issue; The second wife was Isabell, Daughter of
Charles the sixth, King of France, an infant of seven years of age, who after
his death was returned into France, but without Dower, because the marriage was
never consummate for want of copulation; The Lord Henry Piercy had the
conveying of her over in Anno 1401. His dead body was embalmed and seared, and
covered with lead all save the face, and carried to London, where he had a
solemn obsequie kept in the Church of Saint Paul, the King being present, and
the chief Companies of the City: From thence he was conveyed to Langley Abbey
in Buckinghamshire, and there obscurely interred by the Bishop of Chester, the
Abbots of Saint Albones and Waltham, without presence of the Nobility, or
confluence of the Commons, and without the expense of a dinner, after the
celebrating of the Funeral. But Henry the fifth caused his body to be taken
up and removed to Westminster, and there interred amongst the Ancestors, with
Queen Anne his first wife, in expiation of his Fathers violent and unfaithful
dealing, it was not amiss in regard of the Commonwealth, that he was dead,
yet they who were actors in his death, had small reason to reckon it among
their good deeds; These accidents attend such Princes as being absolute in
power, will be too resolute in will and dissolute in life.

Humphry the Son and heir of the Duke of Gloucester, in his return out of
Ireland, where King Richard had left him prisoner, dyed of the plague at
Chester, the news whereof killed the Duchess his Mother: about this time dyed
Thomas Mowbray, the exiled Duke of Norfolk, who had outlived his honor, he
married two wives, both named Elizabeth, the first the Daughter of the Lord
Strange, who dyed without issue, the second Sister and coheire of Thomas
Fitz^llayne, Earl of Arundel, by whom he had issue Thomas and John, Margaret
and Isabell. In this year also deceased John* Duke of Britain, who had taken
a Wife, Mary Daughter to King Edward the third, but by her he had no issue.
Also this year dyed Edmond Duke of York, surnamed of Langley, the first son
of Edward the third, his reputation he kept unblemished, and honor untainted,
he was not careless of good fame, nor greedy of greatness, wary and
circumspect in his behavior, not desirous of other men's wealth, nor too
parcimonious of his own, he did not by obstinate opposing himself against
the torr^ of the time, rashly hazard his fame or fall, but by moderation,
attained safely that degree of praise, which others aspiring unto, by desperate
courses won an ambitious death without further profit; He married two Wives,
the first was Isabell, second Daughter and coheire of Peter King of Castile, by
whom he had issue Edward Duke of Albemarle, Richard Earl of Cambridge, and
Constance first married to Thomas Spencer Earl of Gloucester, and afterward to
Thomas Holland Earl of Kent; his second Wife was Ioane Daughter of Thomas
Holland Earl of Kent, and Sister and coheire of Edmond Earl of Kent, but by
her had no issue.

King Charles though Lucidus per intervalla, yet sensible of dishonor, moved
with his Daughters disgrace, made preparation to invade England, and brought
down his Army into Piccardy, but upon the certain relation of King Richards
death, he gave over the enterprise, and sent over Ambassadors into England,
to treat or rather entreat, that his Daughter with her Dowry might be
restored to him again; King Henry gave them audience, and answer, that he
would speed Commissioners to Callice, to commune and conclude with them, both
of this and other weighty affairs concerning both the Realms, whither he
sent Edward Duke of York, and Henry Earl of Northumberland. The French King
sent the Duke of Burbon and certain others to Bulloigne; These Commissioners
often met, sometimes at one place, sometimes at the other. The Frenchmen
instantly required their Kings Daughter to be restored, without the doing
whereof they had no order to treat of any thing. The Englishmen made a proffer
to have a match betwixt Prince Henry and the Lady, alleging that there was no
disparagement of birth, nor disparitie of years betwixt them, but thereto they
would give no consent, neither would they agree to the proposition of a
perpetual amity; But in the end it was concluded, that Queen Isabell should
be redelivered to her Father, but sauns Dowry, because the marriage betwixt
her and King Richard was never consummate, by reason whereof she was not
Dowable upon the Treaty of the marriage, the surcease from Arms was agreed
upon in King Richards days, for thirty years, which was now mutually
confirmed for the term of these years unexpected.

Shortly after King Henry sent the Lady Isabella under the conduct of Thomas
Lord Piercy, Earl of Worcester in royal estate to Callice, being accompanied
with a brave troop of honorable Personages of both sexes, she carried with
her all the Jewels and Plate which she brought into England, with a great
surplusage of rich gifts bestowed upon her by the King; At Callice she was
received by Valerian Earl of Saint Paul, Lieutenant in Picardy, and by him
conducted to her Father, who afterward gave her in marriage to Charles, son
to Lewis Duke of Orleans, and so was rest, or rather respite of war in France
procured.

But the fire and fury of the late sedition was hardly quenched: when the
Welchmen upon advantage of the doubtful, and unsettled estate of King Henry,
brake forth into a defection, before the King could either lay the groundworke
of his Authority, or the people frame themselves to a new obedience, and having
been taught, that common causes, must be maintained by concord, they sought
by assemblies to establish an association, and to set up their own
principality again; They Created for their Prince Owen Glendor, a fellow of a
turbulent spirit, and factious disposition, and apt to stir up sedition and
strife, and though he was of no great estate by birth, he was stout in
stomach, of an aspiring spirit, and wit somewhat above the ordinary rank of
those untrained people, bold, crafty, agile, and as he li^t to bend his mind,
mischievous or industrious in equal degree, in desires immoderate, and rashly
adventurous, more desirous to do, then circumspect what to do, in his younger
years he was a student at the Innes of Court at London, and being incensed by
a verdict given against him for tithe of land, betwixt him and the Lord Gray of
Ruthin, and by nature being a man not of the mildest disposition; by this
provocation he was made savage and rough, and determined either to repair, or
revenge his loss, by setting the whole State on fire. Also his expenses had
been too excessive, for a great man to continue, which brought him to
bareness, too base for a mean man to endure, and therefore he was
necessitated, to do, or dare something more then ordinary. And more danger he
thought there was in orderly dealing, then in hazarding rashly: and now
opportunity is presented, for troublesome times are most fit for such
attempts. And some likelihood there was, whilst the King and his Nobles were at
variance, that harm might be easily wrought to them both, upon these causes
his desires were founded, and upon these troubles his hopes; But that his
ambitious humor might bear some pretext of honest meaning, he pretended to
his Countrymen, the recovery of their freedom, the desire whereof is so
naturally pleasing; That birds will rather live hardly abroad in the cold
fields, then be daintily dieted in a warm cage, and that now occasion was
fitly offered, or else never to be expected to rid them of their servilitie
(falsely entitled peace, whilst the Kings power was wayning, and the other not
yet fully waxen, either being grown weak by wasting other, neither was there
any odds which did prevail, since the war touched both alike, insomuch that
war would ruin the one, and victory the other, and like the Vulture sitting
on the tree, whilst the Bear and Lion fought, they need not fear prey if
either fell.

Thus he exhorted them to take courage and arms: And for the introduction to
kill all the English within their territories, for liberty, and Lords were
incompatible; Then to resume their ancient Laws and Customs, whereby more
then by arms, Commonwealths are confirmed and continued, established and
enlarged, so should they be a Nation incorrupt, without commixture of foreign
manners, or blood, and so forgetting servitude, they might either live at
liberty, or be lords over others, upon this many flocked unto him, the better
sort for love of liberty, other in hope of booty, insomuch that in short
time, he had under his command a competent army where with to take the field,
and to make some proof of his soldiers resolution, he set upon his old
adversary the Lord Gray, slew many of his men, and took him prisoner, yet
promised him releasement, if he would take his Daughter to wife. But the Lord
at first did not so much refuse, as skorne the offer; saying, He was too old
to be a Ward, to have his marriage obtruded upon him; Well quoth Owen, though
you be not my Ward, yet you are in my ward, and your Ouster le maine shall
cost you double the Marriage money, you shall procure elsewhere. The Lord Gray
seeing no orher means of his deliverance, at length accepted the condition,
and took the Damsel to wife, yet his death preceded his enlargement.

The Welchmen proceed, and break into the borders of Hereford shire, doing
much spoil therein, against whom Edmond Mortimer Earl of March, (withdrawn
for his quiet to Wigmore Castle) with the Gentlemen of the Country to him
assembled, did draw head, between whom was a cruel conflict, not in form of
a loose skyrmish, but making a maine stand, they endeavored by might and maine,
to break and bear down each other. The courage and resolution on both sides
was equal, but the Welsh exceeded in number and direction, for they were
commanded by one known Leader, who with his presence every where assisted at
need, inciting An. 1401. R. 3.
his soldiers, some with shame and reproof, others with praise and
encouragement, all with hope and large promises; But the English had no
certain General, but many confused* Commanders; yea every man was a Commander
to himself, pressing on, or drawing back as courage, or fear did move;
Insomuch that they had taken a great blow that day, by ill-governed boldness,
had not Glendor upon their beginning to rowte, ceased to pursue the execution,
showing himself more able to get a victory, then skillful to use it; But his
men being most wounded, all weary, the night approaching, and being in his
enemies country, may in good judgments quit him from that aspersion. The night
befriended the English, with liberty to retire without running away, no man
appearing to follow the chase. They lost about a thousand men, who sold their
lives at such a rate, that when manhood had done the worst against them, some
mannish or rather divellish women, whose rage and malice are implacable, and
immortal, exercised a vain, but barbarous revenge upon their dead bodies,
first by stripping them, then cutting off their privy parts, and noses, the one
they stuffed into their mouths, and pressed the other between their buttocks,
yet would not suffer their carcasses thus mangled, to be buried, until they
were ransomed by a sum of money, by which unheard of cruel covetousness,
the faction lost reputation and credit, with the moderate sort of their own
people, who had reason to suspect, that it was not liberty, but
licentiousness, which was desired; And that subjection to such inhumane
minds, would be more insupportable then any bondage.

In this conflict the Earl of March was taken prisoner, and kept close in a
dark dungeon, which was cold and dampish, where he was overburdened with
daily wants, and much misery, which were with the greater extremity, and in
more abundance inflicted upon him, that thereby King Henry his kinsman should
be the sooner persuaded to redeem and ransom him, he was earnestly solicited
by many of the Nobility, but principally by his Kinsmen the Piercies, for to
procure his enlargement, but the King could not hear of that ear, he could
have been well contented that his Sisters had been with him there, or that
all three were in heaven; For then the only blemish of his Title had been
covered over: so that it appeared thereby, that he more desired his
destruction, then to procure his deliverance.

Glendor by his prosperous success, was grown now more hard to be dealt
withal: proceeding further to invade the Marshes on the West side of Severne,
where he burnt many Towns, and slew much people, and returned with prey, and
praises of his adherents where ever he came, now he found that weak
resistance, that he seemed rather to exercise a spoil then a war: King
Henry being then detained with his chiefest forces, in an other more dangerous
service, which besides these former vexations and hazards this first year of
his reign had happened unto him: For the Scots knowing that changes of Princes
reigns was a time most apt for depredations, attempts, taking advantage of the
absence of all the chief English borderers, partly by occasion of the
Parliament, and partly by reason of the Pestilence which was that year very
hot in the North parts of the Kingdom; They made a road into the County of
Northumberland, and there did much harm, they surprised the Castle of Waroke
(the Captain whereof Sir Thomas Gray, was one of the Knights of the shire for
that Parliament:) which they held awhile, and then plundered and dismantled it
and departed, in requital whereof the English invaded, burnt and spoiled
certain Islands of Orckney, whereupon the Scots set forth a fleet, under the
conduct of Sir Robert Logon, with direction to attempt as occasion should be
offered, he purposed to have begun upon our Fishermen, but by the way he was
encountered by certain ships of Linne, and the greatest part of his fleet was
sunk or taken. Thus though peace continued still between both the Realms,
yet a kind of theevish hostility was daily practiced, which after brake forth
into open war upon this occasion.

George of Dunbar Earl of the Marches of Scotland, had affianced Elizabeth his
Daughter to David the Son and heir apparent of Robert King of Scots, and in
consideration of marriage shortly to be celebrated: he had delivered into the
Kings hands, a great sum of money for his Daughters portion; But Archibald
Earl of Dowglasse, disdaining that Donbars blood should be preferred before
his, so wrought with the King, that Prince David refused the Earl of the
Marches Daughter, and took to wife Mariel daughter to Dowglasse: Earl George
not being used to be confronted, or sit down with disgrace, could hardly
enforce his patience to endure this scorn. And first he demanded restitution
of his money, not so much for desire to have it, as to pick an occasion to
break his Allegiance. The King refused to make payment, or give promise, but
deluded him with frivolous delays, whereupon with his family he fled to the
Earl of Northumberland, intending by disloyalty, to revenge the indignity:
and to repair his losses by his enemies ruin, if possible the English with
wide and open arms embrace the opportunity, with whose help and assistance
the Earl made diverse incursions into Scotland, where he burnt many Towns,
and slew much people, enriching himself with booty and spoil; King Robert
depriveth the Earl of his honor, seizes all his lands and possessions, and
writes to King Henry, that as he would have the truce betwixt them longer to
continue, either to deliver unto him, the Earl of March and his adherents, or
else to banish them the Realm. King Henry perceiving that these wars
arising, had almost put the peace out of joint, was determined not to lose the
benefit of the discontented subjects of his adversary; whereupon he returned
answer to the Herald of Scotland, that he was neither weary of peace, nor
fearful of war, and ready as occasion should change, either to hold the
one, or hazard the other; But the word of a Prince (was or ought to be) of
great weight: And therefore since he had granted unto the Earl of March his
safe conduct, it were a great impeachment to his honor, without just cause to
violate the same. Hereupon the King of Scots did presently proclaim open war
against the King of England, who thought it policy rather to begin the war in
the enemies country, then to expect it in his own, because that land which is
the seat of war, does commonly furnish both sides with necessary supplies,
the friend by contribution, the enemy by spoil, sending certain troops of
horsemen before him, both to epsy and to induce an uncertain terror upon the
enemy, he entered into Scotland with a puissant army, and with fire and sword
proceeded, sparing nor Castle, Town, or City, but burned Churches and
religious houses, so that in all places that he passed, the spectacle was ugly
and grisly, which he left behind him, being such as commonly accompany the
Chariot of war. They that fled before the army, filled all places with fear
and terror, extolling above truth the English forces, to diminish thereby their
shame in running from them. About the end of September he besieged the Castle
of Maidens in Edenbrough, where Prince David and Earl Douglasse were, the
inconstancy of the one, and the ambition of the other, being the principal
movers of all this loss of blood; During this siege, Robert Duke of Albany,
the Governor (during the King of Scots inabilitie through sickness to manage
the business) sent an Harold to King Henry, protesting upon his honor, that
if he would abide but five days at the most, he would either remove the
siege, or lose his life. The King bountifully rewarded the Harold, and promised
in the word of a Prince, to abide there during the time by him prefixed; But
six times six days were past, but neither Governor, nor other appeared,
Winter came on, victual in the Camp failed, the Country was cold and
comfortless, it rained every day in great abundance, which distemperature of
weather, and want of befitting sustenance, caused the death of many a tall
soldier: it may be these discommodities arising, stayed the Governor from
performing his promise, for policy was against it, to hazard his men to fight,
when Winter and want, two forcible foes, had given the charge upon his enemy,
sure it is, that they moved the King to remove his siege, and depart out of
Scotland unfought with; Both the Wardens of the Marches, were all this time in
Scotland with the King, upon which advantage, the Scots did break into
Northumberland, and did some spoil in Banborough shire, the English quickly
took the Alarm, but the Scots with as much speed retired; But when King Henry
had discharged his Army, the Scots not so desirous of life, as revenge, made a
speedy road into England, under the conduct of Sir Thomas Hahbarton of
Dirleton, and Sir Patricke Heborne of Hales, but all the hurt they did, did
rather waken then weaken the English, and they themselves were somewhat
encouraged, but nothing enriched by what they had got; But Sir Patrick puffed up
with desire and hope, resolved upon a greater exployt; The people which are
easily led by prosperity, in great numbers resorted unto him, but he was loath
to have more fellows in the spoils, then he thought should need in the
danger, therefore with a competent Army of the men of Loughdeane, he invaded
Northumberland, where he made great spoil, and loded his soldiers with
prisoners and prey. They thought of no peril that might be in the retrayt: so
they marched loosly and licentiously, neither keeping themselves to their
colors, or ranks: But the Earl of Northumberlands Vicewarden, and other
Borderers in good array, set upon them at a Town called Nesbyt; The Scots
valiantly received the charge, and the battle was sharp, in the end the Scots
ranks grew thin, as being rather confusedly shouffled together then orderly
composed, which when the Vice warden felt with a company, which he purposely
retained about him for sudden dispatches, he charged them home and rowted
them; Sir Patricke bereaved of counsel and comfort, ran up and down, from
place to place, commanding many things, and presently forbidding them; And the
less of force his directions were, the oftener did he change them, at last (as
it happens in lost and desperate cases) every man became a Commander, but none
a putter in execution, so the ranks loosed and brake, and could not be
reunited: the Victor closely pursuing the advantage, Sir Patricke thinking of
nothing less, then either flying or yielding, but thrusting himself amongst
the thickest of the enemies, honorably lost his life: many of his Lineage, and
the flower of Loughdeane were likewise slain, there were taken Sir John and
William Cockborne, Sir William Basse, John and Thomas Hablington Esquires, and
a multitude of common soldiers; on the English part no great number were
slain, and none of rank or quality.

About this time King Henry sent his eldest Daughter Blaunch, accompanied with
the Earl of Somerset, the Bishop of Worcester, the Lord Clifford, and others
into Almaine, who brought her to Colleyne, where with great triumph she was
married to William Duke of Bavier, Son and heir to Lewis the Emperor.

About the midst of August, the King with a great power went into Wales to
pursue Owen Glendour, but lost his labor, for Glendour had conveyed himself
into his lurking holes amongst the Mountains; The King through the extremity
of foul weather, was enforced to retire, having spoiled and burnt a great part
of the Country round about.

The Scots under the leading of Archibald Dowglasse, about the number of twenty
thousand, with barbarous cruelty entered into Northumberland, making havocke by
the way, but at a place called Homildon they were encountered by the English,
under the leading of Henry Lord Piercy surnamed Hotspur, and George Earl of
March on holy-rood day in harvest, who put them to flight and took prisoners,
after the slaughter of ten thousand of them, five hundred: whereof Mordack
Earl of Fife (the son of the General who in the fight lost one of his eyes)
Thomas Earl Murry, Robert Earl of Angus, the Earls of Atholl and Mentits
were chief, and amongst the slain were, Sir John Swinton, Sir Adam Gordon,
Sir John Leviston, Sir Alexander Ramsey of Dalehowsey, and twenty three other
Knights. Piercy having put his prisoners in safe keeping, entered Tividale
wasting all in the way, and there besieged the Castle of Cockclawes, of which
Sir John Greenlow was Captain, who upon condition that if he were not
relieved within three months compounded to surrender the Castle. The first two
months were past, and no reskue nor likelihood thereof appeared; But before
the expiration of the third month, the soldiers were sent for to attend the
King in his expedition, as before against Glendour, and so they raised the
siege and departed with a plentiful booty.

The French King to back Glendour in his traiterous designs (not so much for
love of him, as hatred to King Henry) sent twelve hundred men of quality, to
be Captains and Commanders, to those rebellious disorderly troops, but the
winds were so contrary, and the violence of the storm such, that they lost
twelve of their best ships with their fraught, and the rest with great
difficulty returned to France. The English deriding the whilst the French
Kings ill success, whose enterprises though they threatened much, yet they
always vanished to nothing. The report whereof so exasperated his resolutions
that forthwith he sent into Wales twelve thousand men who safely landed, and
joined with the Welsh; But upon notice of the English Armies approach,
suspecting their own strength, or their partakers fidelity, amazed and
heartlesse they ran to their ships, and without any service done
disgracefully turned home.

King Henryes Ambassadors lately sent into Britain for the Lady Jane de An.
1403. R. 3.
Navar, Duchess of Britain, the relict of John de Mountford, surnamed the
Conqueror, with whom the King by procurators had contracted matrimony, in the
beginning of February returned with her in safety; The King The King married.
met her at Winchester, where the seventh of February the Marriage was
solemnized. In the mean time Valerian Earl of St. Paul's, out of a malicious
hatred to King Henry with seventeene hundred men of war, from Har^ew landed
in the Isle of Wight, where burning two Villages and some few Cottages, in
token of triumph he made some Knights; But hearing the people of the Island to
have assembled, he hasted to his ships and retired. About that time John
Earl of Cleremont (the heir of Bourbon) won from the English, the Castles
of Saint Peter and Saint Mary, and the new Castle; The Lord de la Bret won
the Castle of Calafyn, of great consequence for An. 1403. R. 3.
the honor of England to be questioned.

The Piercies, Earls of Northumberland and Worcester, with Henry Hotspur,
which in the initiation of King Henryes attempts had been both advisers and
coadjutors about this time began to turn retrograde to obedience, their reason
was, for that the King not only refused at their request, to redeem their
kinsman Mortimer from Glendours slavery, though often by them and their friends
to that purpose solicited; But likewise contrary to the law of the field, and
Martial custom, as they pretended, had challenged as of right pertaining to
him, all such prisoners as by their martial prowess had been taken of the
Scots, either at Homeldon or Nesbyt, of which they formerly (whether of
courtesy or duty by them it was disputable) only had delivered unto him, Morduk
the Duke of Albanyes son; Nevertheless they came to the King at Windsor,
where (of purpose to prove him) they required that either by ransom, or
otherwise he would procure the liberty and enlargement of their cousin german
Edmond Mortymer ^avishly shackled and abused, as they affirmed, for being true
to him; The King made answer; That the Earl of March was not taken prisoner in
defense of his Title, nor in his service, but willingly suffered himself to
be taken, because he would not withstand the attempts of the Traitor Owen and
his Accomplices, and therefore neither would relieve nor ransom him; Whereupon
Henry Hotspur brake forth, and in passion said, The heir of the Realm is
bereaved of his right, and the robber will not allow him part of his own for
his redemption, and therewith the Piercies departed the Kings presence, and
presently procured Mortymers delivery, and to add more weight to King Henrye's
displeasure, they entered into a league offensive and defensive with Glendour;
And by their Proxies in the house of the Archdeacon of Bangor, they agreed upon
a tripartite Indenture, under their hands and seals, respectively to be made,
to divide the Kingdom into three parts, whereby all England, from Severne and
Trent South and Eastward was assigned for the portion of the Earl of March:
all Wales and the lands beyond Severne Westward, were assigned to be the
portion of Owen Glendour, and all the remainder of land from Trent Northward to
be allotted to Lord Piercy; This was devised or advised say some, by Glendour,
(whom they would make a Southsayer) by occasion of a Prophecy, as though King
Henry was the Mowldwarpe, cursed of Gods own mouth, and they three must be
the Lion, the Dragon, and the Wolf, which should divide the land among them.
But the event proved those blind fantastical dreams of the Welsh Southsayers
to be Deviationes non divinationes; In the mean time King Henry, not
acquainted with these Conspiracies, caused a Proclamation to be made,
intimating thereby, that the Earl of March had voluntarily caused himself to
be taken prisoner. That the Rebels having him in their custody, and company,
might pretend some color, wherewith to varnish such conspiracies, as secretly
they had complotted, and contrived against his Crown and him; And therefore
his discretion for his safety advised him not to hearken to any motion for his
being redeemed.

Hereupon the Piercies, assisted with a company of Scots, (whom they by setting
their Scottish Prisoners at liberty had procured) drew to their party the
Earl of Stafford, and Richard Scroope Archbishop of York, brother to the
beheaded Earl of Salisbury, and many others, and with them purposed to join
with the Captain of the Welsh; And to set the better gloss to their
treasonable attempts, they framed by way of accusation, certain Articles
against the King, which they published, and to this effect sent them unto him
in writing.

Articles against King Henry.
1. IN primis, That when he returned from his Exilement, he made faith, only
to challenge and recover his Inheritance and his wives, and not to intermeddle
with the King, nor with his Crown, by reason of which oath, diverse loyal and
good Subjects to King Richard, resorted unto him, not having any treasonable
intent; But after when he saw his power so much increased, that he might do
what he pleased, he wickedly brake his oath, and without any right or
colour-like right, procured himself to be made and Crowned King. 2. Item,
That not only as an arch-Traytor he had imprisoned his own Liege Lord, and
undoubted Master, King Richard, but had caused him to be barbarously
murdered, that so with the grearer security he might enjoy his Masters
Crown and Kingdom. 3. Item, that eversince the death of King Richard, he had
unjustly kept the Kingdom, and the Crown from his Kinsman Edmond Mortymer
Earl of March, who was the Son and heir apparent of Philip the Daughter and
heir of Lionel Duke of Clarence, elder brother to John of Gaunt, Father of the
new usurping King. 4. Item, That when neither present occasion, or need
compelled him, he had imposed diverse Taxes and Subsidies upon the people, to
their great grief and impoverishing, whereof they willingly would but durst
not complain. 5. Item, That no justice could be expected at his hand, because
that contrary to the oath which he had taken when he was Crowned, he had by
Letters sent into sundry Shires, and thereby procured certain Burgesses of the
Parliament, and Knights of the Shire to be chosen, whom he knew would not
fail to serve his turn, as occasion should be offered. 6. And lastly, That
where in honor, and for affinities sake, he ought to have ransomed, or
redeemed his said Cousin the Earl of March, from his lothesome imprisonment,
(being by some of his Privy Council thereto often solicited;) he not only
denied the said request, but falsely and untruly published and declared, that
the Earl himself, was of his own accord become a voluntary Prisoner, to the
end that Traitors and Rebels joining with him, might have somewhat wherewith
to color such Treasons as they would conspire or plot against him.
For which causes, and many other as bad, they defied him, as an usurping
Traitor, and as an utter enemy, they vowed his destruction, and the restoring
of the said Earl to his right.

The King perceiving that nothing but strength of blows could end this strife:
and being persuaded that if he could victoriously suppress this rebellion,
he should bereave his enemies from future hope to prevail in the like
attempts, with a great and well-composed Army, he marched toward the Lords,
forecasting in his March, how to prevent the English from joining with the
Welsh, which with a provident care he prevented, and about Shrowsburie on
Saturday Saint Marie Magdalens eve, he encountered the Piercies, the Scots gave
a brave onset on the King, but he so welcomed them, that scarce one was left
unhurt, but most of them slain, yet the Conspirators stoutly maintained the
fight, and pursued it with that courage and resolution, that they were
confident of good success, until the King with the young Prince Henry, and
some young branches of honorable stocks in their company, (bravely resolving
rather to die honorably then to live disgracefully) put to their strengths to
join with Valor, and with a noble emulation to give fair example each to
other; They so shook the enemies vauntguard, that Hotspur and some other
chief Commanders on his side, and many thousands more were slain. The Earl
of Worcester was taken Prisoner in the field, together with Sir Richard Vernon,
Sir Theobald Trussell, and the Baron of Kindarton, and the rest fled. On the
Kings part (besides the Earl of Stafford, who had but that morning revolted
from the other side) were slain Sir Hugh Sherley, Sir John Clifton, Sir John
Cockayne, Sir Nicholas Gansell, Sir Walter Blunt, Sir John Calverley, Sir John
Massey of Puddington, Sir Hugh Mortymer, and Sir Robert Gausell, all which had
been but that morning before Dubbed Knights, with Sir Thomas Wendesley, who
afterward died of the wounds there received. This Edmond Stafford was third
Son of Earl Hugh, and after the death of Thomas and William, who dyed
without issue, was Earl of Stafford and Lord of Tunbridge, he married Anne,
the Daughter of Thomas of Woodstocke Duke of Gloucester, by whom he had issue
Humphry afterward Duke of Buckingham, and Philip that dyed young, and Anne
first married to Edmond Mortymer Earl of March, but had no issue by him, and
after was married to John Holland Earl of Huntington, by whom she had issue
Henry Duke of Exceter: of common soldiers the King lost about sixteen
hundred, but had made slaughter of above six thousand of the Conspirators
(whereof thirty six fell by his own sword) nevertheless Dowglasse once
unhorsed him, and in his presence slew Sir Walter Blunt, who with diverse others
that day were in all things habited alike to the King, for which so brave
exploit, after Dowglasse by the unfortunate fall of his horse (having broken
two of his ribs) being taken Prisoner, was by the Kings special command
carefully dressed and attended, and ransomelesse, with great commendation set
at liberty, so far can virtue prevail with a grievous foe.

The day following the King with the whole Army with great show of zeal, gave
God thanks for this victory, by his assistance so happily achieved, and then
caused the Earl of Worcester to be beheaded, and many of the Ringleaders of
that rebellion, to be drawn, hanged, and quartered, and their heads placed on
London bridge. This Thomas Piercie Earl of Worcester. and Lord high Admiral
of England, married Elizabeth, eldest Sister and coheire of David Earl of
Athol, by whom he had issue, Henry Earl of Atholl; After this the King sent
Henry Prince of Wales with the whole Army into that Country; But before his
coming, Owen Glendor was abandoned by all his Company, and lurking in the
Woods was there famished, many of his associates were taken, and there put to
death, and the Prince joyfully returned to the King.

Whilst the Prince was in Wales, Henry Piercy the Earl of Northumberland, of
his own accord came, and submitted himself to the King, with many oaths and
protestations of his innocence, as not being once acquainted with any intent of
Treason and rebellion. And though the King conceived not the least thought that
might excuse him, yet for that time he gave him a seeming show of fair
entertainment, and for that time with gentle language and kind countenance, as
it was thought, for that he had the possession of Barwicke Castle, and other
places of strength in his power, permitted to go free, and come at his
pleasure.

The Britons under the leading of the Lord of Castiles spoiled and burnt the
Town of Rlimmoth, and returned unfought with, his speed was the more, and his
fortune the better, but lest he should boast too much of his conquest, the
Western men under the command of William Wilford Esquire by order from the
King, sent forth a Fleet, which arriving in Britain, took forty Ships
laden with Oil, Soap, and Rochel Wines, and burnt about forty more, and then
landed at Pennarch, burning. Towns and Villages six leagues within the
Country, together with the Town of Saint Matthew, and all the building there
three leagues about the same and returned laden with spoil and booty,
sufficient with advantage, to recompense the losses received at Plymmouth.

A Parliament was called at Coventry about the feast of all Saints; but at An
1^ 04. R. 4.
Saint Andrews tide, for want of good accommodation; then the same was
prorogued to London, until the Feast of Epiphany.

The Frenchmen about that time attempted to have ransacked the Isle of Wight,
and to that end set on land one thousand footmen, who having got together a
great booty of cattle; the Ilanders enforced them to their Ships, and to
leave their prey behind them with many of their men, to help pay the damage
done. An unaccustomed surcharging Subsidy of every Knights fee, whether the
same were held by Mesnaltie or otherwise, twenty shillings to the King, every
one that could dispend twenty shillings per annum ultra A biting Subsidy.
reprises, and so upward of what holding soever, twelve pence the pound, and
above twenty pounds in goods according to the rate, twelve pence in the pound,
is in this Parliament granted* but with this caution and protestation, that it
should not hereafter be drawn for a President, and that no Records thereof
should be kept in the Treasury or Exchequer; but that presently upon the
account made, all the Rowles thereof to be burnt.

This year there dyed that ever to be reverenced with grateful remembrance,
William of Wickam Bishop of Winchester, who more affecting by works of Piety
and Charity, to do good unto his Country, then to propagate Posterity, left
behind him many monuments of his zeal to Religion, and love to the Church,
howsoever his primitive name is uncertain and disputable. For the discordancie
of Writers of those times, have left too many scrupulous questions about his
descent and original surname; I have therefore as near (as God has enabled
me) endeavored to clear the point, and what with some search I have found
hereof, to set down the truth; And though to some it may here appear
impertinent, yet I presume it will not altogether prove unprofitable.

In the year of our Lord God 1324. William the son of John Long, was borne
at Witkham in the County of Southampton; This John was Parish Clerk of
Wickham aforesaid, in which place he taught Children to write, and amongst
others his own son, who profited so well, that he attained to the writing
of a very fair hand; a quality in those days much respected, and by the
better sort greatly desired.

From Wickham this John with his wife and family removed to Litchfield: and
there as afore-time, he continued the course aforesaid; And thither amongst
others, did one Nicholas Woodall then Constable of the Castle of Winchester
send a Son of his to be instructed, who upon his return making relation to
his Father, of this William his skill of fair writing, was a means that this
Constable of the Castle procured the said William of his Father, and kept him
together with his own child at School in Winchester, where he learned his
Latin and French tongues, in both which he profited exceedingly.

From Winchester at Master VVoodhalls charge, he is sent to Oxford, where he
applied himself to the study of the Cannon laws, but from them before any
degree in School taken, he, by his Patron was sent for, who being made
Surveyor general of his Majesty's works (a place in those days of more then
ordinary regard) he is by him employed as his Clerk, and in short time grew
so expert therein, that he far surpassed all others, in orderly keeping the
Account book, and fair engrossing of the same: Insomuch, that King Edward the
Third about that time, much addicted to rea^ing magnificent sttructures:
coming in Progress, and lodging at the Castle, heard a large commendation
from the Bishop of Winchester, Adam de Orleton of this William Longs
sufficiency; who affirmed unto the King, that he had diverse times by his
Masters leave, employed the young man, and upon full proof found him every way
of sufficiency to do his Majesty any requirable service; Whereupon the King
told the Bishop, That if without doing wrong to his Master he might obtain
it, he was desirous to have this William to serve him; The Bishop thereupon
persuades and prevails with Master VVoddall, to prefer this his servant to
the King; who more tendering his Clerks preferment, then his own ease, or
service (a course not over frequent in this Age) accordingly tendreth him; whom
the King graciously entertaineth, and presently imployeth him in contriving and
overlooking his Fortifications at Doven and Quinborough Castles, and afterward
made him Surveyor of his buildings at Windsor Castle, and his Houses of
Henley, and East-Hamstead, in all which his employments, he so dexteriously
behaved himself, that he not only got the general good will of his
contemporary officers and workmen, but also the favor of the King and his
Council, and all the Courtiers; of whom by discreet observation he had
sufficiently learned to make use of the time to his best advantage; And having
sufficiently seen proved by others experience that service is no certain
heritage; And that only to depend on the Kings favor, and the peoples praise,
was a brittle and slippery course to run in, wisely therewithal observing,
that spiritual promotions (the wind blowing as it did) was easily to be
obtained, presuming the King would not be offended, if he should enter into
Orders; when thereby preferment was every day promised, no doubt inwardly
feeling himself to be sufficiently called, he entered into holy Function; And
according to the custom of the Clergy men of those times, be was from thence
forth written, and called by the name of William of Wickham, and by that time
was instituted first Parson of Saint Martins in the field; Then made Minister
of Saint Martins le grand; afterward Archdeacon Archiepisc. Parker. fol. 257.
of Lincoln, Provost of Wells, and Rector of Manyhent in Devonshire.

But within short time after notwithstanding his watchful care in his
deportment, to give no occasion of offense (as near as possible to any) much
less to the King, yet he was fallen into the jaws of Envy (a common plague
to Court favorites) and by some or others be traduced to the King; For
over-ambitiously affecting vainglory, as arrogating the renown of the Kings
choice-peece of building to be the work of Wickham only, and for an instance
thereof, they produce a sculpture in a stone of the wall in Winchester Tower
in Windsor Castle, set up at that time, when he was employed in that work
which imported* This made William of Wickham; And this upon the first
relation gave just cause of indignation to the King, as derogating much from
his honor, to have a subject to attribute the building of the wall to his
Sovereigns house to be done at his charge; For which so saying, the King
sharply reprehendeth Wickham; To whom Wickham modestly replieth, that it was
far from his thought to ascribe by that inscription, the Honor of building
that tower to himself, but his own good hap for being preferred to that
work: for not by any indifferent construction, the words may seem to import,
that Wickham built that Tower; But his employment thereabouts, was the cause
of making and preferring of Wickham: for thereby he had gained his Majesty's
gracious favor and countenance.

By this answer the King was pacified, and as it were to make Wickham amends,
and deter his calumniators from further persisting in such their envious
courses, the Kings favor is daily increased toward him; and he is enriched
with many fair preferments; Insomuch that within few years by the assistance
and plotting of John Buckingham Bishop of Lincoln, and Sir Simon Burleigh
Knight, two of his ancient and most intimate acquaintance in Oxford, he had
gotten into his possession, besides the spiritual livings before remembered,
twelve several Prebendships, and by dispensation from Pope Urban; and
qualification by being the Kings Chaplain, he held at one time in his hands,
so many Ecclesiastical livings and promotions, as the value of them did amount
in the Kings books, to the sum of eight hundred seventy six pounds
thirteen shillings and four pence, in those In regist. Simonis, Larg. fol. 12.
days a great sum; such was his behavior, that he held the Kings favor
firm unto him, and the Nobility for the most part, did well approve his
courses: besides these Spiritual promotions, the King had likewise honored
him with many temporal places of both profit and respect, as being his
principal Secretary, Keeper of the Privy Seal, Master of the Wards and
Liveryes, Treasurour of the Kings Revenewes in France, and some other Offices
of less eminency. Now whilst his wealth and worship every day increased, in
Anno 1356. William Edendon Bishop of Winchester departed Fox. Martyr. fo.
1100.
this life, leaving the sea void, whereupon (the King desiring the same) the
Monks of Saint Swithins in Winchester elected William of Wickham to that
sea: But Urban the then Pope, being sufficiently informed of the Elects little
learning but great livelihood, deferd by the space of a whole year the
confirmation of the Election; in which time VVickhams good Angels interceding
for him in the Court of Rome, he is permitted to take the benefit of the
spiritualties, and to have the temporalties in the mean time sequestered. The
King hearing how much the insufficiency of schollership Godwyn. fol. 184.
was obtruded upon Wickham, began to expostulate with him to surcease further
suit for the place, which required to be supplied by a man of more
sufficiency in Clerkship then he was, to whom Wickham replied, that so
please his Majesty to continue his gracious favor toward him, so that he
might obtain his desire therein, he doubted not, but by Gods special
assistance, so to behave himself, that he would supply all defects of
schollership in himself by providing for others means and maintenance, to
make and keep able persons for the service of the State, and the good of the
kingdom; wherewith the King was so taken, that he wrought so effectually;
That in the year 1367. he was consecrated Bishop of Winchester, and was
restored to all profits of that Bishopric, during the vacancie.

Within short time after he was made Lord Treasurer, and was employed and
trusted with all the affairs of the kingdom, and had the disposition of all
the Kings Treasure, which was the occasion to advantage his enemies to strike
the more easily at him; For the King by the new Bishops care being rid of many
troubles, yet took a further benefit thereby: for whatsoever was done that
displeased the Council, or the Commons that was objected to the Bishop,
whereby when the Kings wants were pressing, it was held the best policy at
that time, to give the King a supply, by squeezing the full moistened sponge of
the Bishops coffers. And to yield some color for their so doing; The Bishop is
charged to give account for eleven hundred ninety six thousand pounds
received, during the time of his being Treasurer, besides a hundred thousand
Francks delivered him by Galeaze Duke of Millaine, which must be suddenly
performed, and the more to puzzle him at that very instant, diverse untrue and
feyned cavillations by way of complaint, are put up against him at the Council
board; to the answering whereof he is instantly convented, where whilst he is
intentive to save the bye, he hazarded the loss of the maine, for whilst he
indevoureth to give satisfactory answers to the foresaid calumniations;
Judgment is through the earnest importunity of the Duke of Lancaster, by
William Skipwith Lord chief Justice upon an information of deceit suggested,
awarded in the Kings bench against him, by means whereof, all his temporalties
were seized upon, taken into the Kings hands, and given to the Prince of Wales.

And for a further addition to his affliction by John of Gaunts means, he is
in the Kings name commanded upon pain of his Majesty's high displeasure, not
to come within twenty miles of the Court. The Bishop with a clear conscience,
and a constant resolution, awaits a fitter time to crave review of this
sentence against him, and like a discreet Pilat plays with the wave, which if
he should meet might endanger him, and by giving way thereto, escapes the
hazard; Access to the King he knew not how to obtain, to pacify the Duke of
Lancaster he saw no possibility, and how to procure any course to be taken
for his benefit, he was altogether ignorant; His train therefore he
dismisseth, expecting some few, of whose honest fidelity, and otherwise
sufficiency he had made sufficient proof, these he imployeth to write out
and ballast his accounts, and such answers, as he had made to the accusations
and informations which as aforesaid were exhibited against him, which
perfected, the Copyes thereof, he privately disperseth amongst his brethren of
the Clergy; and such other, as he presumed would without prejudice to his
cause, vouchsafe the reading of them; And therein amongst other things he at
large sets forth the ground, or occasion of the Duke of Lancasters
irreconciliable malice against him, which was thus, Queen Philip wife to
Edward the third upon her deathbed* by way of Continuator histo. Ranulphi.
Confession, delivered unto Winchester, That John of Gaunt was not the lawful
issue of King Edward, but a suppositious son; For when she was brought to bed
at Gaunt of a maiden child, knowing how much the King desired to have a male
issue, she consulted with one of her maids of honor, by whose industry the
Daughter was exchanged with a Dutch woman for a boy, whereof she had been
delivered about the same hour with the Queens; Thus much she confessed, and
withal conjured the Bishop that if the said John of Gaunt should at any time
directly or indirectly attempt or affect the wearing of the Crown, or that
rightfully for want of issue it should devolve unto him; That the Bishop should
dicover the same, and make it known to the King and the Council: afterward
the Queen being dead, and John of Gaunt during the weakness of the King, did
take upon him so much, that he gave just cause of suspicion to the lookers on,
of his ambitious affecting the Crown. The Bishop first in silent and secret
manner by way of ghostly counsel diswaded the Duke from nursing the least hope
of Antiquitates Britt. fol. 257
ever attayning the Crown, and witha^ used his best persuasions to him to
content himself privately to live without further intermeddling then needs
must, with the affairs of the kingdom; And then he would keep unrevealed,
what otherwise by^ye of duty to his profession, he must and would discover,
which would redound much to the Dukes disparagement: This so nettled the Duke,
that passion confounded reason, and in the height thereof he waded as far as
he durst, for fear of undergoing the censure of the Church, for reviling one
of the Fathers thereof; Nevertheless he did not so temper his words but that
he gave just occasion to the Bishop to provide for his safety, and to look
to himself, hereof he gave intimation to the rest of the Bishops.

And so it chanced, that within short time after a Parliament is convoked,
wherein the Kings necessity of present supply of money is much pressed; But the
Clergy unanimously affirm, that without their Brother the Bishop of
VVinchesters presence, they neither can, nor will consult of any thing, and
therefore crave that he might be permitted to come; The King being told that
he being a principal member of the house of Parliament, could not with
conveniencie be excluded; Whereupon he is sent for.

The Bishop upon notice of the Kings pleasure repaireth to London, but in that
obscure manner, and with that small retinue, that he ministered occasion of
commiseration to the beholders; which so incensed the Duke of Lancaster, that
he not only continued his indignation against the Bishop of Winchester, but
openly did oppose all the Bishops in general, protecting and countenancing
Wickliffe, a man of more zeal then discretion, in all his overbold and
undutifull carriages toward them. In the mean time Winchester having
sufficiently learned, that the King now in his declining time, did so dote upon
Alice Pierce, that in a manner he was altogether governed by her, complies
himself wholly to her, and so effectually aut prece aut pretio, or both, made
his way with her, that mauger all what the Duke could say, or do to the
contrary, after two years being kept out of his livings by her means, the
Bishop is restored fully to whatsoever had been taken, or was detayned from
him.

The Parliament dissolved, the Bishop comes to Winchester, where as well by
the Citizens, as Pryor and Covent, he is joyfully with kind welcome, and
general procession received and entertained; Then and there also he receives
of the Executors of his Predecessors Bishop Edington satisfaction for the sum
of one thousand one hundred sixty two pounds ten shillings, and for the
value of one thousand five hundred fifty six rother beasts; three thousand
eight hundred seventie six Weather-sheepe, four thousand seven hundred and
seventeene Ewes, three thousand five hundred twenty one Lambs, and one
thousand one hundred twenty seven Swine, Vbi supra.
formerly recovered against them for d^apidations, before the Official of
William VVitesley Archbishop of Canterbury.

King Edward being dead, and Alice Pierce being banished the Court, John of
Gaunt confident now to work his malicious designs against Winchester, taking
the advantage of his Nephew King Richards infancy, musters afresh his old
forces, and with small addition of some new surmised cavillations reinformes,
and again accuses the Bishop of Winchester; But the Stowe* 562.
Dukes malice was not more discernable, but the Bishops innocence was every
way as perspicuous; By means whereof he escaped all the Gauntish
machinations, and by the help of his truest friend (his open but full purse)
he obtained a general Pardon under the great Seal of England, and together
with that from thenceforth a quiet and unperturbed estate: during which time,
he made preparations to forward his preintended goodly buildings, providing
himself of all needful materials, and furnishing himself with some of them,
and all his chief workmen, for stone-worke out of France; having made trial
of his Artificers skill in their own Country, where at Roven he built a
stately conventuall Church, and furnished the same with all needful and
befitting ornaments and maintenance.

And now having in readiness all requirable utensells, his first work was the
building of a Chapel at Tytchfeid, where his Father, Mother, and sister
Perrot were buried, endowing the same with proportionable maintenance for a
Priest to perform the Ceremonies in those days used, for the benefit of the
souls departed.

He founded at Southwicke in the County of Southampton near the Town of
Wickham, the place of his birth, as a supplement to the Priory of Southwicke a
Chauntry with sufficient aliment, and all other necessaries for five Priests
for ever.

He bestowed twenty thousand Marks in orderly repairing the houses belonging
to the Bishopric.

He discharged out of prison in all places of his Diocese, all such poor
prisoners as lay in execution for debt under twenty pounds, about which he
expended two thousand pounds.

He sufficiently amended all the high ways from Winchester to London, on both
sides the River.

He procured large immunities to the Sea of Winchester, and purchased lands
thereto, to the value of two hundred Marks per annum, with a License in
Mortmaine for two hundred pounds per annum more.

In the eleventh year of the Reign of Richard the Second, he receives from
the Kings own hands the great Seal of England, and is made Lord Chancellor,
whereby it appears that King Richard was not altogether so void of judgment
in the choice of his Officers of eminency, as the Writers of his time would
seem to make him.

At his return from Court, he called all his Officers to account, amongst
whom he remitted the sum of* four thousand pounds, in which they were
arere, and gave to every one of them respectively a general release of all
demands until that time.

He likewise remitted unto the tenements of the Bishopric, all such
customary payments of knowledge money, as were by his Officers affirmed to be
due unto him, in the whole, amounting to the sum of five hundred and twenty
pounds.

But now as if whatsoever was done before had been but an essay of what he
intended to do after, he began to lay the foundation of that magnificent
structure in Oxford, at that and till this time called new College. And upon
the fifth day of March Anno Dom. ^379. he in person laid the first stone
thereof. And afterward having finished and sufficiently furnished the same with
all befitting accommodations, and endowed with proportionable means, for the
liberal maintenance of a Warden; Threescore and ten Students, twelve
Chaplains, three Clerks, sixteen Choristers, one Organist, and all other
Officers requirable, either in Church on College.

He dedicated the same to the honor of God in the memory of the Virgin Mary.
And upon the fourteenth day of April, in the year of our Lord Isa. Work fo.
90.
God 1386. at three of the clock in the morning, he gave the possession
thereof to them whom he had made choice of to be the Warden and Fellows
therein. Leland and Fox in his Martyrologie affirm, that in this place before
it there stood Noetius College, built by Alver at Noetius entreaty, and that
for the affinity of the name, it came to be called New College.

The next year following, that is to say, the 26. day of March 1387. he
likewise in person laid the first stone of the like foundation, near the
Bishop of Winchesters Palace in the Soake by Winchester, called Woolvesey to
Let in manner of a Nursery or Seminary of Grammarians to be fitted and made
ready for his College in Oxford; And in the like space of six years finished
the same, and Dedicated the same as that other in Oxford, and as before at three
of the clock upon the 28. of March 1393. he gave seizen thereof unto the, by
him then chosen Warden, Fellows, and Scholars, John Morris Clerk being the
first Warden, John Milton the first Schoolmaster.

His provident care likewise was such, that he not only finished these two so
renowned Colleges, and every way for the present furnished the same with all
needful and necessary accommodations for the maintenance of them in a most
liberal proportion; But devised and appointed such, and so many directory
rules and statutes, for the well ordering and good government of the same; That
it ministered just occasion to a most reverend Archbishop to write, and give
this true testimony of him and them.

Quae Collegia constructa and absoluta, tam praeclaris legibus statutisque
fundavit, terrisque ac possessionibus ita locupletavit, ut coeteris literarum
Collegia postea statuentibus tanquam exemplar, atque speciem quod imitarentur
proposuisse videatur; Ita quod a praecipuis Collegio^um Oxoniae,
Cantabrigiaeque Patronis postea observatum est, ut in his quae fundaverunt
Collegijs Wickham, jura and statuta paucissimis verbis mutatis verbatim
describerent, Quae res prudentiam ejus singularem, hisque quae in R. P. gessit
muneribus dignum indicavit quod ad bonarum litterarum incrementum in quibus ne
mediocriter eruditus existimabatur, tam accommod^ta and apposita statuta ex
cogitaverit, etc.

Over and above the immense charges of those his two so stately and unparareld
foundation of Colleges, the one for Prophets, the other for Prophets children,
observing by his excellent knowledge in Architecture, that the small Marble
pillars that stood in the body of Saint Swithins Church were of the weakest, to
support the roof thereof, he began where Bishop Edington ended, which was at
the West end of the Tower, where the bells hang, and from thence to the West
end of the Church all along to enclose the Marble pillars with square
hardstone* and raised the roof higher, and beautified the same, adding to the
North and South side thereof, two fair spacious Isles, covering all that part
with Lead, and made a most beautiful Window at the West end, where in colored
glass was deportrayted the line from I^sse to Joseph the Husband of the Virgin
Mary, and further ornately glazed both those Isles with the portratures of all
the preceding. Bishops of Winchester, and stories out of the old Testament in
like glass,

About the later end of his days, the then Pope having sent over his (...) to
persuade the English to join with other Christian Princes, and undertake the
Crusado. This Bishop (through age and sickness, unable and unfit to attempt a
journey of that nature) would not nevertheless be thought backward in the
service, but made his purse supply the defect of his person, and to encourage
others of more agile bodies to the business, he delivered a great mass of
money to be respectively distributed amongst such as would undertake the
service, and wanted wherewith to furnish themselves accordingly for the journey.

And then some few years before his death, he appointed in the lower end of
the South I Will of the body of the Church of Saint Swithins beautified by him as
aforesaid, a decent, and well-befitting Monument for himself, wherein
afterward he was buried; At that time also, at the end of the North I Will, there
he made a commodious place for keeping the Consistory Court.

At length knowing the uncertainty of the day, but the certainty of his
departure out of this life, he made his last Will and Testament; Whereby it
appeared, that notwithstanding all those infinite occasions of exhausting his
In the College Libraty.
Treasure, he thereby expressed to bequeath respective Legacies, to the full
value of six thousand two hundred seventie two younds; for the orderly payment
whereof he had provided beforehand in ready cash in his Coffers, so much
coin besides plate, jewels, books, vestments, atd all manner of utensells of
household and an almost incredible stock and store of corn and cattle.

Amongst other of his Legacies he bequeathed Aliciae Perrot consanguineae suae
centum libras. Quae an eadem fuerit, quam Aliciam Perres, quidem Historiographi
nuncupant, cujus gratia regi reconciliatus fuerat, incertum est, says the
Author, Britanni^arum antiquit: fol. 258. But the contrary thereof appears in
that it is manifest, that William Perrot, who had married Bishop Wickhams
sister, had a daughter then living, whose name was Alicia Perrot.

He likewise left unto Thomas Perrot whom he adopted to be his heir by the
name of Thomas Wickham, one hundred pounds land per annum to him and his
heirs for ever; Together with all the furniture of house and household stuff,
at the time of his decease, that should be in that house wherein he should
happen to depart this mortal life, which was at South-VValtham, now called
Waltham Epis^. in the County of Southampton.

This Thomas Perrot alias Wickham, was the youngest son of William Perrot,
that married Agnes the daughter of John Long and Sibill his wife: for by her
he had three sons, William Perrot who entered into Orders, and lived at Rome
or Roven beyond the Seas, John and this Thomas, who was afterward Knighted by
the name of Sir Thomas Wickham, and married the heir of William Wilkes,
unde, non constat, a^ a Daughter called Alice, by some supposed to be
Abbatesse of Romsey; but untruly, for her name that was Abbates, was Felitia
daughter of Ralph Long, whether brother or Uncle to Bishop Wickham, is not for
ought I can learn determined.

Before I go further, give me leave pro posse, to remove an objection, that
may primafacie seem to cross the credit, of what has been affirmed about
his repayring Saint Swithins Church, when as it appears by the express words
of his Will; that he left the doing thereof to his Executours; But so please
those, that shall seem to move that question, to observe the time of the date
of his Testament, and the date of the Codicill to the same annexed by which it
is appointed by him, that whatsoever he in his lifetime shall undertake that
therewith his Executours shall not be chargeable though by the Will he has
given them order to do it, so that notwithstanding by his Will he appointed
his Executors to repair the Church, and erect his Tomb, yet he lived to do
both himself.

And now after all these so memorable actions, says Bishop Godwine in his
lives of Bishops, fol. 187. he having run the course of a long, happy, and
most honorable life, he ended the days of his Pilgrimage in peace, in Ann.
1404 Reg. 5.
the year 1404. aged above 80. years, when he had sat Bishop of Winchester
37. years.

I have heard it reported, that this pious Bishop did bestow upon the King,
many rich jewels of inestimable price; And to every Officer of household
attending upon the King, to every one of them one Jewel or other.

And that he likewise distributed to every Parish Church within his Diocese
of Salisbury amounting in the whole to the number of six hundred fifty and
four Churches, a decent Satin Cope imbrodered, with a Challice and pix of
silver; whereon was engraven, Ex dono VVilli. de Wickham, but upon what ground
to build the truth of this relation, certainly I know not more then this, That
in Salisbury I saw in the house of Thomas Grafton, one of the Aldermen thereof,
an old Challice whereon was graven Ex dono Guil: de Wickham. And it appears in
Howes Prosequution of Stowes abstract to 561.

That Bishop Wickham gave many things to the King, to his Courtiers, to every
Church in his Diocese, to his own servants, and to his Colleges: And
therefore doubts not, but that he that thus lived, now lives with God, whom
he beseeches to raise up many more such good Benefactors in this Kingdom, to
whose good wish with all my heart, I say, So be it. Amen.

The French afresh cast anchor before the Isle of VVight, and sent Messengers
on shore to demand the delivery of the Isle to their possession, but upon the
stout answer of the Ilanders, and notice of their preparation and resolution to
fight, the French wayde anchor and departed, presently upon this Monseur Lewis
the proud Duke of Orleance, Brother to the French King, in a vai^ glorious
style, sent a Challenge to King Henry, requiring him with The French Kings
brothers challenge.
an hundred men of name and Cotearmour armed at all points, with Spears, Axes,
Swords, and Poniard, to fight the Combat to yielding, every Victor to have his
Prisoner, and his ransom at pleasure, offering to come to Angulesm^, if the
King would come to Bourdeux to defend the Challenge; The King with great
moderation, made him this discreet answer, That his former actions in martial
exploits (he presumed) had sufficiently acquitted him from any the least touch
of cowardice; And withal, that Kings sacred, and anointed as he was, ought
not to be so careless of the people committed to their charge, for any cause
to fight, except for furtherance or maintenance of true Religion, or for
preservation of their rights, or defense of their Kingdoms from depradations,
or to revenge injuryes obtruded, or other such like important causes, neither
was he by the law of Honor or Arms, bound to answer in Camp-fight, except
upon good ground, with his equal in dignity and office; But added withal,
that he would be at all times prepared to repulse, or repress any that
unadvisedly or otherwise should attempt, to offer him or his, either violence
or disgrace. To this the Duke replies, and the King rejoynes, but not without
some unfitting taunts and jeeres, which so nettled the over-passionate Duke,
that with all expedition he falls upon Vergye a Town in Guian, which for the
space of three months notwithstanding many desperate assaults, was bravely
defended by Sir Robert Antfield, and three hundred Englishmen, insomuch that
the Duke after the loss of many men, despayring to carry it: without honor or
spoil returned into France, Presently upon that the Admiral of Britain (who
the year before had taken from the English certain ships laden with wine)
accompanied The French attempt Dartmouth, and are repulsed.
with the Lord du Castile, and some thirty sail of ships attempted to land
at Dartmouth, but were repelled, in which service the Lord Castle and two of
his brethren, and four hundred of his men were slain, and two hundred taken
prisoners, amongst whom the Lord Baquevile Marshall of Britain was one.

Five hundred men of arms, five hundred Crosse-bowes, and one thousand
Flemmings on foot, under the conduct of the Earl of Saint Paul, laid siege to
the Castle of Marcke, three leagues from Callice. Sir Philip Hall the Captain
thereof, with fourscore Archers, and four and twenty other soldiers,
valiantly defended the same, and put the first assault, the next day the French
entered the base court, where they took some kyne, horses, and other cattle;
But they having notice that Sir Richard Aston Lieutenanr of the English pale,
under the Earl of Somerset, with two hundred men of arms, three hundred
footmen, and ten Wagons of ammunition approached, kept close in their trenches,
from whence (being beaten upon by the Bowmen on both sides) they were forced
and fled. The Earl of Saint Paul escaped to Saint Omers, but left threescore
(most men of quality) dead behind, and fourscore Prisoners, besides his Camp
to be rifled by the soldiers, with the spoil whereof they retreated to
Callice; And within five days after their return thither, they issued forth
in hope to have surprised Arde, but by the valor of Sir Manfrid de Boys the
Captain, they retired with the loss of forty of their fellows, whose
carcasses they burned in an old house, that the French should not certainly
know their loss.

The Lord Thomas of Lancaster, the Kings third Son and the Earl of Kent, the
two and twentieth day of May, with competent forces entered the The Kings third
son with some forces land at Sluice.
Haven of Sluice, burnt four great Ships ryding at anchor, and in
expectation to have met the Duke of Burgoigne they landed, but without
resistance, having spoiled the Country round about, they returned to the
relief of Callice, which by the French was besieged, in the way they were
encountered by three Carricks of Genoa, one of which, with wind, tide, and full
sail, bare so hard upon the Ship wherein the Lord Lancaster was, Three
Carricks of Genoa taken.
that hadnot his Pilat been the perfecter, he had been in danger to have
been overborne, for his vessel was much bruised, the fight was doubtful,
until the Earl of Kent bare with them, and then they took the three Carricks
richly laden, and brought them to the Chambet at Rye, where one of them by
misfortune was fired, and to the gain of neither side perished.

The coals of the Northern rebellion was not so clean extinguished, but that
by removing of the ashes, under which they were hid, the sparcks thereof were
afresh discovered. For envy which always lies beneath, staring upward, had so
infected their eyes, that they could not endure to look upon King Henryes so
great prosperity, so that by the watring thereof the soreness was discovered,
amongst whom Henry Piercy Earl of Northumberland, Northumberland and others
with him rebel.
Richard Scroope Archbishop of York, Thomas Mowbray Earl Marshall, the Lords
Hastings, Fawconbridge, Bardolfe, and diverse others conspired at a time
appointed, to meet upon Yorkeswould downts, with all the forces they could
raise, and that under the leading of old Northumberland, they should bid
defyance to King Henry. The Earl Marshall invented, and the Archbishop
contrived diverse Articles of grievances, both general and particular,
wherewith they spared not to calumniate the King, these first they covertly
showed amongst themselves, but afterward sent Copies of them to their* friends
further off with these protestations, that to vindicate such injuries, and to
redress such oppressions, they would if need were not spare the last drop of
their best blood; Then these Articles are set up in the public streets, and
upon the gates and entrances into Churches and Monasteries. That thereby all
men might be thoroughly informed, what they would endeavor to reform, and what
they were thus resolved by force of arms to undertake, hope of reformation of
some, and desire of innovation of others. drew on multitudes of all sides, to
be partakers of this enterprise, to whom the Archbishop clad in abiliments of
war presents himself, and first giving them his benediction and plenary
indulgence to all such as should dye in the exploit, he exhorted some, and
encouraged others to undertake and proceed with him in this enterprise: The
gravitie of his countenance, the persuasion of his integrity of life, and the
opinion of his deep learning, were motives The Archbi* York persuades the
people to rise against the King.
sufficient to induce many to accompany him, and all men to reverence him. His
fervor erected his zeal, but discretion did not direct his fervor, for he too
suddenly discovered their projects; so that the King about to make an
expedition into Wales, upon notice of these passages, turned his march
Northwards. Ralph Nevill Earl of Westmerland with Lord John the Kings second
son, having had intelligence of this insurrection, assembled what forces they
conveniently could, and with the aid of the Lords Henry Fitz-Hughes, Ralph
Eevers, and Robert Vmphrevile; They made head against the Rebels, and coming
into a plain in the Forests of Galtree, they sat down right against the
Archbishop and his retinue, who were twenty thousand strong, Westmerland
perceiving the enemies forces to exceed theirs, endeavored to sow the Foxes
tail to the Lions skin, and by a politic devise to circumvent the
Archbishop, to this end he sent a messenger unto him, demanding the cause why
he a Churchman, and a grave Prelate, should draw so great a confluence of
people together, and in that manner in arms to fright the Kings subjects, and
disquiet his peaceable government. The Archbishop returned answer, That he
neither had or would do any thing, that should tend to the breach of the Kings
peace, but that he always had, and ever would, pray for the continuance of
the same without violation; And that the cause of his being armed, was for his
own defense, whom the King had without just cause threatened, by the
instigations of such sycophants, as in too too great multitude swarmed daily
about him, whereby his access unto him without such forces could not be
obtained, and herewith he sends unto Westmerland a scrowle of the Articles,
desiring his patience to read them, which upon the messengers return; When
Westmerland had read, he made show of approving the Archbishops pious
purpose, promising with his assistance to prosecute the same, and desired some
conference privately to be had* between them; In the mean time acquainting
Lord John the Kings Son with his intention. The credulous Archbishop though a
great Clerk none of the wisest men, was so forward to believe what was
proposed, that he persuaded the Earl Marshall, though most unwilling to do
so, to go with him to the place appointed to confer, where with equal
company they met; The Articles are read, and allowed of, and reformation
resolved on all hands to be endeavored; Whereupon Westmerland seemed to
commiserate the soldiers, being in armor all day, and weary, wished the
Archbishop to acquaint his party, as he would his, with the mutual
agreement, and so shaking hands, in most courtly friendship drank unto him;
Whereupon the soldiers were willed to disarme, and to repair to their
lodgings, which they willingly obeyed, but were no sooner gone when a troop of
horse, which in colorable manner seeming to depart, wheeled about, but
afterward returned, and being now in sight, the Earl of Westmerland arrested
Westmerland circumvents the Archbish. of York.
both the Archbishop and Earl Marshall, and brought them both prisoners to
Pomfret to the King; who was advanced so far with his power, and from thence
marched to York, whither the Prisoners likewise were brought, and the next day
both the Archbishop and the Earl Marshall who dyed a batcheler were beheaded.
The Archbishop took his death with that patience and constancy, that the
common people did not fear to affirm he dyed a martyr. He is beheaded at
York.


From York after the Citizens had been put to their fines and ransomes, the
King departed thence thirty seven thousand strong, every way well appointed and
furnished, and marched toward the Earl of Northumberland; At Durham the
Lords, Hastings and Fauconbridge with two other Knights (being convict of the
Conspiracy) were executed; Northumberland hearing his plots discovered, with
three hundred horse sped him to Barwicke, from whence after he heard that the
King followed him, and had taken the Castle of VVareworth, he with the Lord
Bardolfe fled into Scotland, where they were entertained by David Lord Fleming.
The King gave summons to the Castle of Barwicke, which they refused to obey,
he planted a great piece which being discharged against one of the towers of
the battlement, so shook the same, that presently they within yielded without
composition, Whereupon William Greystocke, Henry Baynton, and John Blinkinsop
Knights, and five others were put to present execution, and many other put into
several prisons; In his return he took in all such Castles and pieces of
strength, as had been belonging to the Earl of Northumberland, or any
Northumberland his partakers proclaimed Traitors.
other his partakers, who were all proclaimed Traitors.

James, Son and heir of Robert King of Scotland, attended on by the Earl of
Orckney, and a mitred Prelate sailing toward France, whither the Prince being
an Infant of nine years old, was sent by his Father for to be instructed in
safety, was taken by certain Mariners of Norfolk, and presented Anno 1408.
The Prince of Scotland taken prisoner, and sent to the Tower. 1408.
to the King at Windsor, the thirtieth of March 1408* from whence the Prince
and Earl were sent for safe keeping, to the Tower of London, but the Bishop
escaped: Roger de Walden, the tennis ball of Fortune, who had lived to turn
the wheel of chance about its circle, dyed this year: who from a mean
descent, and but a poor scholar in the now but new founded College of Saint
Maryes in Oxford, at length came to be Chaplain there, and stepping on by
degrees, attained to the Deanery of York, and finding the ginge of the Court,
made such use thereof, that he thereby got to be Lord Treasurer of England;
And after that Richard the second had banished Thomas Arundel Archbishop of
Canterbury the Realm, who in Parliament before but minus just, was attaint of
Treason, Walden was Consecrate and authorized Archbishop of Canterbury, and so
for the space of two years continued, but after a deposall of King Richard,
Arundell by King Henry was restored: and by Pope Boniface, Roger was pronounced
an intruder, who now being Archbishop, but without a Bishopric, as
afflictions seldom come uncoupled; he was called to account for the
Treasurership, and though he produced his quietus est, yet were all his
temporalties seized, and he imprisoned, yet from thence being delivered by the
charitable condition of the now Archbishop, he led a private life, but then
was made Treasurer of Callice, and then with great hope of rerising, he was
promoted to be Bishop of London,

The Duke of Orleans besieged the Towns of Burgh and Bloy in Gascoygne with a
great power, but after eight weeks siege, and the loss of six thousand of his
soldiers, he raised his siege and departed.

The Lord Camoyes being arraigned before the Earl of Kent, for that day Lord
high Steward (upon supposition without ground, which some forgetful persons
had accused) to have plotted the Kings surprisall by Pirates upon An. 1408. R. 9.
the Thames, in a ship whereof he had the charge, was by his Peers acquit, and
restored to his goods, lands, offices, and the Kings favor.

Northumberland and Bardolfe after they had been in Wales, France, The Lord
Camoys arraigned for treason, is acquit by his Peetes. 1408.
and Flaunders, to raise a power against King Henry, returned back to
Scotland, where after they had continued a year, with a great power of Scots
and strangers, they returned into England, recovered diverse Castles formerly
belonging to the Earl, to whom great multitudes of people resorted, wherewith
they came into Yorkshire making great spoil: by the way making proclamation,
That they were come for the comfort of the English, and the relief of the
Commonwealth, therefore willed all that desired to retain their liberty, to
repair unto them.

Sir Thomas Rokesby high Sheriff of York, having leavied the power of the
County, with that only upon Bramham More, gave the Rebels battle wherein
Northumberland was slain, Bardolfe taken, but wounded to death, and the rest
put to flight. This Henry Earl of Northumberland had two Wives, the first was
Margaret daughter of Ralph Lord Nevill of Raby, by whom he had issue Henry
Hotspur slain as before; Sir Thomas Piercy, Sir Ralph Alane that dyed young;
His second Wife was Maud, daughter of Thomas Lord Lucy, by whom he had no
issue.

This year a Parliament began, in which the Commons preferred a Petition 1410.
A Petition by the Commons against the Bishops. Means to maintain, Earls 150*
Knights 1500 Esquires 6200. and an hundred Hospitalls of new to be erected.
to the King and the upper house, therein expressing their desire, that the
King might have the temporal possessions which the Bishops and Clergy
consumed in unnecessary courses, the value thereof they pretended would be
sufficient maintenance for one hundred and fifty Earls, one thousand five
hundred Knights, six thousand two hundred Esquires, and one hundred Hospitalls
for maimed soldiers, besides them already erected; They craved likewise, that
the Clerks convict should not be delivered to the Bishops prison, and that
the Statute made in the second year of the King against Lollards might be
repealed, which ^avoured of too much curiosity and too little charity.

The King upon advised consideration justly distasting their distempered zeal,
denied their Petitions, and in person commanded them, upon pain of his
indignation, from thenceforth not to presume to trouble their brain about any
such business; In this Parliament the King moved in every year wherein there
was no Parliament kept, to have allowed him a tenth of the Clergy, and a
fifteenth of the Laytie, the Bishops assented, but the Commons would not agree
thereto.

Sir Robert Vmfrevill the Vice Admiral of England, with ten men of war
entered the Forts in Scotland, lying there fourteen days together, landing
every day on one side or other, taking great preyes, and doing greater hurt,
he burnt the great Gallyot of Scotland, and many ships over against Lies, and
carried away with him fourteen tall ships, laden with Corn and Sir Robert
Vmphrevill termed Mend-market.
other Staple commodities, which at his return he sent to the Markets round
about, which brought down the prises of all things, and purchased to him the
name of Mend-market. He likewise made a road by land into Scotland, and burnt
Iedworth, and most part of Tiuidale. An. 1411. R. 11.


The King Created his son Thomas, Duke of Clarence, his brother Thomas
Beufort third son of John of Gaunt, he Created Earl of Dorset, The Prince
of Wales removed from being President of the Council.
upon some distaste taken, not given against the young Prince, whose youthful
carriage was well-neere censured, by the graver sort to be wild and uncivil:
the King removed him from the place of President of the Council, and gave it
to his third son John; and giving too much ear to his severer Councillors
against the said Prince, he made (at leastwise) was said to make a
misconstruction of all his actions, seasoning the same with jealousy, that he
ambitiously affected the Crown, and that he would not stay the leisure of time
to have it after the Kings death, but would use some stratagem, (though with
the loss of his Fathers life) to take present possession thereof.

To feed this suspicion, all the youthful actions of the Prince are set on the
tentours, and exemplified beyond the degree of wildness, his merriments are
termed ryots, his company are styled Swaggerers, his behavior branded with
dissoluteness, and his words and gesture dangerous; Whereupon a vigilant eye
is carried over him, and a note taken of all his followers and Fashions. The
Prince all this while innocent, would not seem (though he had intelligence of
thus much) to take notice of these passages but continued his sporting,
merriments, with his old companions, amongst whom (as in all ages some such
have been) there were those that would dare, and do many forgetful prankes,
the blame whereof still was laid on the Prince his shoulders, whose greatness
was able to countenance their great follyes which he many times (and not
unwillingly) did undergo. At length being informed that two things were
necessary for a Christian to observe, Credit and Conscience, the one for his
acquaintance sake, the other for his own, and that he would be censured to
be cruel to himself, if that he neglected the opinion of others, as relying
only on the assurance of his own Conscience, he resolved to give this
satisfaction to the world, that such as had given his Father intimation of any
sinister intention on his part, were in an error undeniable, he first by
several Letters of his own, both inditing and writing, expostulated with
such, as he knew to be guilty of doing ill offices betwixt him and his
Father, laying before them the unsufferable wrongs done unto him, that had
devised to discredit him in those misreports; And lastly upon the nine and
twentieth day of June, with a train of all his friends and servants, the
number whereof was very great in a garment of blew Satin wrought all with
eyletholes of black silk, at every hole the needle hanging, by which it was
sowed, and about his arm a thing in fashion of an hounds collar, stooded with
S. S. of gold, and the tyrots of the same, From hence was the honorable
ornament of the collar of S. S. worn by these in eminent places in remembrance
of this Princes reconcilement to his Father devised. The Prince presents
himself to the King.
he came to the Kings Court at Westminster, where being entered into the Hall,
according as he had formerly given direction, not one of his company advanced
himself (though often by the Kings servants requested) above the fire place,
he himself attended by the Kings own servants only, was brought into the
presence; the King (though afflicted with sickness) caused himself in a
Chair to be brought into his privy Chamber, where in presence of but three or
four of his Privy Council, he demanded of the Prince, the cause of his so
unwonted habit and coming; to whom the Prince with a most humble and filial
reverence upon his knees, said, Dread Sovereign and dear Father, thus
prostrate upon my knees, as a loyal subject and dutiful son, with all
befitting humiliation and requirable reverence, I render my self in all things
liable to your command: having of late received information, by the relation of
some nearest about your Majesty, that my forgetful carriage has given unto
your Grace cause of suspicion, that my heart should not be right, nor my
affections toward your highness so placed, as duty and obedience on my part
do require and expect, and being assured, that if I knew any one within your
kingdom of whom your highness should justly have cause to stand in fear that
I hold my self bound by the law of God and nature, to punish that person, and
quantum in me est, to remove the cause of doubt from your heart, now much more
then is that requirable by the laws of filial respect, and natural
proximitie of blood and duty, That I your son and servant, in my own
particular am tide to prevent the least suspicion of unthankfulness in me,
and danger thereby to you, should for the better securing your quiet, tender my
life as a forfeit to your Highness, for giving cause of question of loyalty
to you, that that being taken away, and the ground of your jealousy being
removed, you might with more security, enjoy the quiet of an undisturbed
mind. To this end having this morning with a Christian preparation of humble
Confession, and receiving the blessed Sacrament of the blood and passion of my
Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, fitted my self to be made a sacrifice, to
exterminate your jealousy, I have presumed to approach your seat of Majesty;
And therefore I humbly beseech you to ease your heart, and hereby to take
assurance of your future quiet, by giving a period to my grief, and your
fear; and to give this poniard a passage through my heart (and therewithal
reached his dagger, holding it by the point to his Father) for I desire not to
live longer, then to be justly thought to be what I am, and shall ever be,
your faithful and obedient vassal, which if you shall vouchsafe to do, here
in the presence of your Nobility, I do clearly forgive the fact in this
world, and before God and his holy Angels at the day of Judgment will acquit
you thereof; These words had that penetrating property, and the King therewith
was so moved, that casting the dagger away, he rose out of his Chair, but for
weakness not able to stand, fell upon his sons neck, and with many tears
embracing him, confessed that his ears had been too open to receive reports
against him, and promising by the love of a Father, and the faith of a King
from thenceforth, that misreport should not cause his disaffection, The King
and Prince reconciled.
he assured him, that at the next Parliament, those whisperers against him
should undergo the censure of their Peers, and stand at his mercy for the
scandalls by them against him raised, to whom the Prince replied, God forgive
them, I do; And so with general content they departed.

And from that time forth, until his departure out of this life, the King
enjoyed a calm from all hostility, either at home or abroad; And to express
his great thankfulness to God for this his greater goodness to him, he took
upon him the Crusado, and complaining of the inconsiderate courses of the The
King having taken upon him the Crusado prepares accordingly.
Princes of Christendom, that were more intentive to waste, and weary one
another with intestine and uncivil broils, rather then to join hand in hand,
to oppose themselves against the common enemy of their faith the Turk; whereto
he was persuaded that in conscience they were bound; To animate them therefore
by his Example to do the like, he made great preparations, both of men,
money, and ammunition for that service, with intention the next Spring to set
forward to recover Jerusalem. To this purpose he called a Council in the White
Friars, where order was taken for the provision of all things ready for the
voyage by Sea to the Holyland, and convoked a Parliament to begin on
Candlemasse day following; And now all things being ready for the expedition
against the Turks; The enemy of mankind seized upon him with an Apoplexy, the
fits whereof diverse times, would show him dead to those about him, but ever
upon his recovery again of sense, he would demand for his Crown, which he
appointed all the time of his sickness to be placed upon a cushion in his
sight; At length the extremity of the disease increasing, he lay as though
all his vital spirits had forsaken him, insomuch that those that were about
him deemed him dead, and covered his face. The Prince having notice thereof,
came and took away the Crown, and departed, the Father reviving, demanded
for the Crown, and hearing that the Prince had taken it, he sends for him, and
angerly demands his reason of his so doing; to whom the Prince with a
confident brow made answer; That in his, and all men's judgment there present
he was dead, and then I being next heir apparent to the same, took it as my
indubitat right, not as yours but mine, well said the King and sighed, fair
Son what right I had to it God knows; But says the Prince, if you dye King,
I doubt not to hold the garland, as you have done with my sword against all
opposers; Then says the King, I refer all to God, but charge thee on my
blessing, and as thou will answer it before the Tribunal of God: That thou
minister the Laws indifferently; that thou ease the oppressed; that thou avoid
Flatterers; that thou do not defer Justice, nor be sparing of mercy, but
punish the oppressors of thy people, and suffer not officers to make their
places the staulking horses to their will, so shall thou obtain favor of God,
and love of thy Subjects, who whilst they have wealth, so long shall thou have
obedience, but being made poor by oppression, will be ever ready to stir,
and make insurrections; And so turning about, said, God bless thee, The death
of Henry the fourth.
and have mercy on me, and so he gave up the ghost in a Chamber of the Abbot
of Westminster, which the servants there called Jerusalem, the twentieth of
March 1412. in the fortieth six year of his age, when he had An. 1412. R. 12.
reigned thirteen years, six months, lacking ten days; His body with all
Funeral pomp, was conveyed to Canterbury, and there solemnly buried.

He had been twice married, his first wife was Mary, Daughter and coheire of
Humphry de Bohan, Earl of Hereford, Essex, and Northampton, and Constable of
England, she died anno 1394. and was buried at Canterbury, he had issue by
her;

Henry his eldest Son, who succeeded him. 1.


Thomas Plantagenet his second son, who was Created Duke of Clarence, 2.
in the eleventh year of his Fathers reign, he was slain at Bongy bridge in
France* by the Duke of Orleance, this Thomas took to Wife Margaret Daughter of
Thomas Holland Earl of Kent, and Widow of John Beuford, Earl of Pomfret, who
dyed without issue.

John Plantagenet his third Son, was made Duke of Bedford, the eleventh year
of his Fathers reign, and Earl of Richmond, and Lord of Kendall; 3.
he married to his first Wife Anne, Daughter of John Duke of Burgondy, who
dyed without issue, his second Wife was Ioquellyne Daughter of Peter Earl of
Saint Paul, and by her had no issue, she was after married to Richard Woodvile
Earl Rivers, and had issue Elizabeth Wife to King Edward the fourth. This John
as Constable of England, determined the Controversy betwixt Reignold Lord Gray
of Ruthen, and Sir Edward Hastings, for the bearing of the arms of Hastings,
and at Vernoyle together with the same Town, took the Duke of Alanson
prisoner, and with the loss of two thousand one hundred private soldiers,
slew of the advers part, five Earls, two Vicounts, one and twenty Barons,
seven thousand French, and two thousand five hundred Scots, and dyed at Paris,
and the fourteenth of September 1435. was buried at Roan under a sumptuous
Monument, which when Lewis the eleventh King of France being advised by some of
his Nobles to deface; He said, What honor will it be to us, or you, to
demolish the Monument, and pull out thereof the bones of him, whom in his
lifetime, neither my Father, nor your Progenitors were of ability to make
budge one foot backward, wherefore let his body now rest in quiet, which if
he were alive, would have disquieted the proudest of us all, such respect to
well-got honor, he obtained in the minds of his enemies. An. 1412. R. 13.


Humphry Plantagenet fourth Son, who was styled, Humphry by the grace of God,
Son, Brother, and Uncle to Kings, he was Duke of Gloucester, Hennalt,
Holland, Zealand, and Earl of Penbrocke, Lord of Freezland, 4.
great Chamberlain of England, Protector of the Realm, and Defender of the
Church of England; He had two Wives, the first was Iaquet, Daughter and heir
of William Duke of Bavaria, who being before betrothed to John Duke of Brabant,
was divorced from this Humphry before issue.

His second Wife was Elianor, Daughter of Reignold Lord Cobham of Sterburghe in
Surry, who for Sorcery and poisoning, was much defamed, he was found murdered
in hss bed at Bury in Suffolk, and was buried at Saint Albones in
Hartfordshire.

Blaunch King Henryes eldest Daughter was married as before at Collen to William
Duke of Bavaria, after his death she was married to the King of 2.
Arragon, and afterward to the Duke of Bar, but dyed without issue.

Philip, second Daughter of King Henry was married to John King of Daughters.
Denmark, but dyed without issue.

King Henry was of a middle stature, well proportioned, and formally compact,
of a quick conceit, and active spirit, of great resolution and courage. In his
later days with courtesy and affable carriage, he purchased a great deal
more love and respect amongst the Nobility, then he had in all the beginning
of his reign, with his austeritie, and rigorous courses, and redeemed from the
common people a great portion of good opinion, which he by his impositions and
taxes had formerly lost among them; But if their payments had been more, and
his exactions greater, in my opinion they were not undeserved, that were so
ready to alter the due course of succession, to join hands with him in the
deposing of the rightful and natural Leige-Lord, whose only fault that could
be truly objected was this, that he had been too bountiful to his friend,
too merciful to his foes, but most unrespective of himself.

THE LIFE AND REIGN OF KING HENRY THE FIFTH.
HENRY the Fifth surnamed (of the place of his Ann. 1413 R. 1.
birth, which was a Town in Wales, upon the River of Wye Monmouth,) took upon
him the Regality over England, the twentieth day of March, and the next day was
proclaimed King; and the ninth day of April he was Crowned King at
Westminster, by Thomas of Arundell Archbishop of Canterbury, with all usual
rites and Ceremonies. After the solemnity past, the next day he caused all
his wonted Companions to come into his presence, to whom he used these words;
It is sufficient, that for many years together, I have fashioned my self to
your unruly dispositions, King Henry takes leave of his ancient companions.
and have (not without some reluctation, in the very action) followed you in
your debosht and swaggering courses, I have to my sorrow and shame, I may say
to think of it, irregularly wandered, in all rude and unseemely manner, in the
vast wilderness of riot and unthriftinesse, whereby I was made almost an
alian, to the hearts of my Father and Allies, and in their opinions violently
carried away by your means from grace, by keeping you company, therein I have
so vilified my self, that in the eyes of men, my presence was vulgar and
stale, and like the Cuckoo in June, heard but not regarded. One of you being
convented before the Lord chief Justice for misusing a sober-minded Citizen, I
went to the public Sessions house, and stroke him on the face, and being by
him deservedly committed to the Fleet, (for which act of justice I shall ever
hold him worthy the place, and my favor, and wish all my Judges to have the
like undaunted courage, to punish offenders of what rank soever) it occasioned
my Father to put me from my place in Council, appointing it to be supplied
by my younger Brother, how often have I by your animation committed thefts,
even on my Fathers and my own Receivers, and robbed them of the money provided
for public appointments, to maintain your midnight revellings, and noone
beselings; But it is time now to give a period to these exorbitant, and
unbefitting courses, and to salve the wounds my intemperance has made in my
reputation, and to turn over a new leaf, and not only to decline the company
of such misleaders of yours, but desert their conditions, of all therefore I
straightly charge and command you, and every one of you, that from henceforth
until you have settled your selves in a more orderly course of life, and
redeem your pawnd credits, with fair and regarded behavior, hereafter upon
pain of forfeiture of your heads, not to appear in my presence, nor to come
within the verge of my Court; For what is past I will grant you my pardon, and
withal, because I know sometimes necessity will cripple honesty, I will allow
each of you a competency of maintenance, as a stock to begin a course whereby
to live orderly hereafter; But take heed of relapsing, for the least complaint
of ill-behaviour of any of you hereafter, if proved, shall forfeit your
pardons, and exclude my favor for ever: which resolution of mine I will never
break, and so without attending any reply he departed. And afterward, to
show others the way, he disposed himself to a new course of deportment,
qualifying his carriage with such magnanimous and heroical virtues, as might
best become the Person of so great a Potentate, and knowing that howsoever we
ought to live by laws, and not by examples, yet man's nature is presently
carried away with imitation, he preferred to places of judicature, and public
administration of Justice, such as were truly noble, wise, discreet, modest and
temperate, well able to command others, and to rule themselves; out of which
he selected a choice number of the ablest brains, to be of his Privy
Council. He industriously indevoured to reform the pride, covetousness,
sloth, and other abuses crept among the Clergy, enjoining them to more regular
life, and sincere serving of Almighty God, commanding the reformation of
disorders tenovation of discipline, punishment of irregularitie and amendment
of life; And with moderate severitie caused such administrations of the laws
that he made, both spirituality and laity, tractable to the performance of
their several duties; Then to establish safety at home, that he might not
be molested, either with the Welsh or Scots, he erected diverse
Fortifications, and Bulwarks upon their Frontiers, and furnished them both
with necessaries, and able Commanders, so that he was still powerfully ready
to suppress all insurrections or rebellions, that might be attempted from
thence.

Immediately after Easter he called a Parliament, but in the interim, most The
forwardness of the Nobility to tender their homage
of the Nobility before his Coronation, an usual course never before done,
did strive to outgoe each other in forward, tender, and doing their homage, all
most willingly swearing to him Allegiance and doing fealty; On Trinity Sunday
the Obsequies for his Father were solemnly performed, himself and most of the
Nobility being at Canterbury at the offering present.

Shortly after he caused the body of King Richard the second to be brought from
Langley to Westminster, and there buried with great solemnity by his first
wife Queen Anne.

About this time the opinion of Wickliffe notwithstanding the care taken to
suppress it by the wisdom of the Parliament, and the courses appointed in
their Convocation-house by the Clergy, began to be generally dispersed,
insomuch that Sir John Oldcastle in right of his Wife called in courtesy Lord
Cobham. a man of a bold and resolute disposition, and a stout Soldier, was
convented before the Archbishop of Canterbury, for broching and maintaining
many novell positions, against the received tenet of the Church, the tenor The
Lord Oldcastle convented.
of whose accusation, was by Henry Chichley then Archbishop of Canterbury
presented unto the King, who in commiseration of the Knight, required the
Prelates, that if he were a strayed sheep, to reduce him to the fold, rather
by gentle courses, then severitie. And himself afterward sending for him did
earnestly exhort him to reconcile himself to God and the Church, and to submit
himself to the constitutions thereof, but Sir John first by word of mouth then
by writing, seemed to justify his assertions, affirming that his Grace was
supreme head, and his competent judge and no other; And that he would come to
his purgation with an hundred Knights and Esquires, or fight in defense of his
just cause in open Lists.

But the King by his Council being informed, That by the law, accusations
touching questions of belief, ought to be tried by the spiritual
jurisdiction, he sent him to the Tower of London. And afterward upon the three
and twentieth day of September, a Convocation was held in the Church of Saint
Paul in London, and upon the five and twentieth day following, another in the
Hall of the Blackfriars, in which places the Lord Cobham was fully heard, to
vent a spittle of diseased opinions, and thereupon was by the Oldcastle
escapes out of the Tower.
Archbishop convict of heresy, and denounced an heretic, and remaunded back
to the Tower, from whence he escaped and fled into Wales.

The King keeping his Court and Christmasse at Eluetham, was advertised, Ann.
D. 1414 R. 1.
that diverse had conspired against him, his brethren and the Bishops, and that
Sir Roger Acton Knight, John Brown Esquire; and John Beverley Clerk, were
with a great company in arms on the backside of Saint Giles assembled for that
purpose; Whereupon the King secretly posted to London, and drawing some
Companies of soldiers together, he laid an ambush near the place, where the
Conspirators about twelve of the clock at night, were appointed to make their
randevous, where accordingly many of them were taken, and some slain. The
Mayor of London likewise according to directions, gave order to every Alderman
in his several Ward, to apprehend all suspicious persons, himself about ten
of the clock at night in person, took at Bishops gate at the sign of the axe
there, one John Burgate a Carpenter, and seven other whom he sent to the King,
before whom they confessed, that they were of the Confederacy with Sir John
Oldcastle, to have fought with the King in Saint Gyles field; The Captain
likewise of the commotion being taken confessed the treason, and appeached many
of their accomplices. The gates of London were watched and guarded, so that none
had passage without the word; by which means all their partakers there, were
kept from coming forth; diverse being met upon the ways coming from sundry
parts of the Realm upon examination confessed, that they came to meet their
Captain the Lord Cobham; But he could not be heard of, though the King by
Proclamation offered a thousand marks to him that could bring him: besides
large Privileges to the Town wherein he should be attached: Amongst other
there was one William Morley of Dunstable taken, who discovered what was the
chiefest motive of that Commotion, which was pride and ambition ^f preferment,
for he being but a Maltster, had two horses trapped with g^tharnesse led after
him, and a pair of guilt spurs in his bosom, an ornament for none in those
days, under the degree of a Knight to wear, for he it seems was promised
and assured himself of Knighthood at the least. The ringleaders were attaint
of heresy by the Punishment of treason and heresy.
Clergy, and of high Treason by the Laytie, whereupon they were condemned to
be hanged, and burnt gallows and all, which judgment was accordingly
executed upon Sir Roger Acton, and eight and twenty of the Rebels in
Smithfield, most of the Prisons in and about London, were filled with these
lob-lords, The cause of this nickname came.

In this time the Parliament continuing, the King (as his Father was before
Ann. 1414 Reg. 1.
was much importuned, by some somewhat infected with Oldcastles opinion, and
therefore not well pleased with the greatness of the Clergy, to suppress the
religious houses of this kingdom, because as they affirmed, they were made the
nurses of idleness, and cages of unclean birds; To divert this storm into
another quarter; it was advised that Chicheley Archbishop of Canterbury, should
set on foot the Kings title to France, which thus he sets forth.

Philip the fourth called Philip the fair, eldest brother of Charles Earl of
Valoys, was the forty sixth King of France, he married Ioane Queen of
Navarre, and by her had issue three sons.

Lewis surnamed Hutyn, or Mutyneere.

Philip the Long, and

Charles the Fair and only Daughter Christened.

Isabel which was married to your Majesty's Predecessor Edward the second, who
survived her three Brothers, who successively one after the other had enjoyed
the Crown of France; But after the death of Charles, upon a pretended
fundamental Law of that kingdom Philip of Valoys, son of Charles the
younger Brother of Philip the Fair, endeavoring to exclude all females from
Sovereign inheritance laid hold of the Imperial Diadem, against whom in
right of his Mother, Edward the third opposed and quartering the arms which
was semi de luces, proclaims his Title to be King of France and England, and
in Hostile manner entered France with Banners displayed, where he performed
those honorable exployts, that whilst any Records last can never be
forgotten, there he continued victorious during the time of Valoys, and left
his Son the black Prince to prosecute his Claim, who to his eternal
commendations, so that he took not only John the French King prisoner, but
braved Charles the fifth at his great City of Paris to his teeth and
unanswered, the wise King thinking it no good policy to meet a roaring Lion in
the field; And had not God on whose will depends all things, stopped this ever to
be renowned Prince in his course, by stopping of his breath, the question had
long since been decided, and England had totally brought France to subjection,
but he being dead and his Father but a short time surviving, left his
grand-sonne an infant to finish what his Father and grandfather had so happily
commenced and so gloriously had continued: But unless the Lord build the
house, the workmen labor but in vain, so the Lord displeased with the
disorder of those times gave France a time to breathe, and gather strength; and
opportunity to Charles the sixth to change the arms of France, from the Semi
de luces, to three Flower-de-luces, yet is the Title to France the same that it
was before, and though your royal Father otherwise employed, did not prosecute
the claim, yet he did not disclaim the right, but has to you (for whom I
rest assured God has reserved victory) both left that, and the means to
obtain it. Then went he on learnedly and pathetically, refelled that unjust
surmise of the Salick-law, both by reason and example, and first whereas in
terram Salicam mulieres ne succedant, was the text whereon they build their
position, he proved that that was made in Germany, in disdain of the
dishonest manners of the German women, and had no relation to France, for that
Pharamond whom they affirm to be maker of that Law, deceased above three
hundred and fifty years, before the Frenchmen were placed beyond the river
Sala, the one dying at 426. and the other being seated there Anno 805. And for
example he cited Pepyn, Hugh Capet, and others, who neither had right, nor
colour-like right to the Crown of France, but as heirs general, as their
own stories manifest, he fortified likewise his assertions An. 1414. R. 2.
with Scripture out of the book of Numbers, When a man dies without a Son,
let his inheritance descend unto the Daughter; to this he added, that if the
King would be pleased to advance his Banner in France, to challenge his
rightful inheritance, the war being just, the cause good, and his Motives
for the King to lay claim to the Crown of France.
claim undeniable, his Clergy would furnish him of their own free gift, with
such a mass of money, as never subjects at one time presented King with the
like; This motion took on all sides, and the offer of money wherewith to pay
the soldiers so pleased the King, that nothing was now thought of but the
conquest of France. He begins therefore to alter the bearing of his
Semy-de-luces, and quarters what the then French King bare, and then sends
the Duke of Exceter; the Archbishop of Dublyn, the Lord Gray, the Lord high
Admiral, and the Bishop of Norwich, with five hundred horse, Ambassadors to
Charles the sixth, to require in peaceable manner, Ambassadors sent into France.
(for the avoiding the effusion of Christian blood) the surrender of the Crown
of France, with the members thereof, which if the King would yield unto, then
King Henry would be pleased to take to Wife Katherine the Daughter of Charles,
and endow her with all the Dutchies belonging to the Crown of France; But if
Charles refused so to do, that then Henry would with fire and sword, enforce
it from him or lose his life; The strangeness of this message amazed the King,
and amazed his Council; They craved time to answer: And the King of France
promised to speed Ambassadors with his answer unto the King of England. The
Dolphyn like one that cuts another man meat and his own fingers, having wit
but wanting discretion: deriding as it were the King of Englands youth, as
deeming him fitter for play, then to attempt matters of such consequence: sent
him a tonne of Tennis balls; which King Henry distasting, promised with an
oath, before many months were past, to toss such iron Balls among them, that
the best arms in France should be unable to hold a Racket to return them.
And forthwith due provision being made, and all things prepared, he draws
together his forces, and in his absence to secure the Scots and Welsh, from
attempting his prejudice, he appoints an Army to attend the Marches, and
upon all alarums to be ready, he ordaines his Mother-in-law Ioane Daughter of
Charles King of Arragon Governor in his absence, and whilst he is
dispatching, Richard Earl of Warwick, the Bishops of Salisbury, Bath,
Ambassadors sent to the Council at Constance.
and Hereford, with the Abbot of Westminster to the general Council appointed
at Constance; The Dolphyn sent as Ambassadors (the King of France being weak
and sickly) The Earl of Vandome with others, who having audience, the
Archbishop of Burges made a long Oration in praise of peace, and dissuaded
war, concluding with a tender of the Lady Katherine with a sum of money,
and some Towns of no great wealth or importance; the King of England feasts
them at his own Table, and entertaines them royally, and took order with the
Archbishop of Canterbury, to give them answer to this effect; That if the King
of France would not give his Daughter, and with her the lands and Seignioryes
demanded, that he would not disband: but with all extremities that follow war
prosecute his right, and never give over till he had recovered his Patrimony,
the King avowing the Archbishops speeches, promising by the word of a Prince to
perform the same, and to visit them sooner then they should have cause to bid
him welcome, and so he dismissed them. All things prepared and in readiness
for France; as the King (having shipped his men) was ready to go on shipboord
himself, a plot of treason is discovered, plotted by Richard Earl of
Cambridge, Henry Lord Scroope of Masham, Lord Treasurer, and Sir Thomas Gray of
Northumberland, and plotted and procured by the French agents; These he caused
to be apprehended, and upon examination they confessed the treason, and the
sum of money by them for that end received and were immediately executed.
This Richard of Connesburgh, second Son of Edmond of Langley married Anne,
Sister and heir of Edmond Mortymer Earl of March, and had issue, Richard
Earl of Cambridge, Duke of York, and Isabel married to Henry Lord Burcher
Earl of Essex; Some gather, and I must confess it is very probable, that the
Earl of Cambridge was not so mercenary, as to commit Treason for money, but
would have confessed the cause; had it not been for fear to bring the Earl
of March in question: That his Title was by him and others intended to have
been set on foot, and strongly backed by Sir John Oldcastle and others, if not
as before prevented, but hereby were the sparks discerned, that afterward
blazed so ragingly over the Lancastrian family. The windblowing a fair gale
King The King arms in France.
Henry weighs Anchor, and with his whole fleet puts to Sea, and on our Lady
Eeve landeth at Caux, where the River of Said runs into the Sea: without
resistance being come on shore, he caused Proclamation to be made, that none
upon pain of death, should take any thing out of any Church or Chapel, or
offer any violence to any that should be found unarmed, and that no quarrel
should be renewed, whereby any affray may be made; Then lays he siege to
Harflew, the Lords of Toutevile and Gaucourts Harstew besieged.
being within the same; The French King advertised of the arrival of the
English, sent the Constable, the Seneschal, and Marshall of France, with others
to the Castle of Candebecke: from thence as occasion should be offered, to
relieve Harflue; But the English ceased not daily to forage, whilst the Duke
of Gloucester, to whom the ordering of the siege was committed, ceased not to
plye the battery, and so kept them in the Town waking with continual assaults.

The Captains of the Town, perceiving that they were not able long to hold
out, the walls being undermined, and the Earls of Huntington and Kent, possessed
of the breast: and thereon had pitched their Colors, about midnight sent to
crave parlie; Whereupon the Duke of Exceter, the Lord Fitzhugh, and Sir Thomas
Erpingham were sent, with this instruction, that if they would not instantly
surrender the Town without condition, there should no time be s^ent in
communication, yet upon the Lords importunity the King gave them^ve days
respite, in which time, if no reskue came, they should surrender the Town into
the Kings hand, and for their lives and goods to stand to the Kings mercy;
Hereupon the Lord Bacquevile was sent to the French King to acquaint him with
the composition, but no relief coming, Harstew taken.
they surrendered within three days, the soldiers were ransomed, and the Town
sacked; The Duke of Exceter was appointed Captain thereof, who left there for
his Lieutenant Sir John Falstaff with fifteen hundred men; The dead of Winter
approaching, the King caused all those soldiers, that had not paid their
ransomes, to swear to render themselves prisoners at Callice, at the feast of
Saint Martine following: Whereupon two Forts which stood on the North side of
Harflue, which till then expecting aid stood out rendered likewise; and then
having repaired the Bulwarcke, and furnished it with all things necessary, he
marched to Porthouse, intending to pass the River there, before the Bridges
were broken.

The Dolphin had taken order, to carry into places of safety, all kind of
provision, which might be useful for the relief of the English; But King
Henry kept on his way enforcing the Towns as he went, to supply his wants,
and coming to the river of Soame, he found all the Bridges broken, and the
fourds stakt, he marched to Arams in that orderly manner, that the enemy durst
not offer to impeach passage, until he came to the Bridge of Saint Maxenae,
where thirty thousand French appearing, he pitched his Camp, expecting to be
fought with, where the more to encourage his men, he gave the order of
Knighthood to John Lord Ferrers of Groby, Reignold Graystocke, Percy Tempest,
Christopher Morisbye, Thomas Pickering, William Hadvesten, John Hoshalton,
Henry Mortymer, and diverse others; But not perceiving the French to have any
great will to come on: he marched by the Town of Amiens, to another place of
strength called Bows, and there stayed two days, expecting battle: and from
thence marched to Corby, where the Peasants in multitudes (relying upon their
The Peasants assailed King Henry.
numbers, and the aid of the garrisons of Corby) gave the King a Camisadoe,
and having forestald the passage in a straight, with certain men of arms sent
from the Dolphyn, they charged the right wing of the English which was led by
Sir Hugh Stafford Lord Bourchier, so hotly that they won away his Standard:
But the same was again recovered by John Bromley of Bromley, who being a
Commander in Staffords Regiment, not only made the retiring troops to stand,
but renewing the fight, with his own sword, slew him that had the Lord
Bourchiers Colors, and taking them up displayed the same, with sight whereof
the English were so much encouraged, that they fell in with that vehemence upon
the French, that they presently rowted and fled, the Lord recompensed the
valiant exploit of his kinsman, and for the same gave to him an annuitie of
fifty pounds per annum, assigning Pro recuperatione sigilli sui.
out of all his lands in Staffordshire, as by the enrolment of that deed is
extant, the Seal is a Cheuron charged with a Mullet about the same engraven
Signa Hugonis de Stafford militis.

The same night after the retreat sounded, the King found a shallow fourd
betwixt Corby and Peron, never spied before, at which the night following he
passed safe: making what march he could without Alte toward Callice.
Notwithstanding the extremities which attend his Army, marching through an
enemies Country, where no forage could be found, and small store of pillage,
yet did the King so strictly observe the due performance of his first
Proclamation, against Church-robbing, that hearing one complaynd of to the
Marshall, for having stolen, or as the phrase of them is, ^ade booty, of a
silver Pix out of the Church, he not only caused the same to bec restored, but
the soldier also to be hanged, which due justice at that time done, kept the
rest from offending in that kind, and provoked the people under hand to relieve
his men with necessaries.

The French King hearing that King Henry had past the River Soame, assembled
his Council, whereof thirty five appearing, to the point in question, thirty
of them advised, that the English should not depart without being fought with:
but five (whereof the Dolphin was none) were of a contrary opinion, and though
they assented not, yet by the major voices enforced to consent: Montjoy the
French King at Arms, was sent to defy the King of England, as an enemy to
France, and to tell him he should be fought with: King Henryes answer was,
he was unwilling to provoke battle, yet too confident in God to fear it, by
whose good leave he would proceed in his journey: and if the French, or any
other would oppose him, if he could not find his way, he would make it, or
his Sword should fail him: and so suffered the Herald being well rewarded to
depart. King Henry having notice, that he must of force pass another River in
his way, over which there was but one passable Bridge, he commanded certain
troops of horse to go thither on the spur, and some foot Companies to speed
thither to second them, and to make good the same, until the Army should come.
When the horse came thither, they found the French very busy in breaking down
the bridge, but perceiving the approach of the English, they left their work
and fled; the passage being cleared, upon the two and twentieth of October. the
King of England passed over with his Army.

The Duke of York that lead the reareward, sent word to the King, that his
skowtes had discovered the enemy to come on apace, whereupon he made a stand,
and gave direction to the Officers, what course to take, to acquaint their
soldiers, that to fly would but cause a lingering death, for their flight
would be out of the pan into the fire, there being no place of refuge near,
and the way thither (if any were) was altogether unknown: And so mounting on
horseback, he road from place to place, assuring them of his resolution to
live and die with them, and so with his word and countenance he so encouraged
his men, that they were generally resolved to conquer and dye, and accordingly
prepared themselves, reconciling themselves to God by confession, and receiving
the Sacrament, and lastly embracing each other with constant protestations, to
be firm and faithful one to the other: so upon Friday the five and twentieth
of October, being derayned in order of battle, they attended the signal to
begin.

The Constable of France divided his Companyes into three battles; The order
of the battle of the French.
In the first were placed eight thousand men at arms, four thousand Archers,
and fifteen hundred Crossebowes, the wings consisting of two thousand two
hundred men at arms, this battle was led by himself, the Dukes of Orleance
and Burbon, the Earls of Ewe, Richmond, and Vandosme, the Lord Dampier, the
Admiral of France, the Marshall Bouciqualle and others.

2. The middle battle wherein were more men at arms, was commanded, by the
Dukes of Bar and Alanson, and by the Earls of Vawmont, Salings, Blamont
Grantpee, and Rusey.

3. In the rereward were all the remainder of the French forces, and guided by
the Earls of Marle, Dampmortyne, Fauconbridge, and the Lord Lonray, Captain
of Ards. The Frenchmen thus ordered, consisting of sixfold the number of the
English, thought of nothing but the booty they should get: In the mean time,
King Henry having made choice of a piece of ground, half fenced on his back
with the Village wherein they had encamped the night before, on both sides
having strong hedges and ditches, began there to order his Battles; But first
he appointed an ambush of two hundred bold Archers, which should upon a
watchword given, make a whole flight upon the flancke of the enemies horse;
The Vantgard consisting of Archers only, was conducted by the Duke of York,
who out of a brave and The Duke of York leads the English Voward.
heroic courage had made entreatie for that place; with him were the Lords
Beamont, Willoughby, and Fanhop: The maine battle was led by the King in
person, which consisted of Bill-men and some Bowmen; With him were the Duke of
Gloucester his brother the Earl Marshall, Oxford and Suffolk.

The reareward was led by Thomas Duke of Exceter the Kings Uncle, consisting of
all sorts of weapons, the Horsemen as wings guarded the Companies on both sides.

The King to prevent the fury of the French Cavalery by the direction of the
Duke of York, appointed diverse Stakes, shod with iron at both ends, of six
foot long, to be pitched behind the Archers, and appointed the Pioners to
attend, to remove them, as occasion and direction gave order; These things thus
ordered, public prayers were humbly made, and the onset was expected, which
was presently performed by the French horsemen, who gave on with a furious
bravado, but Sir Walter Orpington who was thereunto The beginning of the sight.
appointed, giving the signal, the English gave a great showte, whereupon
according to direction, the Bowmen behind the hedges sent forth such a shower
of Arrows, that the French horse thereby galled, were so unruly, that their
riders could not force them to give against the ditch, to come at those that
were beyond the ditch; Whereupon the Vantguard of the English, taking advantage
of their disorder made forward, and powered another volly of arrows among them,
by means whereof the horse thoroughly gald, either cast their riders, or through
their unrulinesse so opened their ranckes, that the right Wing of the English
horse gave in so manly, that the French horse disorderly retiring, broke the
array of their foot, who were miserably The disorder of the French.
trod down, and disrancked with their own Company; by this the two hundred
Bowmen having emptied their quivers, flung away their Bows, and with their
swords fell upon the enemy, and wresting from them their own weapons, made a
great slaughter among them: and putting the voward to flight, they adventured
upon the middle battle, which the French The English having rowted the van
charge the battle of the French.
horsemen taking in scorn to be charged with so small a company, bravely gave
on; Whereupon the English made show of retiring, but when they came where the
Bowmen were Impaled with the armed stakes, they made a stand: and as the
horsemen were thereby gored, they were ready to help them forward with a pat on
the pate with a brown Bill to their last home, whereby their maine battle
was broken and disordered, when presently the King with his maine battle gave
on with that resolution, that himself in person charged the Duke of Alanson,
by whom he was in his carere wel-nie unhorsed: but afterward he having slain
two of the Dukes men that were nearer to him then the Duke, he charged the
Duke again, and with his sword beat him from his horse, whom the Kings guard
notwithstanding the King cried out to the contrary slew outright, and with his
fall the maine battle of the French first gave ground, then turned their
backs, and lastly flung away their weapons and fled. The Kings rere being come
up, they all fell upon the rereguard of the French, which confisted of the
greater number, but the weakest men and the worst armd* but their courage with
long standing was dropped to their knees, so that many of them humbled themselves
The French submit.
thereon, and submitted to mercy, the rest presuming that the English with
three hours fight, for so long the battle continued, could not be able to
follow, manfully ran away. In the mean time certain of the French horsemen, of
those that ran first away, led on by Robinet Bondile, and the Captain of
Agincourt presuming to redeem their credit, from running away from soldiers,
by fighting with boys, set upon the Pages and Laundresses, and sick soldiers
that were left in the Camp, who gave such a lamentable shreeke, that King
Henry supposed either that the Constable had reallied his troops, or that some
fresh succors had been come: howsoever he supposed he must have a second
fight, he caused therefore all the arrows that were sticking in the field to
be gathered, and the stakes to be plucked up, and prepared ready to be
again used, amongst whom was found the Duke of York miserably hacked and
slain, the sight whereof, and the danger of a second charge, made King Henry
give order, that the prisoners should be all slain, saving such as were
principal men, and those were all bound back to back and so left, neither
could the King be for this justly taxed of cruelty, An. 1415. R. 3.
for this killing his enemies in cold blood, when the number of the prisoners
exceeded his soldiers, and the uncertaintie of either their honesty, or the
enemies hardiment, that were then expected to charge them, could give the King
no assurance of safety without their slaughter; Then the King again
embattelled his weary, but willing soldiers, upon whom the Earls of Marle and
Fauconbridge, with six hundred brave men at arms, which had stood still all
day, gave a brave charge, and had they had more number, they would have
troubled K. Henry, but being so few, and the stakes having galled so many of
their horses, they were quickly dispatched, but to their honor, it is recorded
that they fought valiantly, and died honorably, all being slain or taken, and
slew more of the English then the whole Army had done. The King being satisfied
by the skowtes that no enemy was to be seen, caused the Army in their array,
as they were to give God thanks for the victory, causing the Clergy present
to sing the Psalm of David, in exitu Israel de Egypto, and made Proclamation,
that every one at the verse non nobis domine sed nomini tuo da gloriam, to
kneel upon their knees, and the horsemen to bow their bodies, and then singing
te deum, and other holy hymns, they marched to the enemies Camp, where they
found plenty of all things, with which having well refreshed themselves, the
King gave them liberty to make booty, and take the spoil.

Next day came Mountjoy and four Harralds more, to have leave to give the dead
burial, and to know the number of the slain, which (after he had feasted
them at their Country-mens cost) he granted unto them: with whom the English
Harrolds were appointed to search, who made return, that there were slain
10000. and odd, whereof 126. were of the Nobility bearing Banners, of Knights
and Gentlemen of Coat Armor 7874. whereof 500. were Knighted the night before
the battle, and of the common soldiers about 1600. amongst the slain of the
Nobility, were Charles le Brets high Constable, Jacques of Chatilon Admiral of
France, the great Master of France the Master of the Crosse-bowes, the Dukes of
Alanson, Brabant, Bar, the Earls of Neuers, Marle, Vaudmount, Beamont, Grand
per, Rousey Fauconbridge, Foys, and Lestreuck. There were taken prisoners,
Charles Duke of Orleance, John Duke of Burbon, the Lords Donvert, Fosseux,
Humiers, Roy, Cawny, Hamcourt, Noell, Bonciqualt, and many others.

On the English part were slain, Edw: Duke of York, and the Earl of Suffolk,
and not full 600. of all; who were all buried in Christian burial; But Philip
Edward Plantagenet Duke of York married Philip daughter and coheire of John
Mahun Lord of Dunster, but dyed without issue. Michael de la Pool^ Earl of
Suffolk died without issue also.
Earl Choroloys was out of charity enforced at his own cost, to bury in a
square plot of ground of his own of 1500. yards, in three graves by poll
accounted 5800. and odd soldiers, and yet sent many yet alive, though
grievously wounded, to Vall mersens de dieu. King Henry having well refreshed
himself and soldiers, and laden them all with spoils of great value, and
rich prisoners, in fair order marched to Callice. From whence on the sixth of
Nouemb. with his prisoners, which according to their oaths, rendered themselves
from Harflue, as those taken at Agincourt, with the dead corpse of the Duke of
York and the Earl of Suffolk, whereof one was buried afterward at Fordinghey,
the other at new Elm: He set sail and arrived at Dover the same day, after
his landing he gave straight order, that no ballad or songs should be made or
sung, more then of thanksgiving to the Lord for his happy victory and safe
return, and that nothing that might tend to ostentation, or boasting of the
valiant, or cowardly act of any in that service, should be either said or sung;
Nevertheless, the shame of his ildaring thoughts did so vilely vex the
Dalphin, that he died suddenly.

Thomas Duke of Exceter Captain of Harflue, with three hundred English, made a
road into Normandy, and returning laden with prey was encountered Ann. 1416 R. 4.
by the Earl of Arminacke, with five thousand horse, who took their booty
from them overnight, but in the morning, when they endeavored, from out the
vantage of a thick enclosed Orchard, wherein they had rested all night to
march away. They were eftsoons charged by the French, whom with a desperate
resolution they entertained, and in that manner behaved themselves. that they
not only escaped safe to Harflue, but recovered a great part of the lost
booty, and made a great slaughter of their enemies, and returned without much
loss.

Sigismond the Emperor, cousin German to King Henry, accompanied with the
Archbishop of Remes Ambassador from the French King arrived at Callice, to
whom were sent thirty great ships to waft him over; At Dover the Duke of
Gloucester with a brave company of Gallants, upon his The Duke of Gloucester
entertaineth the Emperor at Dover.
approaching to land, with their swords drawn, stepped up to the knees in water,
saying, If he came as the Kings friend, or for his honor to move ought, he
should be welcome; But if as Emperor he claimed any jurisdiction, they were
ready to resist him to the death; Whereupon the Emperor renounceth all
Imperial authority, and is received with all befitting honor, he was
afterward with Albert Duke of Holland, who was lately likewise arrived at
Windsor: elected Companions of the noble order of the Garter, and sat in their
Stalles at the solemnity of the Feast; The Emperor after the departure of the
Duke, stayed to mediate a peace between England and France: which the King
(being advertized of the hard escape of his men in Normandy) would not listen
unto; Nevertheless the Emperor very politickly awaited his time, where to
take his best hint to persuade an agreement, which might fortunately have been
found, had not news come of the besieging of Harflue; so all was dashed.

The new Constable with a great power, suddenly clapped down before the Town,
when the Viceadmirall of France brought up the whole Navy, with intent whilst
the Constable should assail it by land, to have entered the Harstew besieged by
the French.
Town by the water side; But the Duke of Exceter defended the Town valiantly,
by whose valor and indefatigable diligence they were defeated of their
expectation; King Henry in person was preparing to Sea with all speed, but
being by the Emperor dissuaded, he sent his Brother the Duke of Bedford,
accompanied with the Earls of March, Oxford, Huntington, Warwick, Arundel,
Salisbury, Devonshire, and diverse Lords and Barons, with two hundred sails to
the reskue of Harflue, they made sail for Rye, and not without some crosses at
Sea, upon the feast day of the Assumption of our Lady, came to the mouth of the
river Seyne; Upon notice of the approach of the English Navy. Narbon set
forward, and got the mouth of the Haven; The Duke sent before his strongest
Ships, two French Ships advancing too forward, were laid aboard and taken; The
fight was continued and resolutely maintained, until the English having sunk
five hundred vessels one and other, and taken three great Carricks of Genoa,
won the harbor, and notwithstanding some opposition made by the Galleys,
which had the advantage with oars to run out of the reach of the Artillery
of the English, they relieved Harflue. Upon notice hereof, the Duke of
Arminacke Relieved by the Duke of Bedford.
raised his siege, and departed to Paris, leaving somewhat more then a little
provision of ammunition behind him; which they of Harflue took and stowed up
for them.

The Duke of Bedford having finished what he came about, returned to the King,
who with the Emperor gave him great, but no more then deserved commendation;
Whilst these broils were honorably managed abroad, two too uxorious husbands,
the Lord Strange and Sir John Trussell of Warmingham in Cheshire, who had
married the Daughter of Sir John Strange; most dishonourably fought in
maintaining their wives folly (forgetfully striving for place) at a Sermon in
Saint Dunstons Church in the East, by occasion whereof, there was much
partaking on both sides, whereby the Congregation was much disturbed, a great
tumult raised, some slaughter and more bloodshed done, the delinquents were
committed to the Counter, the Church suspended, and upon examination the Lord
Strange was found guilty, Penanc^ done.
and by the Archbishop of Canterbury adjudged to penance, which was thus
performed, all the Lords servants in their Shirts, from Saint Paul's Church
where the sentence was given, followed the Parson of Saint Dunstons: after them
the Lord bare-headed, with a wax Taper in his hand, the Lady barefooted, the
Archdeacon Reignold Renwood following last, went to Saint Dunstons in the East,
where at the rehallowing thereof, the Lady filled all the vessels with water,
and according to the sentence, she offered to the Altar an Ornament of the
value of ten pounds, and the Lord a Pixe of silver of five pounds, There was
then belike in use no commutation of penance; Surely I am persuaded, that if
they might have bought out their penance for money, they would have trebled
their offerings; I could wish that such severitie of discipline might now be
practiced against such delinquents, we should then have devotion with more
humility, and less striving for places in the Church.

The Emperor desisteth from further mediation of peace with France, and
enters in a League defensive, and offensive with King Henry, wherein only the
Pope is excepted: which concluded upon the the nineteenth of October, Anno
1416. he returned toward Germany, King Henry accompanied him to Callice,
whither the Duke of Burgondy came, to confirm the League concluded onbefore by
the Earl of Warwick, and other the Kings Ambassadors King Henry accompanies
the Emperor to Callice.
and him concerning Flaunders, and Arthoyes only, from Midsommer 1416. until
Michaelmasse following, where it was prolonged further till Michaelmasse 1419.
which gave occasion of suspicion to France, that the Duke was no firm friend
of theirs.

The Emperor takes his journey to Holland, the Duke returns to Graveling, and
King Henry to Dover, where he landed on Saint Lukes Eeve; upon his arrival he
sent new Ambassadors, viz. the Earl of Warwick, the Bishops of Salisbury,
Bath, and Hereford, the Abbot of Westminster, and the Pryor of Worcester, to
the Council of Constance; whither the Emperor in person likewise went, in
this Council it was decreed, that England should have the title of the English
nation, and should-bee accounted one of the five principal Nations, which
often before had been moved, but never granted till then, and herein were all
Wickliffes positions condemned. At this Council the Antipope John was
prescribed, and all his goods and Treasure amounting to the sum of 750000.
were seized.

The Parliament, by reason of the Emperors being in the Land prorogued: began
again the nineteenth of October, wherein toward the prosecution of wars in
France, was voluntarily granted unto the King from the Clergy two whole
tenthes, and from the Laity a whole Fifteen; In this Parliament during the
Kings absence; John Duke of Bedford was made regent The Duke of Bedford made
Regent.
of the Realm, having out of the Kings coffers allowance of one thousand
pounds per annum, and forty pounds a year out of the fee farm of Exceter.

Whilst King Henry is preparing for invasion, the Frenchmen had waged diverse
Carricks, and other great Ships of the Genoaes and Italians, which jpyning with
the French fleet, lay at the mouth of the River of Seyne, under the command of
Jacques Bastard of Burbon, to bar all succor from Harflew.

John Earl of Huntington, Son to the Duke of Exceter beheaded at Ciceter, The
Earl of Huntingtons fortune at Sea.
is sent to Sea to skowre the Coasts, who encountering with the Bastard Burbon,
after a long fight, took the said Bastard, and three of his great Carricks,
with all the money for the half years pay for the fleet: and bowged three
other Carricks, and dispersing the rest, cleared the mouth of Seyne, and
returned to the King at Southamton; And upon the 23. of July, the King with the
Dukes of Clarence and Gloucester, the Earls of Huntington, Warwick,
Devonshire, Salisbury, Suffolk and Somerset; The Lords Rosse, Willoughby,
Fitzhugh, Clynton, Scroope, Matrevers, Bourcher, Ferrers of Groby, and Ferrers
of Chartley, Fanhope, Gray of Codnor, Sir Gilbert Vmphrevile* Sir Gilbert
Talbot, and a brave well-furnished Army, from Portsmouth took shipping, and
upon the first of August landed in Normandy, near to the Castle of Foncke. The
Kings Army consisted of five and twenty thousand, five hundred and eight and
twenty fighting men, besides a thousand Artificers and Pioners. The Nobility
and Gentry having at their own charges furnished him with eleven thousand, one
hundred and eight and twenty men, whereof every fourth man was a Launceere; The
King besieged the Castle of Tonque; which upon the ninth of August yielded; at
which time the Earl of Salisbury took the Castle of Albervilleirs, which the
King gave him, to him and his heirs, being the first land given by the King in
France, the King at the winning of Tonque, made eight and twenty Knights and
Captains thereof, Sir Robert Circkley; From thence the Army marched to Cane,
whether to prevent the Citizens from burning the Suburbs, the Duke of Clarence
with a thousand men was sent, who found them firing thereof, but drove them
away, quenched the fire, reskued the Abbey Church of Saint Stephens from being
thrown down, and took in the Cell of Nans, which they had strongly fenced.
The King sitting down before the Town, entrenched himself, and cast up a
mount to prevent the Citizens from sallying; The King made many assaults, but
finding the loss thereby, more then the gains, he only kept them busied with
often alarums, whilst his Pioners labored to undermine the walls, which being
effected, upon the fourth of September, he offered the besieged their lives,
in case they would but submit, but they refusing, he made show of giving a
general assault, whilst many of his men entered the City under the foundation.
The Duke of Clarence with his Company, was the first that entered, and came upon
the backs of those that defended the walls, whereby they were Cane taken.
easily vanquished, and the whole Army entered without resistance; The King
caused all the arms in the Town to be brought together to the Market place,
where he caused his men in battle array to stand all night, in the morning
he caused all the Magistrates and principal men of the Town to come before
him at their Senate house, where some of them for their stubborn refusal of
grace proffered, were adjudged to death, and all the rest fined; The spoil of
the Town he distributed among the soldiers. The Captain of the Castle made
show of standing at defense, but having advertisement, that the King had sworn
to show no mercy, if he did not surrender, upon assurance to depart with life,
bag and baggage, the habiliments of war excepted; he made composition, and
accordingly gave twelve hostages, that if he were not fully relieved before
the twentieth of September, to render up the Castle, which not being done he
performed, and so the King had possession both of Cane and the Castle.

In the mean time of the Kings absence, the Scots in great numbers entered the
English pale, but hearing the Duke of Exceter with the Lord Wardens were
marching toward them with a great power, they retired without much hurt doing.

Charles the Dolphin being about seventeene years of age, being bare both of
men and money, yet in the time of his Fathers weakness, studied how to put of
this storm that hung over the Commonwealth, and by the counsel of the
Constable, found a means to possess himself of all his Mothers jewels,
Plate, and money, which was great, which he orderly expended in waging of
soldiers, and making preparation for things necessary, for the defense of the
kingdom. But what can an alone woman do toward the good or safety of the
King or Commonwealth, she knows no good but gold, nor reckons any thing
worthy the preserving, but beauty and costly apparel, she therefore being
bereaved of those ornaments of woman's greatness, jewels, forgetting the
peril wherein both her self and Nation stood most intemperately passionate,
began to work her womanish malice, places the Duke of Burgondy in the
chiefest authority about the King, who having the sword in his own hands, to
revenge old injuries, resolves first to tame the young Gallant, and then to
repulse the common enemy; The Dolphin likewise stomacking the inconsiderate
folly of the Duke, to prefer private quarrels before public preservation,
minded first to repress his insolency, and then to attend the repelling of
the foreign foe; In the mean time King Henry pursues his victorious
success, sends the Duke of Clarence Boyeux taken.
further into the Country, who with great difficulty took in Bayuxe, whereof
he made the Lord Matrevers Captain; The Duke of Gloucester likewise took the
City of Lyseux; The King remained still at Cane, repayring the Town, and
fortefying the Castle, putting out the Natives that were impotent, or young
infants to the number of fifteen hundred, and in their places did settle
English people; and finding a great mass of money and plate deposited by the
Citizens in the Castle, he caused the same upon proof, to be respectively
delivered unto all such as came, to make claim unto the same, and would
acknowledge him for their Sovereign.

His merciful and moderate carriage, won him the good report of his enemies,
nay it incited most of the Captains, and Governors near adjoining to tender
their commands unto him, which he accepted of as testimonialls The Kings good
policy to allure the French.
of their duty; And upon coming into those parts so rendered unto him, he
restored to many of them upon oath of due fidelity, their charges of command
again, making always protestation, whosoever would become his subjects, and
swear allegiance unto him, they should enjoy their lands and liberties, in as
large, if not in more free and ample manner then they enjoyed them before, an
excellent policy to win the Normans, whose rugged condition is, and was
always, easier to be led with facile and gentle courses, then be driven by
compulsary and harsh means, for hereby they were contented to forsake the
French, and turn to the English Crown.

The King having orderly settled things in Cane, made Sir Gilbert Vmphrevile
Captain of the Town, and Sir John Popham Bailiffe, and Sir Gilbert Talbot
Captain of the Castle, and so the first of October departed to Courfy Castle,
which within three days yielded; The fourth of October he came to Argenton,
the Town and Castle whereof made composition, that Courfey Castle yielded.
if they were not reskued by the day, then to surrender: those that would
become subject to England to stay, the rest to depart with their movables, An.
1418. R. 4.
for want of succor at the prefixed time, both were yielded, and Covenants on
all parts performed; The Lord Gray of Codnor, was made Governor there: whilst
the King marched to Sees, a populous place, which together Sees submits to K.
Henry.
with many adjoining pieces, acknowledge King Henry for their Sovereign, and
were kindly received, and fairly entreated. The Town of Alanson endured the
brunt of eight days siege: but in the end took out a Copy from the former
places for submission; The Duke of Gloucester was made Captain thereof, and Sir
Ralph Lentell his Lieutenant, certain overtures of peace were made by the
Dolphin at Tonque Castle, but none concluded, only a truce was made for
certain time, betwixt King Henry and the Duke of Britain, who came in person
to require the same, and the like was granted to the Queen of Jerusalem, and
her son Lewis; for Anjou and Main, the Duke of Britain being their Proxy
for the obtaining the same. From Alanson the Earl of Salisbury was sent to
Falays, to view the strength thereof, and to keep the inhabitants from coming
forth: the King with his Army followed, and entrenched themselves to avoid
excursions, and incursions; The King made his approaches to his best advantage:
and though it was in the hard of Winter, made provision sufficient for his men,
both against cold and hunger, whereupon the besieged concluded, if succor came
not before the second of January next following, to yield the Town; the
succor not coming the Town was yielded, but the Castle held out into which
the Governor, and most of the best able men were gotten, but Falays taken.
being fiercely followed, and kept in continual action by assaults and myning,
they were driven to make composition of surrender, if not reskued before the
sixth of February, the soldiers to depart with their lives only, and the
Captain to be ransomed; The prefixed time come, the Castle was surrendered,
and the Captain detained prisoner until the Castle was sufficiently repaired;
his name was Oliver de Many; The King leaving for Captain there, Sir Henry
Fitzhugh returned to Cane to put in execution, a Proclamation formerly made,
that if the inhabitants of Normandy that were fled returned not by a day to
them prefixed, to grant their lands to his soldiers, thereupon he gave to the
Duke of Clarence during life the Vicounties of Ange, Orber, and Pontinz, Oe,
Mere, with all the lands of those that were not returned according to
Proclamation. All the whole Lent, the King lay at 1418.
Bayeux with part of his Army, but the residue were volant upon exploits
abroad. The Kings Navy still kept the seas, scowring the Coasts, daily taking
the French Bottomes they met: but upon the sixteenth of July such a storm took
them, that had they not by Gods good favor fallen in with Southampton, A great
storm.
the whole Navy had been in great danger, yet in that Haven two Ballingers,
and two great Carrickes, laden with Merchandise were drowned: and the Mast of
one of the great ships was with the storm blown over the Town wall: when
the fury of the tempest was past, the Earls of March and Huntington wa^ted
over to Normandy, and landing there, marched up the country to the King; The
Earl of Warwick and the Lord Talbot besieged 6. Reg.
the strong Castle of Dampfront; The Duke of Clarence at that time took
Courton and Burny, and in the first placed Captain Aubyn, and Captain William
Houghton in the other, he likewise appointed in Chombis, Captain James
Nevill: in Bechelovin for Captain the Earl Marshall, in Harcourt Captain
Richard Woodvile, in Fantgernon, for Captain John Saint Albon, in Crevener Sir
John Kirby, to whom the same was after given for ever in Anvillyers Captain
Robert Hornby, in Bagles Sir John Arthure Ann. 1416 Reg. 6.
was made Captain, and also of Fresny, Sir Robert Brent lately made Vicount
was Captain.

The Duke of Gloucester with the Earl of March, and the Lord Codnor, Captains
made over several places.
march into the Isle of Constantine, wherein he likewise placed Captains, of
such places as he took in; as at Corentine the Lord Botreux, at Saint Low
Captain Reignold West, at Valoignes Captain Thomas Burgh, at Pont done
Captain David Howell; at Hay de paps Sir John Aston, at Saint Savior Sir John
Robsert lately made Vicount, at Pantarson Sir Robert Gargraus, at Hambery the
Earl of Suffolk, to whom afterward the King gave that and Brokevill, at
Auranchos Sir Philip Hall; at Vire the Lord Matreius, who was likewise Captain
of Saint James de Bumeron. And so having taken in the whole Island, except
Chereburg he returned to the King, but was sent back to the siege thereof,
which held out about the space of five months, though in the mean time all
warlike stratagems, and means were used to take it, at last they made
composition, that if not rescued within threescore and two days, to surrender
and stand to the mercy of the King. In the mean time the Duke caused his Camp
to be strongly fenced with Rampires and Bulwarks, leaving nothing for the
safeguard thereof, either unforeseene or unprepared; And whilst he was
providing thus, the Dolphin and the Duke of Burgoigne, by the mediation of the
Pope, and his Cardinals were fully reconciled, and began to consult about the
relieving The Dolphin and Duke of Burgoigne reconciled.
their besieged Friend; The King to prevent any danger that might betide his
brother, had taken order with the Lieutenant in the West-country of England, to
send over two thousand men out of those parts, whom when the besieged at
Chierburgh perceived at Sea to approach, they presumed of succor, but their
hope failing, they surrendered both the Town and Castle, whereof the Lord Gray
of Codnor mas made the Kings Lieutenant for the time, but afterward the King
made Captain thereof John Bromley Esquire, and for his hardy valor, and
commendable forwardness both at this siege and other places, he gave him the
order of Knighthood, gave him fair possessions in the Island, and made him
Constable of Bossevile de Rosse; This was the same party, that at Corby by his
valor recovered the Lord Staffords Colors from the French, and for the
remembrance of that service had an honorable adjunct to his arms. The King
intending to prosecute his intendments to the full, being of equal spirit to
dare, and power to do, had sent for his Uncle the Duke of Exceter, who with
fifteen thousand men within few days of Trinity Sunday came to the King, by
whom he was commanded to besiege the City of Eureux, which he took in,
Eureux besieged.
and appointed Captain thereof Sir Gilbert Halsall. The Earl of Ryme then
also took in the strong Castle of Milley le Vesko. The siege of Roan was the
next thing attempted, which place was now fully fortified* and furnished for
defense, both with men and ammunition; Thither for the more safety had all the
neighbors conveyed all their riches, as being their sole place of refuge now;
The King to have his passage clear, laid siege to the City of Loveirs, which
upon these conditions, that if they were not relieved Loveirs besieged and
rendered.
within seven days, then the soldiers to serve King Henry: the inhabitants to
remain there as subjects to England, only all such Gunners as had discharged
any piece of Ordnance to be hanged, no succor appearing at the day, the
Covenants were performed accordingly. The King marched to Pont de Larch; where
he arrived the seven and twentieth of June; There was a stone bridge which
hindered the approach to Roane, being exceeding strongly guarded, King Henry
devised therefore, floates of wicker, covered with beasts hides, by which the
Duke of Clarence with his An. 1418. R. 6.
quarter passed the River, and then laid siege to the Town on that side; but
to prevent the inconvenience that might come by the River dividing the Army,
there were more such Floates made, and other devises with hogsheads New
inventions for passage over waters.
and Pipes fastened to fur powles and Barges, and such like conveyances with
which he past over his men at pleasure; in the mean time he caused diverse
soldiers that could swim, to make show of passing the River, three mile of
another way, to which place the Frenchmen drew all their forces, but were
deluded, whereupon presently the Fort at the bridge-foot was surrendered, and
the soldiers taken to the Kings grace; From thence the Duke of Exceter with
certain horse was sent to view the places about Roane, and with him Windsor
the Herrald, which sommoned the Citizens to surrender the Town, and to submit
themselves to the Kings mercy, but they proudly returned answer, they received
none from England, nor none they would give the English, and instantly made a
sally forth, but were beaten in with the loss of thirty of their men. The
Town of Loviers the King gave to his brother Clarence, who made his Deputy
there Sir John Goddard, after the return of the Duke of Exceter, the Roanions
fired the Suburbs demolished all Churches, Chantryes, and Hostells, leaving
nothing without the City, which upon the last of July the King straightly
besieged; The Kings quarter was the Charteux, the Duke of Clarence at Saint
Gervays, the Duke of Exceter at Port Saint Dennis; Between the Duke of Exceter
Roane besieged.
and the Duke of Clarence, lay Earl Marshall, to whom were joined the Earl of
Ormond, the Lords Harington and Talbot, from the Duke of Exceter toward the
King were encamped the Lords Rosse, Willoughby, Fitzhugh, and Sir William
Porter with the Northern Prickers, the Earl of Salisbury and Mortaignes
quarter lay at the Abbay of Saint Katherine, Sir John Gray was lodged against
the Chapel of Mount Saint Michael, Sir Philip Leech Treasurer of the Army,
kept the hill next the Abbey, and the Baron Carew held the passage on the river
of Seine, with whom was Squire Ienito Dortoyes; on the further side the river
were quartered the Earls of Warraine and Huntington, the Lords Nevill and
Ferrers, Sir Gilbert Vmphrevile with his Company lay before the Port de Ponte;
A great chain of iron set upon piles, and a new forced bridge for passage from
one Camp to the other, was made over the River.

The Earl of Warwick was sent to Cawdbecke, standing betwixt Roane and the
Sea; The Earl of Warwick sent Sir John Bromley and George Vmphrevile with an
hundred Archers, and two hundred Bill-men to a little Castle called the Strowe,
and in the way were met by eight hundred French; Whereupon Sir John Bromley
casting his Bow-men in a limasson or loose ring, and his Bill-men in two
squares, which in close order marched toward the enemy, who seeing the number
to appear so small, gave on in that disorderly manner, that their Captain the
Lord of Estrisles was slain, before any of his company could come to the
reskewes; The Bow-men opening their order, delivered such a shole of arrows
even in the midst of their enemies, that they stood amazed until they were
awakened with a second; The Bow-men as long as the arrows lasted, kept the
enemy aloof, but at length they were enforced to make use of their slain
enemies weapons, with which they closing to the Bill-men, made it appear that
they could make use of more weapons then one, and after three hours fight the
French fainted, and gave the English leave to take the spoil of two hundred
that were slain, and the ransom of two hundred more taken prisoners; in this
fight was slain George Vmphrevile, and thirty more, all the rest being hurt,
more or less; amongst whom Sir John Bromley was hurt in the face and body;
They were not able to go forth of the field, but continued there all night,
and in the morning some fresh men being come to them, they marched to the
Castle, and so plied them with assaults, and minings, that at length The
English Navy passes the river.
the besieged were glad to suffer the English Navy to pass by to Roane,
whereof one hundred Sail passed by, and likewise they gave hostages, that they
would not inter-meddle to aid or assist Roane any way, but to follow her
fortune, to render if she did; wherewith Sir John Bromley went into the
Castle, with two Esquires and a Surgeon, and the Company back to the King: by
this time the Duke of Gloucester was come to the Camp, and quartered before the
Port Saint Hillary, nearer the enemy by forty roades.

The Earl of Kilmayne with sixteen hundred Irish, armed after their fashion,
came from Harflew where they landed, to the King; who were by him assigned for
quarter, the North side of the Army, upon the way that comes from the
Forest of Lions. This charge the Earl joyfully accepted, The good service of
the Irish.
and as proud of the employment, did many brave exployts, to the more damage of
the enemy, then all the troops of Horse.

The Kings Cousin-german, the King of Portugal likewise sent a Navy of well
appointed Ships, to the mouth of the River of Seine, to stop all passage of
succor to Roane. There were in Roane, two hundred and ten thousand persons,
at the beginning of the siege, which made them so confident, that they swear
each to other, never to deliver up the City as long as they could hold Sword,
or handle Pike. The King acquainted herewith, stopped all passages, both by
land and water, casting deep Trenches, and raising Bulwarckes to hinder all
sallyes or receipt of relief.

The French in the mean time made many attempts upon diverse pieces in the
Kings hands, as upon Kilbuife, Eureux, and Loviers, but were repulsed with
great loss, but more disgrace. Before Roane no enterprise is left unpractised,
no policy unattempted; how either party might indamage other; But now the
many mouths within the City, had devoured a great part of their provision,
and for the better saving of the rest, a great number of aged impotent
creatures, were turned out of the Gates, whom the English would not suffer to
pass the Trenches: betwixt which and the walls the miserable people starved
and dyed, without help of friend or foe; Upon Christmasse day, in honor of
the birth of our Savior, the King Henryes charity.
King relieved, and suffered to pass as many as were at first put out, but
suffered others that were thrust out a second time to famish, except relieved
by the Town. The unwonted noise of Bells ringing, gave the King occasion to
expect an enemy at his back: for prevention therefore of that danger, he
gave order to Sir Robert Bapthorpe Controller of the Army, to provide a deep
Trench well staked, and with bastils to round the Camp, and to make defenses
both behind and before, to withstand all sudden approaches: The Famine began
now to rage pitifully within the City, and the Dolphins promise to relieve
them, now past hope of performance: a Parlie is desired and obtained, but
fruitless at the first, the demands of the besieged being more then stood
with the Kings honor, or pleasure to give consent unto, but upon the
Commissioners return into the Town, the starved multitude began to upbraid
the Commanders, and to tell them, that they must be famished to death for
their obstinacies, and with threatening speeches, they told them, Ann. 1418 R. 9.
they would, if they would not, compound for their redemption upon any terms,
enforced therefore to give way to their implacable furyes, the Commissioners
concluded, that after the nineteenth day of that instant January, the City
and Castle of Roane should be delivered to Roane comes to composition.
the King of Englands hands, and that all should submit to the Kings mercy,
and should pay to him three hundred thousand Skutes of gold, every two to be
of the value of the English Noble. Every Soldier to swear never to bear
arms against the King of England.

That the starved creatures expulsed should be admitted entrance, and receive
relief during the time prefixed, if not before that time reskonsed.

Upon the day agreed upon, Sir Guy de Butler, and the Burgesses Surrendered.
delivered up the keys of the City and Castle, craving grace and favor. The
Duke of Exceter was appointed to take possession of the fame, who accordingly
entered with his soldiers.

The next day after being Friday, the twentieth of January, the KING
triumphantly made his entry, with four Dukes, ten Earls, eight Bishops,
sixteen Barons, etc. He was received with the Clergy, with two and forty
Crosses, and by them was conducted to our Lady Church, where after public
Thankes-giving, he took homage and fealty of the Burgesses and inhabitants,
making proclamation, that all that would come, and acknowledge him to be their
Liege-Lord, should enjoy the benefit of his protection, and retain their
possessions; whereupon many came in: and many Towns were surrendered. The Duke
of Britain fore-casting the danger of having too potent a neighbor (except a
friend) plant near him upon safe conduct obtained, came to Roane, where a
League is agreed upon, that neither should make War upon other, except upon
denuntiation thereof, six months before any attempt, this concluded the Duke
returned.

Whilst the King lay at ROANE to perfect all things, the Duke of CLARENCE took
VERNON and NAVNT, making Sir WILLIAM PORTER Captain of the first, and the
Earl of MARCH of the other. The Earl of SALISBVRY took in HVNFLEVV (which
was afterward given to the Duke of CLARENCE) Munster de Villiers, Ewe,
New Castle, whereof Sir PHILIP LEECH was made Captain.

An Overture agreed upon for an interview, betwixt the King of An Overture for
an interview crossed by the Dolphins default.
ENGLAND and the Dolphin of FRANCE, failed through the Dolphins default, which
displeased King HENRY, who had in expectation thereof, gone from Roane to
Eureux, from whence he sent the Earl of Warwick, to take in la Roche Guyon,
which he accordingly (but not without some loss) did, and thereof made owner
of the Kings free gift; Sir Guy de Bolyleere lately Captain of Roane. In all
places the Kings Commanders prevailed, and by constraint or consent all pieces
of strength, that were sommoned, opened their gates unto the English, and it is
worthy the observation, that when there is (as now there was) a mutual
intercourse of discreet direction, and diligent execution, warlike designs
faild but prosper on the other side, where there is want of skill to Command:
and want of will to obey, nothing can thrive, and these wants now hid, so
clowded the affairs of France, that all lay at six and seven. The Duke of
Burgoine solicites an interview betwixt the Kings of England and France:
Ambassadors on both sides are sent, King Henry is content to come to Maunt, so
as the French King came to Ponthoys, which is consented to. King Henry kept his
feast of Whitsontide at Mounts, where he made the stout Gascoyne, Captain le
Buife, Earl of Longevile, Sir John Gray Earl of Tanckervile, and the Lord
Bourcher Earl of Ewe, upon the last of May at the day appointed, King Henry
accompanied with the Dukes of Clarence, Gloucester, and Exceter, his Uncle
Bewford, the great Clerk and rich Bishop of Winchester, with the Earls of
March and Salisbury, with a thousand men at arms entered the place appointed.
The French Queen, her Husband being taken with his phrenzie, which the Duke of
Burgoine, and the Earl of Saint Paul, and a company of fair Ladies, amongst
whom as a bait to entangle the Kings youthful affection, the Queens
beautiful Daughter; the Lady Katherine thoroughly instructed, and gorgeously
attired presented her self, with whose sight though the King was ardently
taken: yet with that moderation he behaved himself, that though he were
resolved to make the enjoyment of her for wife, a chief Article to be granted,
yet he made no such apparent show thereof, but that the other things
requirable to be concluded at this treaty, should be first agreed upon, but
nothing was affected, for the Dolphin underhand had made means to the Duke of
Burgoine to hinder all agreement, which King Henry observing, at their
departure told the Duke of Burgoine, That he would have his demands and the
Lady, or else drive the King out of his kingdom, and make the Duke seek
another Dukedom. The treaty becoming fruitless and dissolved, the Dolphin
and the Duke upon the sixth of July are reconciled, and the Articles An. 1419.
R. 7.
thereof signed and sealed; In the mean time a Conspiracy in Roane was timely
discovered, and wisely prevented, and the Conspiratours upon examination, and
proof duly punished. By direction from the King, the Earl A Conspiracy in
Roane discovered* Ponthoys surprised by the English.
of Longevile did valiantly surprise the Town of Poynthose, with fifteen
hundred men, there being at that time within the Town, a thousand Launceeres,
and two thousand Arcubalisters; but had not the Earl of Huntington come in
good time to second them; their valor oppressed by multitude, could not have
made good what they had achieved: neither could they both have long subsisted,
had not the Duke of Clarence come to their reskue, who to recompense the brave
spirits of the first entrers, gave the spoil of the Town amongst them. From
thence the Duke marched to Paris, and there stayed by the space of two days,
but perceiving no show of sally to be made, he returned to Ponthoys: King Henry
coming thither, after he had sufficiently furnished the same with victuals
and artillery, he with his maine Army marched further into the country, and
in the way forced the Castle of Vanion Villeirs, but at the intercession of
diverse Ladies, the garrison were permitted without arms or weapon to depart;
Hereof was appointed Captain John de Burgh: upon approach of the Army which
was upon the last of August to the Castle of Gysors, the only piece that now
stood forth in those parts; the Garrison there made a sally, and much hindered
the English in their sitting down, by reason of the inaccessible passage
through the Marshes, which in a manner surrounded the same; yet at length when
they perceived the Kings resolution, not to depart without conquest, and
calling to mind, that no place had bin of strength sufficient to withstand his
power, they agreed if not reskued by a day (which they were not) to deliver
both town and Castle to the King: The soldiers of the garrison, and many of
the Burgers took an oath of fidelity to the King of England, and remained
there still, the Earl of Worcester was made Captain thereof. The well
defenced Castle of Galiard, strong both by situation and art, after six
months siege was surrendered to the Duke of Exceter, and thereof the King made
the Lord Rosse Captain, all the Country of Velquesseine submitted, the King
putting in men of valor and trust into the chief holds, as into Gourney Sir
Gilbert Vmfrevile, the Earl of Worcester at Newtye; the Castle of Dumall
(yielded to the Earl of Warwick) was given him by the King, so that now all
Normandy (Mount Saint Michael only excepted) was reduced to the possession of
the King of England, which had been detained wrongfully until then from him
ever since the year 1207.

The Dolphin all this while, notwithstanding the agreement sealed, and settled
as might be thought, being persuaded that the Duke of Burgoyne was a bar to
his ambitious desires, studied not so much to stop the overflowing current; of
the King of Englands victories, as the effecting of his own ends of revenge
against the Duke, (a miserable thing, when one man's rising is grounded on the
desired overthrow of another;) To that end therefore, covering his private
malice, with the long roabe of public service, he made show of removal, of
all rank our betwixt the Duke and him, and to that end appointed a meeting of
all the Peers at Mountstrew al fault you, where the Duke was barbarously
murdered, whilst he humbled himself in reverence, to the Dolphin on his
knee: which act was by so much the less to be pitied in the Duke; by how
much he in the like kind upon the like enterview, had caused Lewis the Duke of
Orleance to be murdered; But this recrimination of Burgoyne, for the murder
of Orleance, can be no excusation of the Dolphins perfidious treachery;
Hereupon Philip Earl of Caraloys, the heir of Burgoyne, did forbear for a
time the company of his Wife, the Dolphins sister, but upon due consideration
of her pliable and obsequious disposition, and the religious admonition of his
Mother-in-law, and exhortation of his chiefest Councillors, he gave her ever
after all requirable respect and observance, and turned his justly incensed
anger against the Dolphin, but without show of choler or distemperature, either
in words or gestures, howsoever his kindred and allies thretned revenge; But
this distraction settled at home, and danger threatened abroad drew a double
fear of destruction upon the quieter minded Nobility, who used the employment
of their uttermost endeavors, to procure a reconciliation betwixt the Queen,
and the Dolphin; and a pacification of the King of England, and by their
mediation Ambassadors are sent to Gysors where King Henry lay, who gave them
audience, and honorable entertainment, and was pleased to condescend that
Commissioners might have communication, but no cessation of war; No sooner
were they returned, but he drew his forces to Maunt, The English army severed
into three parts.
where he divided them into three parts, sending the Duke of Gloucester with
one part to Saint German in lay, which was delivered unto him. The Duke of
Clarence with another was sent to Mountjoy, which after some show of great
resistance, was given over unto him. The third under the conduct of the Duke of
Exceter, went to Mewlancke* which was strongly defenced, and compassed in with
the great river of Seine: but by the invention of wooden towers reared upon
boats bridges and floates, the Frenchmen were so terrified, that for want of
succor at the time agreed upon, they surrendered the Town and gave hostages,
and oath to remain true subjects to the King of England, and so were permitted
to remain there still; The many rivolets cut out, and running in the several
Forts and Castles as aforesaid, might have much drayned the great river of the
Kings Army: had not daily supplies from all foreign parts (drawn by the
general report of his honorable usage of soldiers) of men and ammunition, and
money out of his Dominions, been broughtunto him; but such was his providence,
and his officers obedience and care, that nothing wanted that was needful or
necessary. But now the new Duke of Burgoine (a wise and politic Prince,)
having debated with himself what course to take, to revenge his Fathers
murder, and being assured, that if he should oppose the Dolphin, and the
Dolphin him, the King of France would lose by both, and King Henry would carry
away all; he endeavored to propose an overture of Peace between the two Kings,
which he was the more likely to obtain, by reason of his powerfulness
amongst the Peers, and the assurance of the Lady Katherines readiness (who
had more power over her Mothers affections then her own) to join with him in
any thing that might conduce, to her obtaining the effect of her wishes, which
was as well the love of King Henry as the peace and quiet of her Father and
country, besides the advantage the Duke had of the Dolphin who was now observed
to be more cunning and revengefull, then wise and valiant, and by the late
murder made obnoxious to the disesteeme of his nearest friends; Ambassadors
are again sent from the King of France, and the French Ambassadors sent to
King Henry.
young Duke of Burgoyne, who were returned with gracious countenance, and some
tokens of courtesy to the Duke, but withal a kind of intimation that there
was small hope of obtaining any thing at his hands concerning truce, if not
desired by the Lady Katherine, whose innocence, as he said, knew not how to
abuse his credulity, as the others had done; whilst these things are in
agitation, his armies lay not idle; The Earl of Salisbury took in Fresney.

The Earls Marshall and Huntington with their powers entered into Mayn* and
approaching Mentz, they were encountered by the power of the Dolphin, An. 1420.
R. 8.
whereof they slew five thousand, and took two hundred Prisoners; These
tidings being brought to Roane, whither the King was come* to solemnize the
Feast of Christ's birth; thanks-givings to God were publicly made, and in the
instant thereof arived other Ambassadors from the King and Queen of France, who
having audience, and the tenor of their embassage delivered, a Letter from the
Lady Katherine to the King of England was secretly by the Bishop of Arras
delivered, the Contents whereof being considered, the King openly said, That
he would wipe away the disrepute cast-upon his actions, as though he should
be the cause of effusion of so much Christian blood, as every day was likely
to be made, if the wars should continue for his quarrel, and would turn
the same upon the King of France and his Adherents, if either they made not
Propositions, such as with safety of his honor might be granted, or did not
condescend to such Articles, as he would reasonably tender them, he therefore
returned the Ambassadors with good content, and sent the Earl of Warwick and
the Bishop of Rochester to the Duke of Burgoyne, between whom an King Henry
sends to the Duke of Burgoyne.
accord was made, in case the King of France, and his Peers with the Commons,
would approve thereof; They being to that purpose by the Duke of Burgoyne
solicited, willingly gave their consent, and appointed the Duke of Burgoyne to
send his Ambassadors sufficiently authorized, to meet with King HENRYES
Ambassadors at Troyes in Campaygne, and to that end the King of England was
earnestly entreated so to do, who thereupon sent his Uncle the Duke of
Exceter, the Earl of Salisburie with others, to the number of five hundred
Horse to the Duke of Burgoyne, who from thence came together with them to
Troyes, upon the eleventh of March, were in that manner received, as where
affection, and loving desire are the entertainers, There it was quickly
concluded, that the King of England should speed himself to Troyes, there to
be espoused to the fair Lady Katherine, and to have assurance of the Crown
of France, after the decease of the diseased Charles; Whereupon with a guard of
fifteen thousand choice soldiers, accompanied with the Dukes of Clarence and
Gloucester, with the Earls of Warwick, Salisbury, Huntington, Longevile,
Tanckervile, and Ewe, the King of England came to Troyes upon the eighteenth
day of May, where he was met by the Duke of Burgoine and diverse of the French
Nobility, who attended King Henry gives meeting at Troyes to the Queen.
him to the Palace, where the Queen with her Daughters, the Duchess of
Burgoine and the Lady Katherine, gave him Princely entertainment, where after
some little pause, whilst the intercourse of complement was passing betwixt the
French and the English, the King addressed himself to the Duchess of
Burgoine, demanding of her in befitting terms, if she thought her Sister
Katherines affection was free, and not in bondage to any, to whom the Duchess
with a graceful smile made answer, that she durst pawn her soul, her Sister
till that hour she first saw his highness, was as free as any Virgin might
be, but how she stood affected now, she referred him to her own answer,
opportunity giving way (as when minds are willing it may be easily
apprehended) the Lady Katherine was by the King interrogated, how she stood
affected to marriage; she answered, she was to be disposed of by the King,
otherwise if she might have the liberty of her own will, she would give him
a more full answer, and so making offer to depart, King Henry with an amiable
voice, said, Give but your consent, and I will by Gods leave make all the rest
agree, or leave them landlesse or livelesse, and thereof rest assured, by this
pledge of my faith, and so tendered unto her a Ring of great price, which she
not without some blushing received, and making a Courtly conge unto him left
him, and he the company, being come to his lodging, he gave order to his
Commissioners to make speed in their consultations, and not to give the least
way to any procrastinations; Whereupon that speed was used in their
conferences, that upon the twentieth day of May, the Lady Katherine was
affianced unto him in Saint Peter's King Henry affianced to the Lady Katherine.
Church, after this the two Kings with their Privy Councillors diverse times
met, and all points of accord, were reduced to a certainty and concluded; to
which agreement the Kings and all present made faith for the performance, and
the Duke of Burgogny for his particular made oath as follows;

I Philip Duke of Burgoignie, for my self and my heirs, upon the holy
Evangelists of God, swear to Henry King of England, and Regent of The Duke of
Burgoynes oath.
France under King Charles, that we shall humbly and faithfully obey King
Henry in all things, which concern the Crown of France, and the Commonwealth
thereof, and after the decease of our now Sovereign Charles, shall remain
faithful leigemen to the said King Henry and his Successors for ever, neither
shall we admit or allow, of any other Lord, or supreme King of France, but
Henry of England and his heirs: neither shall we counsel or consent to any
thing, that may be prejudicial to the said King Henry or his Successors, or
may be damagefull to his life or limme, but shall with all speed give notice
thereof, and endeavor to prevent it; The morrow after Trinity Sunday, being
the third of June the Marriage with all bef^ting Ceremonies was solemnized, and
the King of England named and proclaimed heir, and Regent of the Realm of
France, of this accord, and the Articles subsequent, the French King sent
Copies all over France, and King Henry the like to England, in these words.

Henry by the grace of God, King of England, heir and Regent of France, and
Lord of Ireland, to be perpetually remembered of all Christians The Articles of
agreement certified.
under our obeisance, do notify and declare, that whereas there has bin
diverse Treaties, betwixt our royal Father King Charles, for peace and quiet to
be established betwixt the Realms of France and England, which have proved
fruitless, considering the many detriments thereby fallen, not only to those
Realms, but the disturbance of holy Church, we have now concluded with our
said royal Father, for removing all distractions, and accorded that our said
royal Father, and his ever to be honored Queen Isabell, shall be entitled
the Father and Mother of us, and reverenced and respected in all things as such
alliance shall require.

That the said King Charles, shall during life hold and enjoy, in peace and
tranquillity, his royal Dignity, Crown and Revenewes of all France; And
that all Writs, Process and Commissions, and such like proceedings shall pass
under his Name and Seal as King; And that his Queen Isabell in case she
survive him, shall keep her estate and Title, and all such rights and
revenewes, as were formerly enjoyed by Blaunch Queen Dowager to Philip
Grandfather to King Charles.

That Queen Katherine should with all convenient speed be sufficiently
endowed in England, with twenty thousand Marks per annum.

That during the life of Charles, King Henry should not assume the Title of
King of France. and that the French King should write and entitle him; our
thrice noble Son, Henry King of England, and heir of France.

That after the death of Charles, the Crown of France would really and
entirely remain to King Henry and his heirs for ever.

That in regard of the inabilitie of King Charles, by himself to rule, and
manage the affairs of the kingdom, King Henry should be Regent and govern
the ^ame, as to him should seem expedient for the Kings honor, and the
commodity of the Realm and Commonwealth.

That the estate of Parliament in France should retain, all accustomed
privileges, power, and authority.

That King Henry should to his power, faithfully assist both Peers and people,
to regaine all such things, as did of right belong unto them, and should
protect all the preheminences, privileges and possessions of the Crown of
France.

That King Henry should support the Subjects of France, against all foreign
enemies, and labor the suppression of all intestine debates and civil wars,
and endeavor the increase of the prosperity and peace of France, by
impartially administering justice to all.

That King Henry in places of Justice, and charge, should place persons,
generally taken for wise, faithful, and fit to administer and manage those
things unto them committed.

That King Henry should speedily endeavor to reduce the Dolphin, and the Earl
of Arminacke, and all their confederates, to their due obedience to the Crown
of France.

That King Henry should cause all persons, of what degree, condition, or
quality soever, to take a corporal oath for their true obedience to K.
Charles during life, and after his death to King Henry and his heirs, and to
admit no other King or Regent, nor conspire any thing against his or their
Persons or estates, but disclose all mischiefs plotted or intended, for his or
their hurt or loss.

That all possessions King Henry should gain from any Rebel to King Charles
(except in Normandy) should be to the use and benefit of the French King: But
upon voluntary taking the beforementioned oaths to be tendered and taken, then
to retain their possessions freely.

That after the death of King Charles, the Duchy of Normandy, and what else
had been conquered by King Henry, should return to the obeisance of the
Crown of France.

That King Henry should not overburden his Subjects of France with impositions,
but in cases of urgent necessity, and then the same to be assessed and
levied, according to the Custom and manner of France* and not otherwise.

That after the death of King Charles, the two Realms of France and England,
should Soveraignely be ruled but by one man, and not to admit two Kings, and
that neither Crown should be subject to other, but each of them to retain,
and enjoy their particular customs, privileges, liberties, immunities, laws,
and preheminencies.

That diligent observation be used, to retain both Nations in fraternall
concord, and mutual friendship, as brethren and friends.

That neither King should conclude any peace, or make any truce with the
Dolphin, except they and the Duke of Burgoyne, all three consented thereto.

That none shall be placed about the French Kings person, but Frenchmen such
as he by his Council should make choice of, and should reside wheresoever in
the kingdom at his pleasure.

And lastly, that both the Kings under their great Seals, and all their
Peers, Prelates, Cominalties, Gentry, and Corporations, under their usual
seals, shall ratify and confirm the Articles of agreement, and shall all
swear to observe them, to their uttermost abilities and power.

These thus concluded, were proclaimed publicly, both in England and France,
the Kings with their Nobility present, solemnly sworn to the observation of
them.

This caused a solemn Procession, upon the fourteenth of June following in
London, and a Sermon at Paul's Cross being Friday, wherein the Preacher amongst
other things, affirmed that for perpetual manifestation of this so honorable
an accord, that the old Seal was to be broken, and a new great Seal to be
made, wherein the Kings Title as Regent of France, and heirs apparent to the
Crown thereof, and three Flowre-de-luces, instead of six formerly borne in
the Scutcheon of arms was to be engraved.

There was likewise a private League contracted between king Henry and the
Duke of Burgoyne, to this effect; A League with the Duke of Burgoyne:


That the Duke to the uttermost of his best abilities, should endeavor the
continuation of the former agreements, That one of the Dukes Sisters should be
matched to one of the Kings Brothers, that after the death of Charles, he
should do fealty to the King of England; That King Henry should prosecute the
murderers of the Dukes Father, with all extremity; And that if any of them,
or the Dolphin should in any place be taken, that they should not be delivered
without condign punishment, without the consent of the two Kings, and the
three estates of both kingdoms.

That the Duke should have assurance of lands, for the annual payment of the
fee of twenty thousand pounds Paris, to him and his Wife, and the heirs males
betwixt them to be begotten; And that King Henry upon the receiving his homage,
should confirm the same.

This thus finished, King Henry invites the King and Queen of France, with the
Duke and Duchess of Burgoyne, with all the Nobles of France there, to a
stately banquet, the Ceremonies whereof ended, he made unto them so pithy and
patheticall Oration, declaring therein the utilitie, of the union of the two
kingdoms, his right to them, on the surer side, with protestation of as true
love, and affection to France, as if a native thereof, and promises of tender
regard, to be always by him extended toward them, with all filial respect,
and dutiful observance to his Father and Mother-in-law; and the true
performance of all and every part of the Agreement; And so persuading them to
mutual love, and friendship amongst themselves, and truth and loyalty to their
Sovereign; And so with an expression of detestation of the late murder of the
Duke of Burgoyne, and giving assurance of his desire to procure the revengement
thereof he concluded. The next day following, James the young King of Scots
arrived; And upon the fourth day of June, King Henry with the French King, the
King of Scots, the Duke of Burgoyne, the Prince of Orange, one and twenty
Earls, five and fou^y Barons, with many Knights and Gentlemen, with an Army
consisting of French, English, Scottish, Irish, and Dutch, to the number of
six hundred thousand marched toward the Dolphin, and upon the seventh day
laid siege to the Town of Seins, that sided with the Dolphin, which after
four days siege yielded, and thereof the Lord Benvile was made Captain; From
thence they removed, having the Duke of Bedford in their company, who had
brought out of England large supplies of men and money to Monstreau en falte
Yon, which was taken by Escalado; here the murdered Duke of Burgoyne being
buried, and from thence his Son caused his boues to be taken up, and carried
to Digeon in high Burgoyne, and there enterred by his Father Philip: The Castle
held out; and during the siege thereof, King Henry Created an Officer of arms,
to be king of Herolds over the English The creation of Garter principal King
of arms.
men, and entitled him Garter, whom he had formerly sent with offers of mercy
to the Castle, but was by the Captain thereof reproachfully upbrayded, for
punishment of which his presumption, a gibbet was erected, and in view of
Mounsieur Guitry the Castle Captain, twelve of his friends were executed;
Whereupon the Castilians treated for peace, but the King in eight days
together would not vouchsafe a parle, so that after they had borne the brunt of
six weeks siege, they were enforced, with saving of lives simply to yield. The
Earl of Warwick was appointed, to examine by poll all the prisoners, and
others that yielded, to find out any that had bin privy, or parties to the
murder of the Duke of Burgoine; and was afterward made Governor both of
Castle and Town. From thence the King marched to Melun upon Seine, which was
besieged the thirteenth of July, the Captain whereof was Barbason a Gascoyne,
a skillful soldier, and of approved valiancy; And as Hanniball in war was
not more ready to invent stratagems, then Quintus Fabius to prevent them; so
King Henryes counsel could not be more wily to win, then Barbason was wary
to defend.

The King by land and water stopped all passages, making use of his
beforementioned floates, to pass his soldiers over the River; yet Barbason
sallied out, and fell upon the Earl of Warwickes quarter, where if he had not
been the more valiantly resisted; The Duke of Burgoynes men had tasted of
their fury. The Duke of Bavier another of King Charles Sonin-lawe, (but his
Duchess was dead,) with seven hundred well-appointed Horsemen, came to the
Camp, which were presently listed under the Kings pay. Barbason countermined
some, and stopped other mines made by the English, and fought hand to hand in the
Barryers with King Henry, yet notwithstanding all his circumspect care, and
praiseworthy diligence; when he found he was to fight against the two bitter
arrows of Gods wrath, Famine and Pestilence, he humbled himself to the King,
who pardoned all that were not guilty of the forenamed murder, whereof
Barbason being suspected, and others that were found faulty, were sent to
Paris under the conduct of the Duke of Clarence, whom King Charles made
Captain of Delea that City, and was accordingly admitted into the possession
of all the strength thereof; And presently thereupon both the Kings with their
Queens, the Duke of Burgoyne and his Duchess, with a royal train came
thither, where they were most magnificencly entertained; the French King was
lodged in the house of Saint Paul, and the King of England, in the Castle of
Lover; Here the three States of France, anew under their hands and seals, in
most authenticke manner, ratified the former agreement, the instruments The
ratification of the agreement laid up in the Treasury at Westminster.
whereof were delivered to the King of England, who sent them to be kept in
his Treasury at Westminster.

Now King Henry began to exercise his Regency, and as a badge of his
authority, he caused a new coin which was called a Salute to be made,
whereon the arms of France and England were quarterly stamped; He there heard
the Appeal of the Dowager of Burgoine against the Dolphin, whose Advocates in
his behalf made large offers for satisfaction, but they were adjourned to
another day. He placed and displaced diverse officers, and appointed the Duke
of Exceter with five hundred men, to the guard of Paris. Sir Gilbert Vmfrevile
was made Captain of Melun, and the Earl of Huntington of Bloyes de Vinces,
King Henry awarded out Process against the Dolphin, to appear at the Marble
table at Paris, which he not obeying, sentence was denounced against him, as
guilty of the murder of the Duke of Burgoyne, and by the sentence of the
Parliament the Dolphin was banished the Realm.

The King with his beloved Queen Katherine the sixth of January left Paris An.
1421. R. 9.
and came to Roane, where he received homage of all the Nobility, as well such
as were enobled by descent of the French, as such as were dignified by desert
of the English; And making Thomas Duke of Clarence Lieutenant general of
France and Normandy; and his Deputy in Normandy the Earl of Salisbury: Having
finished his Christmas, he with his Queen went to Amiens, and from thence to
Callice, and thence landing at Dover, came to Canterbury, and afterward through
London to Westminster, where Queen Katherine Crowned.
the Queen upon Saint Mathewes day, the fourth of February, with all
ceremonies, rites, and accustomed solemnities was Crowned. The King of Scots
sitting at dinner in his Estate, but on the left hand of the Queen, the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Kings Uncle the Bishop of Winchester being on
the right hand, all were served with covered messes of silver, but all the
Feast was fish, in observation of the Lent season.

King Henry by his ghostly father being instructed, that the surest stone, that
can be laid for the foundation of future felicity, must be dug out of the
quarry of Piety, first visited many places for devotion, by way of Pilgrimage,
King Henryes Piety.
and then took his Progress through the Land, and knowing that great evils
may grow out of the smallest causes, if neglected, he by the way reformed all
misdemeanors, whereof he received notice, hearing with a diligent ear, the
complaints of his poor subjects, taking order for the administering of Justice
to high and poor, neither sparing the great for might, nor the mean for
misery: And showing that Examples are the best Lectures, and Virtue the best
example, after he had set his ministers a copy thereof: He gave meeting to
the Queen at Leicester, where they kept their Easter.

In the mean time the Duke of Clarence making a road into Aniou, with the
garrisons of Normandy, came to the City of Ampers, where he knighted Sir
William Rosse, Sir Henry Goddard, Sir Rowland Vider, Sir Thomas Bewford, his
natural Son; And retutning home laden with prey, was advertised, that the
Duke of Alanson, intended to intercept his passage; he therefore sent the
skowt-Master Andrew Fogosa, to discover the face of the enemy, who being a
treacherous Lombard, and having been corrupted by the enemy, at his return
reports their number to be but small, meanly armed, and worse ordered, so
that if presently charged, there could be no resistance. The Dukes credulity,
caused him to draw all his horses together, leaving the strength of the field,
his Bows and Bills behind, with them he makes toward the enemy; the traitor
leading to a straight, where by his appointment an ambush was laid, that the
Duke could neither retreat nor The Duke of Clarence betrayed.
flee, which perceiving, the Duke with a valiant courage, told the Earl of
Tanckervile, that their chance was very hard, when no means was left, but to
sell their lives at the dearest rate to their enemies, and so setting spurs
to his horse, charged upon the enemy; but over-layed with multitude, and
overwearied with fight: The Duke of Clarence, the Earl of Tanckervile, the
Robert Vmphrevile here slain, was both Earl of Argus and Kime.
Lord Rosse, the Earl of Angus Kyme, Sir John Lumley, and Sir John Verend,
with above two thousand English slain: The Earls of Somerset, Suffolk, and
Perch, Sir John Berckley, Sir Ralph Nevile, Sir William Bows, and threescore
Gentlemen were taken prisoners. The Bastard Clarence having an inckling of the
Lombards treachery, brought on his Archers, whom the French perceiving to
approach, fled with their Prisoners, leaving the dead undispoyled, by which
means the Lord Fitzwater, and some others were found wounded, and almost
stifled amongst the carcasses; The bodies of the dead were by the footmen
buried, except the Duke of Clarence, who by Sir John Beauford his base son,
the Duke dying without other issue wac conveyed to England and buried at
Canterbury besider his father. 1421.
This happened upon Easter Eeve. The King was at Beverly when he had notice of
his brothers death, and presently thereupon, he dispatced away Edmond Earl of
Mortaigne into Normandy, making him Lieutenant thereof. Then calls he his high
Court of Parliament to Westminster, wherein A Parliament at Westminster.
he enforced the necessity of speedy pursuance, of the Dolphin and his
Adherents, and easiness of revenging the loss of his brother and their
friends and allies, in case they would furnish him with money, men and
ammunition being in readiness provided; Whereupon the Clergy cheerfully
granted two tenths, and the temporalty readily one fifteen, and for that the
Kings have could not well stay the wonted course of collection thereof.

The Bishop of Winchester, laid forth to be received again of the Designs
of the spiritualty, twenty thousand pounds; so willing was the rich Cardinal
to have his brother Clarence death revenged. The King thus provided with money,
sent his brother the Duke of Bedford, with the Army to Callice, consisting of
four thousand men at arms, and four and twenty thousand Archers, himself
about the middle of May follows, and safely King Henry returns to France.
arriving at Callice; he hasted to relieve Charters, whom the Dolphin with
seven thousand men had besieged, and coming to Maunt, heard that the Dolphin
was retired to Tours. The Duke of Burgoyne, who had received, and feasted the
King, with his Father and Mother-in-law at Monstruell, and from thence came
with the King to Maunt, went back to Piccardy, to resist the insolences of
Sir Jacques de Harcourt,

The King of Scots with the Duke of Gloucester, about the eight of July,
besieged Dreux, which upon the eight of August compounded; That if they Dreux
besieged.
were not reskued, before the twentieth of that month, to deliver up the
Town, the soldiers with their goods, to march whither they would, upon which
day no reskue came, they had all leave to depart, except one Searle an
Englishman, fled thither for Treason out of Roane, whom they presently
executed, and the Town was delivered to the King of Scots, whereof the Earl
of Worcester was made Captain, and Sir Henry Mortimer Bayliffe. The King
pursued the Dolphin from place to place, but he was too flit of foot, to be
easily overtaken; In the way King Henry surprised the Town of Baugency, but
took them all to mercy that craved it; the like he did at Rugemounte, from
thence victual failing, he went to Orleans, and from thence to Vignei Saint
Yon, where he stayed awhile to refresh his men, and from thence to Paris, and
having there fitted himself with supplies, he went and fate down before
Meuix in Brye, a Town no less well victualed then manned, and no better
furnished then fortified, nevertheless after many assaults, the besieged
forsook the Walls, and drew into the Market place, where they began works for
their defense, from whence being likewise beaten, the King had possession of
that, and all the Fortresses in the Isle of France, in Lonvaus, in Brye, and in
Champayne.

The Duke of Bedford in the Kings absence, called a Parliament in England,
1422. A Parliament in the Kings absence called. The birth of Henry the sixth.
in which was granted to the King, toward the maintenance of his wars, one
Fifteen to be paid in such moneys, as at the time of the grant were
current. Upon Saint Nicholas day, Queen Katherine was brought to bed of a
Son at Windsor, who was by the Duke of Bedford, and Henry Bishop of
Winchester, and the Countess of Holland Christened by the name of Henry,
whereof when the King had notice out of a propheticke disposition he said;
Good Lord, I Henry borne at Monmouth shall small time reign, and much get; and
Henry borne at Windsor, shall long Reign and lose all, but Gods will be done.

Diverse Frenchmen under the leading of Oliver de Many, who had given faith
never to bear arms against the King of England entered Normandy, and did rob
and spoil the country; But being by the Earl of Suffolk encountered, he was
after a long and desperate fight taken, and all his Confederates rowted; the
King notwithstanding his breach of faith, put him not to death, but sent him
prisoner to England, where he dyed.

The Dolphin laid siege to Cosney, who made composition, that if they were not
reskued by the King of England within ten days to surrender. The Dolphin
besieged Cosney.
The King was so intentive to the reskue, that he over-heat himself with
travel, and coming to Senlis found himself so distempered, that he was
enforced to remain there, and send his brother Duke of Bedford to prosecute
the dissigne, who effected the same: the Dolphin upon his approach, raised the
siege, and dishonourably retired into Berry, whereof in mockage he was after
called King of Berry, the Queens untimely visit, who not long before having
taken shipping at Southampton, with a gallant Company of freshmen raised, and
furnished at her own charge, under the conduct of the Duke of Bedford, was
come into France, and had met the King at Paris, where he left her, but she
having notice of his sickness was come unto him, did much increase the Kings
Fever, insomuch that by the persuasion of the Doctors, and direction of the
Kings Council against her own will, and the Kings desire, whose ardent
affection unto her could hardly brook her An. 1422. R. 9.
absence, she left the King, who after her departure growing worse and worse,
was removed to Bloys, where within few days he yielded up his King Henry
dies.
conquests to the all-Conquerour, who sent him Crowned with never-dying victory
to place of ever-living glory.

Somewhat before his departure out of this world, he made the Duke of The Duke
of Bedford made General of Normandy. The Duke of Gloucester Protector.
Bedford Lieutenant general of Normandy, and Regent of the kingdom of France;
And the Duke of Gloucester Protector of England, and his sons person,
exhorting all to be true and friendly to the Duke of Burgoyne, to be at
unity amongst themselves, to be loyal to their young Prince, to be
serviceable to his dearly beloved Queen, to hold and preserve, what he by his
valor and Gods assistance had won, never to conclude contract of amity with
the Dolphin, or the Duke of Alanson, until they had submitted themselves to
the Kings grace, and so giving God thanks for all his former favors, and
blessings bestowed upon him, he dyed the last of August 1422. in the eight and
thirtieth year of his age, when he had reigned nine years five months, and
four and twenty days; his body was carried to Westminster, and there buried
amongst his Ancestors, his character appears best when it is referred to his
recollection of himself; for as he was in youth the most untowardly, so in
his riper years he approved himself of great nobleness and virtue, his
stature was tall, his personage slender, but very strong and active, he was
says Walsingham, modestus vultu, actu magnanimus, of courage invincible, and
fortunately victorious in all his battles, never receiving check in any; of
nature liberal, of disposition affable, of a generous spirit, of infatigable
constancy; he was wise and provident in Council, in judgment upright and
just, in his speech sober, in countenance majesticke, in comportment
magnanimous, borne and bred for conquest, of life unreprovable, and in his
death generally greatly lamented; in brief, his deeds gave cause of admiration
to contemporaries and imitation, and to others as having spirit to dare, and a
power to do bravely, he was married to Katherine, Daughter of Charles the
sixth King of france, whose company she enjoyed but two years and three
months, by whom he had issue only Henry, that succeeded him in the Crown,
her affections after tied her to Owen Theodor, a Gentleman of no extraordinary
lineage, but absolute for the lineaments of his body, by whom she had issue
three sons, Edmond, Jasper, and Owen: Edmond was after Earl of Richmond, and
married Margaret daughter and sole heir of John Duke of Somerset, who had issue
King Henry the seventh.

Jasper was Earl of Penbrocke, and after Duke of Bedford, she dyed in
Southwarcke, and was buried at Westminster.

THE LIFE AND REIGN OF KING HENRY THE SIXTH.
HENRY the sixth, borne at Windsor an infant of Ann. 1422 R. 1.
nine months old, began his Reign the last of August, Anno Dom. 1422. The
government of the Realms preappointed by the Father on his deathbed, and
after confirmed by the Nobility, was committed to Humphrey Duke of Gloucester.
The guard of his person, to Thomas Duke of Exceter, and Henry Bewford Bishop of
Winchester, and to John Duke of Bedford, was appointed the Regency of France:
This triple twyne until the time unhappily untwisted, kept the wheels in
orderly motion, that guided the Clock of good government in this Realm, so
that there was in the beginning of their proceeding, no disproportion or
disagreement betwixt them, but all things were continued advisedly and well.
The Protectors knowing that it is treachery to wisdom in managing great
affairs, not to be directed by the clew of advise, made choice of grave and
discreet Councillors, by whose approvement he made provision of all things
necessary, as well for quiet governing the English, as for retayning the
conquered parts of France in obedience, and further conquest of such as yet
were refractary; leaving nothing undone, that might conduce to the honor and
happiness, of the estate of the young King and the Realm.

The Regent of France was not backward on his part, but endeavored all that was
possible, to second the Protectours care; But the death of Charles The Dolphin
proclaimed King.
the sixth, and the proclaiming the Dolphin King of France, by the name of
Charles the seventh, gave the Regent just cause to suspect the tergiversation
of the French. Whereupon he increases the Garrisons, and sufficiently
furnishes all places of import, with men and ammunition, exhorting the Normans,
to continue constant, according to their fealty, made to the King of England;
On the other side, the new King of France makes provision in Pont Melon
surprised by the French.
all places, to draw his forces together; And in the mean time, sends the Lord
Granvile to Pont Melan, who surprised the same, putting all the An. 1422. R. 3.
English soldiers to the sword, for revenge whereof, and the recovery of the
Town, the Regent sent the ever to be commended Commander, Thomas Montacute
Earl of Salisbury, with convenient forces thither, who Reduced by the Earl of
Salisbury.
for the space of two months, so straightly beleagred the same, that the Lord
Gravile surrendered the same, and swear (but fleshly) to be true man to the
King of England: Hereof was Sir Henry Mortimer made Captain, and Sir Richard
Vernon of the Castle; From thence he marched to Seyne, which he took by
assault, and put all the soldiers (except the Captain Sir William Maryn) to
the sword, and thereof made Captains, Sir Hugh Godding, and Sir Richard
Aubemond, the first of the Town, the other of the Castle.

The Regent, the Duke of Burgoyne, and John Duke of Britain meet at Amiens,
and renewed the old league, and further enlarged it, to be defensive The
league renewed with Burgoine.
and offensive respectively; And knowing that affinity for the most part, is
the truest entertainer of friendship, and an unquestionable obligation of
amity: the Regent afterward marries Anne, the Sister of Burgoyne at Troys: In
the mean time the Parisian conspired, to have let in the new King into Paris,
but the day before the night, appointed for his admission, A conspiracy at
Paris.
the Duke with his power entered, apprehended the Conspiratours, and put them to
public execution, which done, he furnished all the Forts, and places of
strength with Englishmen, sent Sir John Falstaff, who took in Preventtd and
punished.
Pacy, and Coursay, two strong Castles, whilst he with his forces took in
Traynells, and Bray upon Seyne.

The Constable the while, with all the new Kings forces, laid siege to Cravant
in Burgoyne. But the Regent and the Duke of Burgoyne, sent their forces under
the conduct of the never-sufficiently to be praised Earl of Salisbury, who
having with great difficulty, and small loss passed the river of Yone,
seconded by the Burgonians, set upon the French, and after a long and doubtful
fight, put the French to flight, slaying about eighteen hundred Knights and
Gentlemen of note, and three thousand common soldiers, Scottish and French,
there were taken Prisoners, The Constable of France, who had lost an eye, the
Earl of Ventadour, Sir Alexander Merdyn, Sir Lewis Ferignye, and two and
twenty hundred Gentlemen, of the The French defeated.
English part were slain, Sir John Gray, Sir William Hall, Sir Gilbert
Halsall, one of the Marshalls of the field, Richard ap Maddocke, and one and
twenty hundred soldiers, one with another.

From hence the Earl led his forces to Montaguillon, and sat down before it,
and after five months siege took it, whilst the Duke of Suffolk, took in
the two strong Castles of Coucy, and le Roche.

The Protector in the mean time, ransomed and enlarged, the young King of
Scots (who for many years had been prisoner) taking Homage and Fealty of
him, from the Crown of Scotland, the tenor whereof is thus recorded, I JAMES
STEWARD King of SCOTS, shall be true and faithful unto you Lord HENRY, by
the grace of GOD, King of ENGLAND and FRANCE, the Noble and superior Lord of
SCOTLAND, and to you I make my fidelity, for the said kingdom which I hold
and claim of you; And I shall bear you my faith, and fidelity of life and
limme, and worldly honor, against all men, and faithfully I shall acknowledge,
and shall do you service due for the Kingdom of SCOTLAND afore-sayd, so GOD
me help and these holy Evangelists; And with consent of all the Nobility,
gave him to wife the Lady Jane, Daughter to the deceased Duke of Somerset, Ann.
1422 R. 2.
and Cousin german to the King, with a large Dowry, besides many great and
rich gifts bestowed by the Mother, Uncles, and other her kindred, but no
courtesy or bounty, could keep him from proving unfaithful and unthankful.
The King of Scots marieth the Duke of Somersets Daughter.
The Protector with his accustomed provident circumspection to prevent
dangers, that want of supplies might bring to the Army, sent over to the Regent
ten thousand well-furnished soldiers, with all things whereof he might
stand in need, with which fresh succors, he won and valiantly conquered
many Towns, Castles, and places of strength, whose power the Frenchmen not
able to withstand, began to fasten the foxes tail to the lions skin, and what
they could not by courage compass, they attempted by crafty subtlety to
accomplish, first they work upon the inconstancy of the Duke of Britain, and
his Brother Arthure, by King Henry the fifth Created Earl of Yewry, these two
by gifts had promises, things that blind the eyes of the treasonally minded
wife, they suborned, perfidiously to deliver over into their possession, the
Castle of Crotoy and Yernye, and what the English had won by true manhood and
valor, they stole away with craft and treachery, but little to their praise or
profit, for the English before the garrisons were settled, fell upon Crotoy,
and took the prey out of the Leopards Crotoy lost and recovered.
jaws, and like unkind hosts made them pay too dear a price for their
lodgings; Crotoy thus regained, the Regent straightly begirts Yenrye, and by
secret myning, fierce assaults, and violent batteryes, so shook the walls,
that composition was made to yield it up, if not relieved by a certain time;
The Regent was thoroughly resolved to set up his rest, and to abide battle what
forces soever should appear, and thereof permitted the besieged to send notice
to the French King; The Duke of Alanson thereupon with sixteen thousand French
approached, but when he perceived the English were ready prepared to receive
him according to the French fashion, at that time to brag much and do
little, he wheeled about to Vernoyle, whereas perjury is the concomitant of
every other sin, he joined it to his cowardice, swearing to the Townsmen,
that he had put the Regent to flight, and had beaten him out of the field, and
reskued Yenrye; by this false report, he got Vernoyle. Whilst the Regent had
Yurye surrendered unto him, which being strengthened and furnished, he followed
the cowards to their conny-borrough at Vernoyle, who by the encouragement of
some fresh companies of Scots come unto their succor, came to a battle in the
field, where the English The English are victorious at Vernoyle.
with the loss of two thousand one hundred common soldiers, and two of the
Nobility, Lord Dudley and Lord Charleton, got the glory of the day, and slew
of their enemies, five Earls, two Vicounts, and twenty Barons, and above seven
thousand other of the French, besides two thousand seven hundred Scots lately
arrived; The Duke himself with the Bastard of Alanson, the Lord of Hormyt, and
diverse other French, and Sir John Turnbull, and two hundred Gentlemen, besides
common soldiers were taken prisoners. This battle was struck the twenty
eight day of August, Vernoyle hereupon without battery or assault, upon promise
of 1424. The reduction of Vernoyle.
safety of life only was delivered, and there of Sir PHILIP HALL made
Captain, and sufficient garrison left him: from thence the Army marched to
Roan, and from thence to Paris, both which places were at strife which should
exceed other in freedom, of welcome and loving entertainment to the Regent.

This overthrow so weakened the new King, that he was enforced to quit the
country, and went to Poyteers, where he established his high Court of
Parliament, and labors his own establishment. The valiant Earl An. 14. 24.
R. 3.
of Salisbury with ten thousand men, takes in the strong Town of Maunts, the
town of Saint Susan, le fort St. Bernard and others, from thence he went into
Angeou, where he performed such heroicke acts, that his very name grew
terrible in all France; for instance, The new high Constable perfidious
Richmond, in hope to do some what to advance the reputation of his new Office,
with forty thousand men, lays siege to the good town of Saint James in
Bevion, the garrison whereof, consisted but of six hundred English, who being
droven to some extremity, bravely (I might say desperately) at one time
sallied forth, crying Saint George, a Salisbury, the French The French frighted
with the name of Salisbury.
men fearing, that they had some token given, that Salisbury was come to the
reskue, or that he was behind in the Town with more forces, were so suddenly
affrighted, that the craven cowards, casting away their weapons, ran all
away, saving some few that yielded themselves prisoners, leaving all their
tents, fourteen pieces of Ordnance, forty barrells of Powder, three hundred
Pipes of wine, two hundred Pipes of Biscuit and flower, two hundred pieces of
Raisins and Figs, five hundred barrells of Herrings, much Armor, and some
Treasure.

At this time Sir John Montgomery, and Sir John Falstaff with two thousand
men, entered into Ainon and Main, and took the Castles, of Beamont, Vicount,
Teune, Sillye, Osce, Courceriers, Ronsey, Vasike, Couetenement, and very many
others, so that it appears, at that time it was, but for the English to ask
and have, so pitifully were the French Cowde with the Regents prosperity.

The French were come to their old course of fraud, and had compounded with a
Gascoyne Captain there, for the delivery of Alanson to the enemy, notice being
given hereof, the Lord Willoughby, and Sir John Falstaff, with two thousand
men, were sent to spoil she Market, who encountering with the chief Merchant
Charles de villiers, who with two hundred horse, and three hundred foot, were
come to the place appointed for their entry, took and slew them all, except
some few horse, which saved themselves by flying away; The Lord Willoughby with
his troops, returned to the Earl of Salisbury, who victoriously proceeded,
taking in and demolishing, above forty Castles and strong piles, the news
thereof in England caused public Processions, and general thanksgiving to
God, in London and other places. Nevertheless, an unkind variance, and a jarre
betwixt the Protector and the Bishop of Winchester Lord Chancellor arising,
endangered the quiet of the Commonwealth, for the appeasing whereof, the
Regent having substituted, A jarre betwixt the brothers in England draws the
Regent into Ergland.
the Earl of Warwick Lieutenant general in his absence, came into England,
where a Parliament being convoked, he therein discreetly arbitrated, and
compounded all differences betwixt the Protector and Winchester, and to the
comfort of the Council, and content of all, stinted the quarrel; In honor
whereof the King of England kept a solemn feast, at which time the Regent
dubbed the King Knight, who invested with that dignity, many of his servants,
and Created Richard, Son of Richard late Earl The young King knighted.
of Cambridge, Duke of York, and restored John Mowbray to the Duchy of
Norfolk.

In the mean time the Earl of Warwick conquered many strong pieces in Main,
and made preparation to fight a set battle, whereunto he was challenged by
the French, but they said never the sooner for a hasty word, their hearts were
in their heels, and in stead of coming on to fight, they took their flight
another way, a day before the prefixed time of battle.

All things peaceably settled in England, the regent with the Bishop of
Winchester returned into France, where at the intercession of the Duke of
Burgoyne, the Duke of Alanson was ransomed for two hundred thousand Crowns;
The Bishop of Winchester returned to Callice, where he was The Regent returns
to France.
invested with the Hat, habit and dignity of a Cardinal, I dare not think
because he was a Clergy man, that he ambitiously affected, or otherwise
contracted for that place; But the advantage of a Bull from the Pope, was a
means for him, in short time to gather a great mass of money, so that many
wondered at his wealth, but few approved his proceedings.

Whilst thus in France, the English prosperously aided by the Almighty power,
in a good quarrel every where prevailed, Humphry Duke of Gloucester, who
inveigled (by the enticing behavior of an unconstant woman) had married more
for lust, (which always hunts after new pleasures) then for love, which is
contented with due delights, Iaqueline of Bavier Countess of Henolt, Holland,
and Zeland, who had formerly been coupled in Matrimony to John Duke of Brabant
yet living, (with whom she had lived as man and wife ten months) with his
said Lady, crossed the Seas to Bergen Hennalt, and took in her right the homage
of the Country, which not a little disquieted her former Husband, and much
displeased his brother the Duke of Burgoyne, insomuch that the Duke of Burgoyne
relying of his familiarity with the English, and their respect to Honor,
wrote a kind Letter Burgoyne by letter disswades Gloucester from his new wife.
unto the Duke, wherein he intimated; how he was abused by his said Lady, and
how great a disrepute, he would cast upon his actions, if upon notice of her
husbands the Duke of Brabants claim, both to her and her possessions, he did
not freely relinquish both unto him, withal, admonishing him with the danger,
of holding another man's wife, and usurping her first husbands rights and titles.

But the Duke of Burgoyne perceiving that he sowed but in the sands, whilst
he wrote in that kind sends him a Challenge, on part of the Duke of Britain
to fight with him body to body, according to the law of arms, but Glocesters
hot affection being by this time somewhat slacked, and remembering himself, how
much his honor by these courses was blemished, he did neither accept, nor deny
the Challenge, but only craved time to return into England, to dispose of his
estate, and then he would give him requirable satisfaction; In the mean time,
the incendiary of these turmoyles is betrayed by the Montists to the Duke of
Burgoyne, who conveyed her to Gaunt, from whence she escaped into Holland,
where she made a defensive war against her Husband, and the Duke of
Burgoine, who both laid hard unto her Territories.

But Pope Martin having pronounced the contract of Matrimony with Gloucester
utterly unlawful, made the Dukes the more earnest in the prosecution against
the Lady; In the mean time the Duke of Gloucester though he declined his
affection, not willing the world should think he deserted her altogether,
sent the Lord Fitzwalter to her aid, with a power of Englishmen, who joining
with the Duchess forces about Brewers haven near Zerix, was encountered by
the Duke of Brabant, who gave them a great overthrow, (the fowlenesse of the
cause, and the unjustnesse of the quarrel, having blunted the wonted
resolution of the English) the news of that overthrow, and of the Popes
sentence, coming together to the Duke of Glocesters ears, to comfort himself
against the one, and to free himself from the other, he gave his old wife a
discharge, and forsaking Iaqueline, takes for a second, Elianor daughter of
Lord Cobham of Sterborough his old Mistress.

The Constable of France with forty thousand men, besieged the Town of St.
James de Benuron, and having planted his battery, made a breach as they deemed
assaultable, which whilst the French were straining courtesy, who should first
enter, Sir Nicholas Burdet, with all his forces (leaving the Townsmen to
receive the assaylants) sallyes forth, both they within and those without,
crying aloud, a Salisbury, a Suffolk, the names whereof The name of Salisbury
a bugbeare to the French.
stroke such a terror amongst the besiegers, that they either disorderly ran
away, or stood like men amazed, till their throats were cut, of which six
hundred were slain, two hundred drowned in the ditches; fifty taken prisoners,
and eighteen Standards were taken with one Banner; The Constable was glad to
quit the place with great loss, and retired to Fongeeres.

The Earl of Warwick and the Lord Scales, with seven thousand men besieged
Ponterson many weeks together, in which time all provision grew 1426.
very scantie, insomuch, that the Lord Scales for the relief of their so
pressing necessities, with three thousand men forraged a great way into the
enemies country, and in his return with plenty of provision, was encountered
with six thousand French, but he slew many hundreds of them, and took a
thousand and odd prisoners, and so came in safety to the Camp. The enemy had
raised a great power, to raise the siege, but by the way they fell upon the
Castle of Ramfort) which the garrison of Susan had a little before surprised)
and there they stayed until Ponterson was yielded, and well funnished,
Ponterson taken by the English.
and fortified by the Earl of Warwick, who was returned to the Regent.

A Conspiracy of the Clergy, and Magistrates in Mounts so prevailed, that the
Marshalls by France with five hundred men, about midnight came to the Town
walls, where the guard of English, by those that seemed their friends, and of
one company, were suddenly massacred, and setting open the gates, gave way to
the enemy to enter, upon the alarm given, the Earl of Suffolk with the
surviving English, (according to directions formerly given, in case any
treachery should be plotted) withdrew to the Castle, wherein they were sharply
assailed by the French, who perceiving no good to be done upon them by
assault, knowing how ill they were provided for necessaries for a siege,
carelessly neglected them, falling to ransacking houses, and making good cheer,
whereof the Lord Talbot having intelligence by Captain Goffe, whom the Lord
Talbot (who from Alanson was by night marches with some forces come within two
miles of Mounts) had sent to discover the state of the French, he secretly
gave notice to the Earl of Suffolk, who at the hour appointed, sallied forth
of the Castle, at what time the Lord Talbot was ready with his troops, and on
both sides crying, Saint Mounts retaken.
George a Talbot, they fell upon the careless French, who lost four hundred
of their best men, the residue were all taken, the Town regained: and the
Conspirators, thirty Citizens, twenty Priests, and fifteen Friars, found out,
condemned, and executed.

Now the triple cord began to be untwisted, and one of the great supporters of
the young Kings weakness, the right noble Thomas Beuford (son of 1427.
John of Gaunt, and Katherine Swyneford) Duke of Exceter, Protector of the
King, makes King Henry his heir, and at East- Greenwich in Kent, takes leave
of this mortal life; This Thomas Duke of Exceter married Margaret the Daughter
of Sir Thomas Nevill of Hornby Castle, but had no issue by her. To supply his
room, as Tutor to the King, was the Earl of Warwick appointed, whose place
in France was supplied by the Earl of Salisbury the terror of the French, who
with five thousand men came to Orleans, and for an entrance to his employment,
with one thousand old soldiers, joined with the new, he besieged the City;
The Bastard Orleance An. 1427. R. 6.
had by the space of five miles round, spoiled whatsoever might help or
advantage the English, he himself undertaking the defense of the great Fort,
built upon the East-bridge, from whence making a French bravado, in show more
then a man at first, he retired weaker indeed then a woman, with loss of many
his soldiers, to the Town leaving the English in possession of the Fort. From
an high Tower in this Bulwarcke, out of a window therein, the besiegers
observed the passages of the Townsmen, about two months after the siege
began, the noble Duke of Salisbury thinking to inform himself of the state of
the Town, unhappily looking out of this Window with Sir Thomas Gargrave, a
great shot from the Town, striking the bars of the Window, the splinters
whereof were driven into his head and face, of which wound within eight days
after he dyed; He married Elianor Daughter of Thomas Holland Earl of Kent,
by whom he had issue only Anne, married to Richard Nevill, one of the younger
sons of Ralph Nevill Earl of Westmerland, he had a base son named John.
This Earls death was a second weakening of the young Kings expected triumphs,
for two limbs of his budding tree of careful protection, and thriving
direction are lopt off by death, and a third began to be putrified; The Earl
of Suffolk succeeds in the charge of the siege, who finding necessaries
wanting, sends Sir John Falstaff for supplies, the Regent furnishes him
speedily, and in his return the Lord de la Brets nine thousand strong,
endeavors to intercept him, but being discovered, Sir John resolved to abide
the charge, places his carriages behind, the horse next, and the foot before,
lyning his Bows with Bill-men, pitching stakes behind the Archers, who having
loosed their first volley retired behind the stakes, on which the French
forgetting their former defeats that way, ran and gored their horses, and
were forced to light against their wills, with a knock on the crown with a
brown Bill, laid on with a strong arm, by which their Voward being
disordered, the battle made a stand, which Sir John perceiving, cries out,
Saint George they fly, which was no sooner spoken then it proved true, for
there with they fled, and in the fight and chase, the French lost two thousand
five hundred men, with the Lords de la Brets, and William Steward, and eleven
hundred were taken prisoners, with whom and a rich booty, they came to the
Camp before Orleace, Hereof the besieged having notice, hopeless of help
from the French King, they offered to submit themselves to the protection The
policy of the French
of the Duke of Burgoyne, who was contented to accept them, upon the Regents
consent.

This motion pleased many of the Council of war, but the General, and the
rest more considerate, did mislike it; Whereupon the General returned this
answer, That since the King his Master had bestowed so long time, and exhausted
so much Treasure, and spent so much victuals, besides the uncomparable loss of
the Earl of Salisbury slain there, he could not but think it would much
redound to his own dishonor, and the disparagement of the renown of the
kingdom of England; If now the besieged, were driven to that extremity, that
they were not able to subsist of themselves, that any other then those that had
beaten the bush, should have the birds. Then made the besieged means to the
Duke of Alanson, who used such diligence, that taking advantage of too much
slacknesse of watch in the Camp, being secured as they thought from danger of
sally from within, or approach of enemy from without, he furnished the Town
both with fresh provision and forces, under the coverture of a dark and most
tempestuous night, which put such fresh spirit into the citizens, that they
made a brave salout; and by fine force carried the Bulwarcke upon the bridge,
and another Fort, and slew six hundred English, and adventured upon the
Bastile, in which the Lord Talbot commanded, who not being used to be coopt up,
valiantly issued out, and bravely repulsed them back, with great slaughter and
The death of Salisbury, the downfall of the English good fortune. Both wind and
Sun against the English.
confusion into the Town; But the next day, the Earl of Suffolk left the
siege, and dispersed his Army to their several places of garrison, and in his
return the Lord Talbot surprised the Town and Castle of Lavall; But now the
wheel of fortune began to turn, and disasters and disgraces fell hudling one
upon the neck of another on the English part.

And first the Duke of Alanson having raised a great power, took by assault
the town of Iargeux, and therein the Earl of Suffolk, and one of his
brothers, and slew Sir Alexander Pole, another of their brothers, and many
other Prisoners in cold blood, because of the contention among the French, to
whom the Prisoners did belong; Then the Lords, Talbot, Scales, and Hungerford,
with five thousand men, going to fortify the town of Meum were encountered by
the said Duke and Arthure of Britain, and three and twenty thousand men, who
fiercely assailed them. The English Lords for a time endured the shocke, and
enterchanged some blows; but oppressed with multitude, the three Lords are taken
prisoners all sore wounded, twelve hundred of their company slain, the residue
hardly escaping to Meum: where they used their best forces, to fortify
themselves against future assaults. These disasters were seconded by the
perfidious surrender of many Towns and strong holds to the French King; who
now encouraged by these good successes, marched into Champaigne, where by
Composition he took the chief City thereof Troyes, Chaltons rebelleth, and
enforces The French every where revolt.
their Captain to yield it up; by whose example the Citizens of Reme do the
like, wherein the French King is a new Proclaimed, and there with accustomed
Ceremonies anointed and crowned, and is thereby furthered with the voluntary
submission of many Towns, Castles, strong holds: who from every part sent
their subjective messages unto him.

The Duke of Bedford with ten thousand English besides Normans, marched out
of Paris, sending Letters of defiance to the French King, affirming therein,
that he contrary to the accord, betwixt King Henry the fifth and King Charles,
Father to him that was but an usurper, by the instigation of a feminine devil,
had taken upon him the Title and dignity of King of France, and by deceitful
and unjust means, had surreptitiously stolen (not The Regent defies the French
King.
conquered) and kept diverse Cities and places of import, belonging to the
Crown of England; for legal proof whereof, by stroke of battle he was
come into that part, and thereby would justify his Chartel^ true, and cause
just, leaving allowance to his enemy to make choice of the place, and in the
same he should be sure of battle.

The new King howsoever perplexed, set a good countenance on the matter, and
told the Harrold. that he would sooner seek his Master, then his Master
should need to seek him, and without further answer dismissed him. The Regent
thereupon makes toward him, and making choice of an indifferent place
encampeth in sight of the French; And though the King made show of readiness
to fight, yet he turned faces to the left hand and marched away, The Regent
followed him, but could not overtake him, till he came near Senlys, where the
King was encamped. The armies on both sides The Armies on both sides in array.
were embattailed, and kept in array, as long as it was light, and so again
the next day the Dukes light horsemen, and the Normans made many attempts, An.
1428. R. 7.
and provoked some skirmishes, as it were to give the French a taste of their
resolution, but the King not willing further to provoke such forward
Cavaleeres, in the dead of the night wheeled about and fled to Bray: The Duke
forecasting that this was but a plot to draw him further from Paris, of whose
fidelity, he had no great assurance, followed no further, but with great
grief to the soldiers returned thither; Whilst he lay there he received
intelligence, That his brother the Cardinal, was with some forces at Dover (in
prosecution of some pact formerly made betwixt Pope Martyn and him) ready to
transport them into Boheme, to arbitrate a point of Religion by the sword, he
thereupon writes to him, and to his brother of Gloucester, thereby intimating to
them the wants he had of present supply, with such forcible reasons
persuading, that he prevailed, and the Cardinal with his forces (raised to
another place and purpose) came to the Regent to Paris: The Regent now the
stronger by these new forces, having intelligence, that the King of France, was
marched into Champaigne, follows him, and finding him encamped upon the Mount
Pihal, between Senlis and Champaygne* he pitched in sight of them, and
hourly provoked him to come down by the Norman horse, who braved him to his
trenches, beating back such as came forth to skirmish, without need of
seconds, when thus in sight of each other they had lain for a time, the Regent
expecting to be charged, they having double the advantage of the number, the
French follow their last copy, and silently retired to Crispis. The Regent
perceiving their irresolution to fight, licenced the Cardinal to go his
pretended journey with his forces, whilst he and his marched back to Paris,
of whose constancy, he was, and not without cause, ever warily jealous, yet
gave them no cause of discovery thereof.

Upon Saint Leonards day the sixth of November 1429. King Henry being not full
eight years old, was with great solemnity sacred-annointed, and 1429. Henry
the sixth Crowned.
Crowned King at Westminster, at whose Coronation were made thirty six
Knights of the Bathe, about which time the French King, by the instigation of
that she impostour Le pusill. who had bewitched the credulity of those times,
and was for the more part esteemed as a prophetess, and she again to give
some color to settle this opinion, did dare, and do many things beyond the
reach, modesty, and strength of a Woman, riding manlike astride, and in armor,
making show of manhood, and giving forth in speeches, not without some
ostentation, that she was a messenger sent from God, to reconquer out of the
hands of the English, whatsoever they had now in possession there; By the
subtle working of this Medean Virago, The French King was received into
Champaigne, and Senlis and Bravoys were zaunz blow or battery rendered unto
him, whilst the Lord Longevile took by surprise the Castle of Aumarle, and
slew all the English there.

The Castle of Galiard, was rendered upon composition, where in an iron grated
chamber, they found the Lord Barbason, who having sworn to be true prisoner,
could not be induced, to come out of that place, until Captain The constancy
of the Lord Barbason.
Kingston, to whom he had given that oath, was upon safe conduct recalled, to
acquit him, which was accordingly done. A rare example of constancy in him,
considering how little conscience the rest of his Nation at that time made of
an oath; yet it may not be forgotten, that of those that were sworn at
Harflew, either to send their ransomes agreed upon, or to render their bodies
prisoners at a day prefixed at Callice, of seventy three, not one Gentleman
failed, but either sent his ransom, or yielded their bodies to the Kings mercy.

The French Kings Council were resolved, that the only way to weaken Ann. 1429
Reg. 8.
the english, was to disunite the bond of friendship hitherto kept firm,
betwixt the Regent and the Duke of Burgoine, to this end are many messengers
sent unto him from the French King, whereby he first labors to clear
himself of the murder of his Father, next he makes large offers of
preferments, and assurances of free pardon of all offenses past, and his royal
promise of love and friendship during life; hereof the Duke certifieth the
Regent, but withal gives him a touch of his unkind denial of Orleance
subjection unto him. The Regent gives him many thanks for his kind notice,
and exhorts him to continue firm, as he had given promise, and he should
have no just cause given him, to repent him of being in league with England;
Nevertheless he took order to prevent haddywist, and so to provide, that if
the worst should follow the worst, he might be assured of the maine, (which
he reckoned Normandy) he the less reguarded the by, though he willingly
would neglect no part of the whole; He therefore appointed the Bishop of
Terowen, Chancellor of the Realm of FRANCE under King HENRY, with a competent
number of men to guard Paris, whilst he departed into Normandy, and at Roane
called a Parliament, in which he inculcated the great benefits that redounded
to that nation, by the friendship of the English, what large freedoms they
had, how infinite rich they might grow, by holding good correspondency with
that Nation, whereby their Wives and linen cloth, might fairly be exported
to England, and Wool and lead, and other staple commodities from thence freely
be imported to them, setting out at large all the commodity by their loyalty
they might have, and the discommodity they should reap by the other, he
concluded with the rightful claim to the Seigniory of Normandy, to his Nephew
and King by lawful inheritance, from Rollo the hardy, first Duke thereof, he
now therefore requested, that they would confirm their constancy to the Crown
of England, with manifestation of their true affection to him, and so they
should be assured of protection, and defense against all opposers.

In the mean time King Charles that slipped no advantage, that close working
might bring to pass, having underhand sounded the affection of the Parisians,
and finding them wavering, presuming by the Regents absence, if he did but
appear before the walls, to carry the City, he drew all his forces thither,
and used all possible means by escalado, battery, burning the gates, Charles
attempts Paris.
and what else (sudden invention guided, by furious desire to carry it) could
effect, but all to no purpose, for such was the vigilant care, and hardy
resolution of the Commanders and soldiers in defending the same, that the
King, whom a little fighting for his part, would fill his stomach, sounded the
retrait, and with some loss, but more dishonor, leaving his slain and maimed
But disappointed retreats.
soldiers behind him, all save the Pusil impostor, who being hurt in the leg,
and almost stifled with mire in the ditch, was by Guisio Thierborne a servant
to the Duke of Alanson, drawn up and conveyed after the King to Berry, who in
the way received the submission of the Inhabitants of Laigny.

The Regent returning to Paris, so effectually with words and gesture,
expressed his true acknowledgement of thankfulness, for their good service
generally, and every ones faith in the particular, that the Parisians publicly
professed Friends to King Henry, Friends to Paris, enemies to England, enemies
to the Parisians. The Regent desirous to cope with King Charles.


Philip Duke of Burgoine comes to Paris, where it is concluded in Council,
that he shall remain for the safeguard of the City, whilst the Regent
(infinitely desirous to affront King Charles in the field) makes head An. 1430.
R. 9.
against the usurper, but no certain news could be brought where he was in
prison: the Regent in his March regained Saint Dennis, with diverse other
Fortlets adjoining. The Bastard of Clarence laid siege to the Castle of Sorsy,
which after six months siege was yielded unto him.

Sir Thomas Kiryel, with four hundred Englishmen issued out of Gourney in
Normandy, and wasted the Country, to the suburbs of Clerimont all along; The
Earl of Britain with his forces meet them near Beavoys, The Earl of
Britain defeated.
who not liking to charge them with his horse, observing some disadvantage in
the place, or fearing their stakes, caused his men to dismount, and to charge
them on foot, but their entertainment was such, that the English made shift
with their own horses to follow them flying, taking two hundred prisoners, and
slaying six hundred, and so victoriously returned.

The Duke of Suffolk having paid his ransom and set at liberty besieged the
place, whereof the Lord Rambures was chief, which after four and twenty
assaults he caused to be rendered simply unto him.

Sir Stephen le Hire with Captain Franquet, with three hundred men, 1430.
marching toward Champayne, which was beleagred by the Duke of Burgoyne, the
Earls of Arundell and Suffolk, were encountered by Pusil Ioane, and four
hundred with her, who fiercely charged them, but being by the close order of
the English, debard from breaking in, she like a Masty curre, not daring come
too near, stood baying until she had drawn out the garrisons of Laigny and
other Forts, which all fell upon the English, and made a great slaughter
amongst them, and took the Captain prisoner, who being presented unto her
(for she was reverenced as a Commander in chief) because he would not humble
himself unto her upon the knee, like her self against law of arms, and rule
of reason, she caused his head to be cut off, and all his soldiers taken
prisoners cruelly to be slain; From thence she sped her to Campayne, into
which with her company she entered, the same as yet not being besieged round:
Upon Ascension day at night this Amazonian Virago sallyed out upon the Lord
Bawdoe de Noyels quarter, where she did but little hurt, and was repulsed,
though her plot was to have fired his lodgings, two nights after by the same
place: the Bridge toward Montdrider with five hundred men at arms, she
sallyed out again, but being discovered by Sir John of Lutzenborough, her
company was defeated The Pusil Ioane taken. Proceeded against.
and she taken, and presented to the Duke of Burgoyne, who sent her to the
Regent, who sent her to the Bishop of the Diocese; who after judicial
proceeding against her as a Sorceresse, and deceiver of the King and his
subjects, by her seeming show of sanctity, and her inhumane cruelty, against
the King of England and his subjects, was after her many delays of promise of
discovery, of secret practices, and lastly of her fained pregnancie burned at
Roane.

The siege still continued before Campaigne, whither the Regent sent the Earl
of Huntington, and Sir John Robsert, who brought fresh supplies of Burned.
all things. But Philip the Duke of Brabant being dead, and the Duke of
Burgoyne going thither to take possession of the Duchy as undoubted heir.
Sir John of Luxborough was left in his stead to prosecute the siege, who
contrary to the wills of the English, and against the opinion of the major part
of the Council raised the same and departed, whereby he left the besieged
means how to have therewith famine relieved, but the Pestilence raged very hot
in the Town; The game at Chesse amongst the soldiers played, gave check
sometime to the French, and sometime to the English* the one in one place
prevailing the other, doing in another place the like, and so it continued
wavering in doubtful balance a long time.

The young King of England was by his Council advised, for it was by them
resolved, that his presence would be a good motive, to retain his friends, in
their former fidelity, and reduce the backsliders to their sworn allegiance to
go with armed power in person into France; To this end upon St. Georges eve he
took shipping at Dover, and landed on Sunday being St. Georges day at Callice,
with a wel-appointed Army, and from thence by easy marches, went King Henry in
person goes into France.
to Roan, and from thence to Paris, where he was by his Uncle the Bishop of
Winchester, and Cardinal of Eusebius. with all wel-beseeming Ceremonies and
observances, Crowned King of France, receiving the oaths of homage and Fealty
of all the Nobility of France present, and all the Citizens and inhabitants of
that City, and of the places adjacent.

It was very observable amongst strangers, and not without some admiration,
that so small an Island as England, under the governance of so tender an infant,
should so long, and upon so good terms, contend with so large, potent, and
populous a kingdom as France; But such at that time was the virtue, and
martial valor of the English Nation; That they knew no mean betwixt death,
and victory, always preferring an honorable death, before a lingering
servitude. This moved Eugenius the Pope, and all the Christian Princes, so
often King Henry returns for England after a Truce concluded.
to make Overtures of reconcilement, betwixt these two kingdoms, but could
effect nothing, but an imperfect truce for six years, which agreed upon King
Henry returns for England, and landeth at Dover the 11. of February.

The six years truce, was scarce openly proclaimed, when an unexpected
accident, gave occasion of breach thereof, and which was worse, of the amity
betwixt the Regent and the Duke of Burgoyne; For his Sister the Lady Anne being
dead without issue, he too suddenly married the young Lady Iaqueline The Regent
having buried the sister of Burgoyne, marries a second wife.
Daughter to Peter Earl of St. Paul at Terwy^, from whence, before the
solemnity of the Feast were fully finished, he posted to Callice, to punish
the insolency of some of the garrison there, who pretending want of pay had
restrained the Merchants from venting their Woolls, four of the faulty
soldiers he executed, 110. he banished the Town, and many more he punished
by imprisonment, from whence with his new Bride on Midsommer eve, he departed
for London: where he stayed until the end of August following; In which time
the truce began to be forgotten, for the French awaiting all An. 1432. R. 11.
occasions of advantage, by secret plots and devises, had cunningly possessed
themselves of diverse Castles, and places of strength, justifying their actions,
and affirming, that what was politickly obtained without blows, was no
infringement of the Truce; And afterward they perfidiously conveyed 200. men
at arms into the Castle of Roan, presuming to have surprised it, but being
discovered, they were all taken, and either executed as traitors, or ransomed.

The Regent knowing these coals would quickly kindle: speeds him to his charge,
and preparation on both sides is made for war, wherein he found the Duke of
Burgoine, less forward then he had used to be, whereby the Regent found his
affection did slack, but would not seem to take notice thereof. The Lord
Talbot having paid his ransom, comes to the Regent, and brings with him
700. tried soldiers; They take the field on both sides in warlike manner,
making shows of encounter, but twice together (being provoked by the Regent to
fight) the French slunke away in the dark, as not daring to abide the hazard
of a battle.

The Peasants of Normandy pretending to shake off the English yoke The Peasants
in Normandy rebel.
(which never had been made insupportable,) rudely armed themselves, and in
outrageous manner drew toward Cane, but having neither power to command, nor
honesty to obey, they were by the Earl of Arundel and the Lord Willoughby
encountered, and easily overthrown, with the slaughter of 1000. of them; the
rest were all taken, whereof the chief Leaders were executed as traitors, and
the baser sort, upon submission and acknowledgement of their errors, permitted
to depart to their several homes: But the Earl and the Lord Willoughby being
now in the field, and having intelligence that le Hire had besieged the Castle
of Gorbury, drew thither with intent to have succored it, but finding
themselves too weak, they made account to have retired to Beavoys, but being
descried, they were pursued by le Hire, who having advantage, charged, the
Earl perceiving no safety, but not to hope of help, resolved to win or dye,
fought valiantly, but the Earl is dangerously wounded by the shot of a
Culvering, which caused the Lord Willoughby to retire and convey the wounded
Earl to Beavoys, where within three days he dyed, say the Historians, but
the Harrolds say, he dyed and was buried at Lewis in Sussex, he married Mawd,
the Daughter of Sir Robert Lovell, and had issue Humphry that succeeded him,
and Avitie married to James Butler Earl of Ormon and Wiltshire; After the
death of Arundel, the Lord Willoughby dispierced his forces to their former
garrisons, but stayed himself there.

The Duke of Burbon taken at the battle of Agincourt, after eighteen The Duke
of Burbon receives liberty of body out of prison and loss of life all in one
day.
years imprisonment, paying 18000 pounds for his ransom, the same day he was
enlarged dyed at London* Charles his Son who had married the Sister of the Duke
of Burgoyn, succeeded his Father. Betwixt the two brother-in-lawes an
unnatural jarre was raised, but by the mediation of Mary Duchess of Berry,
they are reconciled, by whose labor and industry, with the help of the Duke
of Burbon, a reconciliation is likewise wrought between the French King and
Burgoyne.

The jealousy between the Regent and the Duke of Burgoyne, now was publicly
discerned; Whereby those that called to mind the great charge, that Henry the
Fifth gave on his deathbed, carefully to retain that Dukes amity, labored an
enterview betwixt them, to remove all scruples on either part, which was
obtained, and Saint Omers, was the place agreed upon, where At St. Omers the
Dukes of Bedford and Burgoyne meet, and depart without conference.
both Dukes being arrived, they both standing too punctually on points of
Honor, who should give prioritie of visitation, the Duke of Bedford, as the
Son, Brother, and Uncle of a King, and Regent of France, pretended it
dishonorable for him to begin; and the other challenging the same, as of right
belonging to him, to have the first place, the same being within his own
Dominions. The wisest in some points are foolish, they both departed more
discontented then before: the haughtiness of the spirit of the one, and the
great stomach of the other, being unable to give way to their unruly passions;
And hereupon the Duke of Burgoyne made choice, rather to enter league with him,
that had murdered his Father, then to keep his oath with the King of England,
or the bond of love, so often plighted with the Regent his friend, and
Brother-in-law. And upon the receipt of a blancke Charter under the French
Kings Seal, to insert what Conditions of peace he would, he proved renegado,
and falsified his faith to England, lost his reputation to the world, and sold
himself slave to perpetual ignomy.

The Town of Saint Dennis by the perfidiousnesse of Matthew Gougley was
betrayed, to the Bastard of Orleance, but the Lord Talbot presently beguirt the
same with a siege, to raise which the bastard Orleance, drew great forces
together, but before their approach the Town was given up, and beatento the
ground. The inhabitants of Pontoys nevertheless rebel, and thrust out the
English garrison, whose examples did set the Parisians minds on work, to
tread the same steps, but the Regents vigilancie over them hindered their
intentions.

But now began the bright light of Englands glory to be ecclipsed, and those
1435.
glorious beams of victory, which they formerly had obtained every day more
and more to decline; The triple twine being clean untwisted, for the thrice
renowned, wise and circumspect, John, Regent of France, Duke of Bedford, Aniou
and Alanson, Earl of Main, Harecourt, Dreux, Richmond and Carlisle, and
Vicount Beamond; the Atlas whose shoulders kept the realm of France from
sliding from their allegiance sworn to King Henry's, Father and Son, upon
the fourteenth of September 1435. at Paris exchanged The death of the Regent.
all his glory here, for the fruition of a more sempiternall felicity in
another place: he was buried at Roan in our Ladies Church; Whereat the
Nobility of Normandy much repined, as seeming desirous, to have had some place
of their own territories, to have been honored; by giving sepulture to so
nobly deserving a Patriot unto them. Yet such was their levitie, that within
few years after, in the Reign of Lewis the Son of Charles, they instantly
desired, to have the Monument erected over him, to be demolished, alleging it
was dishonorable, to have so arch an enemy to France, interred in the
Metropolitan City of that Province. But Lewis answered, God forbid I should
give way to so dishonorable an act, as to molest the quiet of his dead bones,
that living would (if offended) have molested all here, and it savours of too
much baseness to insult upon a dead Lion. He had two wives, the first was
Anne, Sister of the Duke of Burgoyne, the second Iaqueline, daughter of Peter
Earl of Saint Paul, but had issue by neither: No sooner was his death
divulged, but infinite alterations followed, as well in England as France Edmond
Duke of Somerset (as much affecting Sovereign command) underhand labored, to
succeed in the Regency: but the Duke of York was appointed, (the Uncle being
preferred, before the cousin to the King:) which made the young duke to
endeavor, what he could to cross the new Regent, Emulation betwixt the Uncle
and Nephew thwart the business in France.
in all the designs abroad, and to under-value at home, whatsoever was never
so well achieved elsewhere, still plotting against him; For ambition is a
passion, that will never suffer a man to sleep, without dreaming of revenge, or
to wake without inventing stratagems to compass desired ends. Paris making
sail whilst the gale blows, turns Traitor, and not only rebelleth, but
inhumanly abuses the English within their power, and after it had remained 17.
years in the possession of the English, yields to the Constable, who by
composition gave the English leave to depart: other Towns tread in the same
steps, whose course the Normans would have followed, but that the Lord Talbot
with some other his associats, did with great discretion, and warlike
behavior, slaughter some 5000. of the rebellious crew, and thereby kept the
rest in awe. Private envy all this time hindered public good, and the emulation
betwixt the Dukes of York and Somerset, too long delayed the presence, and
supplies of the new Regent, that in the interim the French grew City
merchants, buying and selling Cities, Towns and Forts, to whom would give most:
but the English were no good chapmen, and would not sell honor to buy treason;
But now the Regent with 8000. new soldiers arrived at Harflew, and from thence
marches to Roan, where he won the title and not undeservedly, of equal
holding the skale of justice, keeping the balance so even and upright, that
the partial observations of those whom Somerset had placed as spies over his
actions could not give intelligence of just cause to calumniate.

The revolted Duke of Burgoyne, pretending title to the Town of Callice,
as soon as the spring approaches with an Army of forty thousand men, Ann. 1435
R. 12.
most of them Artificers and tradesmen, whom he easily engaged to the wars, by
his authority, and show of advantage to them, to have a Town so convenient
Callice besieged by the Duke of Burgoyne.
for any Traffic to be at their disposal, passes over the water at
Graveline, and there assaults the poor Bastile of Oye, mand but with fifty
men, twelve of them having sold their lives very dear, killing ten for one,
being slain the residue submitted, whom together with the Fortress the Duke
gave to the Gantoys, which place they beat down, and hanged nine and twenty of
the soldiers, and would have done the like to the rest, had not the Duke
stayed their cruelty.

The Piccards besieged the Castle of Saint Mark, Sir John Gedding being
Captain thereof, who having endured two hot assaults, and seeing no
possibility to hold it, yielded upon composition to have their lives and lims
saved, which Castle was demolished likewise; From thence they beguirt Callice
with a siege, and upon a first approach persuaded themselves, to carry it by
assault, whereof they made three strong ones, but they found by their repulses,
that they reckoned without their host, and were well pleased to keep after
within their trenches, not daring so much, as to attempt to hinder the
shipping, that every day with provision entered the harbor. The Duke of Burgoin
sent the Lord Croye to besiege the Castle of Guiesne, where he got little
honor, and did less harm; many attempts were made, to stop the channel of
the Haven, and to build a Bastile, to stop the passage of boats, but they were
prevented in the execution and made fruitless. In the mean time Penbrocke the
Harrold, brought a defiance to the Duke of Burgoyne, giving him to understand
from the Duke of Gloucester the Protector, that he would God sending him wind
and weather, either there or in any other place the Duke would appoint, in his
own Dominions give him battle, if he would but abide it, to whom the Duke of
Burgoyne answered, I shall be sure to stay for him here, until I have my will
of this Town, wherewith the Harrold departed, the Duke of Burgoyne calls a
Council, and whilst they are debating what is best to be done, the Callisians
make a sally, of horse and foot, the foot falling upon the Bastile (lately
erected, to hinder the passage of the river for Boats) whilst the horse give
the alarm to the Camp, the Bastile is carried by force, with the slaughter of
eight score of the Burgonians, and many prisoners with all the Artillery, and
provision carried to Callice, from wence issued then fresh forces, to favor
the retreat of the horse, who with the loss of twenty horse, and 120 men
returned, which stroke such an amazement amongst the Burgonian Bores, they were
incapable of any understanding what to do, and thereupon a fair gale of wind
blowing, the hearts of the bread and butter fed Flemings were so amated, that
they presently rumored, the approach of the Duke of York; and after the rumor
was once up, the fame increased the number, and the certainty of the sight of
eight hundred sail was affirmed, so that those that seemed not to be daunted
with the news, were suspected to be traitors to the Duke of Burgoyne, the
Dutch upbraid the Piccards, the French the Gantoys, nay the most resolute of
the Council told the Duke of Burgoyne, that the stay might give opportunity
to the enemy to beleaguer his Leguer, and to set down betwixt him and FRANCE,
and then they should be coopt up, and be charged both before and behind,
which so did take the Duke of Burgoyne, that presently in a fury, raging like
the The Duke of Burgoyne retreats from Callice.
Persian, that threatened the Tempest and whipped the Sea, he sent to the Lord of
Croy, and both of them that night quit their quarters, and in that have
departed, that they left a great part of their best Ordnance, and all their
provision, for An. 1437. R. 13.
the relief and help of the besieged. It seemed they had some reason to run,
for the next day (being the seven and twentieth day of July) the Duke of
Glocaster landed at Callice, with five and twenty thousand good fighting men,
and finding the enemy recoyled, forrageth all the Countries adjacent, and for
the space of six weeks, harrowed all the parts of Flanders, Artoys, and
Hennalt, and so returning by Saint Omers, Arde and Guyens, comforting his
friends, and terrifying his enemies, with great and rich booty, they arrived at
Callice; But the want of bread, whereof they could not be furnished all the
way, did bring diverse diseases amongst the Army, whereof more dyed then were
slain, upon any Camisado by the enemy, for encounter they had none all the way.

The Duke of York returns into England to the rescue of Rocksboro Castle,
defended by Sir Sir Ralph Gray, and besieged by the King of Scots with thirty
thousand men, who having advertisement of the Earl of Northumber lands
approach, the Dukes safe return, fled with no less loss then dishonor, and
enough of both.

A truce is desired betwixt England and Burgoyne and obtained, the meeting is
appointed at Gravelin, wherefore the King came, the Bishop of Winchester, John
Duke of Norfolk, with Humphry Earl of Stafford, and others; For the Duke
appeared his Duchess, the Bishop of Arras, and the Lord of Croys, where truce
for a very small time is concluded on, and for less kept.

This year was memorable for the death of three great Princesses, Katherine
1437. The death of three great Ladies.
Queen of England, and Sister to the King of France; The old Dowager of Henry
the fourth King of England, Daughter of the King of Navar, and Mother to the
Princes of Britain: And the old Countess of Armanacke Daughter to the Duke of
Berry, and Mother to the Duke of Savoy, which all dyed within eight and forty
hours, the one of the other: The fury of fighting growing cold, Traffic for
towns was again set on foot, and Harflew sold; For the recovery whereof, the
Duke of Somerset with the Lord Talbot, and a brave company of soldiers, beset
it both by land and water: there being within to defend it, Sir John Estontvile
and his brother, with six hundred men and upward: the Earls of Ewe, with the
Bastards of Orleance and Burbon, with four thousand men, came to the reskue,
but so well were the English entrencht, that the French could neither succor
their friends, nor annoy their enemies, and so as they came they returned:
Whereupon the town was surrendered upon composition. About this time the
Duchess of Bedford followed Queen Katherines example, making election for an
Husband of a gallant young Gentleman, but of small means, yet fortunate only,
enough by being affected, one Sir Richard Woodvile whom she took to Husband, to
the great discontent of her French friends, but especially her Uncle the Bishop
of Terwine: but she cared not who was vexed, so her self was pleased, and God
not offended, who blessed her, and made her Mother of many children, and amongst
the rest of the Lady Elizabeth, afterward married to King Edward the fourth.
James King of Scots which before had bin fifteen The King of Scots murdered.
years prisoner in England, and from thence released with a Wife, a great
dower, and many honorable presents, yet proved ungrateful, was murdered by
certain his traitorous subjects in his bedchamber by night, who being found
out, were cruelly tortured.

The Duke of Burgoine having attempted the unworthy traffic, of bartering for
Callice with money: but not able to compass it, being infinitely desirous to
be Master of it, when neither force, nor fraud could prevail, attempts it by
a strange policy, but of like success to the former, for he was Ann. 1439 R.
14.
persuaded by a rediculous practice, so to cut a ditch, that he might at his
pleasure, drown both the Town and Country, about this he employed much
labor and more cost, but this fantastical fancy of a flood vanished away like
his Flemmish army at the siege there of like a vapor.

The Lord Talbot besieged Tanckervile, and has it after four months, lying
before it, simply rendered unto him; In leiw whereof the French King in his own
person lays siege to Monstrew fault Yonne. Whilst the Duke of York was
providing for the reskue of this Town, he was discharged of his office, by
which means Sir Thomas Gerrard, had the more color to sell, not lose the
Town, which the King of France making his own contract with him, bought of
him for rewards and preferment, both promised, but how performed I know not,
only having sold his honor with his charge, he lived disgraced and discarded
in much discontent an exile in France where he died.

This year is a Parliament holden at Westminster, in which were made many good
and profitable acts, as well for the preservation of peace at home, A Parliament
at Westminster.
as for provision to maintain the wars abroad.

Arthur Constable of France, and John Duke of Alanson besieged the Town of
Auranches, whither the Lord Talbot came and offered them battle, which they
refusing, he marched in despite of them, none daring to make resistance, into
the Town: from whence next morning he sallyed out, and having made a
greatslaughter amongst them, took diverse prisoners, and retreated at pleasure,
the French being well contented so to be rid of him.

The French the next morning were called from the siege pretended for Pautou de
Santrelis for the Hire had sent Letters unto them, that they had the promise of
diverse Bourgers of Roan, when their watch-night came, to Roan attempted, but
with loss to the French.
let them in, they wished therefore the Constable to meet them at Rize, a place
within four leagues of Roane, here of the Lord Talbot having notice, covertly
marched to Roan, and from thence, though wearied with a bad journey, marches
before day to Rize, where he surprizeth the French, takes the Lord Fontaines,
Sir Allaine Geron, and many other, the Hire by the help of his horse, though
not unwounded, by him that pursued him, escaped, and so Talbot returns to
Roan with a fair booty, and full instructions to discover the Traitors, who
convicted had the reward of their treason.

The sixtday of November the Earl of Warwick, who seven times having An.
1437. R. 16.
been abourd, and still beat back by tempestuous and contrary winds, landed
at Hoinflew, with a thousand fresh soldiers, came to Roan, whither the Duke of
York was come down, and from thence returned for England.

The Duke of Burgoine taking advantage, as he thought of a still water, with
ten thousand men, besieges the Town of Crotoy, to relieve whom the new
Regent sent the Lord Talbot, with five thousand men, whereof the Duke having
notice, upon their approach, retyreth with his power, (except four hundred
with whom he had manned a Bastileo by him there erected) to Abvile, but the
Bastilio is soon gained, and all the soldiers either taken or slain.

The valiant Talbot sent the Duke word, that if he would save his Country of
Piccardy from vastation, that he should come into the field, where he
attended him, and would give him, if he dared to come, battle. But the Duke of
Burgoine was not in the fighting humor, neither loved to be too near so
choleric an enemy that would strike, if he might come at him, and therefore
from Abvile secretly conveyes himself to Amiens. Twenty days together did the
Lord Talbot with fire and sword pass through Piccardy Ann. 1437 Reg. 15.
and Arthoys, destroying all that stood in his way, and so returns
unencountred; Sir Thomas Kiryel seized upon the Dukes Carriages and Ordnance,
and having left in Crotoy, victual enough for six hundred men for a The Lord
Talbot harroweth Piccardy.
whole year, he brought the rest to the Earl of Warwick, who thankfully
received them.

Henry Earl of Mortaine, son to Edmond Duke of Somerset arrived 1438.
with three hundred Archers, and three hundred Spears, and past through
Normandy to Main, and took in his March by assault, the Cattle of Saint
Anian, wherein were three hundred Scots and Frenchmen; the Scots he slew all,
and hanged the Frenchmen, for that they had sworn fealty to England, and
broke it; he took likewise the Castle of Algarche, and by means of an Ambush
takes the Lord of Camerois; coming to the reskue thereof; on the other side,
the Towns of Neux in Bry and Susan, were sold and delivered to the French, by
the treacherous Burgers.

All manner of grain in England, in respect of the scarcity thereof, was at
Famine in England, Pestilence in Paris.
exceeding high prices, and had not the care and industry of the then Mayor
Stephen Brown, been such that he had caused provision of corn, especially
Rye, to be bought, and brought from far Countries thither, the famine would
have raged as much in London, as the fearful Pestilence did in Paris, where
those that dyed in the streets lay unburied, until the ravenous Wolves made
their mawes the sepulture of their flesh, but God in his mercy ceased the
plague in Paris, and replenished London with grain in abundance, to the great
relief of remoter parts of the kingdom, which before that time were driven to
make their sustenance of Fearne roots and Ivy berryes.

In June the Earl of Huntington with two thousand Archers, and four 1439.
thousand Spears, was sent into Gascoyne, whither the Earl of Danoyes was
lately come, thoroughly instructed and provided, to buy the best pennyworths of
Towns and Castles he could compass, but the Earl of Huntington upon his
coming thither, changed all the Captains and Officers, and put others in
their rooms, whereby he warily prevented the Bastards chafferours. This
strumpet Bribery, and whore covetousness, began to spread their wings so
far, that in Normandy the English Captains, had small confidence in the
Natives, and not too much in some of their own Nation; Whereupon Sir Richard
Woodvile, Sir William Chamberlain, Sir William Peto, with a thousand men were
sent thither, to stop the current of French crowns, from corrupting the yet
faithful soldiers with them. They according to their directions, narrowly
sifted all, and where they found fault, or cause of suspicion, they punished or
removed, and having settled all things in good order returned.

A gap began this year to be opened, whereby the English might have entered to
have made a reduction of those pieces the French had bought or conquered, but
the wisdom of the Council of France, stopped it by reconciling the King and
his son the Dolphin, between whom by the sinister persuasions of base
Sycophants on both sides, there were discurtesies taken before given, and
discontent without any ground; the son deeming his Fathers grave deportment,
too too much austerity, and the Father the Dolphins youthful countenance, to a
kind of contempt beyond filial duty, neither having just cause of jealousy,
yet both suspicious of each others countenance; But the knot of seditious
faction, tide between the Dukes of Burgoyne, Alanson, and the Dolphin is
dissolved, and the King and his Son in show reconciled; Some small pieces
were in this time regayned, but Paris for which provision was making for the
reduction thereof was left off, upon the notice of the reconcilement. An. 1439.
R. 18.


In a great bend of Frost, with a deep snow, the English under the conduct of
John Lord Clifford, having covered their armor with white shirts, and their
heads with white Alman skulls, come to Ponthoys by night, and undiscovered
Ponthoys taken by the English.
past the ditches, skaled the walls, slew the guards, and took the Town, with
many good prisoners, and a great spoil: presently upon the regaining of which
Town the Earl of Warwick died in the Castle of Roan, and was from thence
conveyed to England, and buried in his College at Warwick, he was the
sixteenth Earl of Warwick, and Lord Lisle in the right of his Wife; he
married two wives* the first Elizabeth, Daughter and heir of Thomas Lord
Barckley; and Margery his Wife, Daughter and heir of Warren Lord Lisley, and
Ties, by whom he had issue three Daughters, Margaret the eldest married to
John Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury, who had issue John Talbot, Vicount Lisley;
Elianor married with Thomas Lord Rosse of Hamlocke, and after to Edward Bewford
Duke of Somerset.

Elizabeth married to George Nevill Lord Latimer.

Earl Richard Beauchampes second Wife, was Isabell Daughter of Thomas Spencer
Earl of Gloucester; by whom he had issue, Henry Duke of Warwick; and Anne
married to Richard Nevill Earl of Salisbury, who in her right was after Earl
of Warwick.

To reduce Ponthoys, the French King in person lays siege thereunto, and
uses all possible means he can to enforce it, but the defendants but flowt
him for his pains, and many times send his assaulting soldiers haulting home,
with fleaes in their ears,

Richard Duke of York being the second time made Regent, being arrived with
the Earl of Oxford, and the Earl of Ewe, levies a power to raise the siege;
and arriving there, gives notice to the King, that the next morning he would
bid him battle; But the King not liking the breath of Talbot, leaves his
Ordnance, and best provision in the Bastile of Saint Martins, and Ponthoys
succored.
in the midst of the night stole to Poysy. The English possess his tents,
furnish the Town with the provision therein left, and thereof make Sir Gervoys
Clifton Captain, with a thousand soldiers for the defense thereof, and then
marched to Poysy, where he braved the French King, and thought with taunts and
revilings, to have put valor in him, but he was too patient The French King
braved by the Regent, but is patient.
to be provoked to fight, wherefore he left him there and returned to Roan.

A motion of parlie is moved, the place appointed Callice, by the mediation and
solicitation of the Duchess of Burgoyne, she being a Portugal by birth,
very solicitous of the safety of her husband, and the quiet of France, a woman
of no ordinary capacity, but of an extraordinary understanding; by her means
the King of France sends the Archbishop of Reimes and Treaty for a peace.
Narbon, and the Earl of Dunoys. For the King of England, the Cardinal of
York and the Duke of Exceter, with whom came Charles Duke of Orleance, who
having been long kept Prisoner, was in good hope of enlargement, but the
success of the meeting not answering the expectation, nothing was done for his
enlargement, for in such treatises such as have the possession of strong holds,
do commonly use policy, and delayings the stronger giving laws to the
weaker, so that the English would not bate an ace of what they had gotten to
keep: and would have for the ransom of the Duke their first asking, which was
more then his means could any way compass: and the French King not very
forward to give him any assurance, so that the disconsolate Duke patiently
returns: but his misery so moved the Ann. 1441 Reg. 20.
heart of the Duchess of Burgoyne, that she prevailed so far with her
husband, that he passes his credit for the payment of three hundred thousand
Crowns for his ransom at Callice, at a day prefixed, at which time and place
the Duke of Orleance in person, and the Duke of Burgoynes money The Duke of
Orleance released.
meet, where the one being received, the other after five and twenty years
imprisonment is released, and by his son that had slain his Father, and
sought the ruin of his house, but now a firm league of friendship is sworn,
and confirmed betwixt them, by the marriage of the Duke of Burgoines Niece,
Mary of Cleurs to the Duke of Orleance, which justifies the Proverb, The best
means to vanquish an enemy, is to do him all the good you can.

The Regent divided his Forces into three parts, he sent the Lord Willoughby
into Amyens, the Lord Talbot to Deep, and himself with the Duke of Somerset
went into the Duchy of Anion. The Lord Willoughby made such speed, that he
took many prisoners, before they could get to any place of defense, but
presently the garrisons drawn together, and make opposition, but they are
defeated, and six hundred men of arms slain, such as escaped fell into the
hands of the Earl of Saint Paul, who was coming to the aid of the Lord
Willoughby: The Regent returns with a great prey to Normandy, whither
Willoughby likewise comes; But the Duke of Somerset re-entreth the Marches of
Britain, and took la Gearch by assault, from thence he marches to Ponsay;
The Marshall Loach intended to have surprised the Duke of Somerset in his
Tents, but the Duke to prevent that hazard, meets him half way, and charge
so suddenly and soundly, that the Marshall is rowted, and threescore and two of
his men are taken Prisoners, then he marched and took the Town of Beamond,
and having manned all fitting places upon the Frontiers laden with rich spoil
he returns.

The Lord Willoughby had entrenched himself round Deipe, and built a Bastile
upon Mount Pawlet, which did much annoy the besieged; But wanting ammunition and
supplies of men, he left his natural Son to prosecute the siege, himself
posting to Roan. The Dolphin with sixteen thousand men comes to raise the
siege, and three days together, plye the Bastile with assaults, but could not
carry it, until shot and powder failing, they were overpressed with multitude,
and young Talbot is taken prisoner, with Sir John Peyto, and Sir John Repley,
all which were shortly redeemed by exchange; The rest of the soldiers seeing
the Bastile won, stood in arms all day, but the enemy not over-willing to
do too much, and they as willing to give way, not being able to cope in the
dark of night they retired to Roan.

The Earl of Saint Paul forsakes the English, and is reconciled to The Earl
of Saint Paul forsakes the English.
France.

The English besieged Tartus, for the raising whereof the French King marches
down threescore thousand strong, and relieveth the Town, and from thence
marches to Saueryne, which he takes in, and therein Sir John Rampston
prisoner; Then took he in Arques, the Captain with all the soldiers by
composition withdraw to Burdeux; The English cut off all convoyes of victuals
from coming to the King, for want whereof, the King is driven to return,
after whose departure the English reduce, all that the King of France had
taken, and take his Lieutenant prisoner, slaying or hanging all his soldiers.

The Lord Talbot this while takes in Conquet, and drives the Bastard of
Orleance from the siege of Galiordon: The French in the Castle of Cornill An.
1442. R. 20.
detained many English prisoners, Sir Francis the Aragonist apparelleth half a
dozen lusty fellows like Pesants, carrying baskets with corn and victuals,
and sends them to the Castle, he with his company lie in ambush in The Castle
of Cornhill surprised by a stratagem.
a valley near the Castle, the six unsuspected are admitted, and coming to
the Captains chamber, seize upon him, and give the signal to the ambush, who
came readily on, entered the Castle, put the soldiers to the sword, and set the
prisoners at liberty, burnt down the Castle, and with the Captain, and the
booty of the Castle returned to Roan.

Whilst thus the ball of war was by the English honorably tossed from one end
to the other, in the tennis court of France. The devil and his ministers
Unnatural dissension betwixt brothers.
sow the seeds of unnatural sedition between the two brothers in England,
the one seeking by a legal course the reformation, the other the ruin of a
brother: The Protector articles against the Cardinal, for too ambitiously
affecting pre-eminence, to the derogation of the Kings prerogative, and
contempt of his laws, these Articles are delivered to the King, and by the
King to be maturely examined by them to his Council, who being most of the
Clergy, and not daring to give occasion of offense to the Cardinal, leave
them unmedled withal: whilst the Lady Elianor Cobham the Dukes Wife, by the
Cardinals plot is accused of treason, by sorcery and Witchcraft to have
intended the overthrow of the King, and advancement of her husband to the
Crown, for this howsoever she was acquitted of the treason, she is adjudged
open Penance, and perpetual imprisonment in the Isle of Man, Thomas Southwell,
John Hun Priests, Roger Bullingbrooke a supposed Necromancer, and Margery
Iourden styled the Witch of Eley, are arraigned for devising of a picture of
Wax to be made in proportion of the King, which by their Sorcery, they should
make to consume, and so accordingly should the Kings body: for this they are
condemned, the Witch was burnt in Smithfield, Bullingbrooke was hanged,
constantly affirming upon his death, that there never was any such thing
devised or thought of by them: neither at any time was more desired of from him
by the Duchess, or any other from her, but if he could by his Art, find out
how long the King should live: John Hun had his pardon, and Southwell died the
night before he should have been executed.

The Duke of Gloucester silently sees what speech could not amend, and undergoes
all these affronts with patience, attending equal distribution of Justice, as
it had past on his forgetful Wife, so it might pass on his unnatural brother
the Archbishop: But the Cardinal by his orall sanctity, and mental impurity,
had so bewitched the King, and those of the Church of his Council, that the
good Duke hoped in vain.

The Duke of York has a Son borne at Roane in Normandy, and Christened
there by the name of Edward. The Countess of Camings being An. 1442. R. 21.
dead, the King of France, and the Earl of Arminacke, are Competitors for the
inheritance; The Earl takes' possession, but doubting, and not without cause;
That the King of France would not be pleased to take a Rowland for an Oliver;
makes offer to the King of England, of his Daughter in marriage, and besides a
large portion in money with her, to deliver over full possession of all such
Towns and Castles, as were by him, or his Ancestors detained in Aquitaine, and
had been formerly by the Progenitors of the King of England conquered, or by
the King of France to any of them given. And further, to furnish the King with
money sufficient to recover all, or whatsoever was withheld from him there, by
any person whatsoever. The Ambassadors for this business were by the King of
England graciously Ann. 1442 Reg. 21.
heard, and honorably returned after whom were sent, Sir Edward Hall, Sir
Robert Rose and others to conclude all things and by proxcie the young Lady is
affiranced to King Henry.

The King of France, to peruent the grows of so rank a mischief, King
Henry betrothed to the Earl of Arminacks Daughter.
sends the Dolphine, with a puissaunt army, who took the Earl, with his
youngest son, and both his daughters, and gained the Countries of Arminack,
Louergne, Rouergue, Moulessenoys, with the Cities of Seuerac and Cadeack,
chasing the bastard of Arminack out of the Country, by means whereof the
marriage was then deferd and afterward disanuld.

The Christian Princes, casting their contemplative looks upon the misery of
France, for the present groaning under the three arrows of Gods vengeance, An.
R. 22.
Fire, Sword, Famine, and the danger of England to be embroyled hereafter in
the like, whereof there were already discerned, to many sumeptomes, like
themselves, did by their several Ambassadors, labor a peace, between these
two powerful Kings, and prevail so far, That at a diet at Tours in
Touraine, there appeared for the King of England William de-la-poole Earl of
Suffolk, Doctor Adam Milyes, Keeper of the privy seal, Sir Robert Rose and
others: for the King of France, Charles Duke of Orleance, Jews Earl of
Vendosme, Perce de Bresse, stuard of Poyton, and Bartram Beavar Lord president
of Presignry, there came Ambassadors likewise from the Emperor, the Kings of
Spain, Denmark and Hungary, to be mediators, The assemblies was great, and
the expenses greater every day then other each, one striving to exceed the
other in entertainment for the honor of their Masters, many meetings were had,
many motions made, but as one wave brings on another one quere increased many
doubs, no full conclusion is made only a truce for eighteen months is agreed
upon. In the mean time the Earl of Suffolk stretching a point of his
Commission, beyond his direction withoutthe knowledge of his fellow
Commissioners, A truce agreed upon.
plotted a marriage with thekins woman of the French King, and the King of
England, in which business the Earl of Suffolk, was so intentive and made
such large, and unnecessary proffers, that he did not escape the aspertion The
Earl of Suffolk transends his Commission.
of being bribed by the King of France to that business an enteruiew betwixt
the two Kings of England and France is agreed upon, without warant of King
Heneryes part, to be between Charters and Roane, The Commissioners return,
where nothing is forgotten by Suffolk, that might illustrate, the beauty and
loveliness of the proposed Bride, or the great utility that might redound, to
both Kingdoms by the consummation of this marriage, the King was easily
induced, to give credence to the relations, but diverse of the Kings Councels
especially the Duke of Gloucestor opposed, and give reasons against the
proceeding, first that her descent was not royal, not her dignities, but
barely titular, and all her fathers titles, but disputable, alleging that Duke
Rayner, Father of Margarite the much commended Lady, was but by himself
styled, King of Scisill, Naples, and Jerusalem, without any penny profit or
foot of possession of any those places.

Next, that his Poverty was such, that he could not subsist without continual
relief from his friends, whereof his son in law, must be ever a furtherer
then the Duke obtruded the dishonor, that would redound to the King if he
should forsake, the Duke of Arminacks daughter, to whom he had in that
ceremonious manner been publirkly affiranced, and the dangerous consequence,
of breach of faith, and neglect of the friendship of so potent a neighbor, and
lastly the insufferable loss, by the surendring and releasing his Title to the
Duchy of Anions, so unadvisedly proffered, by the capitulation An. 1444. R.
22. 23.
of the Duke of Suffolk, but all this while he but labored against
prejudice, for though it could not be denied, but that his reasons were
undeniable, and better then could be given to the contrary, yet they must not
have place of belief, because Suffolkes affirmation and negotiation; must not
be undervalued.

John Holland Earl of Huntington; is Created Duke of Exceter: Humphry Earl of
Stafford, Duke of Buchkingham: Henry Earl of Warwick, Duke of Warwick, and
the Earl of Suffolk, Marquess of Suffolk, The new Marquess honorably
accompanied, fetches the Lady Margaret from FRANCE, and shortly afterward she
is Married at Southwicke in Hampshire, King Henry marries Duke Rayners
Daughter.
and Crowned Queen of England at Westminster, on the thirtieth day of May; How
advantageous this match was for the Crown of England, may be gathered, when
she brought not a penny portion, the charge of coming 1444.
being defrayd by the Marquess, who had toward the discharge thereof, the
full Fifteen granted to the King in the late Parliament, and in exchange of
her Person, the Duchy of Anion, the City of Mauns, with the whole County
Main, and so the best Props of the Duchy of Normandy, are surrendered into the
hands of the French, but affection is blind, and what shall-be shall-bee, youth
rides in post to be married, but in the end, finds the Inn of repentance to
be lodged in.

The Duke of Arminiack in requital of the King of Englands kind usage of his
Daughter, is a means to expel the English out of the whole Duchy of Aquitan.

And it is to be feared, that God was displeased with the match, for after the
consummation thereof, there was a quotidian consumption of the Kings Friends,
both in his own Land, and Foreign parts, intestine wars are kindled at
home, and rebellion is rise in all parts abroad, and which is most grievous of
all, after the slaughter of many thousands of his Christian subjects, the
confusion of his Uncles, and their Posterity almost, the Deposition of
himself; the inhumane butchery of his Son, the Queen must be sent home
again, in as much misery and contempt, as she was now received, with pomp
and acclamations.

During the time of the truce, as well to be partakers of the jollitie of the
Court at this time, as to visit their familiars and friends; the Regent and
chief Commanders resort to England, and there put the King and Council The
Regent comes for England.
in mind, to provide a cloak ready, though Sun shone bright, lest it should
rain. Whereupon a Parliament is assembled, wherein is especial provision made
for the furnishing of all the Frontier towns, but principally the places of
Normandy. To which end levies of men and money are made, and An. 1416. R. 24.
all things usefully-necessary are prepared; But a sparcke of fire is fallen
amongst the flax, which though little, and unseene at first, grew to an
unquenchable flame, for the Duke of York being at first chosen Regent for five
years, and at the expiration thereof returning, was received nec merito with
great love and commendation. After the death of the Earl of Warwick, who
succeeded him in the Regency, he again as a man well-deserving the place, is
sent over with the like Authority, and instructions for other five years; but
Somerset which envied the Duke of Yorkes first advancement, and still was full
of peccant humors against his continuance of that place so undermined York,
that by the means of the new Marquess, whose favor from the King and Queen
now, was beyond mediocrity, and into whose more inward familiarity Somerset
was now engratiated, he not only supplanted him from the place, but procured it
for himself; to the no little hart-burning of the Duke of York and his
friends, but he had wit in his anger, and rested silent.

The town of Mauns according to the agreement, is not given up; The King of
France prepares to besiege it, but upon the motion of the Marquess, order is
given for the present surrender thereof; now no man in grace with the King but
he, none can have any favor from the Queen, but by him, the extent of his
power over-reacheth all the Council, he gets of the King the Wardship of the
body, and lands of the Countess of Warwick, and of the Lady Margaret, sole
Daughter and heir of John Duke of Somerset, afterward Mother to King Henry the
seventh.

The Kings facile nature, and flexible condition, was the occasion that many
enormities increased, and many things made worse, that might have been better,
if observed, and stopped in the beginning. The Duke of Gloucester for his
moderation, and provident care in all things styled good, and for his pains in
delivery of his mind honest, is an eyesore to an ambitious minion, and an
imperious woman; she will no longer admit any curb to her vast desires of
empery; she is as well able to advise the King as all his Council, to what
purpose then needs a Protector; The Duke of Gloucester must therefore be
removed and excluded, not only from command, but Council: and to add to
affliction Glocesiers destruction plotted.
she permitted, if not procured, diverse sinisterly affected, to inform
against him; whereof the new Marquess and the Duke of Buckingham were not the
most backward; and the Cardinal Bishop of Winchester, and Archbishop of York
would not be much behind, one objection was made against him, that he had
caused diverse persons to be executed, contrary to the judgment of the Court
denounced, and against the law of the land, in these cases provided, his too
much zeal of execution of justice, (if zeal in that point may be justly
termed a crime) made him subject to be censured to have perpetrated a criminal
offense; But to avoid tumultuary partakings, (for he was generally well
esteemed, howsoever by purblind observers, deemed worthy tax) it was concluded
by those that maligned his sincere and just proceedings, that he should
without any public denuntiation of his offense, be privately convicted and
condemned, to which end, a Parliament by the procurement of his enemies,
unwitting to the King, is called at Bury, to which the Duke of Gloucester
resorting, is on the second day of the Session by the Lord Beamond then high
Constable (abetted by the Duke of Buckingham) arrested, and put to Ward, all
his followers without exception sequestered from him, whereof thirty two are
committed to several prisons, the next day after his commitment, he is found
in his bed murdered, yet showed the same day, being the four and twentieth
day of February, publicly making show, as though he had dyed of an impostume,
but all indifferent persons that saw his corpse, could not but deem, he dyed of
an unnatural cause, his corpse were the same day conveyed to Saint Albones,
and there buried, five of his meniriall servants, Sir ROGER CHAMBERLAIN Knight,
MIDDLETON, HERBERT, ARTZIS Esquire, and JOHN NEEDHAM Gentlemen, were condemned
to be drawn, hanged and quartered; But the Marquess of SVFFOLKE, to make a
show to the world of his having no finger in the business, brought their
pardon, and delivered it at their proposed place of execution, some critical
observers have affirmed, the style of Gloucester as ominous, and make instance
of, Hugh Spencer, Thomas of Woodstock, and this Duke Humphry, but it may be
well collected, that this Dukes death, gave a prodigious presage of the
ensewing Calamity of the Commonwealth, sometimes in quenching of smoke, men
burn their fingers in the fire, so the Queen casting to preserve her husbands
honor, and her own regalitie, in making away this honest Duke, affected that
which discretion should have most labored to prevent, which was the decay of
the house of Lancaster, which was unlikely to have chanced if this Duke had
lived. For his primogeniture would have kept back the Duke of Yorkes claim to
the Crown this Richards father being but the fifth son of Edward the third.
Humphry Plantagenet was the fourth son of Edward the third Duke of Gloucester
Earl of Hennault, Holland, Zeland, and Pembroke Lord of Frisia, great
Chamberlain of England he married two wives, Iaquet from whom he was divorced,
and Elianor, daughter of Reginald Lord Cobham, by whom before marrage he had a
daughter called Antigona, married to Henry Gray Lord of Tanckervile, but no
issue legitimate.

The new Marquess of Suffolk, by the great favor of the King, But more desire
of the Queen, is created Duke of Suffolk, which brought him 1448.
within the compass of Contempt, of the Kings surviving Uncle, The Duke of
York, who now beginning to suck the venom of his kinswoman the Lady Cobhams
sorcery, and awakened with his brothers loss her disgrace and his own
disrepute; having by consanguinitie, and affinity, a fair means to draw a
party, observing that they only sat at the stearne that were unable, yea,
unworthy to use the oar of the commonwealth, and that all affares of state
were merely managed, by the Queen and her favorite the Duke of Suffolk: the
King being as a Cipher but at their pleasure, to make a number, did amongst his
familiars privily whisper, his title, and right to the Crown, and afar off
as in a landscape to make a show of desire to see the flourishing increase of
the white Rose; And so politikly carried his intent, that all things were
provided to further his project, ere his purpose was published, during this
plotting Henry Bewford, the rich Cardinal Bishop of Winchester, takes his
leave of this world and leaves more riches behind him, then either good deeds
or glorious The Cardinal of Winchester dies.
name, he was more noble in blood, then notable in learning, of high look, and
haughty stomach, constant in nothing more then malice, and mischief and that
chiefly employed against good Duke Humphry, his desires were insatiable for
money, still coveting more, but misimploying nothing in expense, for he only
horded to make others rich and himself poor, what his ends were except he was
persuaded; never to dye, no living man did know, and had he desired, to have
measured his greatness, by his goodness, he had never been administrator to
his own good name, for that dyed long before him, without which we leave him,
to be seconded in the Bishopric of Winchester, by a more deserving Prelate
which was William Wanfleet so styled of the place he was borne in, but his name
was Pattern, of the worshipful family whereof he was descended.

The fifth of August following, dies John Holland Duke of Exceter Earl of
Huntington, and Iuory, in Normandy Lord of Sparr, Leivetenant William Wanfleet
consecrated Bishop of Winchester.
general of the Duchy of Aquitaine, Admiral of England, and Constable of the
Tower of London he married two wives Anne daughter of Edmond Earl of Stafford,
by whom he had issue, Henry that succeed in the Dukedom, his second wife was
Anne, daughter to John Mountacute Earl of Salisbury, by her he had issue a
daughter Anne An. 1430. R. 26.
married to the heir of Westermerland John Nevill, by whom she had no issue.
Then she was married to Thomas Nevill; brother of Ralph the father of her first
husband, by whom she had issue Ralph, the third house of Westmerland; and her
third husband was James Earl Dowglasse, by whom she had no issue. Before the
time of truce was expired the devil cast a bone by means of an overforward
Curre, that set all on snarling, For Sir Francis Suryens and Araganois, thought
worthy to be admitted into the honorable society of the Garter, taking
advantage of the security the French Garrisons did sleep in, suddenly upon
our Lady The truce broken by the English
day eve in Lent at night, surprised a Frontier Town belonging to the Duke of
Britain called Fougeirs, ransaking it killing the inhabitants and carried away
all the spoil, the Duke advertiseth the French King, lying at R^unes, thereof,
who by his Ambassadors complain, both to the King of England, and the regent
Somerset, the fault is all laid upon the Aroganoys, who did it without warrant
or wit: the King, or Council, nether advising, or approving what was done,
nevertheless for restitution, or satisfaction, a meeting is appointed at
Lanveirs, where the Commissioners treat of the business, But whilst they talk
of this, news are brought to the regent. That the French by a stratagem of a
Carter, that with a load of hay, coming over the drawbridge, caused the
axeltree to break, and whilst the porter was ready to help the Ardes
surprised.
Carter, the Porters brains were beaten out and the Town of Ardes surprised,
and the Lord Fauconbridge Captain thereof taken prisoner, restitution is
demanded by the English, they are answered with their own language, what was
done, was neither by the privitie, or porcurement, of the French King or any of
his Council; so they hold fast, on both sides their ill gotten bargains, and
from thence forward the truce, on both side is broken, all things grow worse
and worse. The French King assembleth a mighty army and dividing it into three
parts; imployeth every one, in a several quarter, who according to direction
get possession of Louviers, Gerbury, and Vernuele all which by composition
attended twenty days to be reskued, but none came. This war is begun before
the term of truce expired, the English gave the first occasion and are paid
with their own coin, whilst the new Regent which like the sons of Zebede
presumed of more abilities then he had, knows not where to begin, nor what to
say, or do, makes ready to reckon the Towns lost, but news is brought of a
conspiracy against him in the same Town, he goes about to suppress that,
whilst the enemy is at another town ready to carry it, without speedy succor,
whereupon he gives Command to such troops to march as he thinks fit, but they
in steed of putting his Command in execution expostulate the reason of such
directions, then calls he to Council, but there is more time spent in chiding,
and finding fault, then in debating for the amending of what is out of square,
whereby his proceedings as it were make a parenthesis to a discourse between
the good government of the Duke of York, and the bad event of the murdered
Duke of Gloucester. Thus perplexed, the regent in a desperate case, complains
of want of Counselors, talks much to no purpose, does many things to as
little proof, or profit, and so having tired himself to no end, retires
himself to his Chamber, and there with more deliberation then discretion
debates with himself what is best to be done.

The Cocks now begin to ctow upon their dunghill, which but a while before were
cowed by the English, if staying, or Cravend by themselves An. 1449. R. 27.
if they fell a running; Constance, Guisard, Gahard, Pontean sa meare S. Lo,
Festampo, Newcastle, Tongue, Moleor, Argenton Lisseux and some other pieces in
Normandy, are reduced to the Crown of France, Maulisson in Guyen upon notice
of their defections, arm against their Garrison, and set open the gates to the
Earl of Foys, who enters and takes it. This is seconded by the Citizens of
Roan, who vexed the regent, and the Earl of Shrousbury, more within, then the
French army abroad and enforced them, to make composition, to have liberty with
bag and baggage to march to Cane, and to procure by a certain day, diverse
adjacent strong pieces, to be surrendered unto the French, and until the same
were delivered, the Earl of Shrousbury and the Lord Butler the heir to the
Earl of Ormond to remain pledges, who were sent to be safely kept in the
Castle of Eureux.

Succors are sent for into England, but an unexpected occasion diverted the
passage of them, for the necessity of present means, to suppress an
insurrection made by rebels in Ireland, for the effecting whereof, the Duke of
York is with an army sent thither, where he so behaved himself, that he not
only suppressed, the insurrection, but purchased the good The Duke of York
sent into Ireland.
will and affection of the Irish nation firm to him and his for ever after.

The Frenchmen now thoroughly flesht, assault Harflew, but are by Sir Robert
Curson for along time valiantly repelled, but in the end fearing to be forced,
he makes composition, to depart with body and goods Fougers, and Sir James de
Benron are likewise received by the Duke of Britain.

A fresh supply of fifteen hundred men, under the conduct of Sir. Thomas
Kiryell, are sent over, who did as much as with so small an handful, could be
expected, taking in some Towns, but marching with the rest of the army toward
Bauguenx, at a place called Formigney, he was encountered by the Earl of
Cleremont, and seven thousand, French and Scots; at first the French were
driven to recoyle, and lost two pieces of their ordnance, but the Constable of
France, with four hundred men at arms, and eight hundred archers, came to the
reskew, and being fresh so beat upon the tired English, that they with the
loss of three thousand seven hundred threescore and thirteen, besides diverse
prisoners gave proof, that it was not altogether unpossible, but that the
English might be The English overthrown.
overcome, which hitherto in France for many years they never had been Sir
Thomas Vere and Captain Goughe escaped to Roven.

The French King with an army royal, besieges Cane which is bravely defended,
till the Duchess importuneth her husband, to take pity of her, and his
children, and to give over the Town, her entreaties and his childrens tears,
so far prevail that he moves the surrender to Sir David Hall, whowas there in
right of his Master the Duke of York owner of Cane, who knowing that there was
no great Correspondency, betwixt the Duke of Somerset and his An overbold but
true language.
Colonel, boldly told the Duke, that he had the charge of that City delivered
to his Care, that he would give a good account of the keeping of it, or leave
his life, as a testimony of his good will to have done it, the Duke of Somerset
urged his authority, which so incensed the old Captain, that he said, that he
could never better have expressed his insufficiency then ambitiously having
affected, so iminent a place, now durst not abide the hazard to stay in it,
this so moved the Regent, that he complains hereof to the rest of the
Captains, to whom he makes show of more danger then there was, and so far
prevailed An. 1450. R. 27.
with them, that they for the most part agree to make composition, for their
departure with bag and baggage, which being granted, Sir David with some few
of his retinue departed into Ireland, where to his Colonel he related all the
passages betwixt him and the Duke, which set a root of rankor in the heart of
the Duke of York against Somerset, that the seeds were never after dead, till
drowned in blood.

The French triumphed in Normandy, having clearly gotten it, after an hundred
years possession, out of the English men's hands, and finally won all France
to the obedience of Charles their King: the reasons of this total reduction of
these Provinces, are diversely delivered.

Some affirm, that the English had grasped more with their hand, then they
could well hold, joining more Towns then they could man, and having more lands
then they could manure, so that their store bred their poverty: Others say,
that the Captains kept not half the number in their Companies, that they
received pay for: Others affirm, that Somerset was blinded with French-crowne
dust, that he could not discern danger, till the soldiers tasted
destruction; But it is most agreeable to truth, that the triple-headed Gerion
in England, presumption in government, by some unmeet to rule, the inveterate
malice, and insufferable pride of the last created Nobility, and the
universal distaste of the Commons, too much oppressed with exactions, and
burdens, was the original and final cause of the ill success our Armies had
in France. Yet by the way consider, but the deportment of the English Nation,
the concurrence of martial men their counsel, discipline, designs, from the
beginning of Edward the first until this time, and you will acknowledge, that
they were men of worth and prowes, and carried the palm of victory before them
wheresoever they went. But Suffolk must bear a share, and a great one, of the
blame for this business, for he is not only exclaimed against, as the cause
of the surrender of Anion and Main. The chief procurer Suffolk traduced.
of the Duke of Glocesters death; The occasion of the loss of Normandy, but
they accuse him further, to have wilfully wasted the Kings Treasure, for being
a means to remove sufficient men, from the Council board, and admitting of
Favorites, that were only to serve his turn, his ambition aiming at the
advancement of his faction, though with the destruction of the King, and the
subversion of the Commonwealth; The Queen takes notice of these aspersions,
and too well knowing, how far they were guilty, that were thus touched,
doubting the Dukes destruction, and her own downfall, if this current were
not stopped, so wrought, that the Parliament The Parliament adjourned from
Blackfriars to Lecester, and then to Westminster.
assembled at the Blackfriars, is adjourned to Leicester, and from thence to
Westminster.

In the mean time all means possibly are used, to stop the mouths of those
that were incensed against the Duke, but it prevailed not. For the Lower house
exhibited their Bill of grievance against the Duke of Suffolk, to this purpose;

1. That he traitorously had incited diverse the Kings enemies, as namely the
Bastard of Orleance, the Lord Presigny and others, to levy war against the
King, to the intent that thereby the King might be destroyed, and that John
the Duke of Suffolkes Son, who had taken to Wife Margaret Daughter and sole
heir of John Duke of Somerset, whose Title to the Crown, the Duke of Suffolk
had often declared, in case King Henry should die without issue, might be King.

2. That by his sinister practices, Charles Duke of Orleance, notwithstanding
the many cautions upon great reasons, by King Henry the fifth to the contrary
given, obtained his liberty.

3. That through his treachery by the abetment of the Duke of Orleance, the
French King has gotten possession of all the Duchy of Normandy, and taken
prisoners, the valiant Earl of Shrewsbury, the Lord Fauconbridge, and many
other brave Commanders; But to all these, he affirmed himself not guilty,
neither in thought or deed.

Then was further allegations made against him, to this purpose.

1. That being with others sent Ambassadors into France, he transcended his
Commission, and without privitie of his fellow Commissioners, presumed to
promise the surrender of Anion, and the delivery of the County of Maunts, and
the City of Mants to Duke Rayner, which accordingly was performed, to the
great dishonor of the King, and detriment of the Crown.

2. That he had traitorously acquainted the Council of the French King with
all the affairs of State, and passages of secrecy, by whose traiterous
information, the enemy was througly instructed, in all the designs of the King
and Council.

3. That he had received rewards from the French King, whereby all succors
sent to the Kings Friends in France, were disappointed and frustrate.

4. That by his wicked practices, the good Duke of Gloucester, was deprived both
of Protectorship and life.

5. That by his laboring, such only were made of the Kings privy Council,
that more respected the Dukes particular profits, then the good of the King or
Realm.

6. And lastly, that he had underhand fraudulently enriched himself with the
Kings Treasure and revenewes, and had possessed himself, by abusing the
Queens favor, of all Offices of charge and credit about the King. All these
he faintly denied, but could not acquit himself of them. But to bleare the
eyes of the people, and to keep them hoodwinckt during the time of Parliament.
The Duke is committed to the Tower, but the Parliament is no sooner dissolved,
but he is set at liberty, which so much incensed the vulgar Suffolk committed
to the Tower.
people, that they could not be restrained within the limits of obedience, but
in many places, after they had vented their swollen spleenes in garrulent
exclaiming, against the corruption of times, and the wrongs the Commonwealth
sustained, by the misgovernment of the Queen and her Favorite. They fell to
an insurrection, and under the leading of a desperate Commander; stiling
himself Blewbeard, they began to commit some outrages, but by the diligence of
the Gentlemen of the Country, the Captain was apprehended, and the rebellion
ceased.

The Parliament is again assembled, and great care taken of the Election, of
moderate-minded men, for Citizens and Burgesses, presuming thereby to A
Parliament summoned.
stop any further proceedings against Suffolk; But his appearance gave such a
general distaste in the House, that though he came in the company of the King
and Queen, they would not forbear, but begin the assembly with Petitioning the
King for exemplary punishment, to be inflicted upon such, that had plotted or
consented to the dishonorable release, and resignation of Anion and Main,
whereof by name they did instance the Duke of Suffolk, John Bishop of
Salisbury, Sir James Fynes, Lord Say, and others. This Petition was seconded by
the Lords of the upper House; whereupon to give some satisfaction to the
Houses, the Lord Say Lord Treasurer, is sequestered from his place. The Dukes
Offices are all discarded, and himself formally banished for five years, but
with an intent, after the multitude (which are quickly forgetful of what is
not ever in sight) had put out of mind, the hatred conceived against him, to
have revoked him; But God did otherwise dispose of him; For when he was
shipped in Suffolk, with intent to have wasted over into France, he was met
by an English man of War, taken and carried to Dover Sands, had there his
head chopped off, on the side of the long boat, which together with the body were
left there on the sands, as a pledge of some satisfaction for the death of
Humphry. This William de la Poole married Alice Daughter and heir of Sir Tomas
Chaucer, who had issue by her John, who succeeded him and William.

Whilst these things are in agitation, the Duke of York though in Ireland,
began to spread his nets in England, to catch such as either through disgraces
were discontented, or otherwise envious, at the unworthy preferment of
illdeserving persons, or such as were any way ill-affected with the present
government, ever suggesting by the way his Title to the Crown, as descended
from Philip Daughter and heir of George Duke of Clarence, elder brother of
John of Gaunt, great Grandfather of Henry the sixth. Then is it privately
whispered.

1. That the King was simply of a weak capacity.

2. The Queen incorrigibly ambitious.

3. The Privy Council if wise, yet not honest enough for their places.

4. That through their inabilities, all France was lost; And that God would not
bless the usurped possession of King Henry the sixth.

Amongst others that were caught with these reportative engines; The Kentishmen
swallowed down the hook, and are taken therewith, which being observed by an
Instrument of the Duke of Yorkes called Mortimer: he Mortymer incites the many
to insurrection.
takes his time, and tells the many, that if they will be ruled by him, he
will put them into a course, to work a general reformation, both in Court and
Country; and free them for ever, from those great and insupportable burdens of
taxations so often (upon every slight occasion) obtruded upon them.

The people are so taken with these promises of reformation, and freedom of
impositions, that they draw to a head, and make Mortymer, otherwise Jack Cade
their Leader, who stiling himself Captain Mend-all, marches with no great
number, but those well-ordered to Black Heath, where between Eltham and
Greenwich, he lay by the space of a month exercising his men, and sending for
whom he pleased, and for what he pleased, in that majestic manner, as if he
were Lord Paramount of all Kent, nay of London also: To him resort fresh
Companies of all sorts, and from all parts. Then he presents unto the
Parliament then assembled at Westminster, the complaints of the Commons, and a
justification of the cause of their assembly, to be for the glory of God, the
honor of the King; and the good of his faithful subjects. And first whereas it
was generally voiced; That the County of Kent should be depopulated, and made
a wild Forest, for the death of the Duke of Suffolk, they justify their
innocence of the fact, and therefore crave the aversion of any such sentence,
or decree, Then they make remonstrance.

1. That the Queens Favorites, share among them the revenewes of the The
grievances of the Commons tendered to the Parliament.
Crown, whereby the King is enforced, (for the supportation of his present
estate) to tax and burden the Commons, with many great and unusual payments,
to their utter undoing, and the general impoverishment of the Kingdom.

2. That the Lords of the blood royal, are sequestered from the Kings presence,
and the places of Council are supplied, by persons of poor condition, who to
enrich themselves, make sale of justice.

3. That the Commons, have their commodities daily taken from them, for the
purveyance of the Kings household, for which they are not paid, nor any
assurance for payment thereof given, but Court promises.

4. That upon the apprehension of any man for treason, or felony, before
conviction, the Kings meniall servants, beg the goods and lands of the
impeached; Whereupon, indirect and unlawful proceedings are used, by
subornation of witnesses, embracery of Jurors. And great men's Letters to the
Judges, whereby Justice is perverted, and the innocent after attainted, and if
not executed, yet perpetually imprisoned to their undoing, and the enriching of
such Court Barratours.

5. That the Commons can have no legal proceedings in their law suites, so
that the rightful owners of inheritance, dare not (if opposed by any Courtier
or their Favorites) maintain their titles, or attempt the recovery of their
interest, or maintenance of their possession how just soever.

6. That the treachery of making sale of the Kings possessions in France, have
brought to beggary many thousand English, who now for want of employment, are
ready to starve or steal, whilst these Towne-robbers are suffered to enjoy the
benefit of their traitorous compositions, and are opulent and mighty.

7. That the Kings Collectors, and other accomptants are much troubled in
passing their accounts, by new extorted fees, and by being enforced to procure
a late invented Writ of quorum nomina, for allowance of the Barons of the
Cinque Ports, and there suing out their quietus, at their own charge, without
allowance from the King.

8. That the Sheriffs and under-Sheriffes, let to farm their Bayliwicks,
whereby those that buy dear (being to make a saving bargain) are compelled to
sell dear, whereby they so fleece, and sharke upon the poor Commons, that
they are hardly able to subsist.

9. That such Bailiffs under color of the greenwax out of the Exchequer, do
levy greater sums, then are by the record justifiable, yet maintained.

10. That the Officers of Dover Castle, did usually upon feyned actions, do
arrest through the shire, forcing poor people to give their demands, rather
then they would be at that expense to go to the Court, and there dance
attendance at pleasure, by means whereof they are often driven to spend more
then the thing demanded to the great vexation of the Commons.

11. That they cannot have the freedom of election of Knights of the shires,
Citizens and Burgesses for the Parliament, but by letters from the Favorites of
the Court, to their friends and retainers, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses
are chosen, and commonly such, as to please the Courtiers, displease the
Commons,

12. That the Collectours offices, are bought and sold at the pleasure of the
Justices of the peace, taking bribes of some, that are of a soft disposition to
be spared; and taking bribes on the other side of turbulent spirited men, to
have leave to execute the place,

13. That they are too much troubled, with too often coming to attend the
general Sessions, being enforced in many places to make five days journey, to
the place where they are kept, hereof they made complaint, and crave redress,
and that speedily.

The Captain likewise for his own particular, after protestation made to live
and die in the quarrel of the King, and in justification of his being
Sovereign and undoubted Lord: and of affirmation of his desire, of the Kings
welfare, and prosperity of the Realm, makes Petition, that the King would be
himself, and not live of the alms of his poor Commons, whilst his proud
Courtiers, riot out the revenewes of the Crown, to that end he craveth that
the Captain Mend-all his private petition.
King will resume into his own hands, all the demeasne lands, rights and profits
of the Crown, now sold or leased, or farmed, or otherwise disposed of.

2. That his Majesty would be pleased, to call back, and into favor to
receive the truly noble Prince, the Duke of York now exiled from his presence,
and with him the right honorable, the Dukes of Exceter, Buckingham, and
Norfolk, and the ancient Noblemen of the Realm, by the undue practices of
Suffolk, and his accomplices commanded from his presence; And that all their
antagonists and ill-willers, might be banished the Court, or bard their place
in Council, and displaced of their Offices.

3. That condign punishment might be impartially inflicted upon all the
plotters and contrivers of the Duke of Glocesters death, their associates and
abettors; and of all such as were the causes of the death of the Dukes of
Exceter and Warwick, with the irrecuperable loss of the Kings possessions in
France.

4. That there mightbe a general amotion of corrupt officers, an abolition of
the green Wax, and other instruments of extortion out of the Exchequer, a
qualification of the rigor of proceeding in the Kings bench, an inhibition of
unequal purveyance of provision for the Kings household, a cessation of
proceedings against the offenders of the Statute of Laborers, and a present
execution of the Promooters, Slegge, Cromer, Isell, and East, whom he pretended
by wrongful informations to have abused the King, and wronged his subjects.
These bills of intimation and petition, are sent from the lower House to the
upper, from whence the examination of the circumstances, are committed to the
Lords of the Kings privy Council, who having thoroughly perused them, and
maturely examined the particulars, explode them as frivolous, and conclude the
promovers and authors there of, proud and presumptuous rebels; Whereupon the
King is solicited by his privy Council, to punish the unlawful attempt of
these rebellious pretenders, rather by force then entreaty; This advise is
seconded by the Queen, whom she perceived now they principally aimed at, though
not as yet in overt terms discovered; The King draws his forces to
Greenwitch, from whence he appointed diverse namelesse Lords to assail the
rebels, but they were told by their followers, that they would not fight
against their friends: as only labored the reformation of abuses, and the
punishment of such traitors about the King, as the Lord Say, the Kings
Chamberlain was, whose name was rife in every man's mouth, as well on one side
as other to be reproched, whereupon the L. Chamberlain is presently committed
to the tower, and (until other forces come) the King and Queen retire to
London, from whence within two days being nowful 15000. strong, the King in
person marches toward Captain Amend all: who politickly withdraws his
forces to Senock wood; upon notice where of the King retireth to London. But
the Queen thirsting after their ruin that plotted hers, sends the two
Staffords, Sir Humphry and William, with many gallants to follow the rebels,
these proud of employment, make more have then good speed, for they found Jack
Cade in good order, ready to receive them, who in the first encounter, slew The
two Staffords defeated and slain.
Sir Humphry, and afterward his brother, and put all the rest to ^ight; The
Kings forces being at Blackheath, could not by threats or entreats be enforced
or persuaded, to go to the rescues; But hearing of the discomfiture of the
Staffords, and the forward Courtiers, they began to whistle treason, wishing
the Queen and her favorites in Staffords room, or that the Duke of York
were in England to aid his Cousin, Mortimer (never ownd to be of the house of
March until now) But all expressing their backwardness to make resistance,
many of them steal to the Kentishmen and others from Sussex and Surrey
increase his number, whom he orders restrains from forraging, or taking any
thing by force, or without payment, yet how or from whence he had provision of
food, for this numerous company or money to provide it, had not some Londoners
underhand given him assistance, might have been wondered, But he returns
again to Black Heath, and encampeth, where the Kings army lay the night
before, who were now fallen down to Green-witch. The Archbishop of Canterbury,
and the Duke of Buckingham, are sent to expostulate with the rebels and their
Captain, about their demmand (a miserable time the while when two such peers
must be employed in such a manner to so mean a person and a rebel) But now
being together, Jack Cade with a sober composed countenance, and great
moderation, expressed himself in very good terms, but without show of
reluctation or cessation from arms, except the King in person would hear the
grievances of the subject and pass his Princely word, for reformation of their
wrongs, thus settled (if not peremptory resolution) made known to the King, who
was in doubt of his own forces, as being unsure of his own Soldiers faith,
marches presently to Killingworth Castle in Warwickshire, where he fortifieth,
and victualleth as suspecting to be besieged, having left nor power nor
Commander of note behind, but only the Lord Scales who with some forces were
left to guard the Tower. The Kentish Captain, taking advantage of the Kings
departure, comes to Southwarke, where he orderly quartereth his men,
earnestly exhorting his Soldiers, to be Examples, of that in themselves, that
they made pretense, to find wanting in others, and to be regular, and modest
and to Commit no outrage, either in or about their lodging, he himself kept
the watch, and kept all things fair and square. The next morning they marched
to London Bridge, where they made shift with their swords to cut the ropes of
the draw bridge, no force being used for resistance, and so in good order they
march by London stone, upon which the Captain struck his sword, saying, Lo
Mortymer is now Lord of London: The Mayor of London. Sir Thomas Chalton,
standing upon the threshold of his door, with a bold countenance, as though he
had power enough (if he would) to repress him, told the Captain that if he
should attempt any thing against the quiet of the City, that he should feel
hands enough about their ears to stop them, before they went too far,
whereunto Jack Cade not permitting him to proceed with a settled brow, said.
Let the world take notice of our honest intention, by our actions, we pretend
not public reformation, and intend private ends of enriching our selves, by
undoing others, let us have your favorable opinions, if you will not give us
further assistance, and in the mean time to give you assurance our tongues and
hearts are relatives, observe our demeanours, and so giving the word, his
Soldiers faced about, and returned to their last quarter, not doing by the
way, the lest thing that might be termed wrong to the Citizens. This orderly
carriage of himself with the care of the Commanders to keep the men in
obedience, to the statutes and provisions of their General, won them a good
opinion amongst the most of the lower rank of Citizens, he therefore assuming
to himself, the place of chief, sends out his Letters of safe conduct, to
such whom he pleased to make use of, amongst whom he wrote this to Thomas
Cock Draper of London.

By this one writing ensealed, we grant and will permit truly, That Thomas The
form of Jack Cades Warrant.
Cock of London Draper, shall come in surety, and in safeguard to our
presence, without any hurt to his person, and to avoid from us again at his
pleasure, with all other persons asigned at his denomination, with him coming
in, subscribed thus His Majesty's loyal subject, John Mortimer, Captain amend
all.

Upon Cocks admission he had private conference with three other with him: and
the Captain at his departure gave him these instructions in writing.

You shall charge all Lombards, and Merchant strangers, Genowayes, Venetians,
Florentines and others, This day to draw themselves together; And to ordain
for us the Captain, twelve harness complete of the best fashion, four and
twenty Brigandines, twelve battle Axes, twelve glaves, six horses with saddle
and bridle completely furnished, and a thousand marks in ready money; And if
this our demand be not performed and done, we shall have the heads of as many
as we can get of them.

Next morning being the third of July, having received the Lombards
contribution, he returned in battle array to London, and from thence sent to
the Lord Scales for the bringing of his prisoner the Lord Say to the
Guild Hall, whither he had called the Mayor with his brethren, and before whom
he caused the Lord Say to be arraigned, who craved the benefit of the Law, to
be tried by his Peers, was forth with taken from his Keepers, and brought to
the Standard in Cheap, and there had his head chopped off, which being pitched
upon a Pike, was carried before him to Mile-end, whither he went to have
conference with the Mutiners of Essex, which were encamped there, by the way
casually meeting with Sir James Cromer, the high Sheriff of Kent, who had
lately married the Lord Says Daughter, he caused his head to be struck off,
and carried with his Father-in-Lawes before him in derision; From thence he
returned into Southwarcke, and orderly kept his watches, tying the Companies to
their martial duties.

In the morning they came again to London, where after public execution made
of some of his followers that had done things contrary to his Proclamation, for
he made the transgression of his Edicts criminal, without the least
partiality, or sparing any, upon some displeasure formerly taken, against
Alderman Malpas, he sent and seized upon all his Wares and goods, and sent it
to his quarter in Southwarcke, and fined Alderman Horn at five hundred Marks,
and began in a more insolent manner then hitherto he had used to bear
himself, which caused the graver Citizens, to take advise amongst themselves,
for some speedy course to be taken, for the repressing of these insolences,
and the assurance of their lives and substance, from the fury of such Rebels.
They send therefore by night to the Lord Scales, who promises them his best
assistance, and to that end sends to them Matthew Gough an old soldier, and
an able Captain, with some forces and furnitures out of the Tower; who
presently are drawn down to London Bridge, and at the foot thereof, stand to
debar the Kentish rebels from passage that way; whereupon the alarm is
given, and Cade endeavored to force his passage, so that a cruel fight began,
which did continue many hours, sometimes joining, sometime losing ground, at
length the Rebels prevailed so far, that they drove the Londoners from the
drawbridge; then they began to set fire on the houses, when the aged and
impotent, between the merciless elements of fire and water, (whilst the more
able were slain by the sword most miserably perished, Captain Bough
Alderman, Sutton and Robert Haysand, valiantly fighting were slain, now had
the Londoners lost the Bridge, and were driven to S. Magnus corner, but a fresh
supply being come, they recovered the Bridge, and drove the Kentish beyond the
stoop in Southwarke, at which time both being weary agreed of a truce, until
the next day, neither party to go into the others quarters, after the
retreat Cade found that he had lost, many of his most able men, he was
therefore driven for supply, to set at liberty all the prisoners in
Southwarke, as well fellones as debtors, to fill up his number, but now his
Soldiers, entering into consideration, of their danger, and the desparate
services their Captain had brought them to, and though which the latest
advising privately amongst themselves of some Course, to retire and return to
their houses and families, being weary of the life of a Soldier, they hung
down their heads only waited but opportunity to give their Captain the bag,
which being wisely apprehended, by the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury collecting
by their Countenances their change of opinion, he together with the Bishop of
Winchester, came from the Towen by water to Southwarke, where they showed the
kings General pardon, under the great seal of England, which being publicly
published, the people were not more weary of rebelling then glad of the pardon,
and without bidding the Captain farewell, they that night withdrew themselves,
to their several habitation, Jack Cade having sent his pillage by water, with
some few followers, bent his joureney to Quinborough Castle, where contrary to
expectation, being debarred entrance he disguised himself and privily fled,
but Proclamation being made, that he that should bring him alive, or dead,
should have for his reward a thousand Marks, he was afterward by one Alexander
Eden Gentleman, attached, but making resistance in a Garden at Hothfield in
Sussex he was slain, his body was brought to London, and there beheaded and
quartered, the one placed on London Bridge, the other sent The captain of the
rebels slain.
into diverse places in Kent, to be set up: upon this news the King sends his
Commissioners into Kent, to enquire of the abettors of the Kentish rebels,
whither himself follows in person, and notwithstanding five hundred were
found guilty, eight only were executed. The slippes of this rebellion, did
spring about this time, in many places of this kingdom, but chiefly, in Sussex
Surry and Wilshire, but were soon appeased without much hurt done, only the
Wilshire men upon the nine and twenteth day of June, drew William Askots Bishop
of Salisbury, from the high altar celebrating The Bishop of Salisbury murdered.
Mass in Edington Church, in his albe with his stole about his neck, to the
top of the hill, and their inhumanly murdered him. Their rage having blinded
their reason, banished humanity, and drowned all pity, they stripped him
naked, every one of his tenants striving to have a piece of his bloody shirt,
not as others to have the relikes of the Martyr, to celebrate his memory, but
as glorying in their own villainy, they having the day before robbed his
carriage and taken the sum of ten thousand marks. The French King taking hold
of these disorders in England, wins out of their hands, all whatsoever was
in their possession in France, no succor, though often, and earnestly by
writing, and Messengers required, being sent unto them, so that England at this
time suffered a total eclipse of glory in France, They every day loosing more
or less, until they had nothing left in France to loose, but the Town of
Callice, and the Castles of Hames and Gnynes, so that King Henry the Fifts
propheticke declaration, that what An. 1452. R. 29.
Henry of Monmouth got in France, Henry of Windsor should lose, was now
verified.

The Duke of Somerset having so well discharged his place of Regency, that he
had lost but few men, but consumed much Treasure, and kept never a Town,
comes into England, and at a Parliament, which began at Westminster A
Parliament.
the sixth of November, was put under arrest, upon notice whereof the commons of
London despoiled his house at Blackfriars, and ransacked the same, making
havocke of all things, until Proclamation was made, on pain of death, that no
man should meddle with any the Dukes houses or stuff, and one for disobeying
the Proclamation, was beheaded at the Standard in Cheap. The Duke of York
under pretense of coming to this Parliament, came out of Ireland, and at
London had private conference, with John Duke of Norfolk, Richard Earl of
Salisbury, the Earl of Devon, and other his assured Friends; where it was
resolved to keep the chief purpose, (the pretense to the Crown) secret, and
only make show of his The Duke of Yorkes policy to cloak his intention.
endeavors to be bent, to remove those from the Council of the King, that had
so dishonored the Realm, and wasted the revenewes of the Crown, in losing so
many good Towns in France, and doing nothing worthy their place, or credit
they held about the King: whereof the Duke of Somerset must be the chief man
to be instanced, and the rather, for that he was in great contempt of the
Commons, and was the only he, that opposed the Duke of York in all things;
The Duke having laid the foundation, of this his so long intended enterprise,
sent diverse Letters unto the King, wherein he intimated, the many unworthy
proceedings plotted against him by his enemies, whereby they had well-nie, if
hot altogether, withdrawn his Majesty's affection from him, and though he
were, and was ready, to lay down his life at the Kings command, as a testimony
of his ever to continue loyalty, yet by their secret, and dishonorable
practices, they had besmeared his honor with suspicion of his integrity, which
was a grief unutterable, and an injury unsupportable; That his patience abused
might turn to fury, nevertheless his only request was, to know his accuser,
and either to have liberty to defy him, and make good his challenge by the
law of Arms, or be permitted to take that course for the reparation of his
Honor, as was appertaining to his condition and birth.

To this the King makes answer, that he would take his complaint of wrongs
into consideration, and endeavor to give him fair satisfaction; but withal
somewhat blames him, for the death of the Bishop of Chester, by his means
suspected to be slaughtered, and of dangerous speeches, uttered by his
servants tending to rebellion; concluding that notwithstanding any thing said,
or done to the contrary: he did take and esteem him as a faithful subject,
and a loving kinsman.

The Duke of York not herewith satisfied, intending at once both to promulgate
his protestation, and display his colors, departs into Wales, York raises
forces in Wales.
and there levieth men, making his color for the good of the Commonwealth,
(and the removing the bad Councellers, that sought the ruin of his subjects)
from the Kings Council.

News hereof being brought, the King with the Duke of Somerset, (now enlarged)
with an Army marched toward Wales, whereof the Duke of York having notice by
his Scoutes, which way the King came, by a contrary way marched toward
LONDON, but having from thence received advertisements, that he would be
prohibited entrance, he past the River Thames at Kingstone bridge, and marched
into Kent, expecting there to find many friends, at least partakers, and
encamped upon Burnt heath. The King in his pursuit came to Blackheath, and
there pitched The King sends to the Duke of York.
his Tents; From whence the King sent the Bishops of Winchester and Ely, the
Lord Rivers and Richard Andrews, the keeper of the Privy Seal, to know the
cause of this Commotion, and to make offer of reconcilement, if the Dukes
Demands were consonant to reason; The Duke made answer, that there was nothing
intended, that might be prejudicial to the Kings person, his Crown or
Dignity, nor to the hinderance of any good man, but to remove Yorks answer.
certain blood-suckers, evil disposed persons, oppressors of the poor, and
infamous impostors from about the King; but especially Edmond Duke of Somerset,
whom if the King would be but pleased, to commit to Ward, until by a legal
trial in Parliament he might receive judgment, of such treasonable crimes,
as should then and there be proved against him, that then he would not only
dismiss his Army, but come unto his presence as a true and loyal subject, in
duty was bound so to do, and to tender him all befitting service; Hereupon
the Duke of Somerset is committed to prison, the Duke of York dismisseth his
Army, and comes in person to the King, where finding the Duke of Somerset in
the Presence, he charge him with York dismisseth his army.
Treason; The Duke of Somerset denies the accusation, and recriminates the
Duke of York, to have conspired the death of the King, and the usurpation of
the Crown. The King removes to London, and the Duke of York as a prisoner
rode before the King, but the Duke of Somerset at liberty, which ministered much
occasion of heart-burning amongst the friends of York.

The King calls a Council at Westminster, where the Dukes are earnest in
accusing each other, Somerset instantly craved of the Council, that the Duke
of York might by compulsion, or otherwise be made to confess his Conspiracy,
and to doom him to condign punishment, and his children taken as enemies to
their country, as the only means to repress the so much to be feared civil
dissension; This he with great show of vehemence urged, but not (how true
soever to the point of belief) for the most of the Council suggested his
innocence, first by his voluntary submission, when he had power sufficient,
either to have kept the field, or to have assured his retraite, then by his
request made not for himself, but for the ease of the poor Commons, next his
careful and honorable endeavors, both in France and Ireland, where if he had
had any such traitorous intent, he had the pan by the stale; and might have
kept it; But while the Council are debating this, at the very instant, the
Earl of Kendall, and the Lord Lespar crave present admission to the Board, and
audience as Ambassadors from Burdeux, for business of great import, and
speedy dispatch, they being admitted, declare to the Kings Council, how
readily and really the inhabitants of Burdeux, are to submit their obedience to
the Crown of England, if they might but be assured, to be defended by it,
they therefore offer upon the appearance of an Army in Gascoygne (if come
before the plot be discovered) to yield all up unto them. To second this,
comes a constant urged report, that Edward Earl of March, Son and heir to
the Duke of York, with a great power of March-men, made a speedy march toward
London, These news troubled the Queen, those the Council, it is therefore
resolved on, That the Duke of YORK (lest private dissension should hinder
public designs of such consequence as the reduction of GASCOIGNE) should in
the presence of the KING and his Nobility, and all the Congregation at the
high Altar at Paul's, take his oath of submission, and allegiance to the King of
England, which he accordingly did, and so had liberty to depart to his Castle
of Wigmore. York takes the oath of allegiance.


After his departure, the Earl of Shrewsbury with about three thousand men,
was sent to Gascoyne, who arriving in the I Will of Madre, passed forth with his
power, and took Fronsacke and other pieces; But having received in the
nightinstructions from Burdeux, he makes all speed thither, and was entered
therein, before the French had notice of his coming, so that many of them
Burdeux is reduced.
were slain by the Lord Espar in their beds: shortly after the destruction of
Burdeux, there arrived at Blay the Earl of Shrowsburies Son Sir John Talbot,
with the Bastard of Somerset, with diverse others, with two and twenty hundred
men furnished and victualed, by whose means Burdeux is well mand with English,
and provided for at full, whilst the Earl was not idle, but went from place to
place, to receive the offered submission of all places whither he came, and
having taken Chattillon, he strongly and sufficiently fortifieth, and
furnishes the same. The French King rayseth an Army, and forthwith besieges
by his Commanders Chattillon; to the reskue whereof the Earl makes all
possible speed with eight hundred Horse, appointing the Earl of Kendall, and
the Lord Lespar to follow with the foot; In his way he surprised a Tower the
French had taken, and put all within it to the sword, and meeting five hundred
Frenchmen, that had been forraging, he slew a great number of them, and
chased the rest to the Camp, upon whose approach, the French understanding
which way the enemy came, they left the siege, and retired to a place which
they had formerly trenched and fortified, whither the Earl follows them, and
resolutely charge them so home, that he got the entry of the Camp, where
being shot through the thigh with a Harquebush, and his horse slain under him,
his son desirous to Shrowsbury with his fourth son and his natural brother
slain at Chattillon.
relieve his Father, lost his own life, and therein was accompanied with his
Bastard brother, Henry Talbot, and Sir Edward Hall, and thirty other Gentlemen
of name, the Lord Molynes with threescore others were taken prisoners, the rest
fled to Burdeux, but in the way a thousand of them were slain.

Thus on the last day of July at Chattillon, the thrice honorable Earl of
Shrowsbury, the first of that name, gave the last testimony of his true service
1453.
to his King, after he had employed the same to his never-dying Honor in the
parts beyond the Seas, by the space of four and twenty years, he had married
two wives; The first was Matild, daughter and sole heir of Thomas Nevill Lord
Furnivall; by whom he had issue John that succeeded him in the Earldom, Sir
Christopher Talbot, and Sir Humphry Talbot Knights.

His second wife was Margaret, elder Daughter and Coheire of Richard Beuchamp
Earl of Warwick, by whom he had issue John Talbot, in right of his Wife
Vicount Lisle, slain with his Father, Sir Humphry Talbot slain at Mount
Sinay; Elizabeth married to John Mowbray Earl of Norfolk, and Elianor Wife to
Thomas Boteleer, Lord of Sudley Castle. And a natural son slain, as before
with his Father, his body was buried in a tomb at Roan in Normandy, with this
inscriptioa; Here lies the right noble Knight John Talbot, Earl of
Shrowsbury, Weshford, Waterford, and Valence, Lord Talbot of Goodritch and
Orchenfield, Lord Srange of Blackmere, L. Verdon of Acton, L. Cromwell of
Wingfield, L. Lovetoft of Worsop, L. Furnivall of Sheffield, L. Fauconbridge
knight of the noble orders of St. George, St. Michael, and the golden Fleece,
great Marshall to K. Henry the sixth of his Realm of France.

The Earl of Kendall, the Lords Mountferrat, Rosayne and Dangladas, entered
Ann. 1453 R. 30.
into the Castle of Chattillon, which they made good against the French, by the
space of ten days, and then without hope of succor, delivered it upon
composition, to have liberty to depart to Burdeux; Now the tide turned again,
the Gascoynes levitie, being as ready to open the gates to the French, as they
were but little before to the English, by means whereof, in short time the
French recovered again all Gascoyne except Burdeux, which the French King in
person lays siege unto, and at length has it surrendered, upon condition
that both garrisons and inhabitants with all their substance, might safely
depart for England or Callice, and that the Lords Lespar and Durant, with
thirty others, whose names were expressed upon pain of death, should never
after be found in the territories of France: the neglect of which oath, within
few years after, caused Lespar to leave his head behind him there, whilst the
rest in safety came to England, this loss of Aquitane was palliated by the
happy delivery of the Queen of a Son who was The Queen delivered of a Son.
Christened.

The King and the Dukes beginning to bandy one against the other, gave a
beginning to that faction, whose end was not procured without the deplorable
loss of so many thousand Englishmen; and now as a praeludium to that tragedy,
upon Saint Bartholmewes day an ancient custom being, that the Mayor of London
and the Sheriffs should be present, in giving prizes to the best Wrastlers, at
the wrestling place near More-fields; The Prior of Saint John's being there to
see the sport, a servant of his not brooking the disgrace, to be foiled before
his Master, against the custom of the place, would have wrastled again, and
with foul language provoked the Victor, but one bad word begat another, and
from foul words they fell to fouler blows; The Mayor observing the mover, to
be the Pryors servant, not only commanded the Kings peace in general to be
observed, but perceiving by the Priors countenance, that he did abet his
servants insolency, he commanded Richard Ally one of the Sheriffs, to lay hold
upon the Priors servant, who did so, and delivered him to one of his officers,
from whom by the Priors servants, and others their partakers, the prisoner was
in danger to be reskued, so as the Sheriff craved assistance of the Mayor, who
with his brethren, and officers, and servants, valiantly assisted the Sheriff,
in the execution of his office, whilst the Prior hasted to Saint John's, from
whence, and Clerkenwell, he under the guide of one Callice, a desperate
swaggerer, sent a number of Bowmen to resist the Mayor, upon whose approach,
great bloodshed and some slaughter was committed, the Majors cap was shot
through with an arrow, he nevertheless courageously did his devoire, in
encouraging the Citizens, and apprehending some of the mutiners, whom he sent
to Newgate, and put the rest to flight, which being done, he comes to his
Pavilion, and would have had the sports go on, but the Wrastlers were out of
breath or hurt, so that none came, nevertheless Sir John Norman the Mayor told
his Brethren, that he would stay a while to make trial of the Citizens respect
toward him, for if they came to his reskue, though it needed not, yet they
would express their love, or their neglect if otherwise: he had no sooner said
so, when the Citizens, with Banners displayed, came in great numbers to him,
and fetched him home in great Norman the first Lord Mayor that went by water to
Westminster to take his oath.
triumph; This was that Mayor which first began to go by water to Westminster. to
take his oath in that manner, as is at this day used, whereas before that time,
they used to go by land; This Mayor again was troubled by the Sanctuary men of
S. Martins, which not without some bloodshed, and a great deal of industry on
his part, was with the public punishment of some of the ringleaders appeased;

But upon the neck of that began the quarrel in Holborne betwixt the Gentlemen
of the Innes of Chauncery and some Citizens, in appeasing of which the Queens
Attorney and three more were slain. But these were but The Queens Attorney
with others slain in a fray.
Peccadelloes to the deformities made in civil societies, by civil
dissentions the year following; For now began the spark that fell into the
bundell of flax at Somersets going Regent into France to flame out; For first,
York by all means labors to stir up the hatred of the Commons against
Somerset inculcating in their ears, (who are apt enough upon losses in wars
to accuse the Leaders, of some crime of neglect or other) what dishonor
England sustained by Somersets dishonorable giving over, by composition the
strong towns of Normandy, to these he adds favor with the King and Queen,
which he imployeth, says he to his own gain, and the Commons grief, and
so having anticipated with his speeches their apprehensions, he addresseth
himself to those of the Nobility, that could not well brook, the too much
commanding power of Somerset, over the King and Queens affections, for what
he told the Queen was believed, and what she told the King must be true,
amongst others the Duke of York fasteneth upon the two Nevills, both Richards
the Father and the son, the one Earl of Salisbury, the other Earl of
Warwick. The Earl of Salisbury, was second son of Ralph Nevill Earl of
Westmerland, whose Daughter the Duke of York had married; And this Richard was
married to Alice Daughter and only heir of Thomas Mountacute Earl of
Salisbury, slain in France, with these he deals so effectually, that an
undissoluble knot of friendship, is knit betwixt them, by whose assistance the
King lying dangerously sick at Claringdon, the Duke of Somerset is arrested in
the Queens great Chamber of treason, and sent to keep his Christmasse in the
Tower, and a Session of Parliament at Westminster now convoked, Somerset is
appeached of treason, and many heinous crimes objected, but the King though
weak, is brought to London to dissolve the Parliament; After which the Duke of
Somerset is again set at liberty, which more incenseth the Duke of Yorkes
choler, and inciteth others more to be choleric, and the rather, for that
Somerset in-stead of receiving of punishment, for the loss of Normandy, is
entrusted with the sole remainder of our interest in France, and preferred to
be Captain thereof, to lose that too, (say his enemies) of the whole
Commonwealth, they assemble a great power, and therewith march toward London;
The King being assured, it was no good policy, to suffer the Duke to approach
London, wherein he had by his long practices, got no small party, resolves to
stop him on the way, and accompanied with the Duke of Somerset, and attended by
the Duke of Buckingham and his Son, both named Humphry: Henry Earl of
Northumberland, James Earl of Wiltes, Jasper Earl of Penbrooke, and two
thousand fighting men march forward, both Armies meet at Saint Albones; The
Duke and the Lords encampe without the Town in a place called Keyfield, the
King pitched his Standard in a place called Goseslow; the Lord Clifford kept
the end of the The Duke of York writes to the King.
town, which he barrcadoed; The Duke in the morning sent a Letter unto the
King, stuffed with many protestations of fidelity and sincerity, offering to
give testimony thereof in any thing, so please his Majesty to give due
punishment to those that have abused his favor, and dishonored the Realm,
and that so be witched him (especially the Duke of Somerset) that nothing his
loyal subject can either say or do, can make him give credence to their true
relations against Somerset, the delivery of him into their hands, to stand or
fall by the judgment of his Peers, is all they desire, and that they will
have, or die in the pursuit.

The King for answer commands them to disband, and submit to his mercy, Ann.
1454 R. 33.
and not expect any in his Army, to be delivered to their wills, for he will
rather lose his life then any should be wronged, for their loves that were
with him; Here with the Duke acquaints his friends, who before resolved, and now
prepared fell every one to his quarter; the Earl of Warwick with his First
battle at St. Albones.
March-men fell upon the Lord Cliffords quarter, driving down all before them,
for that wanting room to use their weapons, the Kings party was much
disadvantaged; the Duke of Somerset hasting to the rescues was slain, and with
him the Earl of Northumberland, Humphry Earl of Stafford, The Duke of
Somerset slain.
the Lord Clifford, and about five thousand; The Kings army being increased
after his coming forth, to eight thousand, but now they are all dispersed and
slain, and the King unguarded, left in a poor thatched house, whither to be
freed from the arrows flying, he had withdrawn himself. The Duke of York
having notice where the King was, comes with Warwick and Salisbury, who all
three present themselves upon their knees before him, making humble petition
unto him for pardon for what was past, for now since that the common enemy was
slain, they had what they aimed at, to whom the King thoroughly affrighted,
said, Let there be no more killing then, and I will do what you will have me.
The Duke therefore in the Kings 1455.
name, commands a surcease from further hostility, and so comforting the King,
in what he could, with good words, he went to take order for the quartering
his men. This first battle of Saint Albones, was fought upon the three and
twentieth day of May, in the three and thirtieth year of King Henryes reign.
The bodies of the Noble men, the Duke of Somerset, the Earl of Northumberland,
and the Lord Clifford, were buried in the Chapel there; Had it not been
Somersets unhappiness to stand in the eye of York, or to live in that age,
when all actions were accounted of, according to the event. This Somerset might
have been ranked amongst the best Commanders of those times, but his ambition
at first crossed York in all his designs, so Yorkes malice at the last did him
a courtesy before the calamities of this kingdom, were swollen to their full
extent; He married Elianor, one of the Daughters and heir of Richard Beachamp
Earl of Warwick, and had issue by her four Sons and five Daughters, Henry
who succeeded him in the Dukedom; Edmond who succeeded his brother therein,
John and Thomas: Elianor his eldest Daughter was first married, to James Earl
of Wiltshire, and after to Sir Robert Spencer.

2. Ioane was married to the Lord Hoth of Ireland, and after to Sir Richard Fry
Knight.

3. Anne was married to Sir William Paston Knight.

Margaret was first married to Humphry Earl of Stafford, and after to Sir
Richard Dorrel Knight, and Elizabeth was married to Sir Henry Lewis, all which
to the last breath continued firm and faithful to the Lancastrian Family.

Henry Lord Piercy, Earl of Northumberland now slain, married Elianor
Daughter of Ralph Nevill, first Earl of Westmerland: and had issue Henry, that
did succeed him in the Earldom, Thomas Lord Egrimond, William Bishop of
Carlisle.

Anne married to Thomas Lord Hungerford.

Katherine was Wife to Edmond Gray, Earl of Kent, and

Elizabeth married to Thomas Lord Clifford.

Humphry Earl of Stafford, married Margaret, Sister and coheire of Edmond
Bewford, Duke of Somerset, who had issue Henry Stafford, who succeeded his
Grandfather in the Dukedom of Buckingham. Ann. 1455 Reg. 33.


The Duke of York with all befitting complements, conveyeth the King to
London, where they keep the Feast of Pentecost together, and in the mean time
a Parliament is summoned at Westminster, to begin the ninth day of July: The
Duke of York conveyeth the K. to London.
whither the King comes, and there it is enacted, that the late Duke of
Gloucester should be declared publicly a loyal subject, both to the King and
Realm, and that none should misreport, or dispute the actions of the Duke of
York or any in his company; For that they had like good subjects enterprised
nothing, but what was for the Kings safety. In this Parliament the Duke of
York is made Protector of the Kings royal Person, and of the York made
Protector of the King.
Realm; the Earl of Salisbury Lord Chancelour, and the Earl of Warwick
Captain of Callice; The former two have the administration of all civil
government of the Commonweal at home, and upon the third is conferred, the
disposing of all Military affairs abroad. Their demeanours in their several
places, were judged unblameable, for with that respective moderation, and
orderly proceedings, they managed their affairs; That they showed no
injustice, used no bribery, exercised no oppression, but practiced
indifferency to poor and rich, to their great commendation.

But all this while the high spirited Queen cannot but distaste their
proceedings, she puts the Duke of Buckingham in mind (as though his revenge
were slow and sleepie) that t^se traitors had slain that noble Gentleman, and
hopeful son of his at Saint Albones, she tells the now Duke of Somerset,
that there his dear Father fell, and both retort to the Queen, the
unsufferable indignity done to her, in making her Husband a Whitsontide lord,
only a King in name, whilst the Duke of York and his accomplices must manage
all; what needs spurs to willing minds, or provocations to rage thoroughly
incensed; all are apt enough to revenge, But the cursed Cow has short horns,
envy must invent, and malice execute the course of revenge, a woman's wit
througly stung with disgrace, and vily stird with despite, cannot long be
undelivered, of some plot to do mischief. All the enemies of the York
faction (for now the devil began to deal his alms, and to make a faction,)
are assembled by the Queen at Greenwitch, where it is amongst them debated,
what course is fittest to be used, for restitution of the King, to his
pristine liberty and government, at length it is concluded, that the Protector
should be commanded to leave off his place of Protectorship, and the Earl of
Salisbury his Chancelours place, the one in respect the King was of years, and
discretion sufficient, without a Tutor or Guardian, to rule and reign, and
therefore a Protectors place needless, and the Earl of Salisbury to surrender
his title of being Lord Chancelour, for that the great Seal was never
delivered unto him, and that that which was now used was made since the Kings
restraint of liberty, and so not sufficient; The Kings easy yielding condition
is quickly wrought upon, to countenance their proceedings against the Duke and
Earl, and thereupon in his name, they are both discharged from their offices,
and summoned to appear at the Council table at Greenwitch, whither if they
had been so forgetful as to have gone, they had been entrapped, but they
better advised returned answer, That none had power either to displace them, or
command their appearance in any place, but in Parliament: and so they continued
about London, placing their friends and fautours, in all places of government,
and displacing others whom they either not affected, or had cause to suspect,
and with a triumvirate authority, they took John Holland Earl of Exceter out
of the Sanctuary, and sent him prisoner to Pomfret Castle; These proceedings
gave occasion to the licentious Commons, to take hold of any occasion for a
commotion; And thereupon an Italian Merchant being by a Mercers apprentice,
reprehended for wearing a dagger, contrary to the laws of their own country,
gave disdainful speeches, which moved the English man to take his dagger from
him, and to break it over his coxcombe, hereof the Merchant complains to the
Mayor, the Mercer is convented and committed, the Mayor in his return, is met
by diverse, terming themselves Prentices, that would not be persuaded to
depart, until the Mercer was sent for out of Newgate, who now being at
liberty, draws diverse (willing enough of themselves to go) to spoil the
strangers about London, and ransacke their houses, wherewith like furious mad
bedlam men they rifled, and robbed the outlandish Merchants in all places The
Merchant strangers rifled.
of the City, doing them much mischief, and committing many outrages. The
Mayor to suppress these enormous courses, assembleth a company of honest and
substantial Citizens, who with good discretion, but not without some
bloodshed appeased their rage, and quieted the many, whilst the ringleader
(which more for revenge of his commitment to Newgate) then any desire to enrich
himself with their spoil, got himself to Westminster, and there takes
Sanctuary; The Council being advertised of this misdemeanour, sent the Duke of
Buckingham, by the Qeenes direction, with Commission to enquire, and punish
these offenses; But when the Mayor and the Commissioners were set, tidings
came, that t^ Commons were up in arms, to stop all proceedings against any of
those offenders, the Commissioners thereupon, well knowing how distasteful
their Commission would be to the multitude, when thereby the Majors power
should be abridged, and the government of the City questioned, departed and
left the business to be proceeded in by the Mayor and his Brethren, who with
great care and much industry so managed things, that many of the offenders were
punished, some by death, others by fines and imprisonment, and all things
quieted and well ordered.

The French in this time of uncivil dissentions, manned out two Fleetes,
whereof one under the conduct of William Lord Pomyers, the other of Sir Peter
Bressy, went Eastward and Westward, the Lord fell upon Fulnay, and burning
certain houses soon retired, the Knight spoiled Sandwich, the An invasion
attempted by the French. Sandwich plundered. The Scots make an inroad.
people for fear of the plague (which mightily raged there) being fled from
thence, but with no great booty or harm done, returned.

The Scots, under color and countenance of their Kings presence, came into
Northumberland, burning and spoiling the Borders, but hearing of the Duke of
Yorkes approach retired; Thomas Piercy Lord Egremond, one of the younger sons
of the Earl of Northumberland had a great conflict with the Earl of
Salisburies Sons, in which many were slain; But the Lord was taken, and
brought before the Council, by whom he was committed to Newgate, and deeply
fined, but he escaped with many other prisoners, to the great trouble of the
Sheriffs of London. Whilst the Duke of The Sheriffs of London in trouble for
the escape of the Lord Egrimond.
York was absent for repelling the rebellious Scots in the North, the King
went to Greenwitch to the Queen, who persuaded him for his health and
recreation, as she alleged, (but her drift was, for that she found by
experience, that the Duke of York was more favored, and his favorites
respected about London, then either she or the King, so that it was in vain
to attempt any thing against him there; yet something must be done against him,
or else she should be undone) to take his Progress Northward into
Warwickshire, which he did, by the way hawking and hunting, the Queen making
show of minding nothing but pastimes, had caused private Letters, under the
Kings privy signet, in most loving terms, to be sent unto the three Lords,
whereby Ann. 1455 Reg. 33.
they-were earnestly solicited, by an hour appointed to be at Coventry, which
they reverently intended. But by the way they have true information, of the
mischief plotted against them and so warily by flight, but not without some
danger escaped, for they causing their stewards, with their retinue to go
forward, on the way to the Court, whilst the Duke of York, but with The Duke
of York with the Earls of Salisbury and Warwick betake themselves to their
several strengths
a groom, and a Page sped him to Wigmore Castle. The Earl of Salisbury to his
Castle of Middilham, in the North; And the Earl of Warwick, to the Seaside,
and so to Callice, but before they departed they agreed upon an alphabet, by
which they might have intercourse of letters which though intercepted yet their
intentions might be kept vndiscovered.

The King unwitting of this intended mischief, against the Duke of York, and
his friends returns to London, whither he calls a Council, And therein of
his own accord desires, some course to be invented for the banishing of
Rancour, and malice out of the hearts of his nobility, and to the end he might
have the glory of the reconcilment, though themselves the good, he promised on
his salvation, a thing unusual with him so to assevere so to entertain the
Duke of York and his friends, that all discontents and injuries should be
outwardly respectively forgotten, and inwardly religiously forgiven, and
perpetual love, and amity on all parties established, to this end Messengers
are dispatched to the Duke of York, and all other of what rank soever worthy
notice to be taken of, which since the battle of Saint Albones, had expressed
themselves to be displeased, on either part, Commanding them for urgent
affairs, of the realm, and upon royal promise of safe conduct, to repair to
his Court at London, at a time appointed. The Duke of York having intimated to
his confederates, his resolution and given them admonition to provide for
prevention of the wrong, observantly came, and with four hundred men well
appointed, lodged at his house called Baynards Castle. The Earl of Salisbury
with fivehundred men likewise lodged at his house, called the herbor, the Dukes
of Exceter (lately released) and Somerset, with eight hundred men were lodged
without Temple-barre. The Earl of Northumberland, the Lord Egrimond, and the
Lord Clifford with fifteen hundred men were lodged in Holborne the Earl of
Warwick with six hundred in red Iackets with ragged staves embrodered behind
and before, were lodged at the Gray-Friers in London, upon the seventeenth of
March the King, and Queen came to London, and were lodged at the Bishops
palace. The Mayor like a provident Magistrate, Commanded every Alderman, in
his Aldermanry to keep a standing watch in arms both by day and night,
himfelfe having five thousand well appointed men in readiness upon any
occasion, rode with a competent number all day long round the City for
preservation of the Kings peace on all sides. The Lords, lodging within the
City held their Council at Blackfriars, the others at the Chapter house at
Westminster. Between both, the reverent Archbishop of Canterbury the son of
Henry Bourchyer Earl of Essex a man every way Complete without exception, with
some such prelates of whose modest condition and learning he had made
experience, did diligently intercede, and so effectually labored that both
sides by his mediation, were well contented, to come to Communication: the good
success whereof was good, for that after much conference (the wisdom of the
indifferent, being such that all repetitions of wrongs on either side done
should be forborne) it was finally concluded that all wrongs, injuries and
misdemenors, on every side, should be forgotten, and forgiven, that each side
should be friends to the other, and both be obedient to the Commandes of the
King. And by their further consent, the Duke of York, the Earl of Salisbury,
and the Earl of Warwick, should assure forty five pounds, per annoum to the
Abbey of Saint Albones, for obites and The General agreement amongst the
Nobility by the mediation of the King.
ceremonions suffrages of the Church (at that time usual,) for the benefit of
the souls of all such as were slain and buried at Saint Albones. And that
those their slain, should be reputed and taken in an equal degree of loyal
subjects, with those that survived of the adverse part.

That the Duke of York, should give to Elianor Dowager of Somerset, and Henry
Duke of Somerset, her son, an assignement of five thousand marks due to him
from the King at his being in Ireland, to be distributed amongst her Children.

That the Earl of Warwick should likewise assign a thonsand Marks due to him
from the King, to be distributed amongst the children of the late Duke of
Somerset, That whereas Thomas Percy Lord Egremond and Richard Percy sons of
the Countess of Northumberland, were at a Sessions, in Yorkshire fined at
diverse great sums of money to the Earl of Salisbury his wife and children.
And that the said Lord Egremond, was for the payment thereof, committed to the
prison, from whence he escaped, for whose escape Verney and Steward Sheriffs of
London were sued. That the said Earl should acquit all those fines, to the
said Lord Egremond and his brother and release all actions to the said late
Sheriffs,

That the said Lord Egremond should enter into recognizance of ten thousand
pounds in the Chancery to keep the peace against the Earl of Salisbury his
Lady children, servants and tenants.

That General releases on all parts should be made, of all Appeals, and
personal actions whatsoever.

That the two Lords chief Justices should hear, and determine any debates and
controversies that might casually arise, for any thing formerly done amongst
the tenants, or servants of either party, without further proceedings.

That the recognizances to be entered into of all hands, for the performance of
this award, should stand of force, without pardoning or parcelling the sums.

This award, order, and agreement was ratified under the great seal of
England, the four and twentieth day of March, in the six and thirtith year
of the Reign of King Henry the sixth.

Upon the publication whereof at the Feast of the Anuntiation of our Lady An.
1449
Saint Mary the Virgin a solemn procession was made in the Cathedral of
Powles. At which the King was present, in royal habit wearing his Crown
imperial, before him hand in hand went the Duke of Somerset and the Earl of
Salisbury, the Duke of Exceter and the Earl of Warwick, and so one of one and
another of the other part till they were all Marshalled, behind the King came
the Queen the Duke of York leading her by the hand: who in going made show of
favorable countenance toward him, service ended, they return as before to the
Court, in all outward appearance truly reconciled. But the appearance of the
blazing Star, the strange apparitions Strange apparitions
in the elements. The more strange sight of a seeming monstrous Cock, to come
out of the Sea and in the presence of a multitude of people. at Portland to
make a hideous Crowing, three times, each time turning about clapping, his
wings and beckning toward the North, the South, and the West with many
prodigious births, did but presage, the admirable occurrences of things this
year following; In which as if with a general deluge of civil An. 1459. R. 34.
dissension the whole Christian world should be overthrown, beside the rent in
the Church by the schism of any Popes. No Country being free, rebellions
factions, subjects against their King, the brother against the brother, the
son against the Father, the wife against the husbands son. For example
desire of rule (says the Spanish Historian) being an affection of a greater
magnanimous nature, did so far possess Prince Charles, son of Henry the
fourth, King Son against father
of Castile, that he opposed his father, against whom his mother in Law took
arms, in defense of King Henry her husband, from which pernicious quarrel,
which proved successes to the same did spring the two factions of Beamont and
Gramont, which for many years together infested Navare and Leon, and was the
cause of effusion of much Christian blood.

The Gauntoys rebel against the Duke of Burgoyne who being succored by 1459.
Subjects against Sovereigns. Father against Son.
the Hollanders rowtes their forces and makes a great slaughter amongst them
and Charles the seventh sends the Earl of Dampmurtyn, in a miserable
employment (says the French Historian) against the Dolphine who was in arms
against his father, whom they enforce to fly to the Duke of Burgoyne, who
about that time to make his bastard Bishop of Vtrich had committed much
slaughter amongst the Brabanters, and raised his son a stayer of slaughtered
carcasses to mount into the Bishops Chair.

More Popes then one bred disorder, to the great scandal in religion and
prejudice of Christians. The Emperor not being able to cure the infirmity of
the mind by force, has recourse to the authority of the Church, he intimates
to all the Kings, and Potentates of Christendom, his desire to have a general
Council at Constance, to which all consent, and the Emperors of Constantinople
and Trapisond with the Churches of Greece send their Ambassadors. In this
Council John 23. is convented, condemned, deposed and imprisoned, Gregory the
12. and Benedict the 13. are deprived, and Otho Colom by the name of Martin the
15. is chosen Pope by the Council, somewhat before this time in England John
Wickliff, and John Husse in Bohemia, had so persuaded, that diverse were ready
to disclaim the Popes authority, teaching them not only to leave the abuse of
manners, but the doctrine it self, affirming that it was lawful for subjects
to reform religion when Princes refuse to do it, but their dangerous opinions
were condemned for heresies, the Council ended, but the schism continued, and
during these confusions in the Western Church, the Christians in the Eastern
parts are utterly ruinated, the Emperor smothered to death in a press of
people, and Constantinople made the seat of the Mohammedan Emperor.

An affray unfortunately falls out, betwixt a servant of the Earl of
Warwick, and a Courtier who in the encounter is dangerously wounded, The
Earls man flies. The Kings servants, seeing their fellow hurt, and A fray.
the offender escaped, watch the Earls coming from the Council table, and
assail him, many are hurt, the Earl gets a wherry and so escapes to
London. The Queen incontinently commands him to be committed to the Tower, but
he seeing where it began to rain in at, posts to Yorkshire, where he
acquaints the Duke of York, and his father of all the occurences, with the
palpable discovery of the Queens cankred disposition, advising them to stand
upon their guard, and to provide to keep out the approaching storm. And so
speeds to Callice. And being then Lord Admiral, to prevent revocation of that
office, he speeds himself to sea with all the Kings ships, that were in
readiness: and skowreth the Seas, meets with five great Carricks, three of
Genoa, and two of Spain, and after two days An. 1458. R. 34.
fight, takes three of them: with which he returned to Callice: where he
discharged their freight: and found it worth ten thousand pounds in staple
Commodities, besides the ships and prisoners. In the mean time as it was Three
great Carricks taken worth 10000.
before agreed upon; The Earl of Salisburie with about five thousand men,
marches through Lancashire to pass that way to the King, and to acquaint him
with the affront offered to his son: and the inveterate malice discovered in
the Queen against him. The Queen with the Dukes of Somerset and Buckingham,
gave order unto the Lord Audley to apprehend Salisbury, sending to him (as to
that end she had provided many badges of a white Swan for a public expression
of being firm to her and her son) one badge thereof for himself, and diverse
other to bestow on such well deservers, as should by him be approved of;
whereupon he levieth, of Cheshire and Shropshire, ten thousand men, with which
about a mile from Drayton, in a plain called Bloreheath, he attended the
Earl, there being a small brook but of some depth between them.

Early in the morning; the Earl made a seeming retreat, which the Lord Audley
observing, he presently causes his troops to pass the river, but before they
could be reduced again in order, the Earl with his whole 2. Battles fought.
strength falls upon them, and with the slaughter of the Lord Audley, and most
of them that had past the river, he discomfited the residue: there were slain
about four and twenty hundred of them. Sir John, and Sir Thomas Nevil Knights
the Earls sons, are sore wounded who with Sir Thomas The Lord Audley slain
Harrington travayling into the North Country were apprehended and sent as
prisoners toward Chester. But upon a message sent from the March-men, their
keepers quickly released them.

The Duke of York now begins to resent these proceedings, and resolves no
longer to be looker on, but like a free gamester, to venture a Cast for all, he
levies men, makes preparation to take the field, sends to Salisbury to do the
like; who sends to Warwick, and all resolve to set up their rest, amongst
others of approved valiancy, that Warwick had brought from Callice with him,
were two principal noted men for direction, and policy: Andrew Trollop, and
John Blunt. The army in the marches of Wales near Shropshire are strongly
encamped. The King with the Dukes of Somerset, and Exceter the chief of the
Lancastrian family, draw their forces to Worcester, from whence Richard
Beuchampe Bishop of Salisbury is sent, to offer the Yorkists a full and
general pardon if they would give over this enterprise, and become loyal
subjects: this message was answered that there was no trust in the Kings
pardons as long as the hen crowed, therefore they durst not submit unto them:
but if any course might be given them, of assurance of their safety, they would
express their loyalty and render themselves at his service. The King
thereupon advances nearer, and approaching the Lords army: he causes
Proclamation to be made that whosoever would, abandon the Duke of York should
be received to mercy, and have pardon, whereupon the night following Andrew
Trollop with all the Callicians submit to the King, and by him are all the
counsels of the Duke of York discovered, which so much discouraged the Duke of
York that he with his young son the Earl of Rutland, fled first into Wales,
then into Ireland, the Earls of March, Salisbury, and Warwick, got into
Devonshire, The Duke of York flies.
where by the means of John Dinham they were shipped from Exmouth to Gernsey and
so to Callice, where they were well entertained. The King pardons all the
common Soldiers, makes some exemplary punishment of few Captains, sends the
Duchess of York and her two younger children An. 1428. R. 38.
to the Duchess of Buckingham her sister, to be safely kept, and then having
spoiled the town and Castle of Ludlow he dismissed his Army. A Parliament is
convoked at Coventry, in which amongst other things, the Duke of York and A
Parliament.
all his confederates are convict of treason, and all their lands and goods
seized on to the Kings use. Henry Duke of Somerset, the inheritour with his
fortunes of his Fathers favor with the Queen, by her means is made Captain of
Callice, whither coming to take possession of his new charge, he was forced to
retire out of the harbor: the Ordnance from Ricebank playing so hot upon him;
The Queen herewith much incensed in heat of passion, gives order to furnish
and make ready, all the Kings ships lying at Sandwich, to give assistance to
Somerset; but the beforementioned John Dinham with his Western Mariners, who
all well affected the Earl of March, bourded those ships in the harborand
took the Lord Rivers, who was designed Admiral for that service, and carried
both him, and the ships to Callice, from whence the Earl sailed to Ireland to
the Duke of York, where having conferred, and concluded what course to take,
he returned to Callice, the new Admiral the Duke of Exceter not daring to stop
his course in his return; Sir Simon Momford was appointed to guard the
Cinque Ports, having diverse ships under his command, to bar the Earl of
Warwicks entrance, but the Earl by his espialls having perfect intelligence of
all passages, fell suddenly upon Sir Simon, before his ships were full ready:
took him prisoner, ransackt the Town of Sandwich, and carried his Prisoner
and the ships to Callice; by the way he understood, how much the Kentish-men
desired his speedy return, and to come on shore in their Country, where they
were ready to give him all assistance; Whereupon the second time the Earl came
to Sandwich, to whom presently resorted the Lord Cobham, and diverse Gentlemen,
insomuch that now they were 25000 The Earl of Warwick with 25000. men takes
the field.
strong, with which the Earl of Warwick marched toward London, against whom
the Lord Scales was appointed to oppose: and with some convenient troops to
assure London, but the Lord Mayor utterly refused, to admit him entrance;
saying, he was able enough without his counsel or help, to keep what the
King had committed to his charge: Whereupon the Lord Scales resorted to the
Tower, from whence afterward he did the Londoners many discourtesies. Warwick
well pleased with the Londoners promise not to impeach his passage, and having
notice that his Father was upon march to meet him, passes over his men, and
without impeachment, joined with his Father and his friends near Exceter. The
King with the Dukes of Somerset and Buckingham, with a great Army marches
toward them, and near unto the town of Northampton, both armies meet; The
Earl of March with the advice of 3. Battle at Northampton.
the Earl of Warwick prepares for the fight. The Queen, (the King more
intentive of devotion then fighting) did the like; The fight began and
continued on uncertain terms above two hours; In the mean time were slain
on both sides above 10000 men; But upon the fall of Humphry Duke of Buckingham,
by the good policy of the Earl of Warwick and the Lord Gray of Ruthens
joining with them, who led the Vantgard of the Kings part withdraw to the Lords
side, the Earls party prevailed, and John Talbot Earl of Shrowsbury, Thomas
Lord Egremond, John Vicount Beamont, and some others of Mark were slain. The
Queen with the Duke of Somerset and some few others, taking with them the young
Prince, fled to the Bishopric of Durham. The King was taken, and as a prisoner
conveyed to London; At their coming thither, the Tower of London is yielded
unto the Earl of Warwick by his soldiers, Warwick possessed of the Tower.
the Lord Scales in disguised apparel endeavored to escape, is taken by the
Watermen, and by them without due course of Law, or orderly proceeding An.
1459. R. 39.
beheaded, and his corpse carelessly left upon the sands. Tho: Thorpe one of the
Barons of the Exchequer (upon whose advise the Lancastrians much relied) in the
habit of a Monk his or own shorn, purposely to fly to the Queen, is taken
and committed prisoner to the Tower; The Duke of York at this time being
neither idle nor asleep, being advertised of this good success leaves
Ireland, and posts to London, where by the advice and consent of the York
faction, he thought fit to discover the head of that ambitious serpent that The
Duke of York puts in claim.
hitherto had bin covered in the grass of reformation, and so that in the
Kings name he summoneth a Parliament, which being assembled in the presence of
the Lords in the upper House, he places himself in the Imperial seat, and
with great courage and a confident brow, he lays open his rightful claim
and Title to the Crown of England, as being the Son and heir of Anne,
Daughter and heir of Roger Mortimer Earl of March: Son and heir of Philip,
the sole Daughter and heir of Lionell Duke of Clarence, the third Son of
Edward the third, and elder Brother of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, Father
of the usurper Henry the fourth, grand Father to Henry the fifth, who was Father
to him that untruly styles himself King Henry the sixth; He further related,
that God had not blessed this unlawful usurpation, for by means thereof the
Commonwealth had suffered so many and so grievous calamities, that had not God
been the more merciful, the same had bin overwhelmed by the multitude and
grievousnesse thereof; that though Henry the fifth had made many conquests in
France and Normandy, yet as of ill-gotten possessions, his heir could not take
any benefit by them. And how much heaven is at this time offended with his
government, we may well fear if we but call to mind the cruel butchering of
so many honorable great Lords, in defense of his title abroad, the slaughter
of so many thousand of his loyal subjects in maintenance of his quarrel, the
inutterable exhaust of the treasure unnecessarily consumed in France, Normandy,
and elsewhere; The civil broiles at home, the loss of all formerly got in
France and those parts, the loss occasioned by the excursion and depredations
of the Scots and French. And lastly, the oppressions, extortions, and violence
daily unsufferably practiced by the tyranny of an insolently ambitious woman,
upon the meaner sort of people; And then concluded, that he craved no favor
from them, except that justice did warrant his claim, nor would expect or
desire the possession of the Crown, except his descent were undisputable, and
his Title without just exception, and for his own particular he presumed that
since virtue might be as bold to challenge its due: as vice is apt to borrow of
insinuation: he might without offense put in his claim, and demand allowance
thereof. This being a business of import, required deliberation, and mature
consideration; but in conclusion, the Duke having before hand by his agents
prepared the Lords Spiritual, and few of the Nobility present, that were not
on his part, the Burgesses were easily persuaded, and that was generally
resolved, and enacted accordingly; That King Henry during his life should
retain the name and honor of a King; That the Duke of York should be
proclaimed Heir apparent to the The Duke of York to be proclaimed heir to
the Crown, and Protector.
Crown, and the Protector of the Kings person, his Land, Dominions, and
Country; That at any time, any King Henryes Friends, Allies, or Favorites in
his behalf, should attempt the disanulling of this act, that then the Duke
should have present possession of the Crown.

No sooner was the Parliament dissolved, when the Duke dispatcheth Letters into
Scotland, requiring in the Kings name, the Queen, the Dukes of Somerset and
Exceter, and all other of the Nobility that remained in that kingdom, with
all speed to repair to his Presence to London. But they were otherwise
resolved; And having gotten together of English and Scots, to the number of
eighteen thousand men they marched into England; The Duke of York with his
younger Son, the Earl of Rutland with the Earl of Salisbury, leaving the
King in the custody of the Duke of Norfolk and the Earl of Warwick, marched
toward the Queen, and approaching near her Army at Wakefield, the Dukes
Scow^s being returned certified him, that the enemy far exceeded their power
in number and all warlike preparation; Whereupon the Earl of Salisbury advised
the Duke to retire, and attend the coming of the Earl of March, who was gone
into Wales to raise the Marchmen; But it being appointed, that here his
ambitious desires should come to a period. The pride of his former victory, and
overweening of his soldiers valors, made him deaf to all counsel of
forbearing the field, and hastened on by his destiny, from Sandall Castle he
marched to Wakefield 4. Battle at Wakefield.
green, where the Lord Clifford on the one side, and the Earl of Wilts on the
other, were placed in ambuscado; The Duke of York supposing, that the Duke of
Somerset, who had the battle, had no more forces but what were with him
valianly, and in good order marches toward him, but being entered within their
danger, the Ambushes on both sides broke out upon him, and slew him and three
thousand of his side, the rest with number and confusion overborne fled, the
Earl of Salisbury is taken prisoner, and harmless Rutland that came thither
but to see fashions, is made a sacrifice for his Fathers transgression, and
kneeling upon his knees (instructed by his infant Young Rutland butchered.
fears) with tears begging life; is unmercifully stabbed to the heart by the
Lord Clifford, in part of revenge, as he swear of his Fathers death; The Queen
unwilling to be behind hand in cruelty, as unlike a merciful woman, as he an
honorable gentleman in cold blood, without due form of trial causes the
Earl of Salisbury, and as many as were taken prisoners to be The Earl of
Salisbury beheaded.
beheaded at Pomfret Castle, and to have their heads, as it were, in scorn to
be placed on poles about the walls of the City of York, an incitement as it
were to make all interessed in the shame, to add spurs to the speedy course
of vindicative desires, and to draw on revenge to the uttermost.

This Richard Nevill Earl of Salisbury was third Son of Ralph Nevill, first
Earl of Westmerland, by Ioane his second wife, Daughter of John of Gaunt, Duke
of Lancaster; he married Elianor; Daughter and heir of Tho: Montague Earl of
Salisbury, and had issue four Sons, and six daughters.

1. Richard the eldest was restored, and succeeded in the Earldom. 2. John
the second, was Created Marquess Mountague. 3. Thomas married the Widow of the
Lord Willoughby. 4. George was Archbishop of York, and Lord Chancellor.
1. Ioane the eldest Daughter, was married to William Fisz-Allen Earl of
Arundell. 2. Cecily was married to Henry Beuchamp Duke of Warwick. 3. Alice
was married to Henry Lord Fitzhugh. 4. Elianor to Thomas Stanley Earl of
Darby. 5. Katherine to William Bonvile, Lord Harrington, and 6. Margaret to
John Vere Earl of Oxford.
Richard Plantagenet Duke of York took to wife Cecily, Daughter of Ralph
Nevill, first Earl of Westmerland, and had issue eight Sons and four
Daughters.

1. His eldest Son Henry dyed young. 2. Edward afterward King of England. 3.
Edmond Earl of Rutland slain with his Father. Ann. 1458 R. 34.
4. John dyed young. 5. William 6. Thomas 7. George after Duke of Clarence. 8.
Richard surnamed Croutchbacke, after King of England.
1. Anne his eldest Daughter was married to Henry Holland Duke of Exceter. 2.
Elizabeth married to John de la Poole, Earl of Suffolk. 3. Margaret married
to Charles Duke of Burgundy. 4. And Vrsula.
The Earl of March having tidings of his Fathers death, increases his Army,
and borne up with two wings desire of revenge, and expectation to 1461.
reign, he took his leave at Shrowsbury of the Inhabitants, intimating to
them at his departure, the murder of his Father and Brother, the destruction
intended of himself and Family, and downfall of all that wished well to his
part (if not heedfully prevented) he craved therefore their utmost assistance,
and their neighbors, which they accordingly performed, and then with some good
strength, presently took the field, and having advertisement that Jasper Earl
of Penbrooke, with the Earls of Ormond and Wiltshire, with a great power of
Welsh and Irish did follow after him, he suddenly marches back again, and
in a plain near Mortimers Cross, on Candlemasse day in the morning he gave
them battle, and with the slaughter Fifth battle at Mortimers cross.
of three thousand and eight hundred, put the Earls to flight; Owen Teuther,
who had married Queen Katherine, Mother to Henry the sixth, and diverse Welsh
Gentlemen were taken, and at Hereford beheaded.

The Queen encouraged by the death of the Duke of York, with a power of
Northern people, with an intent to undo what was done in the last Parliament,
marches toward London, but when her soldiers were once South of Trent, as if
that River had been the utmost limits of their good behavior, they did most
licentiously forage the Country, harrowing, burning, and spoiling the same, as
if they had been in the most barbarous land of heathens; Approaching Saint
Albones they were advertised, that the Duke of Norfolk and the Earl of
Warwick were ready to give them battle; The Queens Voward hastes to pass
through Saint Albones, but were saluted Sixth battle and second at Saint Albones.
from the Market place with such a shower of arrows, that they were for
safeguard glad to retire, and sought to pass by another way, which (but not
without some blows) they did: and encountered with their enemies in the field,
who perceiving the maine battle to stand and not to move, by the treachery of
Lonelace, who with the Kentish men led the Van. the Southern men turned afide
and fled, and by the Northern prickers were slaughtered until night saved
their backs; When night was come, the residue despairing of each others
well-meaning, shifted away; The Nobles about the King perceiving how the game
went, withdrew themselves. The Lord Bonvile, coming in a complementall manner
to the King, saying, It grieved him to The Lord Bonvile and Thomas Kiryell
beheaded by the Queen, contrary to the Kings promise.
leave his Majesty, but necessity for safeguard of his life enforced it, was
importuned, and Sir Thomas Kiryell like wise by the King to stay, he passing
his royal word, that their stay should not endanger their bodies; upon which
promise they stayed, but to their cost, for such was the inplacable fury of the
Queen, that hearing Baron Thorpe was by the Commons beheaded at Highgate, she
the day after the battle, being Ashwednesday, caused both their heads to be
smitten off at Saint Albones, whose death reckoned with the rest makes up of
the slaughtered the number of three and twenty hundred.

The King was advised to send one Thomas Hoe, that had been a Barrester to the
Victors, to thank them for their pains, and to tell them that he would
gladly come to them, if with convenience it might be done. The Earl of
Northumberland appointed diverse Lords, to attend him to the Lord Cliffords
Tent, where the Queen and young Prince met to their great joy, it 30. Knights
made. Prince Edward dubbed Knight.
was now observed, that victory always fled from where the King was present.
At the Queens request, he honored with the order of Knighthood, thirty that
the day before fought against the part where he was, the Prince likewise was
by him dubbed Knight; Then they went to the Abbey, where they were entertained
with Anthems, and withal, an humble Petition to be taken into the Kings
protection, thereby to be freed from the tyranny of the loose soldiers, which
was promised, and Proclamation accordingly made, but to small purpose, for the
Northern men said, it was made in their bargain, to haveall the spoil in
every place, after they had passed the River of Trent, and so they robbed and
spoiled all they could come at, which gave The Families of York and Lancaster
distinguished by the red Rose and white.
just cause of dislike to the indifferent-minded, which only wished the quiet,
and peace of the Country, not respecting which Rose, the red or white
prevailed, for now began that distinction by those Badges, for the factions of
York and Lancaster to be worn.

The Londoners hearing of this disorder, were warned to look to themselves,
and they were resolved, since there was no more assurance in the Kings promise,
to keep the Northern men out of their gates; The gentleness and tenderness
of a King, not accompanied with courage and severitie, is both hurtful to
himself and his estate.

In the Kings name the Londoners are sent to, to send over to the Camp,
certain Cart-loades of Lenton provision; The Mayor accordingly provides, and
makes all things ready, but the Commons (rose about Cripplegate, and by strong
hand, say, or do what the Mayor or his officers can; they kept the Carts from
going forth of the City; The Mayor sends the Recorder to the Kings Council,
and knowing the predominancy of the Queens passion, if never so little
troubled, they entreat the Duchess of Bedford and the Lady Scales, with all
the Fathers of the Church resiant about London, to intercede for him, and
excuse his not using force, considering how apt the multitude was to take fire
upon the least flash, and how dangerous it might be in these doubtful times,
to raise their fury, that would not easily be allayed, it was well advised, to
send women to entreat women, for they so prevailed, That some of the Lords of
the Council, with a guard of four hundred good soldiers, were appointed to
go for London, to enquire and certify the truth of these things; But before
they set forth, diverse Northern men, that long looked to have the ransacking
of London, came unto the gates, and would have entered, had not the Citizens
valiantly repelled them, and with the slaughter of some three or four, they
were sent to carry word to the Camp, that the Earl of March, with a great
Army was marching toward them, neither was it a fiction; For at
Chipping-Norton by Cotsall, the Earl of Warwick having drawn together, as
many of his scattered troops, as he could find, met with the earl of March,
and his victorious troops, which being joined, they hasted toward London, and
were joyfully received, upon the eight and twentieth day of February, and upon
Sunday the second of March, the Earl of Warwick mustered all this Army in
Saint John's fields, and having cast them in a ring, the Leader read unto them
the agreement of the last Parliament, and then demanded whether they would have
King Henry to reign still, who all cried, No, no; then they were asked whether
they would have the Earl of March, eldest Son of the Duke of York by that
parliament proclaimed King to reign over them, and with a great clamor they
cried yea; Then went there certain Captains, and others of the Common
Council of the City, to the Earl of March to Baynard Castle, whom they
acquainted with what was passed, whereof he expressed himself, in some terms
as unworthy of the place, and unable to execute it: yet he thanked God for the
gift, and them for their good wills. And by the advice of the Archbishop of The
Archbishop of Canterbury animated the Duke of York to take upon him the Crown.
Canterbury, and theanimation of the Bishops of London and Exceter, and the
Earl of Warwick, he resolved to take it upon him; And the next morning, he
went in Procession at Paul's, and offered there: and after Te deum sung, he was
with great royalty conveyed to Westminster. and there in the great Hall seated in the
Kings seat, with the Scepter of Saint Edward in his hand; And then the people,
whereofthere was a great Concourse, were alowd demanded if they would
acknowledge him to be their King, to which with great willingness they cried,
Yea, yea; Then taking homage of diverse Noble men then present, he was with
Procession, and great State conveyed to the Abbey there, and placed in the Quier
as King, whilst Te deum was singing, that done, he offered at Saint Edwards
shryne, and then returned by water to Paul's, and was lodged in the Bishops
Palace: Upon the fourth of March he was generally proclaimed King, by the
name of Edward the fourth.

THE LIFE AND REIGN OF KING EDWARD THE FOVRTH.
EDWARD Earl of March, borne at Roan in Ann. 1460 Reg. 1.
Normandy, Son and Heir of Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York, by Cecily
Nevill, Daughter of Ralph Earl of Westmerland, and Ioane Daughter of John of
Gaunt, by Lady Katherins Swinford, upon the fourth day of March, rode in State
to the Church of Saint Paul in London, and there made his Oblation; And after
Te Deum sung, he was with great solemnity attended to Westminster, and there
being placed in the great Hall, with the Scepter Royal in his hand, before a
confluence of people there assembled (well knowing with what bait to angle, to
catch the many:) He The Dukes title to the Crown double.
makes a solemn declaration of his right to the Crown of England, challenging
it to belong unto him by a double Title.

The first, as Son and heir to Richard Duke of York, the rightful Heir of
the same.

The second, as elected by Authority of Parliament, upon King Henryes forfeit
hereof. Nevertheless, he was resolved to wave both Title and right, by either,
except the people would willingly approve of his proceeding therein, and
lovingly allow of his Claim: Whereupon it was again publicly demanded of the
assembly, if they would unanimously admit, and acknowledge the said Earl, to
be their King and Sovereign Lord, whereupon all with one voice cried, Yea,
yea, King Edward, King Edward: Thereupon he went from thence to Westminster
Abbey, and entered the same with solemn Procession, and there as King offered,
and afterward by the name of Edward the Fourth was proclaimed King, throughout
the City of London.

In the mean time, King Henry in the North was raising what powers he could
to stopthis Torrent; But the Earl of March (great in the favor of that great
beast of many heads) the multitude, presuming of their ready willingness to
assist him, makes preparation to encounter King Henry; To Edward resort men of
all ages and condition, the one making tender of their persons, the other of
their patrimonies, to be spent at his devotion, and for An. 1460. R. 2.
the support of his cause, by which means, he suddenly was furnished, with a
puissant and well accommodated army. And being persuaded that no other means
would serve for direction of his claim but the sword, he resolved to set up
his rest, and by battle to give a certain determination to the question.

Upon the twelfth of March, his forces marched from London, and by Edward
leaves London.
easy journeys came to Pomfret Castle, where he rested, and from thence the
Lord Eitz-walter, with some companies was sent by him to guard the passage, at
Ferry-brigg, to stop the enemies approach that way. King Henry likewise
advances forward, and sends his power under the conduct of the Duke of
Somerset, the Earl of Northumberland and the Lord Clifford. Whilst himself,
Queen and son stay at York,

The Lord Clifford very early, on Palm Saturday in the morning, with a troop
of Northern Prickers, falls upon those that had the guard of the Lord
Fitzwalter slain at Ferry-brig.
passage at Ferry-brig, and defeated them, with the slaughter of the Lord
Fitzwalter and the bastard of Salisbury:

The Earl of Warwick hearing of this defeat, posts to the Earl of March
his Camp, and in his presence killing his horse, said; Sir I pray God have
mercy on their souls which in the beginning of your enterprise, have for your
love lost there lives. The enemy has won the passage at Ferrybrigg, There is
no hope now but in God: yet let him fly, that will fly: when (kissing the
Cross of his sword,) he said by this good sign I will stand by him that will
stand by me, fall back, fall edge.

The Earl of March no whit amated but somewhat moved with Warwicks resolution,
presently made Proclamation, that all such of his company, 1461.
as were unwilling to stay; or afraid to fight, should at their pleasure
depart. But to those that would abide, he promised good reward; Adding withal
that if any that stayed, should after turn his back, or flee: That he that
should kill such a Changeling should have double pay.

Then gave he order to the Lord Fauconbridge and Sir Walter Blunt to lead on
the Vowarde, who in their March about Dindingdale encountered with the Lord
Clifford (who formerly in cold blood had slaugtered the young Earl of Rutland)
him with John Lord Nevill, son and heir of the Earl The Lord Clifford
slain.
of Westmerland they slew with most of their companies; putting the rest to
flight.

The next day likewise (the Duke of Norfolk being dangerously sick to whom
that place was assigned) Fauconbridge and Blunt continue the leading of the
vantguard. And on Palme-Sunday by break of day they came to Saxton, from
whence they made a full survay of King Henryes army, and certified the Earl of
March that the enemy was threescore thousand strong: whereupon a second,
Proclamation was made through the Camp, That no quarter should be kept, nor
prisoner taken (a Course more savoring, of policy then Religion) yet by so
much the more excusable, by how much his number was so far short of his
adversary.

The armies being both in sight, The Lord Fauconbridge gave direction to the
bowmen upon a signal by him to be given, to shoot every man a flight arrow,
(for that purpose provided) and then to fall back three strides and stand,
which they accordingly did. The Notherne men hereupon plied their bows, until
their sheaves were empty. But all their arrows fell short of the mark, and
turned to their own disadvantage; For their arrows being spent, hasting to
join to come to hand-blowes; Their own arrows did themselves much hurt, that
had done the adversary no harm Ann. 1461 Reg. 2.
at all; The works of those sticking galling their shinnes, and the splinters
of those broken piercing their feet, whilst the Southern men shot at their
bodies as if they had been shooting at butts, policy prevailing beyond
strength, Ten hours in doubtful terms of victory; The battle continued,
when the Earl of Northumberland being slain, with the Lords Beamond The Earl
of Northumberland with 36776. English slain at Caxton field.
Gray and Dacres. The Earls of Exceter, and Somerset fled, left the conquest
to the Earl of March, but the bloodiest that ever England felt, for on that
day fell there thirty six thousand seven hundred threescore and sixteen
persons, besides those that dyed of the hurts then received, all of one nation,
no prisoners being taken but the Earl of Devon. This Henry Earl of
Northumberland now slain, was the third Earl of the family of Peircyes: he
married Elianor Daughter and heir of Richard Lord Poyning, by whom he had
issue;

Henry that succeeded him in the Earldome, and three daughters, Elizabeth
married to Henry Lord Scroope.

2 Elianor married to West Lord Laware.

3 Margaret married to Sir William Gascoyne.

The victor hasts to York, where he is readily admitted entrance, when
presently he causes, The heads of his father, and his friends, to be taken
down, and buried with their bodies, setting in their places the heads of the
Earl of Devon and three others there then executed.

This Earl of Devon was Thomas the xvi. Earl and Lord of Ockhampton, he
married Margaret daughter of John Beawford Earl of Somerset, by whom he had
issue three sons and two daughters, Thomas who was taken with his father, and
presently by reason of the Proclamation, slain. Henry the second son, who
was after beheaded at Salisbury, and John who was after slain at Tewkesbury.
The father and the three sons with the loss of their best bloods witnessing
their true affection to the house of Lancaster.

Johan his eldest daughter, was married to Sir Roger Clifford Knight and
Elizabeth was married to Sir Hugh Courtney Knight.

The Earl of Somerset being the messenger of the late overthrow, persuades and
prevails with King Henry his Queen and son, from York to fly to Barwicke,
where leaving the Earl of Somerset, they slye further for succor to the King
of Scots, who comfort them with promise of relief, but makes a sure
bargain, and receives in liewe of a pension to be assigned to King Henry
during his abode there from him, upon Saint Marks day the Town and Castle of
Barwick; to such poor shifts was this potent King driven, to pawn his best
fortress for bare food.

Queen Margaret, and her son are sent to France to labor there, whilst
those that stayed with the King (himself being only intentive to devotion)
failed not to solicit friends, and make preparation for a second encounter.

The Queen upon her arrival obtained of Lewis the eleventh her Cousin, that
those of the house of Yorkes favorites, were prohibted traffic, or stay in
the French Kings dominions. But all such as loved the Lancastrian line were
permitted freely.

In triumphant manner the Earl of March comes to London, where he is by the
Mayor and Citizens gloriously entertained, being by them upon the xxvi. day of
June from Lambeth attended to the Tower of London, who upon his first entrance
therein, invested four and twenty with order of Knighthood; and upon the next
day he did the like to four more.

Upon the xxviii. day of June, he rode through London from the Tower to
Westminster, where he was Crowned in the Abbey there. Edward the 4. Crowned.


A Parliament is summoned which began at Westminster, upon the fourth of
November, in which all acts, of Henry the sixth formerly made An. 1461. R. 24.
(which might see me any way prejudicial to Edw. title or profit, were
repealed. And therein John Earl of Oxford, a learned, valiant and wise man, he
who An. 1462 R. 2..
in a former Parliament, disputed the question concerning the precedence
between the temporal and spiritual Barons, (a bold attempt in those days
and by force of whose arguments judgment was given for the Lords temporal)
with his son Aubry de Vere, Sir Thomas Tiddenham Kinght, William Terrill, and
Walter Mongomery Esquires were without answer convict of Treason and beheaded.

This John Earl of Oxford married Elizabeth the daughter and heir of Sir John
Howard, and had issue five sons and three daughters.

1 Aubry de Vere beheaded with his father. 2 John de Vere that succeeded in the
Earldom. 3 George Vere Knight that died living his father. 4 Richard Vere and
5 Thomas Vere Knights
1 Mary a professed Nun at Barking in Essex 2 Joan married to Sir William
Norris and 3 Elizabeth married to William Bourcheir son and heir of Henry
Bourcheir Earl of Essex.
King Edward, to encourage others to obtain like favor by well deserving at
his hands, after that he had created his two younger brethren, George An. 1642.
R. 2.
and Richard the one Duke of Clarence the other Duke of Gloucester, he makes
John Lord Nevill first Vicount, then Marquess Mountacute.

Henry Bourcheir (whose brother was Archbishop of Canterbury) Earl of Essex,
and William Lord Fauconbridg Earl of Kent, enobling many others with
dignities and honorable titles.

To hansell their new Honors, Essex, and Kent, with the Lord Audley, and diverse
other of the nobility, with ten thousand soldiers are sent to Conquet and Ree
taken and pillaged by the Earls of Essex and Kent.
skowre the narrow Seas, these land in Britain, and by force enter the Town
of Conquet, and the Isle of Ree, which having pillaged and the Coasts cleared
they return.

Henry Duke of Somerset, Sir Ralph Peircy, with some others, come in and submit
themselves to King Edwards mercy, who graciously receives and entertaineth
them, protesting his propension of free pardoning them and as many others as
would follow their example of submission.

The distressed Queen with five hundred French (a small stake to play an
aftergame of Reputation with) came to the Coasts of Scotland, and from thence,
sails to Timmothe, where she went on shore, but speedily resorted again to
shipbord, and by tempest was beaten to Barwicke. Erom whence with the increase
of some few Scots, leaving the Prince at Barwicke, she with the king her
husband, marched into the Bishopric of Durham, having by the way in
Northumberlaine somewhat more increased their army. To them resorteth the so
late reconciled and now newly revolted Duke of Somerset, Sir Ralph Peircy, and
diverse of King Henryes welwishers, who altogether made show, of a competent
army. But their disorderly burning and spoiling wheresoever they went,
whatsoever they could come at, lost the goodwill of many, and purchased the ill
will of more, King Edward to be prepared to meet the enemy, at every turn,
makes preparation both by Sea and Land, he sends Vicount Mountacute into
Northumberland, with Commission to raise forces, whom King Edward in person
follows with his whole power, leasurely but hasts some Companies after the
Vicount, to prevent any attempt of the Bishopric men, in case they should
prove treacherous, with these the Vicount marches toward King Henry, and by
the way encountreth the Lord Hungerford, at Hegley-More, but he with the Lord
Rosse upon the first charge ran away, leaving Sir Ralph Peircy alone Sir Ralph
Piercy slain.
with his own regiment, who there with them died valiantly fighting.

Mountacute having intelligence that King Henry was encamped in Levels plain,
near the River of Dowell in Hexamshire, marches thither by night and set upon
him in his Camp. The Northern men with a desperate resolution receive the
charge. But were in the end with great slaughter overthrown, Henry Bewford
Duke of Somerset, the Lords Rose, Mollins, Hungerford, Wentworth, Hussy, and
Sir John Finderne Knight with many The Earl of Somerset taken prisoner.
others are taken prisoners, King Henry escaped but very hardly.

The Duke of Somerset was presently beheaded at Exham, he was never married,
but had a natural son, named Charles Somerset, who was afterward created
Earl of Worcester.

The other prisoners were sent to New Castle, and there beheaded. Thus was the
White Rose in every place dyed red with the blood of the Nobility, and the red
Rose turned pale with the horror to view the calamities occasioned by this
dissension.

King Edward came to Durham, and from thence, sent the Earl of Warwick and
others into Northumberland, to reduce such Castles and forts as yet held out
for King Henry, which effected, King Edward marched to York, King Henry
shifting from place to place, is at length discovered and An. 1464 R. 3.
in the manner of a notorious offender, with his legs tide under the horse
belly, without other company, then Doctor Manning Deane of Windsor (taken with
him) is by the Earl of Warwick, brought to the Tower of King Henry brought
prisoner to the Tower.
London, a sudden and strange alteration of estate, when he that was, the
most potent Monark, for Dominions that ever England had, was not now the Master
of a Molehill, nor owner of his own liberty: so various are the changes and
chances of this transitory life.

His distressed and disconsolate Queen, with her son, are driven once again
to fly for shelter into France.

K. Edward to raise some with ruin of others, distributeth the Lands and
Possessions of those, that held with King Henry, amongst his own favorites,
and followers, having the better to palliate his proceeding therein, first made
Proclamation, that whosoever of the contrary faction, would come in, and
submit, should be received to grace, and restored to their patrimonies.

King Edward, having as it were a breathing from martial employments, knowing
that he was to deal with a people, more easily to be drawn, then driven,
addicted his courses altogether, to endeer himself to their good affections:
and the better to settle in their minds a good opinion of his after-government:
he applied himself to accomplish those things whereof report had given out his
predecessors have been neglective in. And first he began, to set the beam
even that was to carry the scale of Justice, in equal point of right, and to
that end in Michaelmas term in the second year of his reign, three days
together, he sat publicly with his Judges in Westminster Hall, on the
King's Bench: to acquaint himself with the orders of that Court: and the
proceedings therein, and to observe what deserved reformation in that Court,
either at bench or at bar. He likewise ordered the Officers of his Exchequor,
to take more moderate fees, and to be more intentive, of their duties, for the
benefit of the subject, then their own unjust gain. And not under color of
preserving the Kings revenewes: to enrich themselves, and undor the subjects,
thereby wronging both King and people: Then he complies himself, to the
multitude and publicly with such extraordinary shows, of unusual congies,
and complements from a Sovereign, entertaines them; That he thereby ties their
pliable tongues, to set forth his uncessant commendation drawing out their
loves to the largest extent. He daily frequentes the Council Table: which he
furnished for the most part with such as were, most gracious amongst the
Citizens, and were most facile; either to give dispatch, or Court holy water to
petitioners. These he imployes, about references, and businesses of private
consequence, whilst mysteries of state were intimated only to such whom he
selected, to be of his more private, Cabinet Council; with whom now he
advises, how to increase his foreign correspondence, and advance his estate,
with some linck of fair alliance with such that might stand him instead, and
be a comfort, or countenance in his proceedings, as occasion should fall out.
For which purpose the fittest means is concluded to be, some match to be made
with France, By which all means of succor might be withdrawn from his femall
persecutor, Queen Margaret, and assistance drawn to persecute her husband,
and such as should oppose his Sovereignty. For the better effecting whereof the
Earl of Warwick is made choice of, and employed by the King into France, to
treat of a match betwixt King Edward: and the The Earl of Warwick sent into
France.
Lady Bona daughter to Lewis Duke of Savoy, and sister to the Lady Carlote
Queen of France. Upon the first proposition, this motion was readily embraced,
and was willingly assented unto on all parts. And Mounseir Dampmortyn with some
others, are incontinently sent into England, for the full accomplishment
thereof: but before his arrival, the game is changed, and a new triumph
turned. For upon the first of May, the King had taken to wife, the Lady Gray
the widow of Sir John Gray of Groby slain at the last battle of Saint
Albons a Lancastrian, she was daughter of Richard VVoodvile, Baron of
VVymington, and Iaquet daughter of Peter of Luxenborough Earl of Saint Paul,
the widow of John Duke of Bedford, sometimes Regent of France, a sharer with
her daughter, of troubles to ensue upon their marriage: for as the marriage of
the mother, gave the first cause of distaste to the Duke of Burgoyne, whose
severing after from the English, was partly if not principally, the overthrow
of our Conquest in France, so this match of the daughter, first alienated the
heart of Warwick from the King, and gave the occasion of the effusion of so
much Christian blood, and the downfall of the great Bear and all his ragged
staves.

This marriage, at the Command of Love the Lord of Kings was begun in heat of
desire, and finished in have, without advise of any but his own, untamable
affections: it much distasted the French King, displeased King Edwards mother,
and disquieted the Council and state; And as it commonly falls out when men
ride post for such matches in the end of their journey, they take sorrow for
their Inn, and make Repentance their host, for speedy repentance follows
precipitated have in such affairs But in the Kings marriage, and VVarwickes
distaste thereof, appeared different effects, of unbrideled passions. The fervor
of the kings desires are lessened, but the fire of the E^rage every way and
every day increased, and flamed with greater fury, until it consumed both him
and his: yet for a while he covered the coals, and concealed the cause of his
indignation, howsoever now and then in private to his familiars he would
complain how much he was disgraced, to be made an instrument to set a young
Lady a Gog for a husband, and then to have her disappointed: upon his return
he carried a fair countenance on the business, publicly An. 1466 R. 6.
approving the kings choice, and commending the new Queens beauty, and natural
endowments, applauding whatsoever she said or did. But privately he only
awaited how to displease her, and displace her husband, wherein he was the more
resolutely intentive, by how much he presumed the K. of France, and the D. of
Savoy, who were interessed in the disgrace, and the Q. and her sister Bona
which shared in thedishonorable affront, would be always as occasion should be
offered, ready to second him with power and prayers, in any thing, that to that
end he should attempt. To have the more liberty to plot his designs the E.
procures leave to leave the court and retires himself to his Castle of Warwic.
K. E. in the mean time, having just cause to suspect the French, and his
discretion pro^pting him to be watchfully valorous, to retain his but yet
borrowed title. Wisdom admonishing him in day of Sunshine to provide a cloak to
prevent being wet in case astorme should fall, thought it good policy, to
strengthen himself by some befitting co^federation abroad, and to that end
enters into a league, with John K. of Arragon and H. K. of Castile, to who^ he
sent for a present a score of Cotsall ewes and five rams which though they were
but few in number, yet has the loss that has thereby redounded to England bin
too too great, yea more then he could then well imagine and greater then the
reader can prima facie apprehe^d, but great evils may grow out of small
causes. To secure himself at home he took truce with the K. of Scots for 15.
years. And as he had former ly married his two sisters, Anne the eldest to H.
Holland E. of Exceter, and Eliz. to John de la Poole D. of Suffolk: so now he
matched Margaret the third sister to Charles D. of Burgoin. This last match
added oil, and flax, to quench the flame, of Warw. fury: insomuch that now he
gave it vent. And having, with much ado drawn to his part his two brothers,
the Archbish. of York and the Marquess Mou^tacute, he now began to cast a
windlace todraw in the kings two brothers. The D. of Gloce. he found so
reserved that he durst not close with him, but finding the D. of Clarence, more
open, he addresseth himself to him. And taking occasion in private conference
to co^plain to him, of the kings uncourteous usage of him, he said, noble Sir,
if I might be my own judge my more then ordinary respect, and diligence to do
the K. your brother acceptable service, deserves more the^ common courtesy,
but all whatsoever I have done and do (howsoever it has bin more then could
any way come to my single share) for his advantage is ever unrespectively
dre^ched in the whirlpit of duty, for which I must be contented. To whom
presently the D. makes answer, did or do you, expect as to a friend courtesy
from him, that neglects the respect of blood to a loving brother? it is all
little enough for him to provide, for to pleasure his dear Loves brave
kindred, and all too little he bestows on the^: whilst he that in the same
belly with him, must attend to be served withtheir leavings, or have nothing:
has he not made a match between his wives brother Of Thomas Lord Scales of
Nucells.
Antony and the sole daughter of the L. Scales? and has he not married Thomas
her son, with the daughter and heir of the L. Bonvile? and like wise his
minion the L. Hastings with the sole daughter and heir of the L. Hungerford.
But no such match can be thought of for me his brother. Nay are not his
brothers, and best friends, that have opposed our selves to all dangers to abet
his advancement undervalued, and unregarded? have we not iustoccasion to be
persuaded he loves us not? how then should you expect better dealings from him?
The E. finding the game coming wanted not words to whet, nor reasons to incite
to a settled distaste of his brothers unrespective carriage toward him, and
prevailed after much Communication betwixt the^ so far, that what he so much
desired he effected for) he counted the natural Current of brotherly affection,
which before ran in the veins of Clarence to an unnatural stream of rancor,
and disobedience, against a Sovereign. And now the better to knit, a firm
knot of association betwixt the^: a match is to be concluded upon, and the D.
is to take to wife Isabel the E. of Warw. daughter, and with her to have
assured unto him, half the lands the E. held in right of his wife, the Lady
Anne daughter of Rich. Bewchamp, E. of Warw. deceased. For the Consummation
whereof, Clarence accompanies of Warw. to Callice, where the Countess and her
daughter then resided: by the way the E. unmasked himself and discovers to
the Duke what hitherto he had concealed of his project for the restoring of K.
H. and hisplot how to accomplish it. To which Clarence gave both approbation,
and promise to aid, and assist him, to the accomplishment thereof to the
uttermost. This thus concluded. The E. dispatcheth messengers, to his brother
the Archbish. and Marquess, to prepare all things ready to set on foot the
intended revolt from K. E. and to take hold but cautiously upon any ground to
procure or prosecute some rebellious co^motion or other in the North, whilst he
and his new son in law would provide, to go through stitch with the work. To a
willing mind occasion will quickly be found, and the brothers entertaining the
Earls advice took hold upon this accident. The Yorkshire husband men,
annually by ancient custom used to give to the poor people of S. Leonards in
the City of York for their alimony certain quantities of corn and grain. A
report is secretly raised but upon what ground unknown, that this wel-intended
charitable contribution, went not the right way, But that the givers were
abused, and the poor people defrauded, the benefit of the gift going to
certain officers of the house, that made a divident thereof amongst themselves,
allowing little or none at all thereof to the poor people. This rumor once on
foot spread it self far and near in the Country. The husband men willing enough
to take any advantage to withold their charity (which in that age began to
wax cold but in this is quite frozen) when the Proctors according to the
accustomed manner came to make collection of the charitable devotion of the
people, they were sent empty away, but not without (in some places) either
foul language or someblowes, and sometimes both, which orcasioned retortion
and partakers, are found on both parties sides. The religious and better sort
of people helping to defend the collectors, whom with great fury the ploughmen
followed. This spark thus appearing is fed with combusable stuff; but
underhand by the Archbish. so that it took flame, and rose to a great height.
Nevertheless the Marquess Mountacute more out of policy then piety seeming
not to approve of what was done, speeds with some forces to York. whither the
unruly multitude to the number of 15000. drew giving forth speeches by the way,
That they would utterly demolish the hospital and fire the City. The Marquess
with his power taking advantage of the darkness of the night and the ignorance,
or negligence of the watch sallies out upon them, takes their Captain and
strikes of his head, putting the rest with some little loss to flight, whom he
follows no further (as not intending their further hurt) but retreated to
York, which he carefully made show, to man and fortify. The more to endeere
his service, he sends the news thereof post to the K. who being certified of
the proceedings, was well pleased with what was done, howsoever he had small
reason to think himself assured of the integrity of the doer, but as yet the
actions of the Marquess like the countenance of Ianus, carried two faces,
which his cunning yet covered. In the mean while, the rebels have reallied,
their dispersed troops, and increased their numbers. Instead of Robert Huldron
their Captain by the Marquess beheaded, they had new conductors, Hen. son of
the Lord Fitzhugh and Hen. Nevil son and heir of the Lord Latimer. The one
being Nephew, the other cousin german to Marquess Mountacute. These having
received full instructions, from the Archbishop of York, jointly take upon
them the command, being assisted by S. John Conyers a kinght of great courage
and good direction. By his council, in regard they wanted engines where with to
force the walls of York, which they had (but disorderly beleagred, The rebels
left the siege. And directedtheir march toward London giving out by the way
according as they were instructed by their leders, and their An. 1466 R. 9.
private directions, That K. E. was but a tirannous usurper. And that they like
good subjects only endeavored the restoration of their lawful sovereign K. H.
adding withal that if any mischief were done to the body of K. H. before his
being restored to liberty. That they would not leave a live any of the house of
York: K. Ed. hereupon gives order to Will. L. Harbert the new created E. of
Pem. to stop this Northern storm and to leavy power to withstand their
further approaching: he both in obedience to K. E. command, and willing to
revenge some former (ash conceived) affronts unto himby the sticklers in this
co^motion. Fitz hugh and Nevil, accompanied with his brother Rich. and about
7000. Welsh men to who^ the L. Stafford of Southwick with some 800. bowmen
joined, embraced the occasion, and willingly undertook the charge: Sir Rich.
Harb. with 2000 horsemen near Northam. charged the rere of the Northern men, in
which was Sir John Conyers, who commanding faces about, so entertained them,
That the Welsh men with some loss made more have back then good speed
forward; hereupon the Northern men having to that end received letters of
direction, shape their course toward Warwick, whither the E. with his son in
law Clarence were come, and had levied forces to join with them. The K. rather
sullen for anger, then amated with fear, upon the tidings of his brothers
unnatural backsliding, related unto him by his other brother Rich. stood a
while silent, but having made recollection of his spirits, he said, brother,
yet I The Lord Stafford forsakes Pembrooke.
am beholding to you, that have made a full expression both of your love, and
duty, in acquainting me with the danger, and staying loyally on any side. But
time permits not discourse, we must prepare our selves to withstand their fury,
and to that end take order to second Pemb. And accordingly he makes
preparation. But before his succors could come, the Nothern men did reach
Warwick upon S. James even, some distaste having bin given by the E. of Pemb. to
the Lord Stafford, either for dispossessing him of his usual Inn at Banbury,
or withholding Sir Hen Nevil slain.
from him some light commodity in that Inn, which he formerly had made use of.
Stafford with his Archers departed, Sir Hen. Nevill having intelligence thereof,
the next morning gave a camisad with some horse to the (...) Pembrooks Camp,
and charged so home that (his seconds, unable to relieve him) he was enclosed
with the multitude and miserably slain: which so incensed the Northern men,
that they all gave on, and so feircely assailed their opposites, that though
for a time the Welsh stood close and kept order, yet when a sudden rumor was
spread, That the E. of Warwick was come with his power, to charge them in the
rere, they rowted and fled. True it was that John Clopton a retainer of the E.
of Warwicks having drawn together about 500 men weakly armed and worse
disciplind, he brought them to the top of an hil^ sight of both armies,
displaying thereon the Bear and ragged staff, the E. of War colors, and making
show to descend, was the occasion those the Welsh turned their back: in the
flight 5000. were slain besides that were taken prisoners, whereof the E. of
Pemb. and Sir Rich. Harbert his brother, who for their valor and sound
direction that day showed (had success followed their attempts) deserve to be
enrowled amongst the best commanders, with ten other not by the law of the
field, but by the unbounded will of the victors were beheaded at Banbury. This
William E. of Pemb. married Anne, daughter of Walter L. Ann. 1469 R. 9.
Ferrers of Chartley, by whom he had issue three sons, William that succeeded
him in the Earldom, Sir Walter Harbert Knight, and Sir George Harbert
Knight, and six daughters Cicely Baroness of Greystock. Mawd married to Henry
Percy Earl of Northumberland.

Katherine married to George Earl of Kent. Anne married to the Lord Powes.
Isabel married to Sir Thomas Cooksey knight, and Margaret married to Vicount
Lisley first. and then to Sir Henry Bodringham kinght.

The news of these proceedings set wide open the gates of the rebellion, and
gave courage to the Northamptonshire men, who prepared before to that purpose
took this opportunity to make a commotion, and under the conduct of one Robert
Hiliard by them styled Robert of Risdate came to Grafton, and there took the
Queens father Earl Rivers, and his Son Sir John VVoodvile and at Northampton
without trial or judgment, courses out of use amongst unruly) rebels caused
them to be beheaded. Richard Woddevile Baron of Wymington, married Iaquiet
daughter of the Earl S. Paul's the widow of John Duke of Bedford for which not
having the kings license, he was fined to K. Henry the sixth in one thousand
pounds, he was installed knight of the Garter, 30. October. Anno. H. 6. 28. And
4. of K. Ed. 4. he was created Earl Rivers and, made high Constable of
England, he had issue by the said Iaquet 7. sons and 6. daughters 1 Anthony
that succeeded his father. 2. Lewis dyed young. 3 James dyed young. 4 John with
his father taken at Edgcote, and with him beheaded at Northampton as before. 5
Lionell Bishop of Salisbury that begat upon his Concubine Stephen Gardner
afterward Bishop of Winton. 6 Edward who died without issue. 7. Richard that
succeeded his brother Anthony in the Earldome but dying without issue left it
to his sisters all living.

1 Elizabeth at first married to Sir John Gray of Groby and afterward to Edward
the fourth.

2 Margaret married to Thomas Fitzallan Earl of Arundel.

3 Anne married to William Burcher son of Henry Earl of Essex, first, and
after to George Gray Earl of Kent and then to Sir Edw. Wingfield, knight.

4 Iaquet was married to John Lord Strange of Knocking.

5 Mary was married to William Harbert Earl of Huntington, and

6 Katherine first married to Henry Stafford, second Duke of Buckingham, and
then to Jasper of Hatfield Duke of Bedford. The Lord Stafford having long
lurked without discovery about Devonshire is apprehended, and for his base
departure from the Earl of Pembrook, beheaded at Bridgwater.

The Northern men have opportunity to join with the Earl of Warwick. The
whole body of the commonwealth thus fearfully groaning under the fearful
expectation of unchristian cruelty, The effects whereof, diverse of the
nobility, and Clergy endeavored by all means possible to prevent, and to that
end on both sides mediated for some pacification. But whilst it is in agitation
both parts having drawn their forces together a general preparation is made
for an unauoydable banquet for death, whilst King Edward the less circumspect,
by reason of some overtures of submission, Cautelously tendered, gave advantage
to the Earl of Warwick who had secret intelligence of the order King Edward
taken prisoner.
in the Kings camp, in the dead of the night to fall upon it, where with some
small slaughter having slain the sentinells they took the king prisoner in
his bedwho was presently conveied to Midleham Castle in Yorkshire to be kept,
safely by the Archbishop of York.

The Earl of Warwick, relying upon his brothers care of his charge,
considering that he was the Key of their work. And being persuaded, that the
brunt of the wars was past, dismissed most of his army, but as one that
reckoned without his host, must make a new account, so to that exigent he was
driven. For whilst he made search and diligent enquiry, after King Henry whose
place of imprisonment was not known, King Edward escaped: but whether by
overgreat promises seduced, or through guilt of Conscience King Edward escapes.
induced thereunto, it is questionable. But howsoever, The Archbishop permitted
him, to have so much liberty, by way of recreation on hunting, that by the
contrivement and assistance of Sir William Stanly and Sir Thomas Burgh, he was
both rescued from his keepers and in safty conducted to York: such is the
instabilitie of occurrences in this world, That therein is certainty of
nothing but incertaintie, the secrets of Gods providence being inscrutable.
King Edward that in the morning was a prisoner at the Earl of VVarwicks
devotion, is now at liberty to provide, how to question his mitred keeper, and
his late triumphant committer, for their undutifull presumption.

From York he posteth to Lancaster, where his Chamberlain the Lord Hastings
had raised some forces, with those he marches to London, the love of whose
Citizens he mainly relied upon, and thereof found himself not deceived, for
they with willing readiness receive him.

The Earl of Warwick having information of what was past, makes a virtue of
necessity, and dispatches letters and Messengers to all his friends and
confederates to draw to an head, which they accordingly did. But by the earnest
solicitation and industry of those good patriots which before had labored to
have the sword of civil dissension sheathed. Now an interview (Upon
interchange of oaths for safety and fair return on both sides) is had
betwixt the king, the Duke of Clarence and the Earl of Warwick in
Westminster Hall. But the Earl like one endevoring to infect the air takes
poison into his mouth and spits it into the wind, makes repetition of former
courtesies done to Edward, and for requital thereof, indignities returned,
which with such peremptory phrase he urged that they savoured so much of
exprobration, that the King unable to endure such harsh, and ill-becomming
language from a subject, in a scornful fury, departed the Hall, and went to
Canterbury. And the Duke and Earl to Lincoln, whither they had preappointed
their powers to repair, under the conduct of Sir Robert Wells son and heir
of the Lord Wells, a valiant Gentleman and of approved sufficiency.

The King with intent to take off Sir Robert from VVarwicks part, sends for
Richard Lord Wells, who with his brother in Law, Sir Thomas Dymock An. 1470 R.
10.
coming to attend the kings pleasure, received information from some of their
friends in Court, that the King was much incensed against them: whereupon The
Lord Wells and Sir Thomas Dymock beheaded.
they take Sanctuary at Westminster. From whence upon the kings promise of
general pardon, they came to his presence, who gave command to the Lord
Wells, effectually by letter to solicit his son Sir Robert Wells, to leave
the Earl of Warwick, and come to the kings service, which was accordingly
done, but because it procured not desired effect, the king not without blemish
to his Honor, in his rage caused both their heads to be struck off. The report
whereof, so enraged the young knight that no persuasion could prevail with him
to abide the Earl of VVarwicks coming, which was every day expected but
passion having blinded his judgment, led on by fury and the inevitablenes of
his fate, he with his forces charged the kings army. And whilst he labored to
go beyond man in doing, (his valor not checked by discretion) he proves less
then a sucking child, and for sinking under an oppressing multitude, he was
taken prisoner, which so discouraged his men that they fled, and the Ann. 1470
R. 10.
lighter to run away, they cast of their coats. And thereby gave a name unto
the place from whence they fled, which ever since has been called Loose Coat
field, in this place were slain of the Earls part ten thousand, and odd, of
the Kings side thirteen hundred but no man of mark. Loose Coatefield.


Sir Robert Wells, with all the prisoners then taken were there presently
executed, Sir Robert beheaded, the other hanged, which were threescore and
seven.

The report of this disaster, turns Clarence, and his father in Law to
Exceter, from whence having dismissed their army, they fled to Dartmouth, from
thence they shipped to Callis, having their Ladies and diverse Gentlewomen in
their Company, intending there to go on shore, but their expectation was
frustrated, for whilst he was about to land, he was saluted with a great shot
from the platform, which assured them there was no going on shore there,
without apparent danger, whereupon the Earl by messenger entreated Mounseir
Vocleer, the Earls Deputy leiftenant there. But to give way to the Ladies to
land (the Duchess of Clarence being then in travail) which Vocleer
uncourteously refused, and like the hedghog kept his Captain out of his own
lodging; not doing or permitting to be done any the least office of humanity,
but denying the sick and tender Ladies all courtesy and comfort, wherefore
the Earl was enforced to put again to Sea. Whilst King Edward, for this so
discourteous usage of the Earl sent the ungrateful Gascoyne a patent of the
Captains place of Callice under the great Seal of England. And the Duke of
Burgoyne gave him an annuitie of one hundred pounds per annum during life.

Notwithstanding Warwick being at Sea, received intelligence from Vocleer (whom
it seems did love the Earl in the second place but himself in the first)
That the Duke of Burgoine plotted his destruction, whereupon the Earl kept the
Seas: and took all the Burgonians he cold meet, making Warwick entertained by
the French King.
prize of their ladings, wherewith he landed in France, and from Deep by the
French Kings solemn invitation, he went to the Castle of Amboyes, where the
King then kept his Court. And there the Ladies wants are supplied, and
honorable welcome, and liberal entertainment given to the Earl and all his
company.

The news of the Earl of Warwickes being at the French Kings Court drew
thither Queen Margaret and her son Edward with Jasper late Visited by Queen
Margaret.
Earl of Pembrock, for this Jasper having been attainted of treason, William
Lord Harbert, was created Earl of Pembrook, but being slain William his son
succeeded in the Earldom.

This Jasper and others with him (who were lately broke out of prison in
England and fled thither, join) in confederation with the Earl of Warwick
Join inconfederacy against King Edward.
and a solemn oath passes betwixt the Duke of Clarence, the Earls of
Warwick, Oxford and Jasper of Pembrook, never to deserte one the other during
life, nor desist to the uttermost of their best abilities, to procure the
releasment of King Henry, and his restoration to the Crown of England, and to
give the better Countenance to this confederation, Prince Edward is married to
the Earl of Warwicks daughter. But therein the Earl of Warwick sitting in his
ownlight overshot himself, and by overdoing in Prince Edward married to his
daughter.
policy to strengthen his part, both himself and partakers are undon. The
water intended to drive the Mill being drawn to drown the same: for the Duke
of Clarence, after he had taken into his own more serious consideration, the
purposed end of this match, he easily perceived, that, that being seconded with
the intended prosecution of the wars against King Edward, would (if
succesfull) prove the utter overthrow of his Brothers, and the final
extirpation of the house of York; From hence arose, and not without just
ground, the Dukes distrust of his own fortunes; For the prevention of which
mischief, he inwardly became less forward to the business, and began to
cast about how to come fairly off from his Father-in-law: propinquitie of
blood, proving a stronger incentive to affection, then contracted affinity,
though never so much combined with solemn promises, and overt protestations.
From henceforth underhand he gives perfect intelligence to King Edward of all
proceedings against him, and withal assures him, that he was resolved upon his
coming into England, to play the part of a loving Brother, and as he did now
in heart, decline the confederation, so he would then clean desert their
cause: herewith when King Edward acquainted his Brother the Duke of York, he
said he always thought as much, for he that at one time had turned Traitor
to his Sovereign, would at another prove treacherous to his friend; but we may
(says he) presume better hereafter of our Brother.

The French King having furnished the new Confederates with men, money, and
ammunition, and with necessary shipping; They all went aborde, and falling down
to the mouth of the river of Seyne; they descried the Burgonians with a strong
fleet prepared to interrupt their sailing forth; Whereupon the Lords strike
sail and call to Council; But during their time of such consultation, a
strong Southwest wind comes from land, with a terrible tempest of rain, by
fury whereof the Burgonian Fleet was driven to Sea and severed, many of them
being driven on ground in Scotland; The storm The Burgonian Fleet dispersed.
being ceased, having set the Queen and Prince with his Wife on shore,
Warwick with his Accomplices hoise sail, and with a merry gale, arrive safely
at Dartmouth, from whence he gave notice to his partakers of his arrival.
King Edward presuming of the strength of the Burgonian Fleet, and their
watchfulness, had omitted preparation, either to impeach his Adversaries
landing, or to affront them being landed, by means whereof the Lords land at
ease, and having a clear passage, march forward in good array, making
Proclamation in every place where they come in King Henryes name, to command
all his loving subjects, to be ready both with purse and person, to give him
assistance against the Duke of York, who like a tyrant and an usurper,
withheld from him his Crown and Patrimony, by this means in few days his
Army greatly increased, wherewith in good order, and by easy marches, keeping
his men always in action, by exercising them, and fitting them to their
weapons, he made toward London: upon notice of whose approach, on the Sunday
next after Michaelmasse day, one Doctor Goddard, Doctor Goddards Sermon at
Paul's cross
a Chaplain of the Earl of Warwick, appointed to preach at Paul's Cross, did
so set forth the pious intention of the Earl his Master, that endeavored the
restoring of a wronged King to his liberty and Dominion, and to free the
kingdom from an Usurper, that his pithy persuasions prevailed so far with
his Auditory, that none reproved him for his boldness, but so approved of his
Sermon, that diverse put their ghostly Fathers advice in practice, insomuch,
that the Marquess Mountacute, who had as was pretended on King Edwards
behalf, levied six thousand men about London, found them all enclinable to
go with him to the Earl of Warwick, and accordingly went and joined with
him: so suddenly and easily will the vulgar be seduced!

This news and the general acclamations, that went through all places of King
Henry and a Warwick, caused King Edward to distrust his own soldiers, and
fearing the tide would turn, his heart failing him, in the dead of the night,
only with eight hundred, of whose constancy he was assured, most of them the
Lords, Rivers, Hastings, and Says retinue: he posted from besides Nottingham
toward Lincolnshire, but having notice that Warwick to impeach his retreat,
had sent his light horsemen before, and followed himself with the body of the
Army, with great hazard, and loss of his carriages which were sunk in the
sands, he past the Washes and came to Lynne, from whence with the Duke of
Gloucester, the Lord Scales, and about seven hundred men, without any change of
raiment, or other necessaries, King Edward enforced to forsake the land.
or other victuals, but what they brought on horseback with them, or what they
had left their horses for in the Town, they set sail, bending their course
for Holland; The Lord Chamberlain stayed behind, as well to make what provision
he could, for the better accommodation of the King to carry with him, as to
take order with such of their followers as were to stay behind, whom he
entreated to temporize things standing as they did, (till the wind came about
again, which he affirmed would be very shortly) but upon the first fair
gale that blew with King Edward to open their sails on his behalf, whilst he
was upon this negotiation, fortune that makes a tennis ball of the greatest,
thus played her part with King Edward; No sooner was he past ken of shore, but
certain Easterlings, enemies both to England and France, were descried to have
them in chase, so that the Mariners were driven, to clap on all their canvasse,
to bear up for the next shore of Holland: King Edward in danger of Pirates.
The Easterlings plied after them so close, that the English durst not take
land, but where their landing might be favored by some Fort or Town, so that
they were forced to fall lower then the first Coast, and came to anchor before
a Town in the Netherlands called Alquemare, as near it as with conveniencie
they might: the ebb being fallen too low to enter the Haven: The Easterlings
whose ships were of greater burden, came as near them as they durst, for fear
of running on ground, intending at the next flood to lay them aborde; But in
the interim the Lord Hastings being landed in Holland, making enquiry after
King Edward, but receiving no tidings of his being come on shore, presently
dispatcheth Curryers to all the Maritine Towns thereabouts, to give notice
that Edward King of England was upon the Coasts, to visit his Brother-in-law
and Sister, the Duke and Duchess of Burgoyne: The Lord Gronteer Governor of
Alquemare being hereof informed, suspecting what was true, that the King of
England was aborde those ships, that the Easterlings had chased in; He
presently mand out a Boat unto them with these messages, that the King of
England was in league with that Country, and his subjects and shipping should
ride safe in that harbor, without impeachment of any man, and therefore
commanded them in the Dukes name, not to disturb the English in their landing,
as they would run the hazard of the Cannon from the Town, by which means the
King was permitted quietly to come on shore, and was honorably entertained by
the Governor, who conducted him to the Hage, where they stayed the coming of
the Duke.

King Edward having now almost in a miraculous manner past the pikes in his
own Kingdom, and the perils both of Seas and Pirates, presuming that Gods
providence had protected him for some good purpose; He by the advice of his
Sister (who in all things expressed her self, a dutiful Wife to her Husband,
but a dear friend to her Brother) did intimate unto the Duke, that he had now
under God none to rely upon in this l^s extremity but himself, and therefore
he earnestly does sollcite him for present succors, which he obtains, but
whilst forces are raising, to secure King Edwards return out of Holland, his
Queen Elizabeth forsakes the Tower, and secretly takes Sanctuary at
Westminster upon report of Warwicks approach, who made the King Edward craveth
succor of the Duke of Burgoyne. Queen Elizabeth takes Sanctuary at
Westminster.
more hasty march for London, for that he was informed, That some seditious
persons about Kent, such that only awaited opportunity to fish in troubled
waters, more out of greedy desire to gain booty then get glory, had plotted
the pillaging of London; from which they were hardly restrained,
notwithstanding the careful, resolute, and industrious courses of the Mayor
and his Compeeres.

These Scatter-goods played reaks about Limehouse, and places adjoining, until
the Earl of Warwick suppressed them, and made exemplary punishment Rebels of
Kent suppressed by Warwick.
to be inflicted upon many of them, to the great content of the more
soberminded people; And much commendation from the Citizens for his care of the
Cities safety.

Execution of these pillages done, Warwick comes to the Tower, which two
days before the Mayor by a bloodlesse stratagem had entered, and King Henry set
at liberty.
did now make good on the the behalf of King Henry, who was by him removed out
of his hold of durance, into his own lodging, and there served according to
his state, which the Earl of Warwick (as the more sensible of the two) did
more congratulate then the King himself.

King Henry upon the sixth day of October, accompanied with the Archbishop of
York, the Prior of Saint John's, the Bishop of London, the Duke of Clarence,
the Earl of Warwick and other Nobles, with great solemnity was conducted
through London to the Bishops Palace; where he rested until the thirteenth
of that month, on which day he went in solemn procession about Paul's Church,
(wearing his imperial Crown) the Earl of Warwick bearing up his train, and
the Earl of Oxford the Sword before him, in whom it appeared, that mortality
was but the stage of mutabilitie.

The next day, as the usual adjunct of like proceedings, in all usual places
about London, King Edward was proclaimed an Usurper, and all his partakers and
abettors, Traitors to God and the King, whereof John Lord Tiptoft Earl of
Worcester, as a partaker with King Edward was made the first example, and on
that day beheaded at Tower Hill; He had to wife Elizabeth, sister and heir of
Sir Walter Hopton Knight, by whom he had issue Edward, who after did succeed
him in the Earldom.

The high Court of Parliament (as a cloak to cover all bracks of eruption in
the State) is assembled at Westminster, wherein King Edward and all his A
Parliament.
known friends and followers are attainted of high Treason, and all their
lands and goods seized on to King Henryes use; And like a Well with two
buckets, whereof one came up full to be empticd, the other goes down empty to
be filled, one Parliament set up an Edward, and puts down Henry, and the next
acknowledges Henry and explodeth Edward. George Plantaget Duke of Clarence is
by the authority of this Parliament adjudged to be heir to Richard Duke of
York his father, and that Duchy was likewise The Crown entayled upon
Clarence.
settled upon him, (notwithstanding the primogeniture of Edward) and his
heirs; The Crown of England was likewise entayled for want of heirs males of
the body of King Henry upon Duke George and his heirs for ever, so proclive
was the Parliament to give consent to whatsoever by the Earl of Warwick on
the behalf of King Henry (in which Well he always interwove some threads that
might seem for the strengthening of his Sonne-in-lawes good respect toward
him) was proposed: By which means Clarence was kept within the Verge hitherto
of the Earl of Warwickes devotion.

Jasper Earl of Penbrooke, and John Earl of Oxford, are fully restored to
Honor and lands.

Clarence and Warwick, are made Governors of the King and kingdom, and all
things both in Parliament, Court and Council consented unto, and concluded on,
as they would propose and appoint.

The Queen is sent for into France, but she as if appointed, not to taste any
of the cup of her Husbands fairer fortunes, is kept back by contrary winds,
so that during the Winter season, against the Kings will and her own desires,
she is kept on the other side the Sea.

Elizabeth Queen to King Edward is in the mean time in the Sanctuary The
Queen delivered of a Son.
at Westminster delivered of a Son christened by the name of Edward.

Warwick, that nothing might seem to be left undone, that might conduce to
the good of the Commonwealth, and advantageous to their proceeding, sent
diverse Companies over to Callice, from thence to infest the Duke of Burgoines
Dominions; And it is not unworthy the observation the peoples levitie, that
whom as yesterday they had proclaimed Traitor, and despightfully traduced;
That the brute of his return into England, was no sooner spread, but the
Earl of Warwickes Cognizance the Bear and the ragged Staff was worn in
every man's cap, yea Monsieur Vocleere was contented to surrender his new
Patent, and accepted of his former deputation now confirmed, and wear the
Earls Livery, which he was pleased to vouchsafe him, notwithstanding his
former uncivil and unrespective demeanor, both toward him and the Ladies in
his company.

The Duke of Burgoyne being sensible of this storm which was likely to fall
upon him, both from the French King and the Calliceans, if not warily
prevented, wisely so wrought with the Duke of Clarence, That the truce formerly
concluded betwixt him and King Edward, should in all things be ratified and
confirmed, the Kings name only altered to Henry; But with this cautionary
restriction, that no aid should be given to his Brother-in-law King Edward:
And hereof assurance by oath is given. Nevertheless within short time after,
whither by the Duke or Dutchesses means, it is doubtful, but by one of theirs
Edward was furnished with eighteen tall ships, and two thousand Dutchmen, and
with fifteen thousand Florens of gold; Thus furnished, he took land at a
place called Ravenspur in Yorkshire, in which An. 1471. R. 11.
place he found but cold entertainment; Nevertheless as one that had no other
hope left, but that little stay he had taken hold of: he made a wary march to
York, where likewise he found no great expression of welcome, so that he was
enforced most unlike himself, to make use of the Devils sophistry, and by most
execrable oaths to win belief the sooner amongst the Inhabitants of York,
he seriously vowed, according as he had prepublished in his passage thither;
That he only challenged the benefit of his birthright, which was the
Inheritance of the Duchy of York, unlawfully with strong hand withheld
against him, utterly disclaiming any intention he had to lay any claim to the
Crown of England, which he seemed ingeniously to acknowledge to be King
Henryes indubitable right. The Citizens credulity was such, that they upon
these protestations, and upon taking the Sacrament King Edward is admitted into
York.
to use the Citizens fairly, and to be true liegeman to King Henry permitted
him entrance, which before they utterly denied him; But he was no sooner
entered, but that he gave them a sufficient taste of his intendment, which was
not to want any thing, whereof in that place he might be by any means
furnished; And having well refreshed his men, and furnished himself An. 1471.
R. 11.
with what men, money, and victuals the City could affourd him, having left a
sufficient garrison to keep the City to his own use; He marched toward
London, waging by the way all the soldiers, that either threats, promises, or
money could win or procure.

The Marquess Mountacute, whose actions and carriage were always reserved and
obscure from the vulgar, yea so disputable and doubtful amongst his own
Brothers and Allies; That none but himself could expatiate them; He now when
he had power sufficient to do it, did not impeach King Edwards passage about
Pomfret, but suffered him to pass by him not fought with, for which he was
much condemned by his Brother and deservedly, for had Edward been then but a
little shaken, he had dyed at root; Being come to Nottingham, diverse of the
Nobility came to him, making tender of their service, but with this proviso,
that he would resolutely take upon him, the style and Title of King, and
accordingly take his State, which he without much contradiction was contented
(his former oath to the contrary, being no scruple to his conscience) to
consent unto; And as a river running far from its first rising, is still
augmented by the access of other brooks and waters falling into it, so King
Enwards Army increased by marching onward to a great number.

The Earl of Warwick upon notice of these proceedings, leaving King Henry at
London, hasted toward his Town of Warwick, from whence he sent to the Duke
of Clarence to advertise him of these occurrences, desiring his speedy access
thither, where he would abide his coming; But the Duke lingering out the time,
and made not that speed that was expected, and the business in hand required,
which gave cause of suspicion of his tergiversation; Warwick entrencheth at
Coventry.
whereupon Warwick with his forces withdrew toward Coventry, where he
strongly entrencheth, and fortifies himself, whither King Edward follows
him, and often provoked him to issue forth; But he wisely not being very
confident of his soldiers fidelity or courage (as yet untried) refused,
keeping himself close within his Trenches; Whereupon King Edward marches to
Warwick, persuading himself, that that course (if any thing could) would
draw the Earl to fight; But when that prevailed not, he bent his course
toward the Duke of Clarence, who with his forces made show to give him
battle; But when both their Armies were in sight, the Duke of Gloucester so
wrought between them, that they were both overtly reconciled, as they
privately were before, and their forces were conjoined; The three brothers, now
by fair promises, and liberal offers assayed to win the Earl of Warwick to
embrace fair offers of favor and reconcilement, but he readier to be broken
then bent, in stead of embracing these proffered courtesies, upbraided the Duke
of Clarence with perjurie, and degenerate cowardlinesse, returning them answer;
That he would rather die like himself, then live and have to do with such
usurping disloyal and ill-conditioned base Turne-coates.

The King taking notice of his headstrong resolution with his two Brothers,
and all their forces United marches toward London, where after King Edward
enters London
some little show of resistance, the Weathercocke Citizens moving like the
ears of standing corn altogether which way soever the wind blew, received him
with great applause, and loud acclamations of welcome, delivering up unto him
the miserable King Henry like a ball to be bandied with the racket of his
pleasure, into what hazard he pleased.

The Earl of Warwick with all his forces warily followed them at the heels,
but could never find opportunity as he expected, either upon advantage An.
1471. R. 10.
to cut off their rere, or hinder their approach to London; And having certain
intelligence, that King Edward was entered London, and King Henry reimprisoned,
he encamped at Saint Albones, as well to refresh his soldiers, as to take
counsel what course to take, and how to dispose of their journey.

King Edward being advertised of the Earl of VVarwicks approach, thinking it
not fit to have him to advance too near London, drew out his forces, and with
them marches to meet his Adversary.

The resolution was equal on both parts, to set up their rests upon the hazard
of that encounter upon Easter eve the King with his power lodged in Barnet
town, the Earl of Warwick encamped upon the hill between Saint Albones and
Barnet, the Camps each in sight of other.

Early on Easter day in the morning (an unfit day chosen for so unpleasing a
service to God,) The soldiers on both sides are put in array; The Earl of
Warwick appointed the command of the right wing which consisted of horse, to
his Brother the Marquess Mountacute and the Earl of Oxford; The least wing
likewise consisting of horse, was led by the Duke of Exceter; and the battle
consisting of Bills and Bows, was conducted by the Duke of Somerset.

The Voward on the Kings part was commanded by the Duke of Gloucester; The
battle in which was King Henry, was led by King Edward himself, and the Lord
Hastings brought on the rere.

There wanted on neither side befitting encouragement, to incite the soldiers
to show themselves valiant, and each one to do his endeavor to conquer, the
exhortations ended the fight began, and with great valor and resolution on
both sides, maintained by the space of six hours, without any disadvantage on
either part appearing, until King Edward gave order to certain fresh troops
of Rutters for that purpose reserved, to charge the now wearied battle of the
enemy, which the Earl of Warwick observing, alighted from his horse, with a
desperate courage, he entered amongst his Adversaries, Warwick slain.
whom his brother the Marquess Mountacute, in hope to reskue followed, and so
were both enclosed and slain; And with their fall, fell the victory to King
Edwards part, who being assured thereof (leaving his Brothers to Marshall the
field, and to take order for the quartering the soldiers) he with King Henry
in his company went on the spur to London, and there at Evening-song in Saint
Paul's Church offered his Banner, and the Earl of Warwicks Standard.

On King Edwards part was slain no man of extraordinary note, but the Lord
Cromwell, Son and heir of the Earl of Essex, and the Lord Barnes, Son and
heir of the Lord Say.

On the other part were slain, the Earl of Warwick, the Marquess
Mountacute, and three and twenty Knights; on both sides fell four thousand six
hundred and odd.

The bodies of the Earl of Warwick and his brother were stripped stark
naked, and put in one coffin, and the next day brought to London, where in the
body of Saint Paul's Church, they lay by the space of two days bare visaged.

This Earl of Warwick commonly styled the Great Earl of Warwick, whose usual
phrase was, That he had rather be able to set up, or pull down a King, then
be a King; was Richard Nevill, Son and heir of Richard nevill Earl of
Salisbury, who married the Daughter of Richard Beauchampe, the sixth Earl of
Warwick, in whose right he was Earl of An. 1472 R. 11.
Warwick, and in his own Earl of Salisbury, and Lord Mounthermer, he was
great Chamberlain, and Lord high Admiral of ENGLAND, Lord Warden of the
North-Marches toward SCOTLAND, and of the Cinque Ports, Captain of Callice,
and high Steward of the Duchy of Lancaster, he had issue two Daughters,
ISABELL married to GEORGE PLANTAGGNET Duke of Clarence, and ANNE first married
to EDWARD, titulary Prince of Wales, and after to Richard the Usurper.

John Nevill Brother to the said Earl, was first Created Lord Mountague,
Marquess Mountacute.
after that Earl of Northumberland, upon the attainder and banishment of Henry
Piercy Earl thereof; But upon his return into England, and restoring in
blood, Nevill surrendered his grant of the Earldom of Northumberland, and was
Created Marquess Mountacute, he married Isabell Daughter and heir of Sir
Edmond Inglesthorpe Knight, and had issue.

George Nevill Created Duke of Bedford, but aftere degraded by Act of
Parliamhnt, and five Daughters, who after their Brothers decease (which dyed
without issue) were Coheires of his estate.

Anne married to Sir William Stonhurst Knight.

Elizabeth married to Thomas Lord Scroope of Risdale.

Margaret married to Sir John Mortimer Knight.

Lucy married to Sir Thomas Fitz-Williams Knight.

Isabell married to Sir William Huddleston Knight, and all these Daughters had
issue.

After these Brothers had been made a spectacle of mortality, and the subject
of their spectators spite, scorn, or pity, three days in that manner they
were permitted to be carried to the Monastery of Bissam, and there in one grave
buried amongst their Ancestors.

Queen Margaret when it was too late, with some French forces, landed at
Waymouth, where having unwelcome tidings of this disastes, znd that the Duke of
Excester supposed slain, was strangely recovered, and had taken Sanctuary at
Westminster, she with her Son conveyed her selse to Bewly in Hampshire,
where she took Sanctuary, having sent her soldiers into Wales to Jasper
Earl of Penbrooke, who with the Duke of Somerset, Thomas Courtney Earl of
Devon. John Lord Wenlocke, and some others repaired thither unto her. Amongst
these it is resolved once more to bring their forces together into the field,
and hazard one stroke more. From Bewley the Queen and the Earl of Somerset
speed toward Bristoll, intending with what powers they could raise in
Glocestershire, to march to Wales to join with Penbrooke, who was gone
thither to make preparation accordingly.

The King made acquainted with these overtures, resolves if possible to cross
the conjunction, and follows Queen Margaret with a great power so close, that
near Tewkesbury in Gloucestershire, he overtakes her forces, who resolutely
turn, and make head against the Kings power, where Somerset on the Queens
part leading on the Van, did perform the part of a good Commander, and a stout
soldier, maintaining the fight for a long time resolutely and bravely; But
when he found his soldiers (thorugh weariness) begin to faint, and the Kings
battle came on, and that the Lord WENLOCKE which had the conduct of the
battle on the Queens part moved not, So nerset rode unto him, and upbraiding
him with Cowardice, with his Pollax bear out his brains; But before he could
bring in his men to the rescues, their Voward was rowted: and John Earl of
Devon (who had no issue) with three thousand and odd of the Queens part were
slain.

Queen MARGARET, John Beauford, the Duke of Somersets Queen Margaret taken
prisoner.
Brother, the Prior of Saint John's, Sir Jervis Clifton, and diverse others were
taken Prisoners, which all except Queen MARGARET were beheaded the next day;
At which time Sir Richard Crofts presented to King EDWARD, Prince EDWARD,
whom he had taken Prisoner: King EDWARD did at first receive him with a kind
of countenance expressing more signs of rejoicing to see a friend, then
triumph of taking an enemy, and began to move familiar questions unto him, but
not receiving such submissive satisfactory answers as he required, and it may
be some of riper years upon the like occasion would have done, he
disdainfully thrust him from him, when presently the Dukes of York and
Clarence, Thomas Marquess Dorset, and the Lord Hastings (the Kings back being
but turned) with their Poniards barbarously stabd into the breast, Prince Edw.
slaughtered.
and inhumanly murdered, against the law of God, Nature and Nations, which
occasioned the revenge of his blood afterward in general upon them all, and
in particular upon every one of them.

The King having made conquest now in twenty days, of what great Warwick had
done before in eleven; with Queen MARGARET his prisoner, triumphantly marches
toward London, from whence (as being assured, as long as there remained any of
the partakers of King Henry at liberty, and in life, his death should be
always plotting) he sent Roger Vaughan, a potent Gentleman, and much reckoned
of in his own Country, to entrap Jasper Earl of Penbrooke, who had escaped
with the Earl of Somerset from the last encounter; But Penbrooke having
premonition of the plot, prevented the mischief, by giving Vaughan means to
taste the same sauce, and struck off his head; King EDWARD lingreth about
Coventry, expecting news from Vaughan, but at once received notice both of
Vaughans defeat, and news that Thomas Bastard Fauconbridge employed by King
HENRY at the appointment of great Warwick to skowre the narrow Seas, had
irritated new sedition; And true it was, that this Fauconbridge having at Sea
encountered with many that had escaped from Tewkesbury battle, and were making
for France, and by them being informed of the murder of Prince EDWARD, and
the incarcerating of Queen MARGARET, he made all fish that came to net, and
robbed and spoiled all that he could come at, of ammunition and able men,
as well Natives as Aliens, and had persuaded many of the old garrison soldiers
of Callice, to the number of three hundred, under the conduct of Sir George
Brook to join with him, and had now drawn from all parts, all such as had
escaped the former encounters, or were willing to purchase boot and pillage,
and now did intend, to work some stratagem against King EDWARD and the
kingdom; And with a well accomplished Army of seventeene thousand men came to
London, and in hostile manner commanded admission into the City, and the
releasement of King HENRY out of prison; But was resisted and denied by the
Mayor and Citizens on the one side, and the Lieutenant of the Tower on the
other.

King Edward upon the first news, knowing how dangerous delays are, in
matters of this nature, presently dispatched Marquess Dorset with some
competent troops of Horse to secure London, whilst himself upon the sixteenth
day of May* follows with his own power, laying all the ways to intercept any
intelligence that might be sent or received betwixt the Bastard and Penbrooke.

Fauconbridge thus denied entrance, brings up his shipping to Saint Katherines,
and leaving in them but men sufficient to receive the boot brought, takes out
the most desperate and dangerous, and with them marches to Kingstone bridge,
promising his soldiers by the way to give them the plundering of Westminster
for their dinners, and of the Suburbs of London for their suppers, but London
it self should be their breakfast in the next morning; But finding King stone
bridge broken down, and all the places of passage guarded, ascertained of the
Kings approach, and doubting to be enclosed, he altered his resolution, and
with all his forces, withdrew into Saint Georges field, from whence he
prepared to assault the City of London; For the effecting whereof, he landed
all his ship Ordnance, and planted them all along the banks side, and
therewith battered down many houses, and much annoyed the City, but having
some religion in his rage, he gave order to the Cannoneeres to spare Churches
and houses of religion; From Saint Katherines by Boat, he past over three
thousand men, giving them directions to divide themselves, and with one moitie,
to assault Algate, and with the other Bishopsgate, whilst he with the residue
labored to gain entrance by London bridge; The houses round about which he
fired, all these places at once were desperately attempted, threescore houses
being fired upon the Bridge, they followed the fire, and recovered the
drawbridge, and then he brought on his desperate Seamen that inured to the
water, would adventure far in the fire, but by the directions of the Earl of
Essex, who with diverse Gentlemen were come in aid of the Citizens, and were
there quartered with their men, they had so barricadoed up the Bridge-foot, and
planted great Ordnance to scowre the entrance that way, that the forward
Bastard seeing no possibility of further approach without apparent
destruction, having wit in his anger made a fair retreat. The Marquess
Dorset in the mean time from the waters side had droven the Cannoneeres from
their Ordnance; But Captain Spicing at Algate won the Bulwark, and drove
the Citizens from the Gate, entering pel mell with them, until the Portcullis
was let fall, when those had adventured too far paid the price of their
folly; Alderman Basset and the Recorder Vrswicke, who with a volant Regiment
awaited to succor (where need should require) came to the reskew, and causing
the Portcullis to be drawn up, made a brave sally forth, and drove the Rebels
back beyond Saint Buttolphs Church; which Earl Rivers Lieutenant observed
well, (having all the day awaited with his men for advantage to give
assistance) issued out of the Posterne with five hundred well-appointed
Bow-men, who saluted the Rebels at their backs with such a shower of Arrows,
that they all amazed fled to their ships, but were pursued, and seven hundred
of them were cut off in their flight; Those that assailed Bishopsgate, hearing
of their fellows ill success shrunk disorderly away, having first fired the
City in many places, the stay to quench the rage of the fire, gave the
assaylants the quieter means of retreat.

The fire upon the Bridge somewhat slaked, Alderman Iosselyne with a Company
of Citizens drawn from Leaden Hall, where the Corpse de^guard was kept,
valiantly (the great Ordnance being first from the Bridge-foot discharged) fell
upon the Bastards troops, and so plied them with his shot, that they turned
back and fled, whom the Alderman followed to ^tcliffe, slaughtering all he
overtooke in their flight, and kept them from going on board, their ships.
Fauconbridge commanded his ships to fall down to the Downs, whilst he with
much labor drew together his scattered troops, and entrenched himself at
Blacke-heath, comforting his company of the assurance of accession of the
Welsh, whom he affirmed to be upon march, to come to their assistance, with
whose aid he promised them to work wonders; But having expected their
coming three days, victuals growing scarce, and hearing of the Kings
approach, he dismissed his soldiers, taking as many with him as would adventure
to Sea, he left the rest to try their fortunes on shore. King Edward upon the
one and twentieth of May, with a great power came to London, where he was
Triumphantly received, which he as thankfully required, giving the Order of
Knighthood to the Mayor, Recorder, and two Aldermen, Basset and Josceline,
giving them respective commendations, both for their loyalty and valors,
promising upon the Word of a King, to requite the meanest of his good Citizens
loves with ample satisfaction, as soon as the Commonwealth had recovered her
quiet, which he was confident now would be shortly; The clouds that had so
long covered it, being almost clean dispersed; In the mean time the Duke of
Gloucester took an occasion to visit King Henry in the Tower, where observing
his unmoved behavior, either out of pity of his unbounded injury, or envy at
his so settled patience; That though he had lost his Crown, his only Son,
and all his assured friends, and was hopeless ever after to see his Wife, the
least of which was a loss unvaluable, and now had nothing left him but a
little breath, yet he seemed as though he had lost nothing; or out of piety
(which may be doubted) to send him thither where he might repair all his
losses with a much overplus of happiness, Gloucester with his Poniard made a
passage for the soul to go King Henry murdered.
out of the prison of the body, and the body to be laid to sleep amongst his
forefathers, and as it were to give the world a taste of that blood-thirsty
inclination, and Canniball condition, whereof his ensuing Tragical murders
should give a more ample Testimony, and to guild his Dagger with Royal blood,
having there with first stabd the Son (a hopeful young Prince) now he
killed the Father, performing to him a merciful act of an unmercifull actor.

The three and twentieth day of May, being Ascension day, the Corpse were
conveyed by direction from the Council with some little show of solemnity of
Funeral rites to Paul's Church, where he lay all that day with his face
uncovered. But that in sight of all the people, there or at the Blacke-Fryers,
whither the body was that night conveyed, or in any other place, it bled in
that quantity, or in that manner, which the report of many gave out it did; I
will not affirm, only say that true it is, the day following he was from
Blackfriars conveyed in a Boat to Chertseu Abbey, without Priest or Clerk,
Torch or Taper, saying or singing, and there buried: But afterward at the
appointment of King EDWARD was removed to Windsor, an^ there interred, and a
fair Monument made over him.

Thus was he freed from this thraldom, after he had groned under the burden
of a Crown, thirty eight years six months and odd days, he married as
before, Margaret Daughter of Rayner, Duke of Anion, by Proxy in Lorayne at the
City of Tours in Saint Martins Church, in the presence of the French King and
Queen; The King was Uncle to the Brides Father, and the Queen Aunt to her
Mother: King Henry by her had issue, only Edward butchered as before: This
Margaret remained Prisoner in London, until she was ransomed by Duke Rayner
her Father, and then departed into France, where she lived and dyed King
Henryes true Widow, that had been his trustfull Wife. This King Henry in his
lifetime had been so truly a participant of both prosperity and adversity,
That few can go beyond him in both, if any his Predecessors could parallel
him in either, being nine months old he began his reign over England, being
wisely, warily, and watchfully, guided, guarded, reguarded by his three, wise,
valiant, and respective Uncles, the Dukes of Gloucester, Exceter, and Bedford,
as long as their triple twisted, triumvirate authority subsisted; In the eighth
year of his Reign he was Crowned at Westminster; And in the eleventh year
of his Reign, he was Crowned King of France, in our Lady Church at Paris;
Thirty years he enjoyed all the benefits of peace within England, without
any manifest interruption; And what content a bucksome and debonaire Queen
could enrich him with; But in the three and thirtieth year of his Reign he
was enforced to fight, after a great defeat given him at Saint Albones; And in
the eight and thirtieth year of his Reign, his Army was defeated at
Northampton by great Warwick, and there by him taken Prisoner: The year
following he is by Queen Margaret his Wife set at liberty, but in the same
year after the overthrow given him at Mortimers Cross, both he and his
Queen were compelled to fly out of the Realm the one to Scotland, the other
into France. He is afterward taken Prisoner at Selby in Lancashire, and
brought Prisoner to the Tower, from whence he shortly delivered, and restored
by him that first took him Prisoner, and last left him there (great Warwick)
for his sake. Edward the fourth is compelled to fly for aid into Holland, and
is Proclaimed Traitor, whilst Henry again is Vested in royalty; But the
year following he is again taken Prisoner in the Bishops Palace at London,
and sent Prisoner to the Tower, for whose releasement whilst Warwick strives,
both himself and Brother lose their lives at the field fought at Barnet, and
young Prince Edward upon the same occasion is murdered after the overthrowe
given to his Mother at Tewksbury, besides many of the royal blood, and his
Noble friends massacred and butchered in other places, yet he in both estates
so demeaned himself, that he modestly carried the one, and moderately
underwent the other, Passion at no time drowning his judgment, nor will at any
time domineering over his Reason; yea, such was his deportment, that the
inconstancy of his state could not alter the constancy of his mind; Insomuch
that one of his Successors King Henry the Seventh, labored for that only
virtue, to have Canonized to be a Saint, and had obtained to have had it done,
had not the charges thereof so far exceeded mediocrity, for the (fees or
expenses to make a King a Saint are much more then the expenses to Canonize a
Clergy man) caused him to leave it undone, so that for want of one to disburse
the money King HENRY lost a Feast day, and his name a place in the Almanacke,
it is most evident his integrity of life was such, that his Confessor a grave
and reverend Doctor confidently avouched, That in ten years together, in all
which time he monthly at least received his Confession, he never could
gather, that he had in thought, word, or deed, committed that, that in his
thought might deserve the injunction of penance.

His continency was such, that before his marriage, he would permit no Woman,
to have any thing to do in his Chamber, nor ever would touch woman, but by way
of orderly salutation, and that so seldom, that it was taken for a great grace
to them so by him saluted.

At a Christmasse time a Mask of Women being presented unto him, whereof some
of them showed there (at this day too commonly used) naked breasts, he left
the presence, crying, Fie, fie, Ladies, in sooth you are to blame, to bare
those parts to the eye of man, that nature appointed modesty to conceal.

He was so far from Vindicative disposition of injuries, or affronts offered
to his Person, that he would give thanks to God, that did so permit men to
punish his transgressions in this life, that so he might escape the punishment
for them hereafter.

He was so watchful over his words, that he was never heard to swear oath,
his greatest and most earnest asseveration, being for the most part, forsooth,
forsooth, or Verily, verily.

He was so far from Covetousness, that when the Executours of his Uncle
(styled the rich Bishop of Winchester) made offer unto him of two thousand
pounds of free gift, he refused it, wishing them to take care of orderly
performance of their duty, in duly accomplishing the Testatours Will, and not
to consume the estate left them for better uses in bribery, or unnecessary
donations.

He was so religiously affected, that he duly observed his Canonical
obedience to the strictest injunction of the Church, and at times of fast
(thereby commanded) he not only observed the abstinence prescribed, but used
other uninjoyned means of mortification, by wearing Fair shirts next his
skin, and tying himself to that austerity of life, and strictness of
discipline, that the strictest and most religious penitentiary could do no
more.

He was so inclinable to pity, that when he spied the quarter of a Traitor
set over one of the gates of London upon a pole, he caused the same instantly
to be taken down and buried, saying, I will not have such cruelty executed
against a Christian after death for my sake, it is enough if not too much that
he received the punishment of death for his offense.

His patience was such, that to one that struck him when he was taken
prisoner, he only said, forsooth you do wrong your self more then me to
strike the Lords anointed.

To another that (when he was in Prison) had drawn blood of him with a
weapon, when after he was at liberty, and the party that had given him the
wound was brought before him, he freely pardoned him, saying, Alas poor
soul, he struck me more to win favor with others then any ill will he
bare me; of that happy memory, that he never forgot any thing but injury.
Lastly, his courage in a good cause, appeared in this, that being a little
before his death in a peremptory manner demanded by the Duke of Gloucester,
why he had held the Crown so long unjustly from the rightful heir, boldly
thus answered, My father was Crowned King of England, and quietly without
contradiction enjoyed the same, as my Grandfather his Father had hald the same
before him, and I but a child was Proclaimed undubitate heir thereto, and was
accordingly sacred and Crowned King without interruption, first of England and
afterward of France, all men to me as to my ancestors swearing and doing
fealty and homage, and so I have held England wel-ny Thirty nine years; And
therefore I may say with the holy King and Prophet David, My lat is fallen in a
fair ground, yea, I have a goodly heritage, my help is in the Lord, which
will save the upright in heart.

His pious intention for provision for competent maintenance for Prophets and
Prophets children, appears by his testamentary appointment for the building,
and endowing Kings College in Cambridge, and Eaton College by Windsor: And
other like Donations appointed by his last Will.

King Edward presently after the interment of King Henry, draws his forces
toward Sandwitch in Kent, where some of the followers of Fauconbridge, to the
number of eight or nine hundred, had in the Castle thereof strongly fortified
themselves; Who upon notice of the Kings approach in Person, sent Sir George
Brooks unto him with this message, that if he would vouchsafe them (which
they humbly desired) his gracious Pardon, so as they might be assured to have
their lives, limbs, and liberty saved, they would surrender into his hands the
Castle, with their shipping and all things therein, and submit themselves in
all obedience to his command, and swear which hitherto they never had done,
from thenceforth for ever to continue his faithful, loyal, and obedient
subjects; But if this mercy were denied them, they were resolute to fight it
out to the last man, fire the shipping, and sell their lives at the dearest
rate, neither were they so destitute of promised assistance, that they had any
just cause to despair of their relievement, if they should abide the hazard,
(being sufficiently victualed to hold out for six months) of being besieged.

The Council having thoroughly debated of the proposition, by the Kings
appointment, and by the instigation of the Duke of Gloucester, they advised the
King to atonement with them, and he accordingly granted their request, and
marching to Canterbury, there sealed, and from thence sent by the Duke of
Gloucester (who now began to affect popularity, and endeere himself to
soldiers,) their general Pardon, who bringing it unto them, forgot not to
acquaint them, with what difficulty he had obtained the same at the Kings
hands.

Upon the receipt thereof, both Castle and ships to the number of thirteen,
are delivered up to the Duke for the Kings use; But how this composition was
observed, may be imagined; when Fauconbridge (who was comprised in the same
Pardon) was afterward taken and executed at Southampton; And Spicing and
Quintine the Captains that assailed Algate and Bishopsgate at London, and were
Commanders, and in Sandwitch Castle at the surrender thereof, were presently
beheaded at Canterbury, and their heads sent to be placed on poles on those
gates at London, they had severally assaulted; And by a Commission of oyre and
terminer, diverse both in Essex and Kent, were arraigned and condemned for this
rebellion, but more for that put to fine and ransom then death, to the great
impoverishing of the Yeomen of Kent, and undoing the Gentlemen of Essex.

The King upon Whitson eve returns to London, where (advised thereto by his
Council) he sent great Warwickes Brother the Archbishop of York, to be kept
prisoner in the Castle of Guisnes, and the Earl of Oxford, who had submitted
himself upon pardon of life only) to the Castle of Ann. 1472 R. 12.
Hams, and laid all the Ports for the stopping of the Earl of Penbrookes
going out of England, which he nevertheless afterward did with the young
Earl of Richmond.

King Edward much displeased, with the escape of the Earl of Penbrooke, but
more of that of Richmond, (by how-much the one could but abet, the other might
lay claim) sent his Letters over to the Duke of Britain, whither those two
Earls had found means to convey themselves, and were in Britanny by him
kindly entertained, intimating therein his earnest desire, either to have them
sent over to him, or at least watchfully kept from attempting any thing (which
he had just causte to suspect they would) to his prejudice, by their being at
liberty, with many promises of thankful respect, for this courtesy if
granted, and for an earnest thereof sent him a token, worthy the receiving,
which so prevailed with the Duke, that the two Earls were debard each others
company, and all their English attendants taken from them and Britons appointed
in their places, which somewhat satisfied the King of England, but gave no
content to the English Gentlemen in France.

A Parliament is called at Westminster wherein all acts formerly made by him,
are confirmed. And those that King Henry after his redemption of the An. 1473.
R. 13.
Crown had abrogated, were revived, And an ordinance made for the confiscation
of all their lands and goods: that had taken part against him, and were fled,
with a restoration, of all such as for his part had been attainted, both to
blood, and patrimony.

Toward his charges: in this Parliament, a competent sum of money is
voluntarily given, and in respect thereof a general pardon is granted.

The Duke of Burgoyne, not willing that his courtesies formerly done to his
brother in law should be thought upon, and willing to ingulph him in the wars
of France. That he in the mean time might have the better opportunity to
work some malicious stratagem against the French king; sends over Ambassadors,
with ample instructions, to solicit the King of England, to set on foot his
title to the Crown of France, making great offers with protestations, to aid
and assist him therein; both with purse and person.

The Ambassadors have audience, and after much debating the point amongst the
privy Council, it was thus amongst them concluded.

1 That the Crown of France, was not ambitiously affected. But the title
thereof legally Challenged as the unquestionable right of the now King of
England.

2 That the French wars (if orderly pursued) always enriched English
Soldiers.

3 That France being made the seat of the war it would keep them from making
invasion on England, and hinder them from supporting any against the King of
England.

4 That the French King had in an unsufferable fashion given an affront to the
King of England, in ayding and abetting Queen Margaret, and her traiterous
accomplices against him, and prohibiting any his true subjects to reside within
his territories. And in continually sending combustible stuff to feed the fire
of rebellion, which had so disquieted the commonwealth of England.

5 That the King of France, infested the Duke of Burgonies Countries with
wars, who was a friend and Colleague with the King of England, and one that
was in league with him both offensive and defensive.

Therefore this proposition from the Duke of Burgoin to undertake the wars
against France, was to be approved of, as being both lawful and behoofefull
for the honor of the King and the good of the Kingdom.

But the means how to pursue the war being once undertaken was an other
cause considerable. For treasure (the sinews of war) was wanting, and to
procure a supply by Parliamentary courses would take up too much time. They
were therefore driven to find out and set on foot a project till then unheard
of, which was to draw by way of benevolence from the subject, a seeming
voluntary, (howsoever often very unwillingly paid) contribution, Thereby to
supply the want of money for the pursuance of these wars.

To this end diverse Commissioners are assigned, with letters to the knights and
Gentlemen, and several instructions are sent into every County, who did
therein so effectually Comply themselves to do the King service, that by their
perwasions most men of ability did enlarge their contributions to this so
fair an enterprise, and readily departed with their money. And a Kings kys to a
sparing and therefore, a rich widow, amongst many others drawn in by Court
holy water to make oblation, brought in twenty pounds more then was demanded,
for that being but twenty she gave forty. A Kings kys to a rich widow procured
40. where but 20. was expected.


It is almost a matter of admiration in these days, how in those days, The
King could out of this little Island, be furnished with able men for his
wars, old men women, and children, with sufficient meat to put in their
mouths; the Clergy, and Scholars with competent maintenance, and the markets
with necessary provision, considering the infinite number of those in the late
Civil broils slaughtered, the paucitie of Ploughmen and husbandmen, the want
of farmers, and the indigency of Cattle wherewith to stock their farms,
infinite quantities of ground lying unmanurde or tilled, and the pastures and
downs without sheep or Cattle. The general spoil and wastment, which the
Soldiers wheresoever they came (and that was almost every where) in this
kingdom made, and the general ceasing and neglect of commerce or traffic,
the shipping not daring to stir abroad, the danger being so great to be robbed
and spoiled either by hombred pirates or foreign foes; yet such was Gods great
mercies that every one of these respectively were supplied, and did subsist
without any notable defect, or extraordinary want.

Henry Holland Duke of Exceter, and Earl of Huntington dishinherited An. 1474.
R. 14.
by act of Parliament, with Henry Duke of Somerset, and Thomas Earl of
Devonshire, in the fourth year of King Edward the fourth was this The Duke of
Exceter found dead.
year found dead, stripped naked betwixt Dover, and Callice, but how he came by
his death no inquiry could bring to light, he married Anne daughter of Richard
Duke of York and sister to Edward the fourth, but had no issue by her: she was
after married to Sir Thomas Saytleoger and had issue by him a daughter to
George Manors Lord Rosse of H^mlack.

Provision for this French expedition of all things necessary being thoroughly
made, aad order taken for the quiet government of the kingdom in his absence,
and the stop of incursiones, if any should by the Scots be made, King Edward
with an army of fifteen hundred men at arms, and all of the nobility and
Gentry gallantly mounted, and well attended with fifteen thousand archers on
horseback, eight thousand common soldiers (whereof five thousand were sent to
Britain) and three thousand pioners to attend the ordnance and guard the
Carriage, came down to Dover, whither the Duke of Burgoine had sent five
hundred skutes or flat bottombd boats to transport the horse to Callice: yet
notwithstanding that help it was above two and twenty days before the Kings
forces were all past over to Callice. Before the Kings departure from Dover,
because he would Ann. 1474 R. 4.
witness to the world his fair and legal proceeding he sent an Harold named
Gorter a Norman by birth, with a letter of defiance in fair and King Edward
writes to the French King.
fitting terms, requiring the French King to yield unto him the Crown of
France his unquestionable inheritance; by the French King unjustly detained
from him; which if he should dare to deny, that then he was to expect from
England, but what the extremity of the sword and the Calamities of war could
bring upon him and his Country. This letter the French king read, and
withdrawing himself caused the Harold to be brought to his presence, to whom
in private he gave this answer. That the Duke of Burgoyn and the Constable (by
whose traiterous instigation and not of his own inclination) he knew the King
of England, intended to visit France, would but delude him, for they were
dissemblers and impostors. And therefore said it would conduce more to the
honor and content of the King of England, to continue in league with me,
though an old adversary, then to hazard the fortune of the wars, upon the
promised assistance, of new-come deceivers, such as those two will prove. And
so Commend me to the King thy Master, and say what I have told thee: and so
with an 300. crowns in gold and 30. yards of red velvet.
honorable reward dismissed the Harold who returned to the King of England to
Callice. And there returned the French Kings answer.

This advise though from an enemy if followed, had saved the King of England a
great deal of money: For the Duke of Burgoyne, notwithstanding his promise in
the word of a Prince not to fail, was not at the time, and place appointed,
ready with his forces, which should have been by pact and promise two thousand
Lanceers and four thousand stradiots or light horse. Whereupon the Lord Scales
is by the King of England sent to the Duke to put him in mind of his promise,
and to hasten his coming with his promised forces. But the journey was to
little purpose, only it occasioned the Duke with a small Troop of horse to
come unto the King of England, formally to excuse himself, for being so
backward: in that he having with his forces been embroyled in the siege of
Nants, could not depart thence without infinite The duke of Burgoyn excuses
his breach of promise.
disgrace, if neither Composition or submission were enforced, which now
notwithstanding, because he would not too much trespass upon his brother in
laws patience to have longer expected hiscomming, he was by the obstinacy of
the besieged enforced to do. But promised to supply all defects both with his
presence and power and that speedily.

The Constable likewise by letters persuades the King of England to proceed in
the action, and not to doubt from the Duke and himself, but The Constable
repromiseth aid.
to be sufficiently accommodated every way, and seconded.

King Edward thus encouraged marches on. But in his way found no performance
of promises either on the Dukes, or Constables part. For the first did not at
their coming to Peroone accommodate the soldiers with victual or lodging, in
that manner as was requisite and expected. And the other in steed of
surrendering up of S. Quintayns according to the agreement, made a sally out
upon such as were sent from the King of England to receive the same, playing
upon them with their great ordnance. Whereupon King Edward comparing the last
days words with this days actions, began to suspect the truth of the Kings
description of the Duke and Constables condition, and from thence forward stood
upon his own guard, and gaveno further credence to any of their protestations,
which the Duke of Burgoyne resenting; pretending earnest occasions for the
hasting forward of his forces, An. 1474 R. 14.
and promising speedy return with them takes his leave and departs,
wherewith the English are displeased, and King Edward not a little disquieted.
Burgoyne departs promising speedy return.


The French King having intelligence of the Dukes departure, forcasting the
worst, suspecteth that the Duke was (with an intent to return) gone to bring
on his power, well knowing that if they should unite their forces, his Crown
was in great hazard to be plucked from him. Nevertheless he thought that
winter being so near they could not well keep the field, howsoever being his
crafts Master, and politic enough to work his own ends which he seldom
failed in, he resolved with himself to assay what might be done to mediate a
peace with the English in Burgoins absence, And yet The policy of the French
King.
so to retreat, that if it took not effect he might disclaim the knowledge
of the overture, he therefore privately dispatcheth a messenger in show, of an
Herhought indeed he was a fellow neither of Office or estimation, and not
known to any of the Kings household, but to Villeers the Master of the horse
who only was acquainted with the plot and party This Counterfeit pursevant at
arms, with a Coat made of a Trumpets banner roll, ad dressed himself to the
King of England, and upon admission to his presence, insinuates the French
Kings desire, which was to have Commissioners on both parts consigned to
confer of the means, to reconcile the differences betwixt the two Kings: at
leastwise to conclude the cessation from wars for some time: and so well
this messenger: delivered his arrand; That it was credited and his request
granted, and with a reward and a letter of safe conduct, for such as should be
imployd from the French King in this business is returned and an Herhaught
likewise King Edward sends an Herald of arms to Lewis.
from King Edward is sent to King Lewis, for the like letter of safe conduct to
be sent for those, that from the English Camp, should be employed in this
negotiation, which is accordingly granted, and at a village near Amiens the
Commissioners meet. For King Edward appear the Lord Howard, Sir Anthony S.
Leoger.
Chalenger, and Doctor Morton, after made Lord Chancellor of England.

For King Lewis, came the Admiral of France, the Lord S. Peirs and Heberg
Bishop of Eureux.

After long conference the Articles of peace were concluded on to this effect.

1 The French King was to pay presently to the King of England threescore and
fifteen thousand Crowns. And from thence forth annually pay fifty thousand
Crowns during the life of King Edward.

2 That within one year the French King should send for the Princess
Elizabeth the king of Englands daughter, and join her in marriage to the
Dolphine. And for their maintenance for nine years, the French King agreed to
allow them fifty thousand crowns per annum: and that time expired, they
should peaceably be invested in the possession of the Duchy of Gayen, for the
better supportation of their estate.

3 That the Lord Howard, and Sir John Cheney Master of the horse should remain
in hostage there, until the army had altogether quitted France, and were
returned into England, and a general peace for nineyeers wherein Burgoine and
Britain are included if they will accept thereof. The way made the easier for
the compassing this so profitable a conclusion, by Lewis his offering to every
Saint a Candle, for he distributeth sixteen thousand crowns amongst King
Edwards Counselors, and favorites, two thoutwo thousand Crowns to Hastings
the Kings Chamberlain, and to the Lord Howard, Sir John Cheney, Sir Arthur
Chauenger or Sellinger, and Mountgomery theresidue, besides great store of
Plate and jewels distributed amongst inferior officers of the Court.

The motives that induced King Edward, the sooner to condesend to this accord
were.

1 The vacillation and instabiltie, of the Duke of Burgoyne, and the Constable,
they never performing any the agreements really concluded on.

2 The extremity of winter approaching, the present want of fodder, and the not
having any strong place or fort to shelter the soldier in.

The impossiblitie of raising any more great forces for relief, if necessity
should require to be seconded the late Civil wars having almost eaten out
the most and best soldiers in England.

4 The emptiness of the Treasury, and always of supply being taken off.

The Duke of Gloucester only, whose brains were busy at work, about great
designs, the easy compassing whereof, he deemed unpossible in case the
wars with France were not pursued, opposed this accord, nevertheless it
proceeded, and notice thereof is presently sent to the Duke of Burgoyne, who
thereupon only with fifteen hundred horse posts to the English Camp, At
Burgoyne retornes displeased.
his first arrival he discovers his inward passion by his outward countenance.
But he came to late too prevent what was done. King Edward persuades him to
enter into the peace according to the reservation. But Charles reprocheth K.
Edward for entering into such a truce, saying that K. Edwards predecessors had
with their armies performed many brave and notable exploites upon the French
and purchased thereby fame and reputation, and that he had brought his
soldiers, but to show them the Country, and return as they came, adding
therwithall, That to make it appear to the world, that he was able without the
help of the English, to subsist of himself he disclaimed any benefit by that
truce, or any other reconciliation with the French: until three months after
the English had remained in their own Country. But when King Edward not well
pleased with this French bravado, retorted unto him the base and forgetful
neglect both on the Constables part, and his, of not being their words Masters.
The Duke in a great snuff returns to Luxenburg from whence he came.

For the better confirmation of what was agreed upon, and settling of amity
betwixt the two Kings an interview is desired, but before the same is
effectuated, the French King sends unto the English army, an hundred Tun of
Gasooyne wine to be drunk out, amongst the private soulders and therewith free
license at pleasure for Commanders and Gentlemen of rank and quality to
recreate themselves in Amiens, where they were freely and fairly entertained
by the Burgers at the kings express commandment. The commanders in chief at
their return, were well rewarded with jewels and plate, for their fair
deportment, and the orderly carriage of The French Kingliberally rewards the
good carriage of the English.
their Soldiers during the abode there: and not without good cause for hadnot
their behavior bin the better, the number of those that were there had bin
sufficient to have done much mischief, or made themselves Masters of the town.
A place of interview of these two Kings is agreed on, and against the time
appointed all things are orderly prepared and readily fitted at the charge of
the The manner of the internew of the 2 Kings.
French king by the English Carpenters, four of the bed Chamber on both sides
are appointed to search the contrary end of the room to prevent traps or
instruments of treachery lest any, thing might be pottedor practiced to the
preujudice of their Masters. They return certifyingl mnia been the Kings
advanace themselves, K. Edward being come in sight of the place, makes a stand
as being told, the omission of any circumstance, in point of honor might
reflect upon not wisely forecasting all passages of state, and knowing to
attend the first offer of the ceremony, would much take of from the dignity of
his state which although King Lewis perhaps did apprehend, yet he would not
stand to straining of courtesy, and fearing to loose the fair opportunity, to
give two blows with one stone (free himself from their presence whose breath
was to hot for his company, and weaken thereby the arm of an overweening
neighbor,) he gave the K. of England the advantage to come at his pleasure,
whilst first to the bar appointed for conference. And there did attend King
Edwards leisure, he had in his company John Duke of Bourbon, with his brother
the Cardinal, and was attended with 800. men at arms. King Edward comes with
his brother the Duke of Clarence, (Gloucester wanting moderation with patience
to admit a Court complement in the sight of an army, with a French man) excused
his not coming the Earl of Northumberland, the Lords Chamberlain and
Chancellor, and at his back his whole army in battle array. The kings
lovingly embrace each other and court cringes, and complements of courtesy
reciprocally pass, which finished, they with their nobles then present all
take their oaths upon the holy Evangelists, in all things pro posse to observe
the articles of accord concluded on as before. Then all were commanded to
withdraw, themselves whilst the two kings fall into private conference,
concerning the Dukes of Burgoyne and Britany. Lewis leaves not a string
untoucht that might make muficke for his profit. And having felt the K. of
Englands pulse not to beat over strongly on behalf of his brother in law, and
that on his part he desired but respit until he might receive answer of a
message he would send, to the D. and that if he refused to accept of the
benefit of the accord, he would leave him to the French K. pleasure, he leaves
further speech of him and earnestly importnes that Britayn might be left out of
their articles, which K. E. utterly denies, affirming that he had found the D.
an open hearted and opehanded friend to his in his extremity, and therefore
would not now leave him unregarded. Lewis observing Ed. countenance in delivery
of those words thought it no policy to strain that string any higher but with
all courtesy takes his leave, giving many kind words and some tokens of favor
to some noblemen and all the officers: and so departs yet after he was gone:
not thoroughly disgesting the K. of Englands defense of the D. of Britain; he
makes a second motion unto him to the former purpose by letter: from whom he
received King Edward could not be drawn from ayding the Duke of Brittayne.
this resolute answer, that if the French K. desired the friendship of England
he should not molest the D. of Britayne, for he was resolved in person to come
at any time for his defense, if the Duke of Britain were disturbed whereupon K.
Lewis rested satisfied though not contented, whilst K. Edw. forslowed no time
to acquaint the Duke of Britayne with all the passages, some think that had not
the desire of compassing the E. of Richmond and Pembrook now in the D. of
Britains countries bin a better motive, then any respect unto the D. the
French K. might have had better success in his requests: K. E. to give K.
Lewis a taste of his respect toward him (notwithstanding his denial of the
proposition, for the Duke of Britain) sends a messenger unto him, to acquaint
him with treachery of the Constable against him, and to carry the more credit of
the truth of what was intimated, he sent two letters written with the
Constables own hand, which were sufficient testimonies to accuse and convince
the Constable of those crimes wherewith afterward King Edward charged him.

The money to be paid by the Articles, is borrowed of the Parisians, (so willing
they were to see the Englishmens backs) and accordingly paid over and the
hostages are delivered, whereupon the army retiers to Callice, and from thence
are tra^sported into England, and performance of the agreement to the content
of both parts, made, the hostages are with great pro^ises and rewards
redelivered

Some forbear not to say that K. E. lost more honor in this voyage then he
had purchased in nine victories before gotten: but they were such as measure
kings actions by the crooked level of their own erroneous fancies. But those of
better understanding affirm, that it had bin a great error in judgment for
the K. to be longer absent from his so late conquered kingdom, but great
wisdom and policy in him to take hold upon such an occasion to come off so
fairly with a match for his daughter which had it taken effect, had
sufficiently recompensed his charge and trouble. But private men must not
dispute the actions of Princes. And further to examine the reason of what in
this kind at this time was done, might give occasion of discourse but not
instruction King Edward being returned into England not unmindful that a great
storm might follow, though but a small cloud as yet appeared, dispatched
Ambassador to the A. 1475. R. 15.
Duke of Britain, to persuade with him to have the young Earl of Richmond
sent over unto him: for that he desired to match him in marriage with the Lady
King Edward attempteth by a colorable pretense to procure Richmands person to
be delivered to him Delivered to the Ambassadors.
Cecily his younger daughter, this fair overture of marriage, or rather the
feeling mediation of Angels (whereof some store were sent but more promised) so
prevailed with the D. That upon the receipt of the sum sent, the E. of Richmond
is delivered to the Ambassadors, who thence conducted him to S. Malos where
whilst they stayed for a wind, by the cunning advise and plotting of the D.
treasurer, (who as it may be by the sequel gathered, not well pleased not to
have bin treated withal, according to that court custom with a feeling respect
a more then ordinary proportion, or common gratuity being inseparably incident
to his treasurers place, more scorn to be so neglected, then love to Richmond)
The young L. escapes into Sanctuary, From whence nor promises nor prayers could
procure him. Nevertheless upon Peter Londoys his promise he should be safely
kept there. The Ambassadors without their merchandise or Escapes into
Sanctuary.
money departed to the no little discontent of the K. who greived much that the
lamb had escaped his woolvish intention; But being taught the rule what he
could not avoid, he made show to receive willingly, he for that time said
little.

At Christmas following he created his eldest son Ed. Prince of Wales, D. of
Cornwale, and E. of Chester; his second son Duke of York, giving the order of
knighthood, to the son and heir of the E. of Lincoln and many others. He
created four and twenty knights of the Bath, upon the creation of the Prince
of Wales, whereof Bryan chief Justice, and Littleton a Judge of the common
Pleas were two. Thus whilst K. Edw. in England lived in peace and quiet the
turbulent D. of Burgoyne never constant, but always in contention, reaped the
triple fruit thereof, this year at three several times. The first at Ganson,
where, he lost some honor but more wealth. The second at Morat where he lost
more honor and many men. The last at Nancy, where he not only lost, men, money,
and reputation but life also by the Switzers whom he had driven to a desparate
resolution and then not in hope to escape, but to sell their lives, (when
submissio^ would not be accepted at the dearest rate) they fought and
prevailed. Now begins Rich. D. of York to set on foot his until then close
contrived divelish An. 1477. R. 17.
devises, to compass the attainment of the crown of England, and for the first
seen of the ensewing tragedy to facilitate his passage, he secretly begins to
with, draw the Kings affection from his brother George Duke of Clarence, and to
that purpose susurreth unto him, that some of Clarence followers were sorcerers
and Nigromancers, and that they had given forth speeches, that one one whose
Christen name began with the letter G. should dishinherit his children, and
carry the crown of England, and to put some varnish upon this suggestion, one
of the Duke of Clarence his servants which came with him out of Ireland from
Dublin, where the Duke was borne, is in his Masters absence he being then in
the country, by the procurement under hand of Gloucester, endighted, arraigned,
condemned and executed at Tiborne for conjuration and all within the space of
two days, hereof the Duke of Clarence being thereto irritated by his brother
Gloucester, grievously complains to King Edward, who instead of giving redress
(suspecting now the truth of the Duke of Glocesters buzz) took an occasion
likewise by Glocesters advise (howsoever he made a glozing show to Clarence of
being jealous of his honor and disliking of the kings disrespect as he termd
it, of his brothers abuse,) frame a color to commit Clarence to the Tower,
where his loving Brother Richard (not (as it was feared) without the Kings
privitie) took that order that he should not (for so he faithfully promised
him upon his first commitment) lie long in prison before he would procure his
Clarence drowned.
release. That he was drowned in a but of Malmesey, and then laid in his bed to
persuade the people that he dyed of discontent.

This George Duke of Clarence was Earl of Warwick and Salisbury, Lord of
Richmond, and great Chamberlain of England, he married Isabell daughter and
coheire of Richard Nevill the great Earl of Warwick, by whom he had issue
Edward afterward Earl of Warwick who dyed without issue, and Margaret
married to Sir Richard Pole knight who had issue, Henry Lord Mountain and
Reginald Pole Cardinal. The Pestilence about this time raged with that fury in
most parts of this kingdom, that the sword in fifteen years before devoured
not so many as that did in four months.

The King upon some present occasion sent to the Citizens of London, a privy
seal for the loan of five thousand marks for a year which were An. 1480. R.
22.
presently provided, and at the time prefixed as orderly repayed, which with
the royal entertainment he gave them (upon invitation at Windsor, and the
store of venson sent by him, with them, to make merry with their wives at home,
won the hearts and affections of the Londoners both male and female; That from
thence forth no pleasure was denied that they could procure him. The Scots make
an inrod into Northumberland, against whom the Duke of Gloce. was sent with
some power but they were retreated before his coming.

James King of Scotland shortly afterward sent Ambassadors to treat of a
marriage between his eldest son James Duke of Rothsay, and Cecily the kings
second daughter. This overture for a match was by King Edward and his council
embraced, and diverse great sums of money, as part of her portion were delivered
to the Scots, but with this proviso, that if the marriage did not take effect,
that the provost and Merchants of Edenborough, should be bound to repay the
same. This James K. of Scotland was too much wedded to his own opinion, and
couldnot endure any man's advise, (how good soever it were,) that he fancied
not, he would seldom ask counsel, but never follow any by reason whereof, such
of his counsel, as more respected the honor of the kingdom, and the public
good, then what should be pleasing to his private conceits or peculiar fancy,
did diverse times reap exilement, and ill will, for truth speaking and well
meaning, so that the way to win his favor could not be found out or followed
but by flattery, whereby few or none but thrasonicall parasites, and camelion
timepleasers would follow the court, or continue their places therein: hence
came it that many ignoble affronts were offered to the King of England, and more
disrespects done to his own nobility. Insomuch that his brother, the Duke of
Albany, was enforced to ^and on the Country, and to fly for refuge into
England; where he was by King Edward respectively entertained. From him was the
King of England truly informed of the weak disposition of King James,
wherewith King Edward was so much incensed, that he made speedy preparation of
a competent army, which being sufficiently acco^modated withal necessaries for
the field, under the conduct of Richard Duke of Gloucester, accompanied with the
Duke of Albany, they marched toward Scotland. The Duke in the way took in
Barwick, and besieged the Castle, which was resolutely defended by the Earl
Bothwell. The Duke perceiving no good to be done against the Castle but by
famishing them; having sufficiently taken course to secure the town from
sallies, leaving the Lord Stanley behind to continue the siege, he with the
residue of the army marched toward Edenbrough where within the Castle of
Maidens the King of Scotland had immurde himself.

The nobility of Scotland, observing the miserable spoil that the English army
did; and the impossibility to prevent it by opposition, endeavored by humble
submission, to procure a peace, at least a cessation from wars, which with much
importunity they obtained, at the hands of the general under these conditions.

1 That full satisfaction should be presently given to the English, for all
damages and wrongs done by the late incursions.

2 That the D. of Albany (whose friendship the general labored to be made
firm unto him) should be fully restored to grace, place, and whatsoever had
bin taken or withheld from him, by the king his brother, and an abolition of
all former discontents betwixt them.

3 That the Castle of Barwick should immediately be surrendered into the
generals hands, and from thence no reduction either of that, or the town
attempted.

4 That all such sums of money, as had bin upon the proposition of the marriage
as aforesaid delivered, should be repayed, or that befitting security should be
given by the Provost and Citizens of Edenborough for the orderly repayment
thereof, at the Tower of London, (at some reasonable time, before the day
prefixed) in case K. Edw. should signify unto them that there should not be
any further prosecution of the said proposition of marriage. Al which except
the first article were accordingly performed. A General pardon and loving
letters from the king are sent unto the Duke of Albany, with an authentic
instrument under the common seal of the Provost and Citizens of Edenborough
for the performance of that part that belonged to them, to the D. of Gloc. who
upon the receipt thereof, and the surrender of the Castle of Barwick with all
ordnance and ammunition therein, (of which and of the town, the Lord Stanley
with a competent number of Soldiers to guard the same, being made Captain.)
The general with the rest of the army joyfully returned for England: leaving
nothing undon by the way to endeer himself to the good opinion of the
Captains and the applause of the common Soldiers. The fair proceedings in
the Scottish expeditio^ did not bring so much content to the K. of England, but
the dishonorable and forgetful breach of oath of the French K. did much more
molest and trouble him. For he had received certain intelligence from his
Ambassador leidger that the French K. not only denied the payment of the
annual tribute of 5000. crowns agreed upon and sworn to, upon the ratification
of the late conluded peace, betwixt the kings and kingdoms of England and
France. But had also married the Dolphyn of France to the Lady Margaret
daughter of Maximilian the son of the Emperor. And thereby notoriously infringed
both the Article concluded for a match between him and the Lady Elizabeth K.
Edwards daughter, and thereby broken his faith for the performance thereof so
solemnly plighted, which much incensed the King of England, and so much the
more, by how much the care to provide a fitting match for his daughter, when he
deemed it to be past, was now to begin to be taken: he resolves therefore to
vindicate this unsufferable disgrace offered his daughter by punishment of the
French kings perjury, and herewith acquaints his Council who unanimously
conclude open wars to be proclaimed and provision to be prepared, to prosecute
the same to the uttermost: in this business the Duke of Gloucester was not
slack: but daily (though he knew it needless) did inculcate to the King his
brother how much it did import his honor, to draw his sword and not to sheath
it, until Lewis for expiation of his jniury, had submitted his Crown to the
rightful owner, and given the King of England possession thereof. And did make
proffer both of purse and person, to give him assistance therein to the
uttermost: preparation for the invasion of France, is making in every place, to
which the King is very proclive. But whilst he is intentive in the business,
he is suddenly attached by the hand of death, and without Glouc. hand, though
not without his wish upon the ninth of April 1483. at Westminster departed
this mortal life, and was buried at Windsor.

He was, says Sir Thomas More, of goodly personage and Princely aspect, An.
1483. R. 23.
couragions in heart, politic in counsel, not much amated in adversity and
rather joyful then proud in prosperity. In war fierce and resolute, in the
field active and valiant, never ventrous beyond reason nor forward beyond
discretion, in peace for the most part just and merciful, of comely
countenance, of body strong and straight, but in his latter days, with ease,
and overliberall diet, somewhat enclining to corpulency, but far from
uncomelinesse. In his youthful years he was a little too too much fleshly
given, from which without the more grace of God, youth in health is hardly
restrained; This fault could not greatly grieve the subject, for neither could
one man's pleasure displease all (if it be done without rape or violence)
neither is it permanent, for he that is most salacious in youth if he will not
leave it, in older years it will leave him.

He kept his subjects not in a constrained fear, but in a willing obedience,
laboring by all means to keep them at peace amongst themselves, reconciling
all differences amongst the nobility whereof he had notice, with which he
concluded the last scene of this lives act,

He had issue by Elizabeth his wife.

Edward his eldest son borne the 4. of November 1471. in the Sanctuary at
Westminster.

Richard borne at Shrewsbury murdered with his brother in the Tower.

George borne at Shrewsbury who died young.

Elizabeth borne at Westminster 11. of Febr. 1466. she was promised in
marriage to Charles the Dolphyn of France, but deceived, courted by her
unnatural uncle the usurper but deluded, but afterward happily married to
Henry the vij.

Cicely treated to be espoused to the Prince of Scotland, but used like her
sister, she was afterward first married to John Vicount Wells whom she
supervived, and took for a second husband one Ryme of Lincolnshire, but dyed
without issue.

Anne married to Sir Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk, but dyed without issue
living.

Bridget lived a professed Nun at Darford,

Mary who was co^tracted to the K. of Denmark, but died before consumation

Margaret who dyed in her infancy,

Katherin who was married to William Courtney Earl of Devon, who had issue by
him Henry afterward Marquess of Exceter.

Besides these legitimate, he had two natural children.

Arthur Plantagenet begotten of the body of Elizabeth, Lucy married to
Elizabeth sister and heir of John Vicount Lisley by whom he had issue three
daughters which all had issue.

1 Bridget married to Sir William Cardan Knight.

2 Francis, first married to John Basset, then to Thomas Monck of Devon.

3 Elizabeth married to Sir John Iephson knight.

Elizabeth begotten of the body, of Beatrix the Lady Anguish, was married to
Sir Thomas Lumley, and by him had issue Richard Lord Lulmey and George Lumley.

The King the night before his death, having before observed some discourteous
passages to have gone betwixt the kindred of his Queen and some of the nobles,
but principally between the Queen and the Lord Chamberlain, (for women that
have been widows Commonly malign them most whom their husbands esteem much
of) not out of malice but nature) caused them all to come to his bed side, to
whom he said holding the Queen by the hand.

My Lords dear kinsmen and allies, in what plight I lie, you may discern but
I feel, wherefore the less while I look to live with you, the more deeply I
am moved, to be careful in what case I shall leave you. For I am confident
such as I leave you, my children shall find you. And if as (God forbid) they
should find you at variance, They may unhappely fall at jar themselves, before
they have capability of discreation to set atonement between you.

You see the tenderness of their years, The only security therefore of
their well being must consist in your concord. For it suffices not, if all of
you respectively affect them, if any of you stomach the other, if they were
men your integrity happily might be sufficient. But childhood must be
refulcitated by wise men's authority, And slippery youth underpropped with
elder Counsel, neither of which they can have except you give it, neither can
you give it unless you accord together.

For when each labors to pluck down what another sets up, and for hatred
to each others person, impugneth each others Counsel, it must be long before
any good conclusion go forward; And whilst each labors for superiority
Flattery shall have more place, then plain and faithful advice, from whence
of necessity must ensew the untoward education of the young Prince, whose mind
in tender youth, infected with looseness of disposition, will (naturally
thereto inclined) slip into riot and mischief, and so be the means of his
own and this Kingdoms ruin, except God send the greater blessing, and
through his grace make him apply his heart to wisdom, which if (as God grant
he may) he shall attain unto, then they that by sinister persuasion, and evil
advice flattered him at first most, and pleased him best, shall afterward fall
furthest out of his favor, for politic plots and vicious courses ever at
length shall reap the sour, when good and wholesome Counsel though at first
not embraced, shall prove sweet and wholesome.

I remember it to my grief, that there has been discord among you, a great
time, not always for great causes, but poor mistakings, sometimes a thing
right well intended toward us, our misinterpretation turns to ill; or a
small displeasure done us, is either by our own ill affection or evil tongue
exasperated; Yet this I wot well, you never had so good occasion of emulation
as you have of unfayned affection.

That we be all men, all natives of one nation, nay, all Christians, and
adopted brethren in Christ, I leave for Preachers to tell you; And yet I am
uncertain, whether any Preachers words, ought to have more power to move you
than his; That is your Sovereign Lord, and is by and by togoe to that place,
that they all preach of.

But this I shall instantly desire you to print in your memory, that the one
part of you are my own flesh and blood, the other of my Alliance, and each of
you with other, of consanguinity or affinity; And this spiritual conjunction
by affinity (if the Sacraments of Christ's Church, hold that estimation with
us, which they ought, and I wish with all my soul they did, should no less
move to mutual charity, then the bare respect of fleshly consanguinity. Jesus
forbid that you should live and love together the worse, for the selfsame
cause for which you ought to love the better, and yet that of late (the more
the pity) has too often fallen out amongst us; And seldom is there found more
deadly fewd, then amongst them, which by right and reason ought most
affectionately to live together; But such a bewitching serpent is Ambition, and
appetite of vainglory and Soveraigntie, that amongst states where she once
enters, she slideth onward so swiftly, and makes forward so fast and so
far, that she seldom stops, nor leaves wrigling and wrangling, until by
dissension and division, she have infected all that are near her. And first
those that be poisoned by her, are carried away with a vehement desire to be
next the best, then to walk hand in hand with the best, and lastly to
transcend the best, not brooking any equal, or allowing any superior.

Through this immoderate affecting of titular worship, and borrowed respect of
popularitie, and thereby of debate and separation, what detriment, what
trouble, what sorrow within these few years, has grown in this Realm? I
pray God as well forget, as we have too much cause to our grief to remember:
which events if I could then as well have foreseen, as I have with my more
pain then pleasure now proved; By Gods blessed Lady, I would never have won
the courtesies of men's knees, with the loss of so many their friends heads,
but since what is past cannot be recalled, we ought to be the more
circumspect, that by that occasion we have suffered such infinite mischiefs
before, that we eftsoons fall not into the like again.

Intestine broils are now passed, and the Lord be praised the republike is at
quiet; And this kingdom in outward appearance in a fair likelihood to prosper
in wealth and peace, under my children your Cousins, if God send them life, and
you reciprocal love, of which two things, the less loss would be they, by
whom though God did his pleasure, yet should the kingdom always find Kings,
and peradventure as good Kings.

But if you amongst your selves, in an Infants reign fall at variance: many a
good Christian shall perish, and happily he and you too before this land shall
again find the sweetness of peace. Therefore in these last words that your
dying King shall ever deliver unto you, I earnestly exhort you, and instantly
adjure you, and every one of you, for the love that I have ever borne you, for
the love of your own souls, and for the love that our blessed Savior bears
unto us all: That from this time forward (all discontents drowned, unkindnesses
buried, and grudges forgotten,) each of you embrace one another friendship,
and unfeignedly love each the other, which I am confidently persuaded you will,
if you regard any earthly thing that is good, if you respect God, your King,
your Native country, the quiet of the Kingdom, kindred or affinity, nay,
your own safety and souls health.

And so unable to use any longer speech, he sunk down into his bed, turning
his eyes toward them, and by his countenance expressed, how desirous he was, to
have that which he had imparted unto them imprinted in their memory; and that
he would have added more, if able, to persuade their mutual atonement, and
reciprocabilitie of real abolition of all former disagreement, and unfeyned
entertainment of future loving affection.

The hearers (as the sequel proved) more at that time to give him content,
then perform what he with so great and good affection, had so Christianly
requested) embrace each other, and who so forward to make fair expression of
his good intention as the Duke of Gloucester, and to that end he with low
obeisance first importunes the Queen to blot out of her remembrance, any
discurtesie or neglect he had offered unto her, protesting upon his faith to
God, and honor to his house, to be for ever her observant, and affectionate
servant: and then turning about to those that were present, he said, My Lords,
I desire to be entertained in your good affections, and I here freely forgive
whatsoever unkindnesse, discourtesie, or abuse I have received from any of you,
and desire the like from you to me; and so courteously shaking them all by the
hands, made show of reconcilement, when all was counterfeit.

THE LIFE AND REIGN OF KING EDWARD THE FIFTH.
THE young Prince was at Ludlowe when his Father An. 1483.
died, being not long before sent thither, with his Presence, to curb the
exorbitant licentiousness of some of the unruly Welsh, who taking advantage of
the great distance, that was betwixt their Country and the Courts of Justice,
which were then settled at Westminster, would diverse times in assurance of
impunitie attempt many disorderly pranckes.

For his better proceeding in mannaging of his place, the King had appointed
Anthony Earl Rivers the Queens Brother, and so by the Mothers side Uncle to
the Prince, to be his Director and chief Councellor, with whom likewise were
many of the Queens Kindred and Allies, in chief esteem and office, whereat
the Duke of Gloucester took exception; And well knowing, that if these were not
by some means or other removed, and their present power abated, it was in
vain for him to set on foot, his new hatched stratagemicall project, to
disinherit the new King, and to take hold of the Crown in his own right, he
did therefore cast about, to procure their amotion, the one from his place, the
other from their Offices and attendance. And to that purpose (presuming on
their inclination that way,) he consulted first with the Duke of Buckingham;
and afterward with the Lord Hastings, making use of their distaste, against
the power of the Queens Brother, the Kings half Brother, and his own
inveterate malice against them all. To these in private conference he first
insinuates the Queens low descent, and her kinreds unworthy promotions, and
afterward openly assures them, that if these Vpstarts and mushrump nobles,
were but permitted to be about the Kings Person in his youth, they would
afterward by that means so purchase his favor, that they would become so
powerful, when he should attain to maturitie of years, that all the
Honors, Possessions, and lines of the ancient Nobility of this Realm would
be in danger, to be subject to their wills; And for prevention thereof, he
did persuade them to join with him for their amotion, assuring them, that that
effected, they might ratably proportion to themselves, and share all the
dignities and places, and what benefit there might accrue thereby, amongst
themselves and their friends.

These insinuations of Gloucester, joined to their own ambitious and malevolent
dispositions, so powerfully wrought upon their yielding natures, that they not
only condescended to this proposition, for the amovall of the Queens kindred,
but to whatsoever the Duke of Gloucester should afterward promove unto them.

But it is to be observed, that over and above the great wheel, which moved
in their fancies, of envy to the eminency of the Queens kindred; there were
two other lesser rounds, which not a little furthered this rotunditie for
association. The one Buckinghams covetous desire to increase his revenewes, by
the addition of the Earldom of Hertford for his part, the other in the late
Chamberlain, to have so good means, whereby to stave off such whom in King
Edwards days he had justly offended, in transcending his authority in doing
many actions, whereof he was reous of too too many, presuming now by this way
to be supported, and though to the offense of many he had made his office the
stauking-horse of his will, yet none should dare say black to his eye.

Whilst these things are projecting, the Queen appoints Earl Rivers her
Brother, and her Son Richard Lord Gray, and the rest of her Allies and
friends, to provide with a strong power of able soldiers, to guard the young
King from Ludlowe to London.

The Duke of Gloucester being herewith acquainted, might well think, that if
this plot were not effected before that time, his policy hardly afterward
would in that point prevail; He therefore cunningly writes to the Queen,
whom ever since her husbands death, he had with a great show of respect, by
visitation and intercourse of message brought to a fools belief, to take
seeming for being, and shadows for realityes; And by his Letters intimates to
her, that it was rumored abroad, that her Brother and Son, against her will,
and without the knowledge of the late Kings kindred, was providing with a mighty
power of armed soldiers, to conduct his Majesty in hostile manner from Wales
to London, which if it should be so done, would breed a great jelousie in the
minds of the common people, who are apt enough to make an ill construction of
the best action whereof they are ignorant; That there were ill members whom the
King had cause to suspect, and therefore enforcedly came thus armed.

And where as now there was no appearance or likelihood, but of true love and
affection, betwixt his kindred and her Allies, if any armed troops should be
now raised, and no cause known to what end, the so late unfeyned
reconcilement, so happily by his late Brother procured, would be in question
to be dissolved, yea any the least mistake, mislike, or distaste, that might
be taken, arise, or given, amongst the meanest of the common soldiers, might
minister occasion to disquiet the peace of the kingdom, and set him and her
Brother, and partakers on both sides together by the ears, and the mischief
that thereby should ensue, (as it is to be feared a great deal would) was like
enough to fall on that part, to which she wished least hurt, and all the blame
would redound to her and her kindred, which now she might easily, so please
her, prevent, if she would but address her Letters to her Brother and Son, to
assure them from his mouth, and upon his honor, that himself and all the late
Kings kindred, were constantly resolved, inviolably to observe the amicable
atonement, made by his Sovereign and her Husband upon his deathbed, between
her Allies and friends, and the Kings kindred.

The too credulous Lady, gave plenary consent to what the Duke of Gloucester
requested, and to that end dispatched messengers to her Brother and Son, who
somewhat unwillingly, but upon her request, were persuaded to forbear levying
any more men, and cashired those they had provided, and attended only with
their own meniall servants, they set forwards toward the Queen; with the
young King. And with more have then good speed, came to North-Hampton, and from
thence the King went to Stony-Stratford, where the two Dukes with a great
train well provided, and mounted, arrived; And pretending the Town to be too
little for the entertainment of their Companies, they went to Northampton, and
alighted at the same Inn, where the Earl Rivers had taken up his lodging that
night, resolving to overtake the King the next morning.

Upon this their accidental meeting, much Court complement, and enterchange of
fair language, and show of courtesy passed, and not the least color for
distaste or dislike, taken or given on either side, neither by themselves or
followers: But no sooner was supper ended, but the Dukes pretending weariness
through hard riding, retire to their lodgings, and the Earl goes to his.

But the Dukes with their private friends, when the Earl went to bed, went to
Council what course to take, with the least suspicion and the most safety, to
make away the Earl and his kindred.

In this consultation they continue the most part of the night; And toward
morning, they took the keys of the Inn gates, and dispersed their followers
to keep the passages, with instruction not to permit horseman or footman to
pass the way toward Stony-Stratford, pretending that none should go before,
because the two Dukes might express their dutiful respect to the King the
better, by being first ready to give their attendance at his going to horse.

The Earl having notice by the Host of these proceedings, imagining his
destruction was plotted, yet being debard of any means, either to make
resistance, or escape, he set a good countenance upon the matter, and came
boldly to the Duke of Gloucester his Chamber, where he found Buckingham and the
rest, with whom he expostulates the reason of this course taken, to imprison
him and his in their Inn against their wills; But they in stead of shaping him
an answer, made their will the law, and without more speaking, commanded the
Earl to be laid hands on, objecting those crimes to him whereof themselves
only were faulty; And having taken order for his safe imprisonment, they
speedily took horse and came to Stony-Stratford, at such time as the King was
taking horse, whom in all fair and reverent manner they saluted; But a staff
was quickly found that a dog may be smitten, and an offense is taken before
given, a quarrel is picked against the Lord Richard Gray the Kings half
brother in his own presence; The Duke of Buckingham making relation to the
King, That he and the Marquess his Brother, with Earl Rivers the Queens
Brother, had endeavored, and almost effected, to draw unto themselves, the
sole managing of the affairs of the kingdom, and to sow dissension betwixt
the Blood-royall of your Fathers side, and those scarce loyal on the
Queenesside, who greedily seek after the others ruin, and the better to
effect it; The Lord Marquess without any warrant, but of his own head, out of
the Tower of London (your principal Magazine) has taken, both the Treasure
and Armor to a great quantity; But what his purpose was to do therewith,
though they were ignorant, yet there was just cause to suspect it was to no
good end; And therefore it was thought expedient by the advice of the
Nobility, to attach him at Northampton to have him forth-comming, to make
answer for these, and other his overbold actions done against common honesty.

The King for want of experience, unable to sound the depth of these plots,
mildly said to him, What my Brother Marquess has done I cannot say, but for
my Uncle and Brother here I dare answer, they are innocent of any unlawful
practices, either against me or you.

Oh, quoth the Duke of Buckingham, that has been their cunning to abuse your
Majesty's gentleness, with keeping their treachery from your knowledge: And
thereupon instantly in the Kings presence, they arrested the Lord Richard, Sir
Thomas Vaughan, Sir Richard Hall, and coveyed them to Northampton, and from the
Kings Person, to his no little amazement and disquiet, they removed all or the
most part of his ancient officers and servants, placing in their rooms, their
own creatures, whom they had power to command.

The Duke of Gloucester taking upon him the custody of the King, took order for
the conveying of the Prisoners to several Prisons in the North parts, and then
set forwards with the King toward London, giving out by the way, that the
Marquess and the Queens kindred, had plotted the destruction of the King, and
all the blood-royall, and all the ancient Nobility of the Realm, and to alter
the government of the Commonwealth; And that they were only imprisoned to be
brought to their trial according to the Law.

And the better to settle these suggestions in the apprehension of the vulgar;
They brought along with them diverse Carts laden with Armor (of their own
providing) with driefats and great Chests, wherein they reported to be
treasure for the payment of soldiers, with which they so possessed the common
people, that all was believed for Gospel that was thus rumoured; But of all
other the neatest devise, was to have five of the Duke of Glocesters
instruments which were manacled and pinioned like Traitors, and these in every
place where the King lodged by the way were dispersed, with some keepers to be
lodged in the chief Officers houses, and to be regarded as men of great
birth, howsoever they were now prisoners, and they must seem to be penitent
for their offenses, and confess their own guilt, but laying the blame on the
Queens Brother, who had drawn them into this vile plot of Treason, but these
did so artificially express themselves, that they could at their pleasures
invite their hosts to call them Traitors, and cry out, that the earth was not
fit to bear such treacherous rebels: and that the Dukes were to blame, not to
stay the King in that place, until execution were done against such horrible
malefactors, and their traiterous companions. This plot continued acting till
the King came to London, and the disguise was taken from these impostors, and
they were put to act another part.

The Queen with her second Son, and five Daughters being at London,
receiving by Post intelligence of these doleful accidents, and fearing there
were worse to follow, presently takes Sanctuary at Westminster, with which
place good Lady, she had formerly been acquainted.

The young King much grieved at the news, and more at the occasion, with
tears and sighs expressed his discontent; But the Dukes as seeming ignorant
of any of these things, comply themselves unto his service, and with all
external show of reverence and respect, and with many glozing protestations of
their fidelity, and care of his safety and content, sought to comfort him,
but it would not be.

The Duke of Gloucester by the contrivement, and procurement of the Duke of
Buckingham, by the Decree of the Council table is appointed; and established
Protector of the King and kingdom, which place added such fuel to the
ambitious fire of his heart, that it burnt all love, natural respect or duty,
either to Country, kindred, or King; And now nothing sets his imagination on
work, but to compass the means how to bring his traiterous designs to
effect; which was to make away the King and his Brother, which he is resolved
wickedly yet wittily to attempt.

To contrive the getting into his custody the Duke of York is the next Scene
to be acted, for the more easy accomplishment whereof, he takes advantage of
the Kings melancholy, and acquainteth both him and his Council; That the
company of his Brother would much conduce to his being thereby made merry,
saying withal, that the Queen Mother was more wedded to her peevish will then
was convenient, either for the Honor of the kingdom, or the Kings content;
And therefore wishtsome course might be taken, either by persuasion, or
otherwise to procure her, to send the Duke of York; to bear the King his
brother company.

The counsel to whom Gloucester seemed to speak nothing but Oracles, (so well
had he molded them) presently apprehend a necessity of a Companion to be
found for the King, and none so fit as his own Brother; And to that end the
Archbishop of Canterbury, (one upon whose advise the Queene-Mother did much
rely) is employed with instructions, to procure her to consent to part with her
younger Son, to accompany the elder, which he accordingly did, yielding
these reasons, the sooner to draw her to yield, (as he said) to reason.

First, for that it was scandalous to the whole Realm, that a Child of so
noble Parentage by birth, so tender of years, so near the King, and so
innocent, should be enforced to be a Prisoner.

Secondly, That none could be permitted to enjoy the benefit of Sanctuary
privilege, but such whose consciences did accuse them of some offense, for
which they feared to be punished by the law; But the Dukes infancy, and
innocence was such, that he needed no such protection.

Thirdly, that none ought to be privileged as a Sanctuary person, but whom
discretion had enabled to require it; and for that reason he was not capable
of it.

And lastly, any person might be taken out of that place, if so it be for his
own preferment and benefit, and not to his punishment or prejudice, and
therefore if the Queen should refuse to deliver him, he must be taken from
her Volens nolens, and the rather, lest that through a froward jelousie, she
should convey him beyond the Seas, as pretending he should be more safe in any
place, then in the King his Brothers company.

To these the Queen makes answer, that none was more fit to have the tutelage
of the child then the Mother, and the rather, in respect of his weak and
tender disposition.

That each of those Brothers was the others safety, so long as they are kept
asunder, that the life of the one was maintained in the body of the other; and
if that one of them did well, the other was in no peril; And that it was
dangerous to keep them both in one place. And as she was proceeding further,
the Archbishop said he was loath to put the power of his primacy in execution,
but her obstinacy would to his grief enforce him thereto; Whereupon the Queen
perceiving that it was concluded, that reason must not dispute against the
Counsels resoltrion, she with such expression of passion, as tenderhearted
Mothers use to part with a beloved child, when their Propheticke thoughts
suggest unto them, they take their last leave of the Babe, she takes the Duke
by the hand, and delivers him unto the Archbishop, saying, at his hands she
would require that sweet boy, and unable to speak more, she opened the
sludgates of her eyes, and bedewing her cheeks with tears turned her back.

The Archbishop having effected his arrand, hastes to the Lords, who in the
Star Chamber with the Protector stay expecting their coming; to whom making
relation with what unwillingnesse the Mother was persuaded, to yield consent to
part with her child, he presented the innocent Babe unto them, of whom the
Protector had no sooner taken a glimpse, when with all ceremonious reverence
he arises, and embraces him in this arms, vowing with affectionate
protestations, that nothing (next the welfare of his Sovereign, which he
esteemed above all earthly things) brought him more content then his Nephew of
York wished for Presence: and then Judas-like kissing his cheek, he takes
leave of the board, and presently conducteth him to the King his Brother, who
with joyful heart and great affection entertained him, which was by so much
the more to be esteemed, by how much it was unfayned.

The Protector now having the game he hunted in his own toils, under pretext
of provident care that they might securely repose themselves until the
distempers of the Commonwealth, (whereof himself only (...) actor and author)
might be quieted; he causes them within few days, in great pomp and state,
to be conveyed through London to the Tower, there at pleasure to remain until
the time of the Coronation, toward which there was great show of preparation
made.

The Protectors machinations could not well work by themselves, they must have
assistance, he wanted Achitophel; The Duke of Buckingham whose authority and
power did bear a great sway amongst the Courtiers, must cunningly be drawn to
his bent; To which purpose he proposed to him, that whereas he had been
formerly an earnest Petitioner to King Edward the fourth his brother-in-law,
for the Earldome of Hertford, whereunto it did appear the Duke to have a good
Title, yet he could never attain it, yet now if he would be constant, and
join hand in hand with him, he would put him in a way, whereby to be assured
to obtain it; And so upon faithful promise, to procure Buckingham to be
estated in that Earldom, and of a match to be concluded betwixt their issue,
and an equal partition of the treasure of the Crown betwixt them two (for
performance whereof the Protectors oaths are not wanting) Buckingham is not
only drawn to condescend; but is most forward to contrive, and plot
stratagems, and the best courses to compass the worst of ill effects, which
was by depriving their innocent Nephews (for Gloucester was Uncle by the Fathers
side, and Buckingham by the marriage of their Fathers Sister) of their right
and livelihood, and some others of their lives, to make the Protector a more
facile passage to lay hold on the Crown.

The Protector having purchased so true a partner of his ambitious designs,
well knowing it was no good policy to play the villain by halfedeale, is
resolved to suffer never a rub to lie in the way, that might hinder the true
running of his bowl; And having a far off sounded the Lord Hastings, and
finding him so constant to the King his old Masters Sons, that nothing could
withdraw him from doing them true service, he himself must be removed out of
the way, the effecting whereof was none of the least strains of policy, for
he must not yet be meddled with, until by his nail, the nails of his
Antagonists the Queens Brother, and Sons by Sir John Gray, her former
husband be driven out: the compassing whereof was merely Hastings his share.
But no sooner was the engine up by his device that should make them headless,
but by Buckinghams device, Hastings himself is brought to his block.

All the Lords of the Privy Council are in the Protectors name generally
convoked to the Tower, where at the Council table, fitting preparations for
the speedy Coronation of the young King are proposed, and other like business
wherewith to amuse the Lords, and entertain time, until the Protector came
in, who excusing himself for having overslept himself that morning, taking
his Chair, very affably saluted them, merrily jesting with some, and more then
ordinarily pleasant with them all; But on a sudden he framed an excuse for his
present absence, leaving them in the meane-time somewhat to confer upon
until his return, which he promised should be very speedily, he so went out
of the Chamber.

Within the space of an hour he returned, but the wind was turned, his
affable countenance and familiar language, are changed into distracted looks,
and much show of inward perturbation, which with sighing and other passionate
gestures he expressed to the uttermost.

After long silence (the better to prepare them to the more attention,) he
confusedly interrogates: what they deserved, that had nefariously practiced his
destruction, being of the blood royal, Uncle to the King, and Protector of his
person?

This unexpected interrogation in that strange manner urged, struck such an
amazement amongst the Lords, that they all stood gazing one on another, as if
the Protectors speeches had had the virtue of Medusaes head. At length the Lord
Hastings, by Buckinghams instigation, and presuming of his (as he thought) more
then ordinary intimacie with the Protector, and the innocence of his own
conscience, boldly answered, That they deserved to undergo the punishment of
Traitors, whatsoever they were, which the rest by their silence approved: with
that the Protector rises up from his seat, with a stern look upon Hastings,
replied; why, it is the old sorceresse my brothers Widow, and her partner that
common strumpet Jane Shore, that have by incantation conspired to bereave me
of my life; And had I not by Gods great mercy happily come to the discovery of
their practices, and found out the plot, they had effected their villainy
before suspected: Yet have I not altogether escaped free from their malice, for
behold (and then he bared his left arm to the elbow and showed it) how
mischievously they have caused this dear lim of mine to wither and grow
uslesse, and thus should all my body have bin served, if they might have had
their will, and a little longer space.

Those to whom the Queens religious courses, and Christian condition were not
unknown, and were not altogether ignorant, to what hard shifts the Protector
was driven, that could provide no other color for his accusation, but the
showing of his late discolored arm, the defect whereof all knew that knew
him, had bin as it was ever since his birth, and the coupling of his Queen
sister, and his Brothers Concubine, in one and the same plot of conspiracy
against him, between whom there was such an antipathy of disposition, was the
occasion that the Lords at his first speech, so now sat gazing one upon the
other, until the Lord Hastings (though not well pleased, that he was not
as well made privy to this intended stratagem, as with that day es conclusion,
to have the Queens Brother, Son and Allies to be executed at Pomfret,)
willing, out of malignitie to her to help forward the accusation against the
Queen, but with some pretext to extenuate the aspersion cast upon his Paramore
Mistress Shore (whom ever since the death of the King, he had entertained for
his bedfellow, and had but that morning parted from her) with a sober look
submisly said, If the Queen have conspired, (which word was no sooner out of
the Chamberlaines mouth, when the Protector in great show of choler, clapping
his fist upon the board frowning, looking upon him said, tellest thou me of if
and and? I tell thee they, and none but they have done it, and thou thy self
art not only acquainted with, but partaker of the villainy, and that I will make
good upon thy body.

And there with upon a watchword given, those prepared before for that
purpose, in the outer chamber cried, Treason, treason, wherewith a great number
of men in arms came rushing in, as it were the guard to the Protector, one of
which with a Pollax struck a maine blow at the Lord Strange, and wounded him
on the head, and had slain him outright, had be not to avoid the stroke slipped
backward, and fallen down upon the ground; Forthwith the Protector arrested the
Lord Hastings of high Treason, and wished him to make have to be Confessed, for
he swear by Saint Paul (his usual oath,) That he would not touch bread or
drink, until he had his head from his shoulders. Hastings calling to mind
his last nights dreams, his solicitations that morning by his sweet Mistress,
from either trusting the Bore, or that day to be at the Council board, the
speeches that had past betwixt the Lord Stanley and him in riding together, and
the ominous predictions of ill speed, by the often stumbling of his horse, and
such old peoples observations, he was easily persuaded to give credit to what
the Protector had sworn, yet being about to say somewhat, he was presently
hurried away, and lest he should have been too long at shrift, or therein
might discover what he knew, which though it were not much, yet it was more
then the Protector would have willingly known, lest the world might be
acquainted with his villainy, he was upon the next Timber-log they were at,
(though laid there for a better use) beheaded on the green near the Chapel
of the Tower; So absolute was the Protectors progress in policy, that incited
Hastings on to plot the death of Earl Rivers, the Lord Gray, and the rest of
the Queens kindred at Pomfret on the same day, whereon Buckingham by the like
train, had plotted to make him headless; And that there might seem some
ground for what was done, The Lords grace of Canterbury, the Bishop of Ely, the
Lord Stanley, and diverse others were presently clapped Prisoners, in sundry holds
of the Tower; And for a further colorable gloss of this so plain a text.
Diverse Citizens of London, prepared before, to give credit to whatsoever rumor
should be set abroach, are sent for with all speed to come with what forces
and power they could draw together, to the Tower to the Protector, who is
pretended (and so it was generally bruited abroad as soon as ever the Lords
were entered within the Tower gates) to be in great jeopardie, occasioned by a
plot of treason contrived against him, by the late Lord Chamberlain, and
others his accomplices; And to countenance the rumor somewhat the more, at the
approach of such friends whom the Protector had sent for, and who to purchase
his custom; or procure his countenance, would go beyond the loss of a limme)
he together with the Duke of Buckingham covered in rustie and unfashionable
armor present themselves to their view, pretending the have and the
appropinquitie of the peril would not permit them to stay for provision of
better And then with a counterfeit show of great perturbation, the Protector
told them, How the Lord Hastings by the contrivance and instigation of his late
Brothers Wife, and Concubine Jane Shore, had well-nie entrapped my good cousin
(pointing to Buckingham) and my self, for suddenly they resolved to have
destroyed us, as we sat at Council table this morning, and notwithstanding
the happy discovery thereof, yet the uncertainty of the number or quality of
the confederates enforced us to prevent the mischief, and preserve the King
(who what the Traitors intended against him was uncertain) in safety, to
run an unusual, but no unlawful course, against the said Lord Hastings,
considering the necessity of the time, and their so eminent danger. And
without orderly Trial, which as now was needless, in regard he was taken in
the manner, and presumed to have been reskued if execution had been deferred,
instantly to have him beheaded. Then the Protector heartily thanked the
Londoners great love and pains, whereby they did express their readiness, to
bring him succor so opportunely, desiring them to acquaint their neighbors
with what had passed, and so dismissed them, but with them sent an Harrold at
arms with a Proclamation, which for the length, and fair writing in a set
hand in Parchment, to all of judgment did appear, to be prepared long before
the intimated offenses against the Lord Hastings, therein so fully expressed,
were either known or suspected. This Proclamation in the Kings name was
publicly made, the Mayor and the Sheriffs present in all places usual,
wherewith howsoever the vulgar seemed satisfied, which seldom understand the
truth of State matters, and are carried away more with opinion then judgment,
yet those of more understanding did not forbear publicly to say, that the
Proclamation was dictated by divination, and engrossed by sorcery.

Presently upon this, Jane Shores lodgings are searched narrowly, and ransacked
thoroughly, and to the value of three thousand Marks, in Jewels, Plate, Money,
and household stuff, and all that ever she had, seized to the Kings use, and
put under safe custody: she her self is committed to straight Prison; The
crime laid to her charge was witchcraft pretended to be wrought against the
Protectors person* which when neither by subordination, suggestion, testimony,
color or inference could be made good against her: yet that somewhat might
be done that might be a means to make her obnoxious to the tongues of the
multitude; The stain of incontinence is laid to her charge, and for that only,
by the Bishop of Londons Official, she is adjudged to open penance, which
she underwent with that deportment and well-becomming countenance, that it
struck malice blind, and drew pity from all the beholders, so that they that
hated her course of former life, and were well pleased to see vice ^o
corrected, took commiseration of her punishment, when they had considered,
that it was procured by the Protector, more upon old malice then new matter,
rather to work his private revenge then her reformation; But this thus done
was left to be the subject of the peoples discourse, as but the bye* The maine
was of more consequence, which must carefully be expedited During these
transactions, all the Nobility that were at liberty, were suspicious one of
another, and few or none could imagine any (...) grounds for suspect, being
altogether ignorant of what the Protector aimed at. In the mean time he with
glozing terms sprinkled Court holy water amongst all, and secret promises of
preferment to those, whose power, and will to withstand him, he doubted, when
he should discover his yet clowded project, by this means he kept them
altogether at the Court, not giving way to any one to depart into the Country

Now he begins to fit the ladder which ere long he will rere up, and in the
(...) so works with Sir Edmond Shawe Mayor of London, and his brother John
Shaw and Friar Pincket Provincial of the Augustine Friars near Algate, both
Doctors of Divinity, and greater then good, Churchmen of greater learning
then honesty, and yet of more repute then learning, being such that more
regarded by the ignorant to be accounted learned, then by the learned to be
judged ignorant; These three were thus severally to be employed, Edmond Shaw
must make some means to draw a party amongst the Aldermen, and most
substantial Citizens to give credit, at least countenance, to whatby these two
Doctors, should be delivered in the Pulpit, and underhand by one and one, to
set forth the incapabilitie, of the Children of King Edward to sway the
Scepter, upon the grounds following;

The Preachers in their several places, the one at Pauli Cross, the other at
Saint Maryes spittle; to exhort the hearts of the people to refuse the last
Kings Son, and accept of the now Protector to be their King: For the better
advancement thereinto, the Protector was not ashamed to appoint at least to
give way, that bastardy should be alleged either in King Edward or his
children or both; Thereby to disable King Edward by right to inherit the
Crown, as heir to the Duke of York his purative Father, and so by like
inference the Prince to him.

To obtrude Bastardy to King Edward, must draw his Mothers fame in question,
she being Mother to them both, and yet living. But rather then he would be
destitute of pretext to fit his purpose, he was not discontented to proclaim
his Mother a strumpet, and his own Father a Cor^te. But that point was by
Buckingham thought, and so advised to be but sparingly urged. And as it were
but by the bye, but to give a touch that neither King Edward nor the Duke of
Clarence, were the lawfully begot children of Richard Duke of York; But mainly
to insist and again and again to press, That the Lady Elizabeth Lucy was
precontracted to King Edward, and was by the law of God and man his lawful
wife, and from those premises to draw this conclusion. That the Prince and all
the children King Edward had by his Queen, the late Lady Gray were all
natural children and illegitimate.

A divellish plot, the prosecution whereof was most unfit for a Divine to have
his finger in, much more to thrust in his whole arm, yet Doctor Shaw by the
instigation of the Devil, and his own ambitious designs; not only forbear to
dissuade the Protector from further prosecution of this so foul and unheard of
a p^ojuction to make the Pulpit worse then a Pasquill, and the sole (...) to
convey abroad the polluted stream of falsehood and lies: But with Judas was
well pleased with the employment, and s^ce the one against nature, would
traduce his own Mothers honesty, the other against the tenet of Religion would
deliver apocrypha doctrine, for Canonical Scripture, by his Auditory, and for
the sooner effecting thereof like a downright instrument for the Devil, upon
the first Sunday in (...), Anno Dom. (...) at Paul's Cross, he being appointed
to preach there, made choice of his text, out of the fourth chapter of the
book of Wisdom.

^st ^d pl^nts shall ta^ do^ (...).
In handling w^eof, (...) much against children begotten in ad^y, which (...)
affirmed all such to be (...) (...) (...) begotten after marriage (...) party
was (...) (...) (...) and (...) mainly to app^ by argument and example, the
truth of his doctrine. And with as much illustration, as Arts could use or
nature help forward; extold the many heroicke virtues of Richard late Duke of
York: the sole legitimat son of whom and lively pattern of whose
disposition he pronounced the Duke of Gloucester now protector to be the true
and lively Image, yet though the protector accompanied with the Duke of
Buckingham and an extraordinary train, came to the Sermon place, whilst his
Commendations were by the preacher set out beyond the allowance oftruth,
whereof he had made ample declaration before, and now again after the two
Dukes were seated did inculcate the same passage of the protectors praysworthy
graces, and many merits, yet neither the declaration or repetition could
prevail so far as to win belief in the auditory, of what was urged, or
delivered: which though it no way discouraged the protector, yet it so dejected
the doctor, that the Sermon ended he as ashamed of his lesson disconsolately
departed, and never after that, was publicly seen. But left the second part
to be acted, by Friar Pincket upon Easter monday following: and the Duke of
Buckingham in the mean time to take their cures and to proceed in the pageant.
And accordingly with in two days after, Buckingham having procured the Mayor
Sir Edmond Shaw to assemble the Record, er Aldermen, Shriffes and many of the
substantialest Citizens in every ward at the Guild Hall in London, as it were
to give approbation of what the Doctor at Paul's Cross had the Sunday before
(so unlike himself forgetfully suggested) to the same purpose, and upon the
said theme, made a rethoricall (though not religious) exhortation, concluding
with this portion of Scripture, Woe to that Realm that has a child to their
King. But the people, contrary to his expectation, and the Mayor prepared (as
was promised) voices, all were silent, whereupon the Duke, enquired in private
of the Maire the reason of this their dull silence. And was answered, that the
assembly, did not well hear nor understand what he had said whereupon the Duke
strayning his voice began again, and both with gesture of body, and formally
composed countenance, repeated to the same purpose other words whereby he
gained the Commendations, That no man could deliver so much bad matter, in so
good words and quaint phrases.

But whether out of tenderness of Conscience, or straining courtesy who
should first begin, or which is likely the heavenly providence had so decreed
it, not the least show amongst the assembly of giving allowance of what was
spoken, by word of mouth or other gesture was discovered; whereupon the Mayor
said to Buckingham, That he was partly persuaded, that the Commons not used to
receive, any such charge, or proposition, but from the mouth of their Recorder,
attended when he would speak, wherefore John Fitz. William the then Recorder
was presently Commanded to desire the votes of the commons to the matter thus
twice by the Duke of Buckingham proposed. But he being as well furnished with
gifts of the mind as of the body a man both learned and honest, with a grave
and sober countenance* made a reiteration of the Dukes duplicate oration adding
no more but this* Thus his grace said, and God give your grace to consider of
it carefully. But the assembly collecting by the Recorders countenance, and
manner of delivery, That he did not well relish the exposition himself, still
continued silent. Then the Duke again whispered in the Majors ears that they
stood obstinatly mute, and addressing himself again to the assembly* he
said, Good friends we are come into you to make a motion, not upon any
necessity that you must give your either assent or consent, to the point in
question. For what we have proposed, will ye nill ye, might and may be done,
but the only inducement thereof, was our respectfull love and loving respect
toward you: for as much as we would have nothing done of this nature, But that
we would first acquaint you with it. And sithence you are to share with us in
the blessing of such a business, which though you see not or regard not, as it
seems, yet is it most conducible to your peace and the general quiet.

We therefore once again require but your answer yea or no, whether you be
resolved, as all the Nobles now at Court are, to accept of the noble Protector
Duke Richard the only legitimate Son, of that ever to be honorably remembered
by you and us, Richard Duke of York for your Sovereign or not.

Whereupon those that stood next unto the bar made an indistinct murmuring,
whilst at their back the skum or dreggs of the City drawn thither by the
Dukes followers with themselves, cast up their Caps and with an obstreperous
vociferation cried a Richard a Richard. And whilst the more sober minded and
sufficient Citizens that were before turned back their heads to observe the
condition and quality, of those that made the acclamation, themselves nor
consenting nor speaking to the point in question. The Duke of Buckingham said,
it was a well becoming expression of their affection, to have all with one
consent to embrace the undubitate heir the Royal Protector Duke Richard for
their Sovereign Lord and King. And that he would thoroughly acquaint him, with
their willing for wardnesse to approve him. And then entreating the Mayor and
his brethren, to be ready the next morning at Baynards Castle where the Duke
Protector then resided, to join with him to petition the elected Richard to
accept of this their so freely proffered subjection, he orderly took his
leave and departed: and so for that time the company was dissolved.

In the morning at the place appointed, The Mayor with all such whose presence
he could persuade or procure, in their Citizens formal habit and the Duke of
Buckingham with all, his favorites and friends, and all the Court Butterflies
of that age reassemble.

Buckingham, together with information of what was past sends notice before
unto the Protector (sufficiently instructed cleanly to dissemble his notice of
any the prepassages) That the Mayor of London with all the most of the
nobility of England, were ready (so please his grace) to vouchsafe them the
hearing, to present a supplication unto him concerning a business of great
consequence, to whom the Protector returns answer. That howsoever he durst not
give way to the least suspicion, of what his Cousin of Buckingham should
promove, yet he heartily desired him, to be pleased by that Gentleman he sent
to return some ^lightintimation of their intended request* before his coming
unto them should be expected. For that the times were dangerous, and the
unexpected approach of such a confluence of noble and worthy persons, might
give occasion of some doubt to his friends, though not to himself of the
motive of such an assembly, wherewith Buckingham though privately otherwise
persuaded, publicly made a plausible demonstration of the Protectors
integrity from affecting any such title, and thereupon returned this reply.

That the message they were to deliver must be to himself in person. And
therefore in the name of all the rest, he humbly be sought his grace, to
vouchsafe them the liberty of admission into his presence. For otherwise they
must return, much discontented to have lost their labors, and the
opportunity to have imparted unto him a business of that importance, wherein
himself partly and the republicke in general had an interest.

At length as if not well assured of their welmeaning toward him, the
Protector appears unto them, in an upper gallery, making semblance, as though
he would prevent danger by standing in his fort. To whom Buckingham, in behalf
of the Mayor and the nobility, and others there assembled, makes his humble
request; in most respective and reverent manner, that his grace should pardon,
what he should declare unto him, and not to be offended with what they with all
hearty and unfeined affection desired should by his Highness be approved of
and embraced.

Many false fires, are flasht out, before the Duke of Buckingham would be
brought to discover, to the Protector in plain terms their cause of coming
but though long first, at last he said.

The languishing estate of the Commonwealth did require speedy help, which
cold no way be procured, except he to whom the government thereof did only
rightfully appertain, would undertake at the respective solicitation, and
humble entreaty, both of the nobility, and Gentry, there present to accept of
the sole managing as King of the affairs of the kingdom, and accept of their
voluntary tender of their due allegiance, where at the Protector starting
back, as if he had seen or heard something most displeasing unto him,
passionatly said, I little thought, good cousin, that you of all men would have
made to me a motion to embrace that which of all things in the world I have
thought most agreeable to honesty to decline, far be it from my imagination, to
affect, or accept that which without apparent wrong to my dear deceased
brothers sweet children, and my own upright conscience, I cannot well approve
of: and then being about to proceed further in his premediated trackt of
dissimulation. The Duke of Buckingham in a seeming abrupt passion kneeling upon
his knee said, your grace was pleased to give a free pardon of what I should in
the name of all this so worthy an assembly relate unto you, in assurance
whereof I have adventured to express the hearty respect we bear unto you, as
is demonstrated by this (I now fear overforward) tender of dutiful obedience
unto you, but herewith I must add further that it is unanimously resolved on,
That the children of your late brother E. the fourth, as being generally known
and proved to be illegitimate, shall never be admitted the possession of the
Crown of England. And therefore if neither respect of your own well deserving
advancement, or regard of the good of the commonwealth will move you to accord
to this our no unreasonable request (we having gone now so far with safety
we cannot retract) we are resolute, to confer the dignity upon some other of
the line of Lancaster that shall be more sensible of his own glory, and our
good, be not therefore so much your own enemy, and our adversary, but at our so
humble entreaty accept of this so presently proffered preferme^t. But if (as we
shall be most unhappy and disconsolate to hear it) your grace will refuse us,
we must then seek, and hope not to fail to find, one that shall and not
unworthily, (with half these entreaties) undertake to undergo the danger or
hazard, which you may be pleased sinilterly to suppose is in the acceptance.
These words in the apprehension of the auditory from Buckingham were so
emphaticall and patheticall, that they wrought so feelingly upon his passions,
That the Protector could not but be contented to expatiate his desire, yet with
some change of countenance, and not without seeming reluctation, he did say
Since it is manifestly demonstrated unto men, that the whole realm is so
resolved, That they will by no means admit my (to me in my particular conceit
most dearly respected Nephews, my entirely beloved, new deceased brothers
children, and your late Kings sons, being now infants,) to reign over you,
whom no earthly creature without your good approbation can well govern. And
since the right of inheritance of the Crown, justly appertains to me, as to
the truly legitimate, and indubitate heir of Richard Plantagenee, Duke of York
my illustrious father. To which title, your free and fair election is
conjoynd, (which we chie^ly embrace as effectual and operative) we are
contented. to condescend, to your importunities, and to accept of the royal
government of this kingdom. And will to the uttermost of our poor abilities,
endeavor the good and orderly managing thereof. And therewith all descended from
the upper Gallery where all the while before he had stayed, and came down and
formally saluted them all, wherewith the gyddy headed multitude, made the
streets ecchoe, with their loud acclamation of long live King Richard our
dread Sovereign Lord. And so the Duke of Buckingham took his solemn leave,
and every man departed to make a descant at home of the plain song abroad, as
every ones several fancies did minister occasion.

All this time the two innocent infants are entertained, with sports and
pastimes, but unacquainted with any thing that had passed as before to their
prejudice.

THE LIFE AND REIGN OF KING RICHARD THE THIRD.
THe next day the late Protector, with a great train An. 1483. R. 1.
rode to Westminster Hall, and seating himself in the Kings bench, where the
Judges of that Court in the term time usually sit, he said that it was the
principal duty of a good King carefully to look to the due administration of
the municipall laws of the kingdom, in which part he would not be defective.
And then proceeding with a well compact oration in Commendations of peace, and
discovery of the discommodities of dissension. He caused a general
Proclamation to be made, for abolition, and pardon of all injury, wrongs, and
enmity past. And to give it the better color, He caused one Fogge (which had
formerly given him occasion of just exception, for abusing him with a tale of
truth) to be sent for out of sanctuary at Westminster, whither to prevent the
Protectors anger he was fled, and set presently at liberty, and caused him in
public to kiss his hand.

In his return from Westminster, his affable complement in the streets was so
free and frequent, That by the discreeter sort it seemed to savor more like
fawning servility then courtly courtesy, rather base then welbehaved.

After his return home, by the fair help of a foul but close covered plot,
he had won an unconstant woman and procured the consent (I dare not think
good will or affection) of the Lady Anne, the youngest daughter of great
Warwick the relict of Prince Edward to be his wife, howsoever she could not be
ignorant, that her suitor had bin the instrument if not the author, of the
tragical murders of both her husband and father. But the reason of most
women's actions, are as indiscoverable, as Reason in most of them is
undiscernable.

To prevent had I wist and to secure his coronation, five thousand men are sent
for out of the Northern parts. The guilt of a biting conscience, like an
atturny general ever informing against the soul, always suggesting unto him
fears, and causes of suspicion, where no need was. These soldiers ill clad
and worse armed being come, and all things prepared for the Coronation (at
least wise those put in use or action that were intended for the investiture of
Edward the fifth in the regalitie) the but late Protector now King Richard upon
the fourth day of July, together with his new bride came from Baynards Castle
to the Tower by water, where he created, Thomas Lord Howard Duke of Norfolk,
his son Sir Thomas Howard Earl of Surry, William Lord Barckley Earl of
Nottingham.

Francis Lord Lovell Vicount Lovell, and Chamberlain to the King and the Lord
Stanley (who had been committed prisoner to the Tower, in regard that his son
was reported to have levied forces in Lancashire) was not only that day
released out of prison but made Lord Steward of the kings household.

The Archbishop of York was likewise then delivered, but the Bishop of Eley was
committed to the custody of the Duke of Buckingham, who took order to have him
sent to his Castle of Brecknock in Wales. The same night were made seventeene
Knights of the Bath.

Edmond the Duke of Suffolks son. George Gray the Earl of Kents son.
William son to the Lord Zouche. Henry Aburgaveney. Christopher Willougby.
Henry Babington. Thomas Arundle. Thomas Boloigne. Gervois of Clifton. William
Say. Edmond Beding field. William Enderby. Thomas Lewkener. Thomas of Vrmon,
John Brown and William Berckley.
Upon the fifth day of July, the King in great state rode thorough the City of
London, from the Tower to Westminster, and on the morrow following, the K. and
the Queen came from the Palace to the great hall, and from thence barefooted
upon cloth of raye they went to S. Peter's Abbey at Westminster, every one of the
nobles and officers of state attending according to their several ranckes and
places. The Cardinal sang Mass, and after Pax the king and Queen descended
from before S. Edwards shrine, to the high altar before which they were both
howseled, having but one host divided betwixt them. Then returned they both and
offered at the shryne, where the king left the Crown of S. E. and took his own
Crown. And then in order as they came they returned. All ceremonies of
solemnity finished, the King gave license to all the nobility and others that
were thereof desirous to depart to their several habitations, (except the Lord
Stanley) respectively giving unto them strict commandment at their departure
from him, To be careful to maintain the truth of Religion, to preserve the
peace and quiet of the kingdom, and to prevent extortion and wrong that
otherwise through their negligence might happen unto his subjects, setting them
forth a lesson himself never meant to learn at least wise practice. For like
Sylla he commanded others under great penalties to be virtuous and modest, when
he himself walked the clean contrary way. The Northern men well rewarded, are
returned home and the king left at leisure, to discover his masked hypocrisy,
and at liberty to invent, and put in practice An. 1484. R. 1.
stratagems of death and murder. And as afterward he ended his time with the
best which was his: so began he his reign with the worst which was the death
of his two innocent Nephews.

The King and the Queen take their progress into Gloucester, to visit in his
new honor the place of which he bare the name of his old. By the way he
plotteth the manner of the destruction of the two innocent lambs left behind
in the slaughterhouse. For the execution whereof he sent one of his execrable
instruments, named John Green with a letter and instructions to Sir Robert
Brackenbury, Leiftenant of the Tower, a creature of no small credit with him,
presently upon the sight thereof, to take order for the dispatching out of the
way those two (as he termed them) bastard brats: But the Lieftenant in this
(howsoever vehemently suspected as guilty of other like employments) being
honest, both detested the business, and denied to perform the Command, with
which answer Green returned to Warwick where the King then was, to whom he
related the Lieftenants answer, wherewith the king was doubly perplexed, with
the discovery of his intention, and the refusal by him, on whose readiness
he much presumed before. And much discontented he withdrew to his Chamber,
where after some vent to his passion, he made enquiry of some of the pages, if
any could think of a man, that to gain his Sovereigns favor, would hazard
the loss of a finger or somewhat more, whereupon one of the Pages presently
gave information of a Knight, who to give wing to his ambitious desires, which
were ever desirous of the Kings employment, would not be scrupulously
conscienced, nor would stand much upon the hazard of his limbs to doc his
Majesty service, adding withal that he was now in bed in the next chamber,
upon this man the K. presently pitcheht; And hastily rifing from the close
stool, (for this Communication was at the time of evacuation, a fair closet
and a fit season for such counsel) he went forth into the palace Chamber,
where he found two brothers Sir Thomas and Sir James Tirrell in bed together,
men of different conditions, but equal comeliness of feature and countenance,
wherein few in those times did exceed them. Sir James before by the Page fully
described to be the undertaker, is singled out and privately conferd withal by
the king. And to him he briefly imports his mind, and the means to
purchase his perpetual respect and favor. The Knight as greedy of the
employment, as the King to have it effected, out went the Kings expectation in
forwardness, undertakes the performance of whatsoever shall be appointed,
whereupon the next morning he is dispatched with letters mandatorie, to Sir
Robort Brackenbury, for present surrender up of his command the keys of the
Tower for a time to the bearer, Sir James Tirrell which was accordingly done.

Sir James before hand had furnished himself with actors for such a filthy
tragedy, whose names were Miles Forest, and John Dighton, a couple of
Rake-shames that had been thoroughly flesht in all villainy, And had so often
offended the law by shedding of blood, that the custom thereof had taken away
the sense of the sin; so that to cut the throat of a Prince or a Pig was
without difference to them. These the second night after his having of the
keys of the Tower, Sir James imployes to smother the two poor innocents in
their bed, which they did, by wrapping hard their pillowes about their heads,
and stopping their breath with their bed clothes, which done, they took and
buried them under the stayres amongst a heap of stones. From whence they were
after removed, in more obscurity but to a place of Christian burial, by Sir
Robert Brackenburyes Chaplain, whose sudden death which happened some few
days after hindered the discovery of the place. And thereby gave cause of
doubt to some, and color to others, by the credulous folly of a few but the
inveterate malice of more, afterward to justify Perkyn Warbecks and others
imposturie.

The tragedy being come to the Catastrophe away poasts Sir James, (having first
taken order for the shipping of his agents for the Low Countries) to the King.
From whom at first he received gracious countenance, good words, and great
promises. But was never afterward preferred or employed by the King (as
perceiving in his looks some reluctance for what he had so lately done) But
scornd and detested by all that knew the employment, abandoned by his own
brother, and despicable in his own thoughts. And such is usually the reward of
those that pawn their souls to purchase uncertain preferment, for as good
Physicians affect not poison, though skilfully sometimes they make use of it,
no more do any the traitor that take advantage of the Treason.

The King does now perceive, that he is able enough to subsist of himself, and
without Buckinghams aid or advise, powerful enough to plot and actuate any
requirable project. And therefore having now freed himself from any
competitors for the Garland by the murder of his two Nephews: he began by
little and little to weane himself from Buckingham, and withdrawes his former
privacy of conference with him. And first delays and then denies to perform
the pact and agreement so solemnly before concluded betwixt them, yet publicly
washes his face in every company with all shows of Court holy water, which the
Duke wisely observing, (one formerly sufficiently acquainted with his
disposition) Thinking it far better to be enjoyer but of a small loaf, then
to have no bread, plays with the King at his own weapon. At Gloucester takes
occasion with outward show of all formal respect and former integrity to take
his leave of the King and so departed the Court. But they had no sooner severed
themselves, but each began to observe the others behavior, and by means of
interlopers they were known to misconster and misinterpret each others words,
and actions, so that the knot of familiarity formerly united in treachery, was
now easily dissolved by Ielou^ie; which was the sooner brought about by this
occasion. After the Dukes arrival at his Castle of Brecknock he sent for his
prisoner Morton Bishop of Ely whom he familiarly entertained, and from time to
time continued such his kind and respective entertaiment toward him, which the
wise Bishop observing, and withal noting the Dukes haughty heart, and
ambitious haughtines, he thought it good discretion from thence to take his
hint, to make his wisdom the means, of his own deliverance, though with the
Dukes destruction. For the Bishop besides his profound learning, having often
and by alternate proof of prosperity, and adversity, gotten experience (the
mother and mistress of wisdom,) and thereby could discern the passages of
polliticke and cunning contrivements, perceiving the Duke so overforward to
Cope with his conversation, that he would omit no place or time convenient, but
he would express himself in a most affectionate manner to be most desirous to
enjoy it, the Bishop at times of conference, would so order his Communication
that he seemed rather to follow, then lead the Duke into any discourse, which
either concerned the commendation of Henry the sixth or Edward the fourth. And
would therein so temper his speech, that he would not deliver further, or
more, then what he was assured the Duke could not well contradict. But ever
modestly without either arrogating or derogating to the Honor of the one or
other. But if at any time any passage in their talk intervened that might any
way reflect upon the now King, he would make sudden stoppes, saying he had
been fomerly too forgetful that way, and had waded to far in relation of
occurrences in the world, more then did become his Coat, but now he was
resolved to leave those courses, and wholly to apply himself to his books,
and beads, and meditate on the next world. Nevertheless the Duke after many
protestations of secrecy, importuned the Bishop but to express his opinion of
the condition of King Richard and the validity of his tirle to the Crown of
England, telling him withal that he was resolved to entreat (and presumed he
should obtain it) his faithful and secret counsel in a business that nearly
concerned him as one upon whose Religious honesty, and every way sufficiency,
he would altogether rely. Adding further that to that end, he had procured
leave from the then Protector to have the Bishop committed to his courtesy,
whereby he might with the more convenience, and safety, confer with him
thereabouts. And the Bishop might be assured of more safety and respect, then
in another place. The Bishop gave him many thanks for this his undeserved
favor, desiring the continuance of them But withal told him that Princes were
like fire, howsoever at a distance they gave warmth, yet kissed they would burn
the lips; And therefore says he, I love not to talk of them as being a
thing not altogether out of danger. For though the words in themselves deserve
no reprehension, yet are they ever subject to other men's misconstruction, or
misinterpretation, and seldom if at any time pass according to the intention
and meaning of the speaker, but as they are taken. But this added more oil to
the flame of the Dukes desire, to be resolved of the Bishops verdict of the
before past proceedings and his judgment of occurrences to follow. And the
more cautious the Bishop was in his relations, the more eager and earnest was
the Duke to be thoroughly informed of both, and at length he prevayled with
his importunity so far, that one evening after supper sitting privately
together, the Duke having engaged his honor, as swearing by his George, and
his soul, by calling his maker to witness, that whatsoever at that time the
Bishop should deliver unto him, should for ever be buried in silence and never
go further.

The Bishop stood off no longer but demonstrated at large, that the late
Protectors proceedings, were discommendable, his Ambition unsufferable, his
bloody designs intolerable, his usurped government tyrannical, and the Honor
and quiet of the Kingdom in apparent ieopardie: And then with great earne^nes
both of speech and gesture he further said, Royal Sir I adjure you by the
faith you owe to God, by the honorable respect you bear to your progeny, by
your oath made to Saint George the patron of that honorable order of the Garter
whereof you are a deserving companion, by the true affection you carry to your
native Country, and your due love to virtue and integrity, be not averse but
bravely second that fair and honest course that I shall propose unto your
grace. For thereby tyrannous usurpation may be suppressed, Justice advanced,
and future peace everlastingly established, which God of his infinite bounty
will vouchsafe to An. 1484. R. 2.
accomplish, if you will with what convenient speed you may, procure or provide
a fit and undisparagable match for the eldest daughter of King Edward our late
King. And if with possibility it may be obtained, let him be such a person, as
may reunite the long since severed bearings of the red Rose and the White, then
will all intestine broils be pacified: and every one shall freely enjoy the
happy benefit of the now so much desired, blessed Concord.

This speech was not so soon ended, but the Duke elevating his eyes to heaven
put of his Cappe; And said: To thee oh heavenly father sole giver of every good
and perfect gift, from the altar of my humblest heart I render all possible
praise and thanks, for that thou ^ast given ability through thy gracious
spirit, to this thy servant, to invent a fiaer means, whereby thy glory may be
propagated, innocence preserved, and inhumanity punished, the good and quiet of
thy people procured, and every true patriot have just cause to rejoice in thee.
And then putting on his Cap again he said to the Bishop; At what time my
brother in law, for I presume it is not unknown to you that King Edward and I
did marry two sisters, left this life, I began to revolue with my self, how
little respect or favor after such my marriage I had received at his hands
notwithstanding any so near affinity besides propension of love to do him all
acceptable service, and his little humanity showen to me, made me as little
reckon of him, and less of his children. Then the old Proverb coming into
mymind, That that Realm often rueth where children reign and women bear
sway, I could not but be persuaded, That much mischief and perturbation would
betide the whole Kingdom, if either the young King were suffered to sway the
Scepter, or the Queen mother to have the government, and the rather, for that
her brothers and children by a former husband, although not extract of very
ancient Nobility, assumed more unto themselves in managing of the state
affairs, then either the deceased Kings brethren or any other Peer of the
Realm; whereupon to prevent a further mischief, I thought it very requisite,
both for the advancement of the public good, and my own particular interest,
to insinuate and partake with the Duke of Gloucester; whom I then reputed as
free from simulation or dissimulation and as tractable without doing injury,
and just without showing cruelty, as now to my shame I may speak it, and to my
grief I have proved him, to be a perjured dissembler and a pitiless tyrant.
And thereupon I sided with Gloucester: and by my sole labor and industry
(without the least suspicion, I protest of what after happened) he was at the
first Council held after the death of King Edward procured (as partly you my
Lord Bishop know) to be made Protector both of King and Kingdom, whereunto he
had no sooner attained, but by like policy he got into his custody, his two
innocent Nephews the King and the Duke of York. Then he begins to solicit me
and sometimes by entreaties he endevoreth to persuade, and then again with
minatory words to enforce me, and the Lords present (by constraint as it were)
to permit him to take upon him the execution of the Regal state and government
of this Kingdom, until the young King were ripe and able to undergo the
burden thereof, and bear the load upon his own shoulders at least wise until
he should attain, to the age of four and twenty years, which project of
his, in regard the example was without president, And that would be as strange
if not more, to have an ambitious mind, to disinantell himself of a place of
that eminent power of Command one obtained: as for him at that instant to
effect it, I seemed not well to relish it, and the rather for that I found by
the countenance of all there present, he was as then unprovided of seconds at
the table, to back his proposition. He thereupon not altogether unprovided of
his baytes to fish with, to give some colorable pretext of reason for what he
had moved, he produced many seeming authenticke instruments and resolutions,
upon depositions of credible witnesses, subscribed by the Civilians and
Canonists the most famous in these times for judgment and learning, by whom it
was resolved and so adjudged that the children of Edward the fourth were to be
reputed illegitimate and no way capable of the inheritance of the Crown; which
overture then (unfeinedly I speak it) I thought as real, and true, as now I
know the deponents names were counterfeited, and the whole business forged.

These depositions and resolutions thus by him produced were read, and
thoroughly by us at the Council table debated, and long discussed upon, until
the Protector himself stood up and said, My Lords as on the one part I and
your Lordships are most willing that King Edwards children should receive no
injury, so on the other side, I beseech you do not you bethe occasion that I
suffer apparent wrong. For this point being thus cleared that my brothers
sons are not inheritable, behold me the unquestionable, and undoubted heir
of Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York my deceased but dear father, who was by
authority of the Parliament adjudged: and so proclaimed lawful heir of the
Crown of England, whereupon we silly seduced men, thinking all had been
Gospel that had been delivered, gave consent, that in regard the Duke of
Clarence his son, by reason of the former attainder of the father, besides the
obtruded illegitimation of him too, was likewise disabled too carry the
inheritance: to accept of the bramble for our King, and Sovereign Lord: the
which I was rather induced to do, by how much he had often with solemn
protestations, both public and private, given me his faithful promise, that
the two young infants should no way be abused, but that they should have
sufficient assurance for maintenance, such as I and the rest of the nobility
should well like and approve of, which how well he has perfomed judge you,
when he was no sooner by my procurement, from a private person made Protector
and from a subject sole Sovereign, but he cast the ladder by, by which he had
climed to this preferment, changing his manners with his honors. And not only
denied me to enjoy the liberty of my undoubted right, as touching the Earldome
of Hertford unjustly detained from me by his predecessor King Edward. (And
which at our first conference about these proceedings this Richard with many
execrable oaths and promises had assured me (but kept touch in nothing with me
of what was formerly concluded betwixt us. But in liewe thereof I was
entertained with flowtes and uncurteous language, giving out as though I had
never furthered but rather hindered his most weighty designs: yet this foul
Ingratitude and his undeserved unkindnesse, I patiently for a seasonunder-went.
But when I had received certain notice of the unnatural murder of his two
natural Nephews, I was so transported with scorn and indignation, that I had
very much to do to temper my passion, from public revenge of their death and
my own disgrace, in his own Court until weighing the doubtfulnesse of the
event, I deemed it the safest way, with patience to wait a fitter opportunity,
and in the mean time, to take out a copy of his dissimulation, and that I
might with the more safty work upon his own scene, I framed my carriage and
countenance, at all times toward him, in that manner as though I knew no pipe
to dance after, but his, never crossing him in any point, nor seeming to
dislike or distaste (though much against my nature) any thing he moved or did.
And by this means I obtained liberty to retire my self to this place. But in
my journey homewards by the way I had many strong conflicts in my mind, which
way to begin to work that I might make this usurper to acknowledge his error,
and to pull of the lions skin from his hoglike back.

First I thought with my self that there was a fair path beaten for me (he
being now by the murder of his tender Nephews grown despicable to God and
all good men) to lay hold of the Garland, in regard there was not one whom I
could then call to remembrance, either of power or pretense, sufficient to
debar me from enjoying it, being no way unprovided of means, men or money for
employment, And in this Conceit I continued a while, until that afterward
that came into my mind, that to come in by way of conquest would prove both
hard and hazardfull; In regard that most of the Nobility and Gentlemen, would
oppose me therein, if for no other end or reason, but only for the
preservation of their tenures and titles, which in a conquerors hands are
liable to his disposal. And then, and there, that embrions conceit of
Conquering continued so formles.

Then my fancy suggested to me that the Lord Edmond Duke of Somerset my
grandfather was within degrees lineally descended from John of Gaunt for Edmond
Beuford Earl Moryton was son of John surnamed Beauford of Beauford in France
which came to the house of Lancaster, by Blaunch of Arthoyes wife to Edmond
first Earl of Lancaster son of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster. That my
mother being his eldest daughter I was next heir to Henry the 6. And hereupon
I set up my rest, thereon to lay a foundation whereupon to erect my building:
But as God would have it, whilst my brains were busy, and as I rode debating
with my self: how to the best advantage I might set my engines going, betwixt
Worcester and Bridgnorth, I accidentally encountered Margaret Countess of
Richmond the true and only heir of my Grandfathers elder brother John Duke of
Somerset, who married Margaret daughter and heir of Sir John Beauchamp of
Bletsoe kinght, By whom he had issue, one only daughter Margaret who married
Edmond of Haddam son of Owen Tewder by Queen Katherine and half brother by
the mother to King Henry the 6. But she was as absolutely forgotten by me as if
I had never seen or known her. Now she and her son Henry Earl of Richmond,
being both cutworke, and percullis, betwixt me and that port, which I must of
necessity pass, if I should at any time attempt to enter into the Court
royal of Majesty, my presupposed title was in my imagination now scarce worth
a tittle. And herewithall calling to mind that those inseparable dangers,
insupportable cares, and unavoydable troubles, that necessarily awaite upon a
Crown are so imminent and numerous: That no one if he but man can with safety
escape, well undergo or with patience endure the least of many of them, except
by lineall descent the law do cast it upon him, or he be by Gods especial
providence as David was preordaind or before appointed thereunto. And further
taking it into consideration, That if I once assumed unto my self the swaying
of the Scepter, howsoever I might perchance be of ability sufficient to lay
hold of it, yet on the one part, I should be sure to find many foes, but few
faithful friends, (who in this age are all for the most part gone on
Pilgrimage and their return is uncertain.) And on the other side King Edwards
Daughters and their Allies, whose patience so infinitely abused, might incite
some furious partakers, or my cousin Richmond with his friends and followers,
or some discontented Lords (for it would be an impossible thing to give
plenary content to all) would be ever snatching or snarling at me, upon every
the least occasion, and upon any advantage, so that in all likelihood my life
and livelihood, should be ever hanging, but by a very slender thread, so that
I should never be secure, but ever in danger of death or deposition: wherefore
from thenceforth I concluded with my self, to banish out of my thoughts, all
ayrie-built Castles, to look after the government of the kingdom, either in
my own right, or to my own use, and concluded watchfully to attend, if at any
time it should please God to make me his instrument, to relieve the wronged,
and to scourge the oppressor; And now I am verily persuaded, that it is the
good pleasure of the Almighty, to make this the means by which both may be
to his glory effected, for the Earl of Richmond to take to Wife Elizabeth the
eldest Daughter of Humphry Duke of Buckirgham slain at St. Albones 1455.
King Edward the fourth (to bring which orderly to effect,) neither my person,
power, or purse shall be wanting; In respect that by this match, The two
houses of York and Lancaster at this time so miserably dis-joynted, may be
brought to unity and conjunction. And whereas my Grandfather Humphry slain at
Northampton, 38. H. 6. 1460.
and Father did both lose their lives in abetting the side of Lancaster; I will
now hazard mine to conjoyne them both hand in hand.

These words the Duke uttered with that vehement earnestness, that the good
Bishop, and not without reason was thoroughly persuaded, that it was as much the
love of Richmond, as the hatred to Richard, that made him make this forward and
friendly offer; And from thenceforth afterward he so condited his discourses
with such powerful and significant words, and prevalent reasons, that he kept
him firm and constant to his first proposition, insomuch that at length by
this Bishops advise and procurement of Reignold Bray (a Gentleman attending
upon the Countess of Richmond) this whole plot is discovered to the Duchess,
and very well approved of by her; And presently from her, Doctor Lewis her
Physician is employed to Queen Elizabeth; who still remained in Sanctuary at
Westminster, to sound how she stood inclinable; Who upon the first
proposition, before she would express any thing unto the Doctor, she
prostrated her self upon her knees, and humbly invoked the blessed Trinity,
to be propitious to this so much desired Unity: And then raising her self up
she did profess her self, (next unto God) to be much bound to him, or her,
that first invented the means, whereby to restore my poor children to their
right, and redeem my self from that thraldom, and fear wherein now I am;
And with great thanks returned to the Doctor, wishing him to assure the
contriver thereof whosoever; That if Earl Richmond would take his corporal
oath, to espouse either her Daughter Elizabeth or Cicely, in case it should
please. God Elizabeth should dye before that time, as soon as he had obtained
the enjoyment of the Crown; That she would not only give hers, and get her
Daughters consent to the match: But procure all the Friends and Allies of her
deceased husband King Edward, and her own to take his part, and in all things
to give him their best assistance.

The Mothers thus having expressed their intentions to keep the game on foot,
Doctor Lewis preferred to the Queen, a religious and learned Priest, called
Christopher Vrswicke, who up on oath taken for secrecy was, as occasion should
be offered, to be employed in these businesses, so that now Bray and Vrswicke
do travail only about home, whilst the Physician who might do it with more
safety, and less suspicion, negotiated in more remote places, first to sound,
then to incite, as many of the Nobility and Gentry, as they should discover
to be willing to give their assistance, but always with this caution to offer
to treat with none, without making oath first for truth and secrecy.

In few days Bray had drawn into confederacy, Sir Giles Daubeney, Sir John
Cheney, Richard Guilford, and Thomas Rame, with some others.

Vrswicke likewise for his share, had prevailed with Hugh Conoway, Thomas
Culpepper, Thomas Rooper, with some others; And in the mean time Doctor Lewis
was not idle, but had won Edward Courtney, and his brother Peter Bishop of
Exceter: amongst whom it was carefully agreed upon, that convenient messengers
should be speedily dispatched for Britannie to Earl Richmond, to acquaint him
with the whole proceedings; For this purpose by the contrivement of Vrswicke,
Hugh Conoway is employed from Plimmouth with great sums of money.

Thomas Rame, by the advice of Bray, is with like instructions sent out of Kent
by Callice, both which within the space of little more then an hour, though
diverse ways, the one most part by Sea, the other most part by land, came to
the presence of the Earl, who graciously received them, and gladly embraced
both the concord and condition.

The Earl acquaints the Duke of Britanny, both with the plot and the
confederation: earnestly imploring his advise and aid, which the Duke as
readily promised, as really performed; Howsoever Hutton Ambassador from King
Richard, had endeavored to preoccupate the Scene, and in his Masters name, had
both by private Letters, and many proffers of much money, and more courtesies
labored the Duke for the Earls restraint; But to little or no purpose.

The Earl thus encouraged, returns Connoway and Rames by the same way they
came, to give notice of his speedy repair, with ample instructions, for the
manner of preparation against his approach to be made; Whereupon the
Confederates in all places provide such as had Castles or Piles of strength
furnish them with men and ammunition; And others use their best means, that
money and men may be got in readiness, against the Earls arrival.

Bishop Morton who had gained opportunity against the Duke of Buckinghams
will, to convey himself into the Lowe-Countryes, is not slack by Letters and
private messages, to conjure all such as he knew, either to hate or envy King
Richard, or to have loved King Edward, to lay to their helping hands with all
their might in this conjuration.

Now whether amongst so many (through some false brothers treachery, or out of
his watchful jelousie over Buckingham it is uncertain.) But King Richard has
intelligence of the design, and politickly dissembleth it, but secretly gives
order as it were but to take a muster, to draw his forces together, amongst
whom he suddenly comes, and having appointed his carriages to follow him, he
marches away without acquainting any of the Commanders with any particular
place whither he lead these forces; In the mean time first by proffer of
friendship, by fair terms, the King did solicit the Dukes presence at
London, where the King kept his standing house; But receiving from him, but
delatory put offs; The King then sent a peremptory message, by the tie of his
allegiance to come away; which was returned with this resolute answer, That
he would not (if he could avoid it) have any conversation with an ungrateful
per jured inhumane butcher of his own flesh and blood, so that now preparation
to offend and defend by the sword is made on both parts.

The King holds on his march, whereupon all the conjurators in every quarter
are in overt commotion, Thomas Marquess Dorset (preserved from slaughter by
the only favor of Sir Thomas Lovell against the Kings will) forsakes
Sanctuary, and in Yorkshire labors to raise forces.

The two Courtneys in Devon and Cornwall take the same course, and they are
seconded in Kent by Guilford and Rame, so that civil combustion is in every
quarter of the Realm: King Richard notwithstanding severs not his forces, but
keeps on his march toward Buckingham, who having notice thereof, both
readily, and willingly sets forward, bending his course through the Forest
of Deane, intending at Gloucester to have passed Severne, and so to have joined
forces with the two Courtneys, and the Western Confederates, but by the long
continuance of wet weather, the waters thereabouts were risen so high, that
Severne was broken out, and had overflowne all the Countries: so that it was a
thing impossible for the Dukes forces to be transported, which the Welch-men
(drawn thither more for fear then love) took advantage of, saying it was a
prodigious token, of their ill success in the enterprise, and secretly by
night slipped away from him, whose example the residue followed, so that the Duke
upon this disbanding, was left to shift by himself, whereupon he dismissed all
his followers, and without or Page or Footman, repaired to the house of one
Humphry Bannister, who dwelt near Shrowsbury, presuming there he might safely
lodge in obscurity, until better fortune should smile, the rather for that the
many extraordinary favors, formerly done to the said Bannister and his father
before him, might justly challenge willing entertainment during his secret stay
there, if not more.

The news of this disaster, added wings to the other conjurators to disperse
their powers and fly, some to Sanctuary, others to unknown places, all of
them making the best shift they could to escape: but they sped best which
conveyed themselves into Britanny; Amongst whom the Marquess Dorset, John Lord
Wells, the Bishop of Exceter, and his brother Sir John Bourchier, Sir Edward
Woodvile, brother to Queen Elizabeth, Sir Robert Willoughby, Sir Giles
Daubeney, Sir Thomas Arundell, Sir John Cheney and his two brethren, Sir
William Barckley, Sir William Brandon and his Brother Thomas, Sir Richard
Egmond, Hollowell and Poynings Captains were chief.

King Richard having intelligence that the enemy was fled, sent order
presently, to lay all the Ports, with strict charge, that none should go on
board, or come on shore, without especial warrant.

He likewise made public Proclamation, that if any one could bring tidings of
the Duke of Buckingham (who was now proclaimed Traitor, and all his lands and
goods seized into the Kings hands) so that the Duke might be apprehended, if
the person were a bondsman he should be manumitted, if a freeman, he should
have a general pardon, and a thousand pound current English coin.

Whilst these things are thus in agitation, King Richard has information from
Hutton his Leiger Ambassador in Britain, That the Duke thereof not only
refused to keep the Earl of Richmond in restraint of liberty; Bu, was
seeming forward, to give him his assistance, to prosecute his intendmentt which
was to work some exploit in England: Wherefore the King took especial order,
for the present rigging, and preparing his Navy, to stop, if possible, the
Earls landing in any Port of England.

In the interim, whether fear to offend the law, or greedy Covetousness to
gain the thousand pounds, it is yet disputable, but Bannister like an
ungrateful servant perfidiously discovered his Master the Duke of Buckingham
to John Mitton then high Sheriff of Shropshire, who thereupon apprehended him,
in a little Grove near Bannisters dwelling house, and conveyed him to
Shrowsbury where King Richard lay, from whence upon All-Soules day, he was
conveyed to Salisbury, and then and there without arraignment or legal
proceedings, in the Marketplace beheaded.

Whether Bannister received his proclaimed reward is uncertain: but that Gods
judgments appeared afterward against him, and his is very remarkable, for he
was afterward hanged for manslaughter, his eldest daughter is debauncht by
one of his Carters, and his son and heir in a desperate lunacy became his
own butcher, and was so found by the Coruors inquest.

This Henry Duke of Buckingham was Earl of Stafford, Hereford, Northampton,
Lord of Brecknocke, Kimbolton, and Tunbridge, and high Constable of England.

He married Katherine Daughter of Richard Woodvile, Earl Rivers, by whom he
had issue three Sons and two Daughters.

1. Edward, who by Henry the seventh was restored to blood, and succeeded in
his Fathers honors. 2. Henry the said King, Created Earl of Wilts. 3. And
Humphry that dyed young. 1. Elizabeth, married to Robert Radcliffe Lord
Fitz-Waters. 2. Anna married first to Sir Walter Harbert, and afterward George
Lord Hastings Earl of Huntington.
Upon the twelfth day of October, the Earl of Richmond with forty ships and
five thousand waged Britons took the Seas; But that evening by the rage of an
impetuous tempest, the whole Navy was dispersed; The ship wherein the Earl
was, with one only little Bark, after they had endured the rage of the
tempest, eight and forty hours, was driven upon the coast of Cornwall, where
he gives express commandment, that none should dare to take land until the
fleet were drawn together.

But after he had huld up and down the shore, by the space of a day and a
night, and never a Vessel appearing, observing an hourly increase of armed
soldiers upon the Coasts by Poole, being assured they were none of his
partakers, because no tokens before agreed upon, at his approach to be used,
were presented: The wind blowing a fresh gale, the Earl hoisteth sail, and
returning toward France, arrived in Normandy; From whence he dispatcheth
messengers to the French King Charles the eight, by whom he readily received a
safe conduct, together with a liberal quantity of French Crowns, to bear his
charges on the way, whereupon the Earl sent his shipping about, whilst he by
easy journies came by land into Britain, where he received the news of the
Duke of Buckinghams death, and the dispersing of the Confederates forces, which
somewhat troubled him at first; But afterward he was much comforted, at the
sight of the Marquess Dorset, and those brave Commanders that were come with
him; And presently they enter into consultation, what course was to be taken
in their beginning, and progress of the intended action, amongst whom it was
then generally concluded;

That King Richard as a Tyrant and a Traitor should be proscribed.

That Richmond should take upon him the Regal Dignity, then by Richard
usurped.

That Richmond should publicly make a solemn protestation, to take to Wife
the Lady Elizabeth, eldest Daughter of Edward the fourth.

That all the Nobles, Gentlemen, and others of the English Nation there
present, should do homage, and swear allegiance to the Earl of Richmond, as
to their Sovereign Lord; And each to other enterchangeably give assurance upon
the seal of their salvation, alone and together with others to prosecute
Richard, and protect Richmond, to the expense of the last drop of blood in
their bodies, and the profusion of all their substances.

This thus concluded on, upon Christmasse day before the high Altar, in the
great Church of Reimes, the Earl of Richmond gave oath to marry the Lady
Elizabeth, immediately after he was quietly seated in the government of
England; And thereupon all the Lords and Knights there present, (the Bishop of
Exceter showing them the way,) did do him homage; And in the same place, each
to other religiously did vow, taking the Sacrament thereupon, never to surcease
prosecuting war against Richard the Usurper, until his deposition or
destruction.

Relation hereof being made to the Duke of Britain, he voluntarily made offer,
to furnish the Earl, with all things necessary for the enterprise, and all
things are accordingly providing in those parts, whilst King Richard makes a
diligent enquiry after all those, that might be suspected, to be favorers or
furtherers of Richmonds association, many of them are apprehended, amongst
whom, Sir George Brown, and Sir Roger Clifford with four Gentlemen more, are
executed at London.

Sir Thomas Sentleger, who had married Anne, the Duke of Ezceters Widow, the
Kings own sister, and Thomas Rame Esquire, were executed at Exceter. And at an
Assizes held at Torrington, for the County of Devon, Thomas Marquess Dorset,
and all such as were with the Earl of Richmond, were indicted of high Treason,
and at the Parliament which presently followed, all those so indicted, were
attainted, and all their lands and good seized upon.

Thomas Lord Stanley is enforced to purge himself by oath, and to swear that
he then was altogether innocent, of any treacherous practice against the An.
1484
King, and unacquainted with any his Wives courses, touching the succouring her
Son: yet nevertheless he is commanded to keep her close, and not to suffer
any to have liberty, to write to or confer with her.

A truce is concluded betwixt England and Scotland, to continue for three
years; And for the better settling of amity, and concord betwixt the two
kingdoms, a Marriage is treated of, betwixt the Duke of Rothsay, the King of
Scots eldest Son, and the Lady Anne de la Poole, King Richards Sisters
Daughter, formerly married to John de la Poole, Duke of Suffolk.

John Earl of Lincoln, the said Annes Brother, King Richards Nephew, is
likewise (the Daughters of Edward the fourth being excluded) proclaimed heir
of the Crown of England.

Suspicion seldom but slumbers, never sleeps; And a guilty conscience, is
ever-more broad waking; The jelousie of Richmonds Title, and the horror of
King Richards conscience, for the murder of his two innocent Nephews, so
justly affright him, that his sleeps are evermore interrupted with fearful
dreams, insomuch that he did often leap out of his bed, in the dark, and
catching his sword (which always naked stuck by his side) he would go
distractedly about the Chamber, every where seeking to find out the cause of
his own occasioned disquiet; And in the day time he always would hold his
hand upon his Poniard, as though he would not be behind-hand, to requite the
stroke of a sword with a stabbe: his brains were still working, and his
cogitations, hammering out strange stratagems for Massacres.

There must be no stone left unremoved, whereupon Richmon might have footing:
Ambassadors are sent to the Duke of Britain with instructions upon any terms
to procure, or purchase his Person, to be delivered unto them; But the Duke by
extremity of sickness was fallen into that weakness, that the Ambassadors
could have no audience; Whereupon they addressed themselves to Peter Landoyes,
chief Treasurer to the Duke, and his great Favorite; They having found out
the length of his foot, by the experience of other men's success, that
negotiated with him; They so anointed him with oil of Angels, and large
promises, of the King of Englands ready willingness to make more ample
satisfaction, for any courtesy therein by him to be done. That he resolutely
undertaketh that the Kings pleasure shall be in that point procured, what
enjoined this Treasurer, that at Saint Mallows not long before, had
countermined King Richards Enginers, and preserved the Earl from the danger of
the plotte; That now he should undertake, to ingulph him in that quagmire,
from whence so lately he had freed him, cannot easily be conjectured, except
that the eminency of his place (far transcending his descent or desert,) had
brought him into the general hatred of those, whom either he by his inward
power with the Duke, had any ways injured, (a course too common amongst those
of like condition and quality) or otherwise, had not given that fullness of
content, that was expected; And thrust him into the contempt of his betters by
birth, that scorned to have such a bubble to take place before them, or into
the envy of all such that would, but could not obtain like favor and
preferment, or into the hatred of the Commons, who seldom or never think, or
speak well of Officers in like place, that purchase their Masters favors by
filling his coffers, and emptying their purses; And that he could not devise a
better means, how to arm himself strongly against the machinations and
excursions, of such incertaine enemies, but by the friendship and protection,
of so potent a Monarch, as the King of England was, the validity of whose
gold, and the power of whose arm, might purchase or procure his freedom or
sasetie, if at any time thereafter impeached.

Whilst the Treasurer is plotting and placing his engines, to make delivery of
the merchandise, as before bought and sold. God who always provideth for the
deliverance out of danger, for those that trust in him, had so appointed, that
Christopher Vrswicke is sent out of Flaunders, from Morton Bishop of Ely, (who
by Gods especial care and providence, was ever mindful, and carefully
watchful of the Earl of Richmonds prosperous proceeding) to forewarne the
Earl of the near and certain peril he was in, and to acquaint him, both
with the plot, and the means to prevent it. The Earl quickly resenteth it,
and presently dispatcheth Vrswicke to the French King, to crave the continuance
of his gracious favor, and again to grant him safe passage through his
Dominions. Vrswicke was no sooner gone on his way, but the Earl (making no
more, then needs must, acquainted with his intention,) having procured a guide
by unfrequented ways, to conduct him into France, gave private directions to
the Earl of Penbrooke, to make an overture, to draw his forces toward the
Duke of Britain (who by this time had been somewhat recovered of his malady,
and was retired to take the air, near the borders of France,) That he (as
though so by him desired) might make view of them. But as soon as ever they
came near any the confines of France, he should with all convenient speed,
make entrance thereinto, and attend further directions. The Earl of Pembrooke
punctually followed his directions, and safely arrived in the Duchy of Anjou,
where they made their randevow; Richmond with only five in his company,
himself disguised like an ordinary Serving-man, through Woods and by-ways,
came to Angeirs, whither some of his retinue were gotten before, and attended
his coming; From thence he writes to the Duke of Britain, excusing his so
sudden, and unmannerly departure, occasioned through his certain danger, (if
not thus avoided) by the plot aforesaid.

Some few days after his departure, the Treasurer with a selected company of
soldiers, under the conduct of John Vitry (Landoys his only creature and
counselor, who gave forth by the way, that these men were waged for the aid
of the Earl of Richmond: and to that purpose had Vitry formerly written to the
Earl) came to Vans, where hearing of the Earls sudden departure, he sent out
his Vauntcorriers into every quarter to apprehend and stay him: but they lost
their labors.

Sir Edward Woodvile and Captain Poynings with their Companies, being left
behind in Vans, had been in great hazard, to have been distressed, but their
discreet behavior, both then and before, had gotten a good opinion amongst the
Townsmen, that they quietly permitted their stay amongst them, until they had
informed the Duke by the means of the Chancellor, who was their friend, and
Landoys antagonist of their estate, who much displeased, with the harsh usage
of the Earl by Landoys; out of a noble and commendable disposition, furnished
them not only with money to discharge their debts in the Town, but also with
carriages, and all necessaries for their orderly accommodation in their march
to the Earl of Richmond: whither with a safe conduct he sent them, where they
safely arrived.

The Earl returns thanks to the Duke, and with an authentical Instrument,
whereby the Earl and all the Gentlemen present, had subscribed to the
repayment of the money lent, and satisfaction of all things else, by those
Companyes received, sends him a more ample and perfect remonstrance of the
Treasurers treachery, which afterward gave just occasion to the Duke of
Britains kindred, (who were by Decree of the King, and all the Peers of
France, in regard of the Dukes infirmity, to manage the affairs of the
Duchy,) to question Landoys for that, and other overbold actions of his, to
his after-overthrow; For he and his Favorite John Vitry, (upon the just
complaint of the Chancellor, and the unappeasable fury of the enraged
multitude) had their process legally made against them, and were accordingly
hanged.

The Earl of Richmond admitted to the presence of the French King, acquaints
him with his intention, and laying claim to the Crown of England, and his
means of prosecution thereof, and requesteth his amity and assistance; Both
which King Charles faithfully promised, and as effectually performed to his
great honor.

In the interim, Richmond and his retinue, are honorably entertained, and
bountifully feasted in the French Court, and many proffers of matches to the
young English Bachelors there made, but none succeeded.

Whilst the Earl is thus attending in the French Court, John Vere Earl of
Oxford, who had long been Prisoner in the Castle of Hams, had so prevalently
persuaded with James Blunt, Captain of the Fortress, and Sir John Fortescue,
Porter of the Town of Callice, that they not only gave him leave to take his
own liberty, but accompanied him to the Earl of Richmond, of whom they are
joyfully welcomed, and to him Captain Blunt gives assurance, that the
Fortress did remain only at his devotion.

To the Earl at this time there resorted diverse young Gentlemen, that were
students in the University of Paris, proffering him their service, amongst whom
was Richard Fox, at that time very famous for good Clerkship and fair
carriage, to whom the Earl then gave entertainment, and then advised with him
in all his affairs, but afterward upon proof of his good abilities, he made
him one of his most privy Council.

King Richard being informed, that his Chapmen could not compass his so much
desired merchandise in Britain, and that Richmond was safe, and fairly
entertained in the French Kings Court, he resolved not to leave any thing
undone, how vile and nefarious soever, that might further him to defeat his
Adversary; And being persuaded that he could by any means anticipate the
Earl from matching with his Niece Elizabeth; And being so flesht in villainy,
that custom in him had taken away all sense of sinning, This downright
instrument of the Devil, resolves to rid his hands of Anne his Queen, and
as it were to win the prize from all precedent Tyrants, in being guiltless of
no impiety, he attempteth the marriage of his Niece, his Queen being yet
living; But she good Lady shall be quickly made sure enough, from hindering
his despicable design, in joining incest to murder; And thus resolved,
cloking his wolvish condition, under the veil of innocent well-meaning, this
Monster of men, backed by the devil and his dissembling looks, endeavors to
persuade the Queen of England, his Brothers Widow, that he most entirely
affected her pleasure, and her childrens preferment, and to obtain her good
opinion, would not only pardon the Earl Dorset, but promote him, and all their
kindred to Honor, and prime offices of the Kingdom.

So far he prevailed with this mere pitiful Queen, that she had quite
forgotten the murder of her innocent infants; the butchering of her own
Brother, Son, and kinsfolks, the calumny of her royal husband, the
aspersion of adultery obtruded to her self, the imputation of bastardy laid to
her Daughters; And her firm faith plighted to the contrary to the Duchess of
Richmond, and the assurance thereby of her elder daughters preferment, upon K.
Richards glosing speeches, was contented first to commit her daughters, to the
custody of him that was author, and actor of all these calumniations and
cruelties; and afterward by Letters mandatory, to solicit her Son the
Marquess of Dorset, to desert the Earl of Richmond and to incline to King
Richard, who she assured him, had not only granted him, his free and general
pardon, but had provided honorably to prefer him upon his return.

This done, King Richard with great solemnity, and formal show of
extraordinary affections (the surest ginnes to catch women and rattlebraines)
entertaineth the abused Mother, and seduced Daughters; And presently takes
order to make one Saint the more in heaven by sending his Wife thither before
her time, but how or by what means it is not made manifest.

She is with all solemnity, which the shortness of time to prepare would
permit, interred at Saint Peter's Church in Westminster, where some few forced
tears for a show, are wrung from his eyes at the Funeral, whilst his thoughts
are plotting, how to compass incestuous copulation, with his own Brothers
Daughter, whom he immoderately visits, and entertaines An. 1484 R. 1.
with all varieties of pompous pleasures, as it were by such music, to
prepare her affection the sooner to admit of his love-suite; But her harmless
innocence, not diving into his villainous purposes, takes all things from him
as honorable courtesies.

Now only fear to lose that little good Opinion which the Common People had
cast away upon him, induced thereunto by his late formal show of repentance,
and protestation of his hearty detestation of his former bloody course of life
did withold this monster of mankind, as yet to discover his beastly desire,
which was to purchase his pleasure by rape, if not otherwise procurable; But
for that it behoved him to labor to prevent the growing storm, threatened from
beyond the Seas, and to hinder the further growth of his enemies forces at
home, against his will he prorogues the execution of his desires, and leaves
love-matters until another season.

The Lord Stanley is commanded, to levy all his forces for the Kings aid, as
he will justify his integrity to him; Nevertheless cannot be permitted to go
down into his Country, until he had left George Lord Strange, his first
begotten son, as a sure pledge of his love and loyalty be hind him.

The surrender of the Castle of Hammes to the Earl of Richmond by Captain
Blount, is come to the ears of King Richard, who presently gives order to the
garrison of Callice, and the Forts adjoining, to reduce the same, which they
accordingly attempted; But the Captain at his departure (having left his wife
therein) had sufficiently furnished it, to withstand any assault, until
relief might with convenience be sent unto it.

The Earl of Richmond having notice of the siege sends the Earl of Oxford
with some forces to remove it, or relieve the besieged.

Thomas Brandon, a servant of the Earl of Oxford, with thirty resolute
soldiers, find the means to enter into the Castle, carrying with them such
ammunition, as was then most wanting, whilst the Earl of Oxford with his other
forces are marching thither, upon notice whereof, the Callicians offered the
besieged, that if they would surrender the Castle, all that were within it,
should have fair and noble quarter, with free liberty to depart, with bag
and baggage, which was accordingly readily embraced, being the only end of the
Earl of Oxfords journey; which was to redeem his friends, in especial the
Genlewomen in the Castle out of danger; And then leaving the Castle clean
bare, without either men, ammunition, or ordnance, they retreated in safety to
the Earl of Richmond.

The ships which King Richard had appointed to guard the Seas, to debar the
Earls passage, (he having been informed though untruly that Richmond was
hapless, and hopeless of help from the French King) are called home, and all
the soldiers discharged, only order given for the diligent watching the
Beacons.

Thomas Marquess Dorset, to give the better color to the report of Richmonds
backwardness to do any thing suddenly: and not induced thereto by his Mothers
solicitation, makes a show to forsake Richmond, and conveyeth himself toward
Flaunders, but by the way is overtaken by Humphry Cheney, who was appointed to
follow him, and was not only persuaded to return, but to remain hostage with
Sir John Bourcheir for security of performing the Articles concluded on,
betwixt the Earl of Richmond, and diverse his friends in France, and for the
repayment of sundry sums of money by Richmond for this expedition borrowed.

But report being come into Britain, that the Usurper labored the speedy
making up of a match betwixt him, and the Lady Elizabeth, and An. 1484. Reg. 2.
had likewise prepared, and proposed an husband for her Sister Cicely. There
was too little time left, to be employed for longer consultation what more to
do, or further expectation of aid how to do; For experience did manifest it,
that the longer they stayed, every day the less ready they were, for either
victual or other provision, grew sour or stinking, and every hour would grow
worse and worse; And that all the passages and Ports, were so stopped and
guarded, that it was a thing almost impossible, to send or receive any further
intelligence out of England, which was the more demonstrated by the certain
relation of Morgan Kidwelly, a student of the Common law of England, who with
great hazard had brought information to the Earl; That Rice ap Thomas, and
John Savage, two approved Commanders, and most powerful in their own Country,
were ready with all the forces they could make, to abet his course upon his
first landing, though with hazard of their lives; And that his trusty Friend
Reignold Bray was ready provided of money and all other necessaries, to furnish
Richmonds necessities, and only awaited his approach; And for the reasons
aforesaid, advised him to steer his course for Wales, and further from them
adjured him, to make all possible festination, assuring him that nothing could
procure better speed, then present expedition; Whereupon Richmond with not much
above two thousand stipendaries, and but convenient Bottoms to transfreate
them, about the middle of August following put to Sea, and on the seventh day
after their departure from Harflew, they arrived at Milford haven, where
without trouble or impeachment, he landed his forces; and from thence peaceably
marched to Hereford, where by the Inhabitants there he was joyfully received.

A common report is raised, that Rice ap Thomas, and John Savage stood out for
King Richard, which gave some occasion of mistrust to Richmond; But the trouble
was lessened, when he was resolved by Captain Arnold Butler, that the Earl of
Penbrooke with all his retinue were upon the way to join with the Earl of
Richmond.

Richard Griffith likewise with a band of of brave Welch-men, and John Morgan
with the like number increased Earl Henryes forces, who with them fairly and
easily marched toward Shrowsbury.

The Earls skowts bring in word, that Sir Robert Harbert and Rice ap Thomas,
were ready with a great power to stop his passage; Whereupon he dispatched
messengers with Letters to his Mother and Friends, to certify them of all
occurrences, since his safe arrival, and to acquaint them with his intention,
to pass Severne at Shrowsbury, and from thence to march directly for London;
and then prepares himself for the encounter; And in his march is saluted by
Rice ap Thomas, who with a valiant crew of soldiers offers their service, so
as Earl Henry will pledge his faith to perform his promise formerly intimated
by Letter, which was, that after he had obtained the Crown, Richmond should
make and appoint Rice sole governor of Wales, which was assented unto, and
accordingly afterward performed.

Sir Gilbert Talbot that evening, with all the Earl of Shrowsburyes tenants,
the Earl himself being the Kings Ward, with about two thousand well appointed
men came and joined with Richmond.

The Lord Stanly in the way with 5000. men, had taken his lodging at the town
of Leicester; But hearing of Earl Henryes march that way he quit the Town,
and went to Adderton, where he quartered his men.

King Richard all this time lay at Nottingham, slighting any intelligence that
was given him of the Earl of Richmonds proceedings, and as it were contemning
their weakness, would often ask of their Courtiers, what they thought a poor
company of fugitive raskalls were able to do to impeach his pleasure.

Although at first he did neglect to stop their proceedings, yet when he
understood that those forces, which he had appointed to impeach their passage,
had only suffered them uninterupted to pass, but were now joined unto Earl
Henry; King Richard began when it was somewhat with the latest, to look about
him, posted directions to the Duke of Norfolk, the Earls of Northumberland
and Surry, with Sir Thomas Brackenbury the Lieutenant of the Tower of London,
and some others his well-willers, with all speed, and forces possible, to
repair unto him to Lutterworth; King Richard is informed by his
vaunt-curriors, that Richmond was encamped at Liechfield, and from thence would
remove to Leicester, wherefore he upon the arrival of his power, marched
toward his enemies.

The Earl of Richmond likewise with his forces make toward Tamworth, and by
the way is encountered by Sir Walter Hungerford, and some others, who had that
night withdrawn themselves from King Richards part; And they gave Richmond
true information, both with the number, and order of King Richards army.

The Earl of Richmond hereupon by night, and secretly repayreth to his
Father-in-law, the Lord Stanley, with whom and his Brother, having consulted of
those things, that might conduce most to his better proceedings, he returns
(but not without some hazard,) to his company which he found much increased and
encouraged, by the accession of Sir John Savage, Sir Bryan Stanford, and Sir
Simon Digby, with their several Companies of valiant and expert soldiers.

King Richard took the advantage of a large plain a commodious place, near
Bosworth, adjoining to a hill called Anne Beam, where he encamped; And
observing by his Adversaries manner of approach, that they were prepared to
give him battle, he the next morning drew his forces with what convenient
speed he could out of the Camp, and put them in order.

The forward that was led by the Duke of Norfolk, which consisted of one
thousand two hundred Bow-men, flancked with two hundred Curasseires, under the
conduct of the Earl of Surrey. The battle King Richard led in person, which
consisted of a thousand Bill-men, empaled with two thousand Pike.

The rereguard was led by Sir Thomas Brackenbury, consisting of two thousand
mingled weapons, with two wings of horsemen, containing fifteen hundred, all
of them cast into square manuples, still expecting the Lord Stanleys presence,
who with two thousand most of them horsemen, were not set out of their
quarter, when the forlorn hope of the Earl of Richmond had begun to skirmish,
the footmen under the leading of Sir William Stanley being upon their March,
were enforced as he pretended, to avoid a myrie bogge that lay betwixt them
and the King, and to avoid the danger of being charged, before they should have
opportunity to join with hime to fetch a compass about, by that means,
casting a mist before the Kings eyes, that he might not palpably perceive
their intention, to give assistance to the Earl of Richmond; For if that
should have been discovered, it might have cost the life of little George
Stanley.

The Earl of Richmond very early in the morning had sent unto his
Father-in-law, desiring his present repair; And the rather for that he
wanted, his more able direction to deraigne his battle: But he was answered
from him, that no aid or direction must be expected from him, more then that
he advised him, with all possible speed to give the onset, and aftet the
battle should be joined, he and his Brother would second the battle; Earl
Henry somewhat staggering at the first at the answer, made a virtue of a
necessity, and took counsel of his own Commanders; And by their advise,
because the weakness of their body, should not be presently discerned, (for
their numbers did but little exceed the half of the Kings,) Their Voward was
made very open and thin, of which John Earl of Oxford had the leading; The
Earl of Richmond in person led the battle, Sir Gilbert Talbot commanding the
right wing, and Sir John Savage the leaft, whose soldiers being all alike
clad, in white coats of cloth or frize, and hoods of the same, by the
reflection of the Son upon them, made them appear in the view of their
Adversaries double their number. The rereguard was governed by the Earl of
Pembrooke, which consisted most of horse, and some Pike, and black Bills.

King Richard having drawn his chief Leaders about him; And placing himself
in that manner, as that he might be the better heard, says;

My faithful friends, and fellow soldiers, you by whose true policy, I at
first obtained, and by whose as true prowess, I have hitherto defended my
Crown, mauger all the rebellious machinations, and tumultuarie seditions of my
so many Adversaries, you by whose Prudence, and provident circumspection
nothing that might further the prosperity of this kingdom, has been
omitted: nothing might impeach or impair the honor of it, has been
committed; so that without adulation I may say it; By your only advise, I am
what I am; And if now by your aid and assistance, I do not this day subsist,
I shall not be so fortunate to enjoy, as I have been happy to obtain; But I
am confident of your loves and loyalties, and thereupon set up my rest.

What should move this but half codled soldier; This linsie-woolsie Welchman
with a crew of poor rakeshame runnagates to attempt thus to rob me of my
Crown, and you of your liberties and lives; I know not, except the devil owe
his ambitious pride a shame, and has brought him this day to your hands to
receive your condign chastisement for it. The beggarly Britons, and
faint-hearted Frenchmen, what further aim have they, then to make prey on
your Patrimonies, to abuse your wives and daughters, and to enrich themselves
by your losses, and to extirpate your posterities.

For prevention of all which, let us this day but show our selves the
inheritors of our Ancestors valors: and but fight like men, and you shall
quickly make them run like cravens, or die like dogs.

For my part, take the word of your Prince, I am thoroughly resolved, either this
day to be a Conqueror, or else to lose my life in quest of victory; And so
Saint George let us charge with courage.

But these words were not powerful enough, to work any great effect in the
hearts of the soldiers, by reason they were delivered not with that alacrity
of spirit he was wont in astrained composure of his countenance, as being
dejected by the remembrance of his horrid dreams which the gnawing of his
conscience had suggested in his sleep that night, which made it appear that
he had no great hope to prevail, whatsoever he said, or showed.

The Earl of Richmond unwilling to be behind hand, in orderly direction, made
unto his men this exhortation.

If ever God gave victory to his servants fighting in a just quarrel, or gave
aid to those, that endeavored the welfare, of the Commonwealth, or gave
Richmonds ex hertation.
a blessing to such as labored the suppression of a tyrannous usurper, the
vindication of innocent bloodshedding, or the just punishment of fratricide,
and most execrable treason.

We need not then, (dear Countrymen and my kind companions in arms) make any
doubt, but that he will be pleased this day to give us a glorious victory, and
give us just occasion to triumph in the Conquest over this usurping
bloud-sucker.

It is not (I presume) unknown to any one of you that our cause is just, for
he against whom we oppose (that wrongfully styles himself King,) unjustly
detaineth from me the Scepter of this Kingdom, which injustice was initiated
with blood, by the unnatural murder of his brother, nephews, and nearest
allies, continued by machivilian plots; and sinister practices, to betray the
nobility and gentry to the loss of their lives, the confiscation of their
goods, seizure of their lands, disinheriting of their children and final
extirpation of their families, as having no care of his conscience, neither
reverencing God nor respecting man. Am not I and you, (nay all the truehearted
nobility of this kingdom) woeful witnesses of this his so insupportable
tyranny, do we not every day and hour, more and more sustain the wounds,
contusions and dislocations that this Richard by his bloody reign and
tyrannous usurpation has made in the body of this Commonwealth, and shall we
part of her members, as if not sensible of her disgraces, or injuries, sit
still, and silently suffer the ravenous bore of the Forest, to root up the
sweet Vine of peace of this Kingdom and prey upon our rightful inheritance?
And as it were willingly lay down our necks to carry the servile yoke of his
imperious cruelty, and insolent usurpation, the Lord forbid.

What are his associate confederates, but of like feather, such as his bare
donation without right, or title wrongfully usurp, as he does the Crown from
me, so they your patrimony and unquestionable right from you and yours without
right or colour-like right.

Let us therefore pluck up our spirits, and setting all fear and diffidence a
part, let us like faithful fellows and loving friends in Gods name join hand
and heart; to quell this monster of men and either make in this days action
the date of our life honorable, or the beginning of our victory triumphant.
And God who is the only giver of victory will, I faithfully believe, look
upon the justness of the cause, and give success accordingly unto us.

It is not multitude, but united hearts for a just quarrel that procures
Conquest, and the God of glory can show his power, through our weakness, the
less our numbers, the more our renown, if we be victors, and if we dye (as we
all owe God a death) in this so well an intended action, neither rust of time
which devoureth all things else, nor any thing whatsoever, can debar us from a
perpetuity of life here on earth after death, and a Crown of everlasting
glory in heaven.

This ungrateful wretch has deffiddnce in all men, and who then can have
confidence in him? Let us therefore like true Heroes against a tyrant, honest
hearted men against a traitor, and true patriots against an usurper, like free
borne undanted spirits against the monster of the earth, both in birth and
behavior, being from his infancy branded for a stigmaticke, express our selves
noble, honest, true hearted and valiant: go forward then, advance our colors,
incite your courages, and in the name of God cry Saint George for England, and
God I doubt not will give us his blessing, and make the day ours. In assurance
whereof thus I plight you the faith of a friend. I will rather be found dead by
fighting resoltely, then alive by flying ignominiously.

These words were with gesture of body and alacrity of spirit, so confidently
delivered, that it drew from the hearers tears of joy: and put such resolution
into their hearts, that they presently expressed the same, in their present
falling to handle their arms, and by the way, to move, encourage, animate one
an other, to buy, and vye for the victory bravely, or to rate and sell their
lives highly deerly. And therewith advance, and giving a great shout to show
their willingness, upon the first sight of the enemy let fly a volly of
shafts so close and home that King Richards voward hasted though against their
wills to join to be out of the danger of a second shower.

The Earl of Oxford was as ready for the encounter and fearing to be
disadvantaged by the thinness of his front, he gave the word that no man
should straggle but follow his leader, and Commanded the fronters not to
advance further nor otherwise then he gave direction, by which discipline they
were presently fallen into a close body: And so stood firm in which time Sir
William Stanley had time to draw up his men likewise, to increase the length of
the van; which gave them occasion on the other side, that were not well
affected to the service, to slack their pace and spare their bow-strings:
which the Earl of Oxford well observing, being encouraged by the approvement
of the course, by the Lord Stanley who was now come to the for-ward, and
publicly professed himself to wish well to his son in laws proceedings, gave
on with a brave charge, and followed it so home, that the adverse part not
able, (or at lest not willing) to endure the shock (for the cause of quarrel
in a Soldier increases the courage, or abateth the edge of resolution) gave
grownd which moved King Richard to bring on the maine battle. And with a
desperate resolution, entered so far into the enemies battle, that with his
own hands he slew Sir William Brandon, Richmonds chief standard bearer, and
unhorst Sir John Cheney a strong and stout man at arms. And at length
encountering, with the Earl of Richmond enterchanged some buffets. But Henry
aided by the divine help, and favored with the uprightness of his cause,
with stood Richards forceable assault. But whilst the armies on both sides
stood striving in a doubtful hazard who should win the price, Sir William
Stanley with three thousand fresh men crying S. George, a Richmond, joined with
his brothers Soldiers, and brake into King Richards battle, who thereupon
fled incontinently leaving their King behind to make a bloody catastrophe of
his slaughterly reign, who thoroughly enraged furiously fighting without
discretion or ability to prevail, he fell under the sword of his enemies.

The rumor of his death, and the rowting of the battle gave occasion to the
reregard Commanded by Henry Earl of Northumberland who rather wished, then
expected what did befall, to submit without striking stroke, whereby the
victory fell to the Earl Richmonds part, who upon certainty thereof instantly
in most religious divotion, gave order for public thanks giving to God for
their happy preservation, and he himself that gave the precept made himself
the pattern therein: alighting from his horse, and kneeling upon his knees
first privately to himself, and then publicly with the rest gave glory to his
maker.

There were not above one thousand slain on both sides, the chief of whom was
John, Duke of Norfolk, who was often warned, and much labored that day to
forbear the field; in regard there was found written upon his tent-dore.

Jack of Norfolk be not to boold;
For Dickon thy Master is bought and sold.
But what God had before appointed, could not be prevented.
This John Howard, was the son of Sir Robert Howard knight, and Margaret
eldest daughter and coheire of Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolk; in whose right
he was created Duke of Norfolk the five and twentieth day of June, in the year
of our Lord, 1483.

He married two wives, the first was Katherine daughter of William Lord Mullyns
by whom he had issue, one son and four daughters.

Thomas that succeeded him, and was created Earl of Surry, in the first year
of King Richard the third, and was restored to grace, and made Lord Treasurer
in the sixteenth year of Henry the seventh; and

1 Anne married to Sir Edmond Gorge knight. 2 Isabell married to Robert
Mortymer of Essex knight. 3 Jane married to Thomas Tymperley Esquire, and
Margaret married to John Windham of Cowtherck in Norfolk knight.
This Dukes second wife was Margaret daughter of Sir John Chadworth knight, by
whom he had issue Katherine married to John Bourcheir Lord Berners, and no more.

Walter Lord Ferrers, Sir Richard Ratcliff, and Sir Robert Brackenbury knights,
with William Catesby an utterbarrister, with some others, were taken flying.
And shortly after executed at Leicester.

Francis Vicount Lovell and the two Staffords escaped and took Sanctuary in S.
John's at Gloucester.

Henry Earl of Northumberland submitting himself; was not only pardoned, but
received into favor, whilst Thomas Howard Earl of Surry eldest son of John
Duke of Norfolk that then, and there, rendered himself as the other did, to the
conquerors mercy, was committed close prisoner in Leicester and from thence
sent to the Tower of London.

There were not on the Earl of Richmonds part above one hundred slain the
principal whereof was William Brandon.

This battle was fought at Rodner, near Bosworth the two and twentieth day
of, August in the year of our Lord God 1486.

After public thanks giving was, as before prescribed, orderly and
religiously performed: Earl Henry gave order to search amongst the slain, for
such as were but wounded, commanding those carefully to be dressed, and the other
to be with decency on both sides buried.

The body of King Richard being amongst the slaughtered carkases found; the
whole army gave a general shoute, and with loud acclamations of long live
King Henry, made the field ecchoe again.

The Lord Stanly having in his custody King Richard the usurpers Crown which
amongst the spoils his soldiers had found and brought to him, placed the same
on Earl Henryes head, wherewith the soldiers reiterated their joyful
acclamations; making the fields resound with long live King Henry of that name
the seventh, as if by their only suffrages, he had bin elected and confirmed
King of England.

Here with the tent-keepers of the usurper came and submitted themselves to the
Lord Stanly, and brought with them young George Strange, whom the usurper upon
the Lord Stanlyes refusal, presently to draw down his forces to join with
him, had sworn (before he went to dinner) by the life of S. Paul, to have had
beheaded. But was persuaded by his council, to forbear the execution, until
the battle should be determined, now being brought to the presence of his
father. The young Gentleman, (being thereto by his keepers instructed before)
craved the help of his mediation to the king for their pardon, which was
willingly undertaken, and as easily procured.

From thence the camp presently removed, and King Henry marched to the Town of
Leicester, where for the more refreshing of his men, and the better
accommodation of himself for his journey toward the City of London, he
remained two days.

In the mean time the body of the usurper stark naked, all mangled and
besmeared with blood, and dust, without so much, as the lest ragge to cover his
privities, was trussed behind Blanch Senigleer his own Pursevant of arms like
butchers ware, his heads and his arms hanging on the one side of the horse,
his legs on the other, and so was brought to Leicester, where for a spectacle
of hate and scorn, by the space of two days he lay bare and uninterred, At
last by the Charity of the Gray Friars there, without solemn funeral pomp,
scarce with ordinary solemnity, he was inhumed in their Monastery there: he
reigned two years, two months and one day.

This Richard married, Anne second daughter of Richard Nevill commonly styled
great Earl of Warwick, by whom he had issue, Edward whom at twelve months
old he created Prince of Wales, but happily dyed before his father.

This Richard was borne at Fodringhay Castle in Northamptonshire, the third
son of Richard Duke of York, younger brother of George Duke of Clarence, by
him murdered in the Tower,

After the death of his brother King Edward the fourth, he procured himself to
be made Protector and guardian of his two Nephews, of whom he made himself
the execrable murderer.

For a fuller expression of his Character, he was borne a monster in nature,
with all his teeth, with hair on his head, and nails on his fingers and toes,
with a viperous strength enforcing as it were his passage through his mothers
womb whom afterward he shamed not, to accuse of adultery, but as one that
then wrought journy-worke with the Devil, his manners and qualities seconded
the feature and lineaments of his body and members, which were much deformed,
being hook shouldred, splay footed and goggle eyd, his countenance sower, the
composure of his face little and round, his complexion swarfie, his left arm,
from his birth dry and and withered.

Nature supplied these deformities of the body, with a strong brain, a quick
apprehension, a good memory and a most fluent tongue, which he seldom
exercised but to the abuse of credulity. And with the sweetness of his
delivery, he could so prevail with such whom he meant to work upon: that he
would ofentimes, as it were infatuate them, and enforce their belief of his
oaths and protestations, which were by Saint Paul, and wishing God to damn
him, if he did not perform his word (which at the time of the speaking was no
part of his thought) sometimes against the hearers knowledge, and conscience,
he was neither morally honest nor religiously good. He usd to make authority
the stawking horse to his will, and his will the sole commander of his
conscience, the largeness whereof could without any scruple, swallow murder
of brother, Nephews, wife, and nearest friends, nay attempt rape and incest
with his own brothers daughter, yet did with artificial dissimulation so
cover his dishonest and abominable intentions, that not many could discover
them.

Who or whatsoever opposed his aspiring pride or profitable pleasure, was by
his plotting cunningly and covertly taken away, or removed. He was so
thoroughly perfect in the Hypocritical art of simulation, and dissimulation,
that he would use most complement, and show greatest signs of love and
courtesy, to him in the morning, whose throat he had taken order to be cut
that evening.

He held it for a maxim in policy, that half doing in any thing, was worse
then no doing; And therefore whatsoever he once attempted, he went through
with it, howsoever it seemed to others unnatural, and unchristian.

He used the instruments of his bloody plottes, as men do their Candles, burn
the first out to a snuff, and then having lighted another, tread that under
foot, yet howsoever his birth were proaigious and life monstrous, yet his
death was not dishonorable. For though his cause were bad, he fought bravely
and dyed fighting, leaving behind an ample testimony of his great valor and
little grace; with the end of his reign by the sword, which he had used for
the moving of civil dissension betwixt the two houses of York and Lancaster,
which had been so long drawn and so often bathed in the blood of Christians,
was happily sheathed; And the passage to concord prepared, whilst this poor
Island that had been imbroyled with war and her companions, had leisure to
call to mind, the many murders, stratagemes, slaughters, overthrowes, and
calamities, which through their unnatural division of the two Roses, she had
sustained, and thereby she found that from the time, that Richard Duke of York
who was slain in the battle at Wakefield seeking to anticipate the time
allotted unto him by authority of the Parliament (whereby the Crown was
entayled to him and his issue,) to gain the possession thereof and from whence
all those, praerecited miseries did proceed, until the death of the usurper
there were slain, fourscore Princes of the blood royal and twice as many
natives of England, as were lost in the two conquests of France. The dissension
that fell, was betwixt the house of York descended from Lionel borne at
Antwerpe, Duke of Clarence, second son of Edward the third, and the house of
Lancaster issued from John of Gaunt, the third surviving, but otherwise fourth
son of the same King: the first giving for his cognizance the white Rose, the
other the Red.

Lionell Duke of Clarence married to his first wife Elizabeth daughter and
heir of William Burgh, Earl of Vlster, and to his second wife Violenta of
Galens Viscount of Mislaine, by his first wife he had issue Philip sole and
only child, which Philip was married to Edmond Mortimer Earl of March, and
Vlster, who had issue by her.

1 Roger March the fourth Earl of March. 2 Sir Edmond Mortymer that married
the daughter of Owen Glendore. 3 Sir John Mortymer beheaded 3. H. 6. 1
Elizabeth married to the Lord Percy styled Hotspur.
Philip, first married to John Hastings Earl of Pembrook and afterward to
Richard Earl of Arundel, and lastly to John, Lord Saint-Iohn dyed without
issue.

Roger, the fourth Earl of March, 1387. nominated by King Richard the second,
successor to the Kingdom of England who married Elianor, daughter of Thomas
Holland, Earl of Kent, by whom he had issue two sons, and two daughters.

1 Edmond his eldest son, who succeeded him in the Earldome. 2 Roger died
leaving his father. 1 Anne who was married to Richard Earl of Cambridge son
of Edmond of Langley Duke of York. 2 Elianor married to Edward Courtney Earl
of Devonshire.
Richard of Conisborough married Anne sister and heir of Edmond Mortymer: and
had issue Richard Duke of York.

This Richard was the first mover of the faction against the the house of
Lancaster, the bearer of the red rose.

He married Ciceley, the daughter of Ralph Nevill first Earl of Westmerland,
and had issue.

1 Henry that dyed before his Father. 2 Edward, of that name the fourth King of
England. 3 Edmond Earl of Rutland, slain at Wakefield by the Lord Clifford. 4
John. that all dyed young. 5 William and 6 Thomas 7 George Duke of Clarence,
murdered as before. 1 Anne the eldest daughter was first married to Henry
Holland Duke of Exceter, and after to Sir Thomas Sayntleoger. 2 Elizabeth
married to John de la poole Duke of Suffolk. 3 Margaret married to Charles
Duke of Burgundy. 4 Vrsula never married, and thus was the title of York
derived.
John of Gaunt (so named of the place where he was borne, (fourth son of King
Edward the third, married three wives the first

1 Blaunch daughter and coheire of Henry first Duke of Lancaster, by whom he
had issue, 1 Henry Plantagenet, borne at Bullingbrooke, 1 Philip married to
John King of Portingall, and 2 Elizabeth married to John Duke of Exceter, 2 The
second wife was Constance daughter and one of the Coheires of Peter king of
Castile by whom he had issue Katherine, afterward married to Henry son of
John the King of Spain. 3 His third wife was Katherine, daughter of Pain Ruet
alias Guyen, King of arms, and the relict of Sir Otes Swinford knight, by whom
he had issue but before marriage. 1 John surnamed Beauford Earl of Somerset.
2 Henry Bishop of Winchester. 3 Thomas Branford Earl of Dorset. 1 Johan
Branford, first married to Ralph Nevill, first Earl of Westmerland, and then
to Robert Ferrers Lord of Ousley.
This marriage betwixt John of Gaunt and Katheryne Swinford was approved of,
and the issue borne before the espousalls made legitimate by act of Parliament,
and confirmed by a Bull from Rome.

This is the Catalogue of the pedigree of the two houses of Lancaster and
York, betwixt whom the competition for the Crown of England, was the occasion
of expense of so much blood.

Although the Crown of England, upon the decease or deposition of Richard the
second without issue, was jure haereditario to descend to Edmond Mortimer the
younger, the Son of Philip Daughter and heir of Lionel Duke of Clarence, the
third Son of Edward the third, yet his cousin Henry of Bullingbrooke, Duke of
Hertford, and Son and heir of John of Gaunt the younger Brother of Lionell
of Clarence, taking advantage of the peoples forwardness, and his kinsmans
being generally distasted was Created and Crowned King.

From the year of our Lord 1399. until the fourth of March 1460. In three
Descents the slips of the red Rose in the line of Lancaster did bear sway, but
not without some interruptions and hazard; For though Edmond Plantagenet Duke
of Aumerle, Son and heir of Edmond of Langley, set not the White Rose claim
on foot, yet as maligning the prosperity of Henry the fourth, he was a maine
stickler in the conspiracy against him intended, to have been executed at
Oxford.

But the eruption of York never was manifest until Richard Plantagenet, Son
of Richard of Bonysborough, Anno 1455. drew his Sword to make good his claim
to the Crown of England. And from his time I shall endeavor to draw a
Compendiary of the times and places of the several battles between these two
houses struck, and the slaughter on both sides made.

The three and twentieth day of May, at Saint Albones in Hertfordshire,
Battle 1. Anno 1455.
Richard Duke of York gave battle to King Henry the sixth, on whose side was
slain;

Edmond Duke of Somerset. Dukes 1. Earls 3.
Henry Earl of Northumberland. Humphry Earl of Stafford. Thomas Lord
Clifford, say some others, John with diverse Knights and Lords 1. Knights 11.
Esquires 18.
Esquires to the number of 37. with five thousand common soldiers, and Henry
himself was taken Prisoner: on the Dukes part only six hundred in the total
5641. 5641.

A Battle was fought at Bloarheath in Shropshire, the thirteenth day of
Battle 2. Anno 1459.
September, between the Lord Audly Lieutenant to Henry the sixth, and the Earl
of Salisbury, in which Audly was slain, and his Army overthrown, at this
battle was slain in all, two thousand four hundred men, with Sir Lord 1.
Knights 7.
Thomas Dutton, beside six other Cheshire Knights, and two Esquires thereof in
all 2411. 2411.


Sir Osbert Mountfort with twelve Gentlemen of his company was taken at
Sandwich and carried to Ricebanke and there beheaded, by the Lord Fauconbridge.
Knight 1.


The Earl of Wiltes at Newbery, causes twenty Yorkists to be hanged and
quartered.

The tenth of June in the thirty eight year of the King at Northampton,
Battle 3. Anno 1459. Duke 1. Earl 1. Lord 1. Viscount 1. Knight 1.
was a battle fought, wherein was slain Humphry Duke of Buckingham.

John Talbot Earl of Shrowsbury. Thomas Lord Egremond. John Viscount Beamond,
and Sir William Lucy with ten thousand and thirty men slain.
The Lord Skales is slain upon the Thames, seeking to escape by the Earl Lord
1.
of Warwicks men.

The thirtieth of December at Wakefield was a battle struck, wherein Battle
4. Anno 1469.
the Queen prevailed with the slaughter of two thousand eight hundred persons,
not numbering Richard Duke of York.

Edmond Earl of Rutland a child, and the Earl of Shrowsbury taken prisoner,
but afterward beheaded. Sir John Mortimer and Sir Hugh Mortimer, Duke 1.
Earls 2. Knights 8.
the Dukes base Uncles.

Sir Davy Hall. Sir Hugh Hastings. Sir Thomas Nevill. Sir William Parry. Sir
Thomas Parry.
Sir Richard Limbricke Knights, then likewise slain on Candlemasse day, upon
the plain near Mortimers cross in Hereford-shire, a field was Battle 5.
Anno 1491.
fought betwixt the new Duke of York, and the Earls of Penbrooke and Wiltes;
wherein the Duke prevailed with the slaughter of 3800. men, but no man of
quality, but Sir Owen Tyther, that had married Queen Katherine. Knight 1.


Upon Shrovetuesday the seventeenth of February at Saint Albones, the second
Battle was fought, between Queen Margaret and the Duke of Battle 6. Lord
1. Knights 3.
Norfolk and others, wherein were slain two thousand three hundred men
besides the Lord Bonvile.

Sir Thomas Keryell, Sir John Gray, and Baron Thorpe.
The most cruel and deadly Battle of all others, during the rage of this
unnatural division, was fought at Towton, or between Towton and Saxton,
Battle 7. Anno 1491.
within four miles of York, the nineteenth day of March being Palm Sunday,
wherein were slain of Englishmen, Thirty five thousand ninety and one, and
of strangers, one thousand seven hundred forty five, besides two hundred and
thirty slain the day before at Ferry Brigge, with the Lord Fitzwater, and the
base brother of the Earl of Warwick. The most remarkable men that fell in
this bloody fight were, Henry Piercy Earl of Northumberland.

The Earl of Shrowsbury. The Earl of Devon. John Lord Clifford. The Lord
Beamond. The Lord Nevill. The Lord Willoughby. The Lord Wells. The Lord Rosse.
The Lord Gray. The Lord Dacres. The Lord Fitzhugh. The two base Sons of
Henry Holland Duke of Exceter. Sir Thomas Mollineux. Sir Otes Beckingham. Sir
Aubrey Trussell. Sir Richard Piercy. Sir William Heyton. Sir Jervoys Clifton.
Sir Foulke Hamys. Sir Thomas Crackenthorpe. Sir James Crackenthorpe. Sir
William Throllop. Sir Andrew Throllop. Sir Walter Harle. Sir John Ormond. Sir
William Mollyns. Sir Thomas Pigot. Sir William Norborough, and William Burton
Knights.
The Earl of Devonshire there taken Prisoner, with three other Knights Earls
4. Lords 9. Knights 22. 37046.
were beheaded at York, and so may be reckoned amongst the slain, so that the
account of the whole number, besides those that died after of hurts then
received, thirty seven thousand forty and six.

At Hegley More, the Lord Mountacute charged and put to flight two Battle 7.
Anno 1463. Knight 1. 107. Anno 1464.
thousand Lancastrians, who were on foot to march to Henry the sixth, at which
time Sir Ralph Piercy with one hundred and seven were slain, the residue
flying, gave alarm to the Kings Army, and upon the 15. of May in a plain
called Livels, near the water of Dowill in Hexam shire, the battle was
fought against Henry the sixth by the Lord Mountague, General for Edward the
fourth, wherein were taken Prisoners Henry Duke of Somerset. Duke 1.


The Lord Rosse. Lords 3.
The Lord Mollins, and The Lord Hungerford. Sir Thomas Wentworth. Sir Thomas
Hussy. Knights 20.
Sir John Finderne, and sixteen Knights more executed at Hexam and York. Sir
William Talboys titulary Earl of Kime or Angus, and not Kent as Master Martin
relates, Sir Ralph Nevill. Sir Ralph Gray, and Sir Richard Tunstall, were
taken afterward, but beheaded. The number slain is uncertainly set down, the
most of our common Writers not naming 2024.
any, only faabian says, about two thousand, so that I make that my skale to
reckon by. Battle 8. Anno 1469.

At a place called Danes more, near the Town of Edgcot, within four miles of
Banbury, was a great Battle fought upon Saint James his day, the five and
twentieth of July, wherein were slain five thousand men. 5009.


William Harbert Earl of Penbrooke. Sir Richard Herbert and eight Knights
more, are taken and beheaded at Banbury. The Earl Rivers and Sir John his
Son are beheaded at Northamton, Earls 3.
The Earl of Worcester, John Tiptoft at London. The Lord Willoughby at
Doncaster. Lords 3.
The Lord Stafford at Bridgewater. The Lord Wells, and Sir Robert Dymocke, were
beheaded in the march, but uncertain Knights 11.
where. Battle 9. Anno 1470. Knights (...). 10000.

Near Stamfort in Lincolnshire was a Batraile fought the first of October,
wherein were slain ten thousand men, but no men of note, but Sir Robert Wells,
and Sir Thomas de land; those that were put to flight for their more ease to
escape cast away their coats, whereupon it was called Losecoate field.

Upon the fourteenth day of April, being Easter day, upon a Plain talled
Battle 10. Anno 1471.
Gladmore Heath, between Barnet and Saint Albones. The Earls of Warwick,
Oxford, and the Marquess Mountacute Commanders in chief, on behalf of Henry
the sixth, against Edward the fourth; there was a terrible battle fought,
wherein were slain ten thousand three hundred men, Earl 1. Marquess 1. Lords
3. Knights 2. 10000.
amongst whom were the Earl of Warwick, the Marquess Mountacute, the Lord
Cromwell, the Lord Say, the Lord Mountjoy, Sir Henry Bourchier, Sir William
Terrill.

Upon the fourth of May being Saturday, Prince Edward with his Mother Battle
11. Anno praedict.
Queen Margaret to redeem Henry the sixth, gave battle to King Edward,
wherein Queen Margaret was taken Prisoner, and Prince Edward was slain in
cold blood. There were slain at this encounter; A Prince. Dukes 2. A
Marquess. A Lord Prior An Earl. A Baron. Knights 20.


John Somerset, Marquess Dorset. Thomas Courtney Earl of Devon. Thomas Lord
Wenlake. Sir Jo^ Delves. Sir Edward Hampden. Sir Robert Whittingham. Sir John
Lewkner, and three thousand others. Edmond Duke of Somerset. John Lonstrother,
Lord Prior of Saint John's. Sir Thomas Tresham. Sir Jervoys Clifton. Sir Richard
Vaux. Sir William Harvye. Sir Thomas Fielding. Sir Robert Lewknor. Sir Thomas
Lirmoth. Sir William Vrman. Sir John Seymor. Sir Thomas Roose. Sir Thomas
Fitzhony. Sir Robet Flamden, were taken and executed in Tewkesbury the one day,
and Sir Humphry Audley. Sir William Crymby. Sir William Carry. Sir William
Newbourgh were likewise with Henry Tresham. Walter Courtney. John Flory. Lewis
Miles. Robert Iackson. James' Gower. James Delves, heir of Sir John Delves
beheaded there the next day;
This was the last battle that was fought in the days of King Edward the
fourth, but not all the bloodshed about this quarrel; For at London by the
treason of Bastard Fauconbridge, there were seven hundred and eighty of his
Esquires 37. 1092. Battle 12. Anno 1485. King 100. Duke 1. Lord 1. Knights 3.
partakers and three hundred and twelve Citizens Londoners slain.

Upon Redmore Down near Bosworth in Leicestershire on the twenty two of
August, was the twelfth set Battle in this unkind quarrel fought, wherein
King Richard the Usurper was slain, and with him on his part John Duke of
Norfolk Walter Lord Ferrers, Sir Richard Radcliffe, and Sir Robert Brackenbury
with four thousand and eight; And on Richmonds side, Sir William Brandon and
180. with him. After this Battle there was a conjunction of the so long
severed Rose branches; Nevertheless the enemy to Englands quiet, would not
suffer the gate of concord to stand quite open, but raised up Impostors, and
counterfeits to interrupt the same; But since the cause of the dissension by
the Union of the Red and White in Henry* the seventh, and the Lady Elizabeth,
their so happy enter-marriage was taken away, what occasion of expense of blood
did after fall out within the Realm, ought (under favor be it delivered)
rather to be imputed to the effect of treasonable machinations, then to any
just occasion of the Roses Title.

And therefore I purposely omit to intermix the number of those that were
slain, since Bosworth field amongst those that are to be reckoned up in the
general slaughter in the twelve Battles, and the occasions of expense of
blood intervening by skirmishes and accidental means, and content my self
with the only recapitulation of the several numbers, of Kings, Princes, Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, Barons, Vicounts, Bishops, Mitred Prelates, Knights,
Knights eldest Sons.
Esquires, Of coatarmour and Ancestry.
Gentlemen, and private soldiers; That during the rage of these civil wars
which followed, that breach of the due course of succession, attempted by the
intrusion of Henry the fourth, fell under the alternate fortunes of the Victors
sword; until that ever to be blessed reuniting the two houses of Lancaster
and York, whereby righteousness and Peace did kiss each other, and Mercy and
Truth (which I pray God ever to continue) established the Crown of England in
an hopeful and happy descending Line; And as Henry the seventh conjoined the
Roses, so has King James of ever-blessed memory united the predivided
kingdoms of England and Scotland, espousing their Union to our Sovereign Lord
King Charles, to Gods glory, the Churches good, and his Subjects great comfort.

HENRY the Roses: JAMES the Kingdoms knit:
And CHARLES of both partakes the benefit.
Oh! thou of Iesse flower, of Judah Lion.
In his dominion plant the peace of Syon.
And never let hearts quiet follow those,
That shall the holding of this Knot oppose.
But let thy best of blessings wait on them,
That zealously shall guard his Diadem.
The total of private soldiers that perished in the time of these civil
wars, and suffered the punishment of immature death, for taking part on the
one side or the other, is

Fourscore four thousand, nine hundred, and ninety eight persons, besides

Kings two. Prince one. Dukes ten. Marquesses two. Earls one and twenty.
Lords twenty seven. Vicounts two. Lord Pryor one. Judge one. Knights one
hundred thirty nine. Esquires four hundred forty one.
The number of the Gentry, is every way so uncertainly reported, that if I
should endeavor to set down a general of what is particularly related, I
should but give occasion of further question, then I am willing should be
moved, for a thing of so little moment, and therefore willingly omit it; And
the rather, for that they are for the most part included, in the number of the
private soldiers as aforesaid, set down to be slain, to which but add the
number of six hundred thirty and eight: the total of all the persons of
eminency not therein accounted, and then there appears in all to have been
slain, Fourscore five thousand six hundred twenty and eight Christians, and
most of them of this Nation, not to be repeated without grief, nor remembered
without deprecation, that the like may never happen more. Pax una triumphis
innumeris potior.

FINIS.

